
Tammy Abraham, Bristol City

Of the 38 players Chelsea have out on loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/chelsea-38-players-loan-who-where>
 some have been bought for millions, some have come from countries far and 
wide, some have lofty reputations. But the best of them all – or at least the 
one in best form – is a lanky 19-year-old from Camberwell, lent to Bristol City 
for the year.Tammy Abraham has been a force of nature this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/tammy-abraham-chelsea-loan-bristol-city>
, his goals tally standing at 12 in 20 games, and is the main driving force 
behind the Robins’ surprisingly excellent start. Abraham briefly appeared for 
the Chelsea first team last season and, if he carries on like this, he could 
well be the first academy graduate to cement a place in their side since John 
Terry.

Paul Lambert sees good and bad sides of Wolves after agreeing to take over | 
Nick Ames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/07/wolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby>
Scott Hogan, Brentford

Scott Hogan is a former team-mate of Jamie Vardy at FC Halifax and he could 
have been forgiven for giving up the whole football thing as a bad business in 
April 2015. That was when he suffered his second cruciate ligament injury, in a 
training-ground drill, nine months after the first, on his league debut for
Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>. But he eventually, 
slowly, made his way back, scoring seven goals in the final four games of last 
season, and picked up where he left off this term. He has scored eight times as 
he spearheads a team who continue to surprise by lurking within striking 
distance of the play-off spots. Hogan can be one of those players who does not 
offer a huge amount when he is not scoring goals but in the penalty box he is 
deadly.

Conor Hourihane, Barnsley

Barnsley’s squad is, frankly, absurdly young. Their oldest player is Adam 
Hammill, a creaking geezer at 28 and he is one of only two players aged over 26 
to have made a first-team appearance for them this season. In the middle of all 
this youth is Conor Hourihane, the 25-year-old Irish central midfielder with a 
calm head and the captain’s armband, an elegant playmaker with a fierce shot in 
his left boot and a youth team contemporary of Jordan Henderson. Appointed 
captain last season, he was one of the key men in Barnsley’s remarkable 
turnaround as they went from the bottom of League One in November to promotion 
via the play-offs in May. His contract is up at the end of the season and, 
although it would be pleasing to see how far he could take this talented group 
of youngsters, bigger and more glamorous things might be in store for Hourihane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64f87715840e6a00e0f67e1db47c978cb098fc14%2F69_127_3035_1821%2F3035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64f87715840e6a00e0f67e1db47c978cb098fc14%2F69_127_3035_1821%2F3035.jpg>
 Conor Hourihane is destined for better things if he maintains the form he has 
shown this season. Photograph: Keith Turner/Rex/Shutterstock 
Pontus Jansson, Leeds United



Describing a player as a cult hero can often be pejorative, because generally 
that tends to mean “popular for some reason but not that good”. Pontus Jansson, 
the Swedish centre-back on loan at Leeds from Torino, has been called exactly 
that but he is a big reason why Garry Monk is bucking the trend of managers 
under Massimo Cellino. Not only has Monk managed to keep his job but he has 
guided Leeds into the play-off places – the first time they have occupied such 
a lofty spot since December 2013 – and Jansson has played a big role in that. 
Already hugely popular with the fans (taking a yellow card after jumping into 
the crowd to celebrate his recent equaliser against Norwich would not have 
hurt), he will presumably be even more so after declaring he wants to stay at 
Elland Road. “Seriously, that’s the only thing that I want now,”he told the 
Yorkshire Evening Post 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united/leeds-united-jansson-wants-permanent-deal-at-united-1-8221854>
 after the Norwich game. “I want to be here and to make a permanent deal with 
Leeds.”

Aaron Mooy, Huddersfield Town

Undoubtedly the surprise success of the Championship season so far has been 
Huddersfield who,under David Wagner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/huddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship>
, dropped only two points from their opening six games and remain just outside 
the top two, despite a drop-off in form. Their finest performer has been Aaron 
Mooy, the Australian midfielder on loan from Manchester City, who has inspired 
some rather giddy comparisons: his former manager at St Mirren mentioned him in 
the same breath as Kenny Dalglish and the Football League Paper recently 
likened one of his moves to something by Zinedine Zidane. The assessment of 
Ange Postecoglou, Australia coach, of him as having been “the best and most 
exciting player in the A-League” might be a touch more realistic but for the 
moment comparisons are not important to Huddersfield. If Mooy keeps up his 
early season form, there is a good chance they will as well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a6d1663bf9078791eabb80563af45c86a71fb70%2F0_0_4860_2915%2F4860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a6d1663bf9078791eabb80563af45c86a71fb70%2F0_0_4860_2915%2F4860.jpg>
 Aaron Mooy was rated the best player in Australia and is staking a similar 
claim at Championship level. Photograph: Robbie Jay Barratt - AMA/Getty Images 
Jacob Murphy, Norwich City



It has been a slightly stuttering start to the season for Norwich and, 
although they remain very much in the promotion picture, it has become more 
familiar recently to see Alex Neil’s face after games crumpled with a frown 
than with a smile. But a bright spark has been Jacob Murphy, who rose through 
the ranks with his identical twin brother, Josh, (a local paper recently 
published 10 pictures of the pair to see who could tell the difference and even 
their mum got only eight right) but he has been the one to establish himself in 
the first team this season. Aged 21 and still rather rough around the edges, he 
can be inconsistent but that is to be expected for someone with his relative 
lack of experience. When he is on form he can be one of the division’s most 
dangerous wingers.

Hildeberto Pereira, Nottingham Forest

If football is essentially a flashy circus designed to entertain us all, roll 
up for the ringmaster. Pereira, signed on loan from Benfica in the summer, is a 
wildly arresting, red-raw Portuguese winger occasionally masquerading as a 
right-back. The problem for Forest is that, in his past seven games, he has 
managed to get himself sent off three times. His third red card came in his 
first game back following suspension for the second; his first was “achieved” 
against Aston Villa, via two yellow cards in the 25 minutes after he came on as 
a substitute. But he is also capable of positive game-changing moments: the 
second booking against Villa was for excessively celebrating a goal he created 
with an astoundingly visceral and direct run through the defence. In Forest’s 
recent win over Birmingham Pereira was brought on as part of a five-man defence 
to help protect a 2-1 lead: five minutes later he ran the length of the pitch, 
played a rapid one-two and popped up at inside-left to score. He is good value, 
to say the least.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569e9b81394cafee6b465ab62ccec4a6ec42ce79%2F52_107_2913_1748%2F2913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569e9b81394cafee6b465ab62ccec4a6ec42ce79%2F52_107_2913_1748%2F2913.jpg>
 Red cards have quickly become par for the course in Hildeberto Pereira’s time 
at the City Ground. Photograph: Joe Toth/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Jonjo Shelvey, Newcastle United



One could probably pick any of the Newcastle players who have taken Rafa 
Benítez’s team shimmying to the top of the Championship. They are possibly the 
best collection ever at this level. Dwight Gayle is the division’s top scorer, 
Jamaal Lascelles has grown into his role as club captain and Matt Ritchie could 
probably still be in the Premier League if he wanted to be. But the standout 
player so far has been Jonjo Shelvey, who was not an automatic selection at the 
start of the season but has since established himself as the division’s most 
important playmaker. Shelvey has thrived under Benítez’s coaching, both 
physically (he has, perhaps alarmingly, lost a stone in weight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/20/jonjo-shelvey-rafael-benitez-newcastle-united-liverpool>
) and mentally, getting rid of what he described as a “childish mindset” over 
the summer. “He controls games,” said Benítez recently. All this could be for 
little ifa Football Association charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-charge-fa-allegedly-abusing-wolves-player>
 of directing racially abusive language at Wolves’ Moroccan utility player 
Romain Saïss is upheld. Privately Shelvey maintains he did not use the words 
alleged. He faces a lengthy ban if found guilty.

Olamide Shodipo, QPR

One to keep an eye on. While life at Queens Park Rangers is again in flux after
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-sacked-qpr-after-draw>
, their fans have at least been treated to the relatively rare sight of a 
highly promising, homegrown youngster shining in their first team. The 
Dublin-born winger signed his first professional contract only this year but 
has established himself in the QPR squad and the Republic of Ireland Under-21 
side and, although he is a distance from being a polished player, Hasselbaink 
chose to keep the 19-year-old at Loftus Road in the summer rather than sending 
him out on loan. “He’s got that rawness,” said the Dutchman before his sacking. 
“He’s not afraid, he has that streetness and that fight. It’s getting that 
discipline in him now and that knowhow and that really needs time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9963e2753f8f1a609ea8fa84ac74e866b7cdee86%2F0_56_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tammy%20Abraham%2C%20Pontus%20Jansson%20and%20the%20Championship%E2%80%99s%20most%20eye-catching%20players%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9963e2753f8f1a609ea8fa84ac74e866b7cdee86%2F0_56_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Olamide Shodipo, right, has rough edges but was rated highly by Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink. Photograph: Alan Walter/Reuters 
Anthony Knockaert, Brighton & Hove Albion

Google Brighton’s magical winger Anthony Knockaert and headlines suggest the 
French twinkle-toes has compared himself to Neymar. That is not quite the case 
– he was calling for creative players to be protected more by referees – but, 
even if there is a reason why one is playing in the Championship and the other 
with Barcelona, the two certainly perform similar roles for their teams. 
Knockaert can be frustrating to watch, a man who looks as if he is constantly 
trying to score the perfect goal from the most preposterous angle, sometimes 
ignoring pleading colleagues. But every now and then he does score the perfect 
goal from the most preposterous angle and he is forgiven. He is probably the 
most naturally gifted player in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>.
 