
From its beginnings on the bench of a 17th century Dutch chemist, the history 
of gin has not always been a happy one. Originally intended as a medicine, gin 
became suddenly affordable in Britain due to changes in the duty levied 
following the accession of William of Orange to the throne. French brandy 
prices went through the roof, a great many small-scale gin distilleries were 
established across London and by the early years of the 18th century what had 
become known as theGin Craze 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-09-14/london-gin-craze-had-roots-in-nascent-consumer-society.html>
 was truly out of hand. The drunkenness and abandon on display in William 
Hogarth'sGin Lane <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beer_Street_and_Gin_Lane> 
(1751) epitomises the widespread misery and dissolution caused by gin, in 
deliberate contrast to the happy, well-fed workers with their foaming tankards
on Beer Street <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beer_Street_and_Gin_Lane>.

In the first third of the 19th century, advancements in distillation 
eventually allowed for the mass-production of pure spirits using"continuous" 
stills <http://wiki.homedistiller.org/Continuous_still>. These spirits were 
then re-distilled to make "London dry gin", the defining stipulations for which 
are still in force today: it must contain no added sugar, be flavoured 
primarily with juniper, and a minimum of 37.5% alcohol by volume.

Gone were the wide variations in quality and the terrible adulterants 
<http://www.gintime.com/features/musing-on-the-quest-for-gin-authenticity/> 
added by earlier generations of unscrupulous distillers, and with the discovery 
that quinine was effective against malaria the colonial officer class began to 
drink the new "tonic water" enlivened with gin. Now enjoyed in fashionable 
circles, the rehabilitation of mothers' ruin was complete, with the added bonus 
that the antimalarial tonic water actually worked.

The perception of a link between gin and glamorous living received another 
fillip in the jazz age. The drinking of cocktails and the culture around them 
grew and flourished even during American prohibition, and President Roosevelt's 
first act upon signing the paperwork which repealed the alcohol ban was to mix 
a martini, using plenty of gin, vermouth and olive brine. The growing 
popularity of gin cocktails provided the distillers with another challenge: the 
fruity juniper and citrussy coriander seed flavours which work so well with 
tonic water are not always ideal in a cocktail.

In the last decade or so enthusiasm for interesting gins has grown, and with 
it, the number of small distillers. One of the newest isPortobello Road 
<http://portobellostarbar.co.uk/portobelloroadgin/>, a small outfit boasting 
its own 'Ginstitute', a tiny room above the Portobello Star dedicated to the 
history and scientific understanding of gin. They offer private tuition and 
blending classes, run by master distiller and (ahem) ginthusiast Jake Burger, 
whose encyclopedic knowledge made for a very enjoyable afternoon for our 
tasting panel.

Here are our tasting notes and musings. This isn't a comprehensive list of the 
gins currently available, it's our panel's pick of those they found most 
enjoyable, interesting or unusual. There are now almost too many gins to count, 
each with characteristics as unique as every gin drinker, so please share your 
loves, hates and serving suggestions.

Bombay Sapphire
 Bombay Sapphire gin. 
Leading the way towards the current gin revival, Bombay Sapphire has been 
around since 1987 and is distilled using a "carterhead" still, meaning the 
botanicals do not come into direct contact with alcohol but are contained in a 
wire basket above the liquid and the flavours released by vapour alone. This 
process makes for a less aggressively flavoured spirit, and if you can recover 
from the disappointment that it's (spoiler alert) not actually blue, you can 
enjoy a nice warm and spicy gin with a liquorice aftertaste. There's not much 
citrus, but heavy hints of cinnamon and for those who can detect it, Grains of 
Paradise.

Details: 40% ABV, RRP £19.99 for 70cl, available in shops nationwide and online
 <http://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/P-2249.aspx>

Adnams First Rate

Made from scratch by Adnams in Suffolk, a company known best for its beers, 
First Rate is made using an innovative Faraday still which produces a 
beautifully clear, crystalline spirit. The higher-than-average alcohol content 
carries bags of fresh juniper and sweet orange flavours alongside wafts of 
cardamom and thyme. Adding tonic brings fennel and a little liquorice to the 
party. A really classy gin.

Details: 48% ABV, £25.99 for 50cl, available from Cellar & Kitchen Stores and 
online 
<http://cellarandkitchen.adnams.co.uk/catalog/product/spirits-1/adnams-first-rate-gin-48-abv-50cl>

Hendrick's
 Hendrick's gin. 
Current darling of many enthusiasts (and named the best in the world by the 
Wall St Journal a few years back) this excellent gin from Scottish whisky 
distillers William Grant utilises rose petals and cucumber for a distinctive 
and memorably fresh taste that's just the right side of floral. Best served 
with a slice of cucumber, it works beautifully in G&Ts and cocktails. 
Bartenders may hate the hard-to-pour apothecary-style bottle but it's a smart 
nod to gin's medicinal history.

Details: 41.4% ABV, RRP £25.29 for 70cl. Stockists include Sainbury's, 
Waitrose, Peckham's, Harvey Nichols, and also availableonline 
<http://www.oneclickvintage.com/hendricks-70cl-p-1447.html>

Berkeley Square

A very smooth gin, but big on taste too with quite some heat from the 
botanicals - makrut lime leaf, basil, lavender, sage - and a bit of sweetness 
from the liquorice. Perhaps a little too flavoursome for a G&T, this gin would 
happily stand up in a martini on the rocks.

Details:40% ABV, £33.99 for 70cl, available online 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=berkeley+square+gin&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a#q=berkeley+square+gin&hl=en&safe=off&client=firefox-a&hs=Os1&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&prmd=imvns&source=univ&tbm=shop&tbo=u&sa=X&ei=N-52UPyfDoGw0QW4mIE4&ved=0CDgQrQQ&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.r_qf.&fp=3baa9496d269b1ed&bpcl=35243188&biw=1730&bih=997>
 and in specialist retailers

Sipsmith
 Sipsmith gin. 
Established in 2009, Sipsmith's was the first new copper pot still in London 
for almost 200 years. There are no flashy exotic ingredients here, just a very 
well-made, carefully balanced spirit. Its smoothness, rich botanicals, warmth 
on the tongue and peppery finish make this everything a gin should be.

Details: 41.6%, £28 for 70cl, available from Waitrose and Majestic stores, and 
online 
<http://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/feature/sipsmith_independent_spirits.aspx>

Whitley Neill

Good and ginny with plenty of fresh-tasting juniper and punchy citrus notes 
courtesy of the makrut lime and cape gooseberries and, apparently, an 
additional zesty sourness provided bybaobab fruit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/jul/16/baobabshouldwebeeatingit>
. The well-balanced initial flavours give way to a nice peppery finish make a 
very good G&T. This is the only gin our panel tasted with charitable links ("5% 
of the proceeds" go toTreeAid <http://www.treeaid.org.uk/>) and at the price 
represents very good value for money.

Details: 42.0% ABV, £20.95 for 70cl, available online 
<http://www.slurp.co.uk/wine-gifts/gifts-for-special-occasions/23402-whitley-neill-london-dry-gin>

Portobello Road
 Portobello Road gin. 
A superbly balanced, traditional gin with a peppery kick. Nice and ginny 
without being too heavy on the juniper, and plenty of G&T-friendly fresh citrus 
and coriander. Enough spicy nutmeg and cassia to stand up for itself in a 
cocktail, even in the ultimate test of a gin's character, a negroni. Add a 
twist of grapefruit for the ultimate G&T.

Details: 42%, RRP £24 for 70cl, available from the distiller on Portobello 
Road, London, andonline <http://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/P-16642.aspx>

BLOOM

According to the blurb this gin is (as you might expect given the name) 
"inspired by the classic aromas of England's country gardens." Sure enough our 
tasters found it "very floral, but warm too. A bit girly." Probably more one 
for a summer's G&T than a cocktail.

Details: 40% ABV, £28.99 for 70cl, available in Waitrose and specialist 
retailers

Oliver Cromwell 1599
 Oliver Cromwell 1599 gin. 
The surprise winner of the Gin and Vodka Association Trophy a couple of years 
ago, beating the more famous premium gins. Not the most complex of gins - 
juniper and citrus dominate - but light, smooth and very satisfying.

At under a tenner it's a real bargain (though it's only a 500ml bottle, so not 
as super-cheap as it first appears), and the classy bottle means you could pass 
it off as more expensive, should you be of a devious nature.

Details: 40% ABV, £9.49 for 50cl, available at Aldi

London Hill

A good introductory gin, very smooth, easy sipping and uncomplicated. Note 
that the "dry" on the label refers to the method and not to the taste - 
angelica, orris root and liquorice give this gin a noticeable sweetness.

Details: 43% ABV (1 litre bottle) or 40% ABV (1.5l and 70cl bottles), £15.69 
for 70cl, availableonline <http://www.anybooze.com/london-hill-gin-304-p.asp> 

Berry Bros and Rudd No. 3
 No. 3 London dry gin. 
Distilled in traditional copper pot stills in Holland, No.3 is designed to 
reflect the essence of what a good traditional gin should be and meet the 
modern challenge of marrying well with tonic and in cocktails. With assertive 
juniper balanced with sweet orange peel and a twist of grapefruit this gin's 
distinctly citrussy tones are lengthened nicely by a warm backnote provided by 
cardamom seeds. A bottle would make a nice gift, both for its drinkability and 
handsome presentation, though the embedded key feels a tad gimmicky.

Details: 46% ABV, RRP £33.65 for 70cl, available at Berry Bros and Rudd, 
London, Waitrose, Selfridges, Harvey Nichols andonline 
<http://www.bbr.com/producer-1874-no-3-london-dry-gin>

Spirit of Hven

Billed proudly as an "organic gin" from Sweden and made in a tiny distillery, 
Hven have been producing whisky since 2008 and only recently started making 
gin, which made a first appearance in the UK at London Cocktail Week 2012. 
Although just 40% ABV the spirit smells very alcoholic, fumes arriving in the 
mouth before the taste. Our tasters detected little evidence of juniper, 
perhaps due to the fresh Swedish berries used rather than imported dried 
fruits, but there's lots of liquorice bolstered by aniseed and two types of 
pepper. Not really very ginny, but the makers suggest it can be drunk diluted 
with only a little water, so perhaps an interesting gift for a gin-lover.
Details: 40% ABV, available online 
<http://www.loegismose.dk/shop/product/4617/> and coming to the UK soon

G'vine Nouaison and Floraison
 G'Vine gins. 
This proud pair of "gins de France" are intended as alternatives to the 
classic London dry style. Inextricably linked to the grape vine, they're made 
in the Cognac region using grape spirit and feature vine flowers among the 
botanicals. On the palate the delicate floral notes that the vine flowers 
provide move on to liquorice and end with spicy cassia. Flavours seem quite 
separate and the gin has more body than a London dry. With tonic, the liquorice 
and cassia of the Nouaison were a bit overbearing and the interesting floral 
notes were lost, but the flowery flavours hold up longer and better in the 
Floraison.

Details: £40% ABV, Gvine-Floraison £29.49-£32.99, Gvine-Nouaison £30.95-£33.99 
for 70cl. Available at over 100 pubs and bars
and online <http://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/P-7242.aspx>

Blackwood's vintage dry gin

Made with sustainably foraged Shetland botanicals and billed as "the world's 
only handpicked gin" this is a slightly floral spirit with a definite presence 
of juniper but not much body or heat. Mixed with tonic, however, it comes into 
its own and was memorably (and slightly worryingly) described by one taster as 
"a session gin".

Details: 40% ABV, RRP £17.40 for 70cl, available at Sainsbury's and other 
retailers and alsoonline 
<http://www.thedrinkshop.com/products/nlpdetail.php?prodid=2032&afwinid=90909>

Monkey 47
 Monkey 47 gin 
A great gift for the gin connoisseur, beautifully packaged in an 
apothecary-style bottle. Only a true expert will identify all 47 botanicals, a 
third of which come from the Black Forest in Germany, where the gin is 
distilled. The sheer complexity of the flavour makes it a little overpowering 
in a simple G&T, but it makes a memorable negroni, a fine martini and would 
make for a very interesting evening's cocktail experimentation.

Details: 50cl, c £38 (about £42 with shipping), available online 
<http://www.vodkaemporium.com/product_detail.php?id=1771>

Little Bird

A strong grapefruit nose, perfectly matched citrus and juniper on first taste 
give way to hints of spicy coriander and ginger. A little light on spice, but 
tonic water brings the ginger out to join in a three-pronged attack with the 
other two big botanicals, and it holds its own surprisingly well in a martini.

Details: 41.6% ABV, RRP £29.95 for 70cl, available at Maltby Street Market in 
London andonline 
<http://www.drinkfinder.co.uk/spirits/little-bird-london-dry-gin-small-batch-gin-41-6-70cl.html>

Plymouth
 Plymouth gin. 
A unique gin produced in Plymouth since 1793 in the oldest functioning gin 
distillery in the country, and the only gin to have Protected Designation of 
Origin status. Long a favourite of the Royal Navy (a Navy strength version is 
available at 57% ABV) it's recently been repackaged in a handsome, art-deco 
style bottle. On the nose it's quite fruity, but to taste it's smooth and 
spicy, more so than a London dry with plenty of cardamom, coriander and some 
citrus keeping the juniper in check and resulting in a flavour described by 
some as "earthy".

Details: 41.2% ABV, £28 for 70cl, available in shops and online from the 
distillery 
<http://storefront.plymouthgin.com/plymouth-gins-70-cl-/original-strength-1l-/prod_1.html>

Beefeater 24

An updated version of a very well-known classic London dry, the up-front fruit 
is balanced by a long, spicy finish of coriander and liquorice and the whole 
flavour profile subtly influenced and bound together by two types of tea. This 
is an eminently adaptable gin: good in G&Ts and martinis.

Details: 45% ABV, RRP £26 for 70cl, available in off-licences, supermarkets and
online 
<http://www.masterofmalt.com/gin/beefeater/beefeater-24-gin/?utm_content=beefeater/beefeater-24-gin&utm_source=database&utm_medium=base&utm_campaign=mom_base_1>

Martin Miller's Super Premium
 Martin Miller's gin. 
On the market since 1999 this spirit is hailed as a pioneer in the current 
wave of high-end gins. It was the first to use cucumber as a botanical, and the 
distiller's obsessive attention to detail is given as the reason for shipping 
the spirit to Iceland for bottling with local spring water before importing the 
finished gin in to the UK. Many people who say they don't really like gin do 
like this one, the major difference with a more traditional London dry being 
beefed-up angelica and orris root notes with hints of violets, and a spicy 
finish carried home by nutmeg and cassia bark. Floral on the nose, with juniper 
following. An interesting and modern gin, particularly good in cocktails.

Details:40% ABV, RRP £25 for 70cl, available from Ocado, Wine Rack, Nicholas, 
Oddbins andonline 
<http://www.majestic.co.uk/find/product-is-50504?cmp=GoogleBase&utm_source=Google&utm_medium=Shopping&utm_campaign=shopping&utm_content=50504>

Gilpin's Westmorland Extra Dry

On the market since March 2012 this traditionally-made spirit has been 
impressively well-received, winning a gold in the 2012 International Wine & 
Spirit Competition. Born of a desire to make the ultimate martini, this is a 
gentlemanly gin with earthy botanicals (sage, borage) and a hefty ABV in a 
chunky cologne-style bottle. The style is classic London dry achieved using 
eight botanicals, three of them citrus peels. Juniper and coriander seed (and 
the alcohol) give it a good kick, without becoming overwhelming. Best in a 
martini or agibson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gibson_%28cocktail%29>.

Details: 47% ABV, £37.50 for 70cl, available at Gerry's, Soho Wines, Amathus 
andonline <http://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/P-17351.aspx> 

Tanqueray No 10
 Tanqueray no Ten gin. 
Presented in a handsome green fluted bottle, this version of Tanqueray is 
clean and crisp with a nose poised between coriander and juniper. Tasting a nip 
reveals a boozy heat, turns up the intensity of these two main botanicals and 
reveals a pleasant peppery finish. It's surprisingly subtle in a G&T due to its 
well-muddled flavours, and if you like a slow-burning lingering spicy finish, 
you'll like this gin. Where it really shines, though is in a martini where the 
smoothness, bottling strength and complex character can really come into their 
own.

Details:47.3% ABV, £27.99 for 70cl, available in off-licenses, supermarkets and
online 
<http://www.simplywinesdirect.co.uk/productcart/pc/viewPrd.asp?idproduct=609&idcategory=36&idaffiliate=3>

Williams Chase Apple Gin

All gins start life as pure spirit which is then redistilled, but unusually 
this one traces its origins back to cider apples, this Herefordshire distillery 
priding itself on producing spirits entirely from scratch rather than buying 
the alcohol in. It leaves you in no doubt that it is alcoholic with a fiery 
kick, and bottled at 48% ABV it's intended for cocktails. Once the heat calms 
down there's a good depth of flavour with lots of liquorice and a pinch of 
juniper.
Details: 48% ABV, about £35 for 70cl, available online 
<http://www.thedrinkshop.com/products/nlpdetail.php?prodid=6389&afwinid=90909> 

Williams Chase London Dry

Distilled from potatoes and using juniper buds as well as berries this smells 
lovely - leading with juniper, following with floral notes and ending up 
pleasantly cinnamony. To taste it's very hot with a strong liquorice 
aftertaste, quite fleeting on the tongue but the flavour builds and builds. 
Good with tonic.

Details: 40% ABV. Available soon
 