
The media is famously reluctant to admit error. And crossword setters and 
editors are no exception. When someone recently took me to task for a clue 
which implied that Robert E Lee was a US general, I spent desperate hours 
trying to discover whether by any chance he had in fact been promoted to that 
rank before resigning to become the best known of the Confederate generals. 
Unfortunately for me, though Colonel Lee was offered a generalship in the Union 
army, he declined it because his native state of Virginia had just voted to 
secede. Even then, I sought to cover my retreat by just getting the clue in the 
archive changed to "American general".

All of this is by way of introduction to the fact that I have been dancing on 
the head of a pin to avoid accepting a solver's claim that a clue in Doc's 
November Genius puzzle broke the Golden Rule that each clue should have only 
one unambiguously clear correct solution.

The puzzle was entitled REAFFORESTATION. As those who broke the code will have 
realised, this indicated that what was involved was solving each clue and then 
rearranging some consecutive letters in the answer to spell a tree before 
entering the resultant gobbledegook in the grid.

The clue for 13 across was: "Stroke or pinch round rough edge (5)". This 
produced TRAIT, where TAIT is a Scottish dialect word for a small amount, R is 
a rough edge and TRAIT is a now rare word for a touch or stroke. Plain sailing, 
then, up to this point. Doc's intention was that the last three letters of 
TRAIT should be reorganised into "ita", which (as we all know) is a name 
derived from the Arawakan language for the miriti palm. Then Susan from 
Shropshire went and spoiled things by pointing out that you could also take the 
last two letters of TRAIT and swap them to "ti", which (as we also all know) is 
a small Pacific liliacous tree with edible roots.

Faced with this challenge, we toyed seriously with the idea of arguing that 
the ti and the (Australian) tea tree were the same thing and that, since this 
would have involved a fourth tree (TEA) appearing twice (instead of just the 
three double entries - ASH, CEDAR, ELM - indicated in the puzzle's rubric) 
TRATI could not be the right answer. But (curse it!) Chambers says that, though 
some people believe that ti can be applied to the Australian tea tree, they are 
wrong. Unconditional surrender was clearly the only available option. So you 
may rest assured that both TRITA and TRATI have been accepted as correct 
answers to 13 across.

_____

With November the downward trend of correct entries seems to be continuing. 
There were only 43, against the previous all time low of 53 for Enigmatist in 
October and 88 for Paul in September. (For the record, the first entry was 
timed at 0943 on November 8 from Elancourt in France, two days after it was 
uploaded.) This clear trend prompts me to ask whether it means that the Genius 
puzzle is becoming more difficult than it should be, or whether there is some 
other explanation for this apparent loss of the will to solve.

In the early days of the Genius puzzle there were frequent complaints that 
some of them were too easy; that something was expected that, if completed, 
would give a real feeling of achievement even to the battle-hardened; that it 
was nice to feel oneself part of an exclusive group.

Recently, the mail on the subject has been more mixed. Some still say that 
they are happy that completing a Genius should be a struggle and that they 
would be disappointed if they routinely finished one quickly or even every 
month. Others say that they wonder if the Genius is not getting to be too 
clever by half; that recent puzzles seem increasingly to call for perspiration 
rather than inspiration; that too much time is spend in Googling through 
obscure lists. These are unsolicited and unrepresentative comments. So could I 
solicit others in the hope of getting a better feel for the level of consumer 
(dis)satisfaction?

_____

With Christmas approaching, this is a reminder that the Bunthorne 
commemorative booklet, edited by Dave Tilley and John Henderson, is now out. It 
is A5 with a colour cover, containing 36 of Bob Smithies' puzzles. It costs £5, 
plus postage (£1 for the UK, £2 for Europe and £3 for the rest of the world). 
Copies can be ordered online atbunthornebook@btinternet.com <>. Payment can be 
via PayPal. Otherwise, you can also order by post from Bunthorne Book, 15 
Harley Wood, Todmorden, Lancs OL14 8HT with cheques made payable to Bunthorne 
Book. All the money made will go to Bob's favourite charity, M�decins Sans 
Fronti�res.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 