
Police have arrested a 15-year-old boy following an investigation into 
allegations of racist abuse of players in Everton’s3-0 FA Cup fourth-round 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/carlisle-everton-fa-cup-match-report>
 against Carlisle United at Brunton Park on Sunday.

Soon after Arouna Koné’s second-minute opening goal for the visitors, the 
referee, Lee Mason, was seen consulting with the managers Roberto Martínez and 
Keith Curle, before a message was broadcast over the public address system 
announcing that any racist abuse would not be tolerated.

Everton’s Koné and Pienaar suffer alleged racial abuse at Carlisle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/everton-kone-pienaar-alleged-racial-abuse-carlisle>
Martínez, the Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager, 
later said it was his understanding some “racial remarks” had allegedly come 
from the Warwick Road End stand as Koné and Steven Pienaar celebrated the goal.

Both clubs were contacted by the Football Association as part of the governing 
body’s inquiries, while Cumbria police also issued an appeal for information.

On Wednesday, it was confirmed one arrest had now been made, with the teenager 
released on bail, as ongoing investigations continue.

A statement from Cumbria police read: “Police have arrested a male as part of 
an investigation regarding allegations of racist behaviour directed towards 
football players inCarlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> 
United’s FA Cup fourth round tie with Everton.

“A 15-year-old male, from Carlisle, has been arrested on suspicion of 
racially/religiously aggravated intentional harassment/alarm/distress by words 
contrary to Section 4a of the Public Order Act. He has been bailed until 9 
March 2016.

“Police are working closely with Carlisle United as part of inquiries to 
identify any other suspects.”

After the cup tie, Martínez had praised Mason for his handling of the matter, 
and added: “There is no room for that sort of behaviour, but I must stress it 
was a very small minority and I want to believe that it was just an emotional 
reaction to the disappointment of conceding a goal.”

A bumper crowd of 17,101 had turned out for what was only Carlisle’s second 
game back at their own stadium since it was caught up in floods.
 