
I used to watch Gillingham play with my dad and brother as a child in the late 
70s/early 80s and remember the thrill of having my name read out on my birthday 
and hearing them play my favourite song –Don’t Stand So Close To Me by the 
Police <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNIZofPB8ZM>. There was a sense that 
children were begrudgingly tolerated in this adult world – the language was 
salty, the food was saltier still and there were no separate family areas to 
speak of, but it was great fun if a bit edgy (even though to avoid the “crowds” 
we always left the ground five minutes before the end of the game and heard the 
seemingly inevitable roar from outside the stadium when the Gills scored).

How times have changed. A record-breaking 44 football teams have been awarded 
Family Excellence awards by the English Football League 
<http://www.efl.com/news/article/2016/the-football-league-family-excellence-award-winners-announced-3096917.aspx#OxzCFmV1uyJywER7.99>
 this year – 61% of clubs. Two mystery shopper-style family visits were made to 
each club – one as a home fan and another as an away fan and the whole 
experience was considered alongside family pricing structures, the quality of 
the club’s website, catering and other factors.

More and more children and families now attend matches around the country, and 
clubs are working harder than ever to attract them. Even though there is a 
record amount of money in the game from TV deals and sponsorship, this approach 
to enticing and retaining the next generation of fans is an obvious long-term 
strategy.


The overall winner of the Family Club of the Year award for the 2015-16 season 
was Fulham, withDoncaster Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> winning in League One and 
Oxford in League Two – Wigan Athletic received the award for the first time.


Championship

Brighton & Hove Albion

Amex community stadium; ticket office: 0844 327 1901; adult matchday tickets 
from £25, children from £5; adult season ticket £530, child season ticket 
under-10 £85;seagulls.co.uk <http://www.seagulls.co.uk/>

Children can become Young Seagulls for free and receive a welcome pack and 
watch an open training session at the stadium. They will also receive a free 
home shirt on their seventh birthday. The EFL’s report found it to be “very 
relaxed and friendly”. There are children’s entertainers and a stage with 
various activities, including a balloonist. As you’d perhaps expect of 
Brighton, there is zero tolerance of homophobic chants, which are still sadly 
to be heard by some visiting fans. The family area is in the East Lower stand.


Access can still be a problem with a lack of car parking and very busy trains 
from Brighton to the stadium at Falmer – walking to and from Brighton might 
actually be a better option.


Brighton have come agonisingly close to Premier League promotion over the past 
few years, and none more so than last season where they started the campaign 
with a 21-game unbeaten run. With the returning Glenn Murray, if they manage to 
hold on to a few key players, especially Anthony Knockaert, they could come 
close again.


Cardiff City


Cardiff City stadium; ticket office: 0845 345 1400; adult matchday tickets 
from £18, children from £5; adult season tickets from £299, under-16s from £49;
cardiffcityfc.co.uk <http://cardiffcityfc.co.uk/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76eee0fd54ac9129e224e66bd6a43df794c309b6%2F0_188_3160_1896%2F3160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20non-Premier%20League%20family%20friendly%20football%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20non-Premier%20League%20family%20friendly%20football%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76eee0fd54ac9129e224e66bd6a43df794c309b6%2F0_188_3160_1896%2F3160.jpg>
 A young Cardiff fan enjoying the game against QPR. Photograph: 
McManus/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
One of the family visitors said: “There was loads going on. We noticed kids’ 
activities, skills drills, basketball, players offering autographs, free 
balloons being handed out, a street dance troupe exercise, TVs with two 
different games on them, music, announcements and the club mascot wandering 
around too.”


Cardiff City’s range of food was highlighted in the report with many healthy 
options and snacks and also an American hot dog service. In the family section, 
which is in the Grange stand, adult matchday tickets are £18 with under-16s 
just £5. They also offer a family ticket for two adults and two children for 
£40.


As for highlights on the pitch, having tasted life in the Premier League for 
the only time in 2013-14, it’s looking like another top 10 finish at best for 
the Bluebirds.


Fulham


Craven Cottage; ticket office: 0843 208 1234; adult matchday tickets from £30, 
children from £15;adult season tickets from £299 in all stands, juniors from 
£99, under-10s £49;fulhamfc.com <http://www.fulhamfc.com/>

Pre-match activities include face painters and entertainers and at half time 
there are crossbar challenges with players from a local team, involving the 
club mascot, Billy the Badger. There is also a chance to have your picture 
taken on theFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> players’ wall. 
The club have campaign posters around the ground to remind fans to watch their 
language during the match. There is a wide range of options to choose from 
including pies, hot dogs, chips and burgers.


One of the respondents was pleasantly surprised to receive an email the day 
before their visit giving lots of practical information such as weather 
forecasts and travel news.


Last season, the Cottagers finished just above the relegation zone and they 
could really struggle to avoid going down this season and will have to cope 
with the loss of their top scorer, Ross McCormack, to newly relegated Aston 
Villa and Moussa Dembélé, who’s gone to Celtic.


Huddersfield Town


John Smith’s stadium; ticket office: 01484 484123; adult matchday tickets from 
£15, children from £5; adult season tickets £400, eight-17-year-olds £200 and 
under-eights £100;htafc.com <http://htafc.com/>

In perhaps the most unusual pre-match entertainment in the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>, Huddersfield Town have 
“live snakes, lizards and other reptiles” to be held by fans as well as the 
more usual face painting and the like. The club’s helpful first-time buyers 
section on their website was also picked out for special praise. One of the 
mystery shoppers said: “We were very impressed with this as it made planning 
for the trip very easy.” Another said there was “a good atmosphere with no 
swearing or abusive language”.


Throughout the season, the club has lots of different activities running in 
the family stand including free face painting, balloon modelling, player 
autograph sessions and football skills.


Matchday tickets for under-eights can be bought for just £5 for category B and 
C games. Also, the chairman, Dean Hoyle, has subsidised 15,000 season tickets 
for £179 – one of the cheapest season tickets in the country. Also, it’s just 
£5 to park at the ground too.


After a number of years as a club who often sell their best players, the 
Terriers have a strong squad this season, with a lot of new players drawn from 
their youth academy and second and third tier German leagues.


Ipswich Town


Portman Road, ticket hotline 03330 050503; adult matchday tickets £32.50, 
children from £8.50; adult family season tickets £417, under-16s £118, 
under-11s £10;itfc.co.uk <http://itfc.co.uk/>

Among the activities that were commended were the practice pitch behind the 
family stand where children can play football and a Junior Blues room, which is 
open from 1.30pm on Saturday games and is suitable for children aged 5-15. The 
staff were noted as being friendly and there were lots of signs encouraging 
fans to mind their language. Junior club members can be seen on the pitch at 
every match as mascots.


There are plenty of car parks within walking distance of Portman Road. In any 
case, the ground is within easy walking distance of the town centre.


Mick McCarthy’s Tractor Boys are once more looking like top 10 contenders and 
may push for the play-offs but they will not be relishing the fierce “Old Farm” 
derby games against Norwich, who have had the better of them in recent years.


Wigan Athletic


DW stadium; ticket office 0871 6633552; adult matchday tickets from £20, 
children from £2; adult season tickets from £179, under-16s free when 
purchasing adult season ticket;wiganlatics.co.uk <http://wiganlatics.co.uk/>

In achieving the award for the first time, the club has been recognised for 
its superb entertainment for families, engaging with young fans and families 
through such initiatives as the free Family Fun Zone, which includes a climbing 
wall and football and tennis activities withWigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> Community Trust. 


One of the respondents said: “The welcome was very good, professional but 
smiling and friendly, speaking to all people as they went in. No foul or 
abusive langue. Made to feel very safe and family friendly.”


Food-wise, all you need to know is that Wigan came fourth in Tom Dickinson’s 
mighty 92 Pies book, in which he sampled the fare at all 92 grounds in the 
Premier League and Football League.


The Latics were promoted last season, immediately returning from League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> and secured – though 
lost – some great pre-season friendlies against Liverpool and Manchester 
United. The Guardian’s Louise Taylor says that “Gary Caldwell’s youthful, 
free‑flowing Wigan Athletic look too strong to struggle – and having bought 
well may even challenge towards the top end.”


League One

Gillingham

Priestfield stadium; ticket office 01634 300000; adult matchday tickets from 
£16, children from £6; adult season tickets from £295, under-12s from £35;
gillinghamfootballclub.com <http://gillinghamfootballclub.com/>

Respondents were impressed that all of the players seemed very happy to sign 
autographs and have their photos taken and by the overall family friendly vibe. 
The club-recommended car park was very easy to get to and well explained on 
their website and cost just £3. However, it was notable that none of the survey 
participants mentioned the food, so perhaps bring a packed lunch …


The club was also commended by the judges for their Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Fun Days and Kids for a Quid 
promotions and there are plans to launch a Junior Gills club too.


Last season, the mighty Gills – astonishingly, Kent’s only Football League 
team – slipped to a disappointing ninth in the division. They’ll be looking to 
do better this campaign, especially after disappointing pre-season losses to 
Barnet and Leyton Orient.


Millwall


The Den; ticket office: 08448262004; adult matchday tickets from £19, children 
from £3; adult season tickets from £412, under-16s £185, under-12s £23;
millwallfc.co.uk <http://www.millwallfc.co.uk/>

At one time synonymous with football hooliganism and the epitome of a family un
friendly club (“No ones likes us, we don’t care”) but nowadays it’s a (mostly) 
very different crowd. In fact, this is the third consecutive year the club has 
won a Football League Family Excellence Award. It was heavily praised for its 
very good atmosphere. One person surveyed said: “There was lots of laughter and 
we even struck up a conversation with a couple of other parents,” which sort of 
suggests that the reputation is still there to be overcome – why wouldn’t you 
talk to other people?


Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> also received the 
Welcome to the Club trophy, which recognises a family’s matchday experience, 
which included criteria such as staff friendliness and helpfulness, appropriate 
signage, activities and much more. With poor parking at or near the ground, 
most fans travel by train from London Bridge to South Bermondsey and walk.


Though they lost in the play-off final last season, Millwall start this 
campaign on very good form (they lost only three of their last 21 matches). 
Gregg Wylde, the winger signed from Plymouth Argyle, should help the Lions 
bolster their attacking options.


Oxford United


Kassam stadium; ticket hotline: 01865 337533; adult matchday tickets £20, 
children under seven free; adult season ticket £300, under-18s £75, under-13s 
£60 and under-sevens free;oufc.co.uk <http://oufc.co.uk/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28dbe79426a559278d0bf70becefdf00a37b54e5%2F0_19_4882_2930%2F4882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20non-Premier%20League%20family%20friendly%20football%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20non-Premier%20League%20family%20friendly%20football%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ften-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28dbe79426a559278d0bf70becefdf00a37b54e5%2F0_19_4882_2930%2F4882.jpg>
 Oxford fans cheer on their side against Swansea. Or perhaps salute the 
excellent car parking facilities. Photograph: BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
The mystery attendees found that there were lots of friendly stewards and club 
representatives and that the family area was very safe and friendly, with 
reasonable-quality food. The website was praised for its excellent directions, 
whether travelling by car, train or bus.


Unusually, Oxford’s ground has just three stands, the fourth oddly being open 
to a car park (but what a car park, with about 2,000 free spaces).


The Guardian’s Paul Doyle says that Oxford have a “realistic chance of 
following last season’s promotion fromLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> with a tilt at 
promotion from the third tier”.


My son, the football fan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/24/my-son-football-fan-qpr> 
League Two

Doncaster Rovers

Keepmoat stadium; ticket office 01302 762576; adult and child matchday tickets 
from £23; adult season tickets from £299, ages 12-16 £70, under-12s £30;
doncasterroversfc.co.uk <http://doncasterroversfc.co.uk/>

The survey respondent said: “The stadium announcer involved the kids, 
interviewing and asking questions, plus as the teams make their entrance a 
group of children wave the big circle banner on the pitch and are then led back 
to their seats in the family stand.”


There is a special deli for younger children and the chance to have Donny the 
mascot deliver your drinks to your seat in the stadium. The club make a big 
effort to keep children entertained, especially around the food concourses. 
There is a table tennis table, pool table, air hockey, TV with a film showing 
and a small area for a mini football kickaround. There are also dedicated 
family stand assistants.


Rovers will look to bounce back from a second relegation in three years and 
there should be goals for them, with Gary McSheffrey and John Marquis, who 
helped Northampton Town to the League Two title last season, now on their books.


The full list of clubs receiving the award in 2016:


AFC Wimbledon 
Birmingham City 
Blackburn Rovers 
Bolton Wanderers 
Brentford 
Brighton & Hove Albion 
Bristol City 
Cardiff City 
Carlisle United 
Charlton Athletic 
Chesterfield 
Colchester United 
Coventry City 
Crewe Alexandra 
Derby County 
Doncaster Rovers 
Exeter City 
Fulham 
Gillingham 
Huddersfield Town 
Ipswich Town 
Leeds United 
Luton Town 
Middlesbrough 
Millwall 
Milton Keynes Dons 
Northampton Town 
Nottingham Forest 
Notts County 
Oldham Athletic 
Oxford United 
Peterborough United 
Plymouth Argyle 
Preston North End 
Queens Park Rangers 
Reading 
Rotherham United 
Scunthorpe United 
Sheffield United 
Southend United 
Stevenage 
Wigan Athletic 
Wolverhampton Wanderers 
Wycombe Wanderers

 