
Marco Asensio, Spain

Elevated into Zinedine Zidane’s Real Madrid team during the opening two weeks 
of the La Liga season, the attacking midfielder was included in Julen 
Lopetegui’s first squad for a friendly with Belgium and Monday’s visit of 
Liechtenstein, though he did not make it off the bench for thewin in Brussels 
on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/belgium-beaten-2-0-by-spain-in-roberto-martinezs-first-match-in-charge>
. Capable of operating centrally and out wide, the 20-year‑old will need to 
bide his time for opportunities but such has been his rapid rise it would not 
be a massive surprise if he became a regular later in the campaign. In the 
meantime it would be good to see him get some game time in noncompetitive 
fixtures. His only cap so far came against Bosnia‑Herzegovina at the end of 
last season.

Belgium beaten 2-0 by Spain in Roberto Martínez’s first match in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/belgium-beaten-2-0-by-spain-in-roberto-martinezs-first-match-in-charge>
Ousmane Dembélé, France

Previously uncapped, the midfielder was brought into Didier Deschamps’ squad 
for the friendly withItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> and 
Tuesday’s trip to Belarus, and he came on against theAzzurri in Bari on 
Thursday. As with Asensio and Spain, the depth of choice available toLes Bleus 
means the midfielder may not be given too many minutes immediately. But he has 
already left an impact at Borussia Dortmund following his move from Rennes, 
with the Mainz defender Leon Balogun calling him “freaking amazing” after their 
Bundesliga meeting last week. He will be aiming to leave a similar impression 
on his international team-mates over the coming months.

Emre Mor, Turkey

After playing up to Under-19 level for Denmark, the country of his birth, the 
midfielder swapped allegiances this year and showed glimpses of his potential 
during Turkey’smostly awful Euro 2016 campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
. Having signed with Borussia Dortmund from Nordsjaelland, his development 
should accelerate further but his career path has been unusual. Turned down by 
Saint-Étienne and released by Lyngby in 2015, his one season at Nordsjaelland 
showed a dramatic improvement. Turkey could also do with fresh impetus in a 
team that looked stale throughout their dismal campaign in France and Mor 
possesses the fearlessness and excitement to provide the boost Fatih Terim’s 
side need. He started the midweek friendly against Russia and should begin the 
qualifier against Croatia on Monday evening.

Bartosz Kapustka, Poland

Recently signed by Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/leicester-sign-poland-winger-bartosz-kapustka-premier-league>
 from Cracovia for £5m, the 19-year-old winger made quite an impression during 
the European Championship – notably inthe group game against Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/12/northern-ireland-poland-euro-2016>
, leading to Wojciech Szczesny saying afterwards: “It’s ridiculous, you 
shouldn’t be allowed to play at that level when you’re 19.” Although well 
established in Adam Nawalka’s team, this qualifying campaign, which has given 
Poland a kind group – starting in Kazakhstan on Sunday – could open the door to 
him becoming a big name across the continent. He has not yet featured for the 
Foxes but should be called on when fixture congestion becomes an issue for the 
Premier League champions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Feurope-european-world-cup-qualifiers-10-ten-rsing-stars-to-watch-italy-poland-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2115cf3952dc049800fa3eb1c222bd5a92584ca5%2F0_0_2732_1939%2F2732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20rising%20stars%20to%20watch%20across%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20World%20Cup%20qualifying%20campaign%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Feurope-european-world-cup-qualifiers-10-ten-rsing-stars-to-watch-italy-poland-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20rising%20stars%20to%20watch%20across%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20World%20Cup%20qualifying%20campaign%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Feurope-european-world-cup-qualifiers-10-ten-rsing-stars-to-watch-italy-poland-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2115cf3952dc049800fa3eb1c222bd5a92584ca5%2F0_0_2732_1939%2F2732.jpg>
 Bartosz Kapustka in action for Poland at Euro 2016. Photograph: Jean-Paul 
Pelissier/Reuters 
Gianluigi Donnarumma, Italy

His namesake Buffon cannot go on for ever, so it was interesting to see the 
17-year-old Milan goalkeeper named in Giampiero Ventura’s squad and his 
introduction at half-time in the friendly defeat byFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> on Thursday night. Buffon will 
remain first choice for Monday’s game against Israel but Donnarumma is the 
undisputed No1 at San Siro and the 38-year-old veteran has anointed the 
teenager as “a chosen one”. Comparisons to Buffon are inevitable but Donnarumma 
should be judged on his own performances – and the early evidence suggests that 
he is capable of a long international career. Mino Raiola, his agent, believes 
he is worth €170m, too.

Ondrej Duda, Slovakia

Acquired by Hertha Berlin from Legia Warsaw in recent weeks, the young 
midfielder was monitored for some time by Arsenal and would likely have gone to 
Internazionale only for financial fair play rules to get in the way. He earned 
the nickname Ondrej di Maria at Legia, giving an insight into how highly he was 
thought of at the Polish champions. Wales fans will recall his cameo from the 
bench during the Eurosin their group opener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
, which was enough to earn Duda a starting role inthe game against Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
. The 21‑year‑old is happy playing in central midfield and as a second striker 
and could start against England on Sunday evening.

Elseid Hysaj, Albania 

The 22-year-old Napoli defender, who like so many of his international 
team‑mates grew up away from Albania, is a key figure in the team that played 
with distinction during the European Championship and secureda first tournament 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/romania-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
, in the final group game against Romania. Most suited to playing at 
right-back, he is able to fill in on the left and his work-rate means he gets 
forward quite often. His club are desperate to keep him but the vultures are 
circling. Now Albania have ticked a tournament appearance off the bucket list, 
there will be an onus on Hysaj to help ensure it was not a one-off, in a 
campaign that begins at home to Macedonia on Monday.

Alessandro Schöpf, Austria 

The 22-year-old midfielder was one of the few members of Austria’s squad – 
predicted by some to be a dark horse – to depart the Euros without his 
reputation being harmed, scoring theironly goal of the tournament against 
Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
. Marcel Koller’s squad must now pick up the pieces, beginning in Georgia on 
Monday, and much focus will be placed on Schöpf’s impact, along with that of 
David Alaba. Schöpf was nurtured in Bayern Munich’s junior ranks but could not 
make the jump from reserves to first team and moved to Nürnberg in 2014. His 
form there earned a move to Schalke in January and that led to a call-up to the 
national team in March. He has not looked back, instantly becoming a key 
influence.

Breel Embolo, Switzerland

The striker was hit and miss when coming off the bench during Euro 2016, 
indicating he must become more consistent if he is to reach the level many 
expect of him. He had broken into Basel’s first team at 16 and was playing 
Champions League games while still in school, so it is important to remember he 
is still only 19 and has a lot of development to come. Considering the numerous 
clubs who were interested in him this summer – Barcelona, Bayern Munich and 
Arsenal among others – it is understandable that Schalke viewed their signing 
of him as a coup, despite the £20m fee. Expect him to secure a starting role 
during these qualifiers, though perhaps not at home to Portugal on Tuesday, and 
he needs to improve on his record of one goal from 14 caps.

Bersant Celina, Kosovo

There will be significant focus on Kosovo’s first competitive match, against 
Finland, on Monday and it will be particularly fascinating to see how the 
Manchester City graduate, on loan at Twente, fares having chosen to switch from 
Norway, where he grew up.Kosovo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kosovo> 
will not be expected to produce results immediately – especially when there is 
still uncertainty surrounding certain players’ availability – but Celina is 
clear to play and has the potential to be a star. He is highly rated at City, 
where he has focused on learning from David Silva, and if opportunities prove 
plentiful in the Netherlands this season, the attacker will be well worth 
watching throughout his country’s maiden campaign.
 