
Walk along Regent’s Canal in east London and it’s impossible to miss the 
freshly painted barge: black and white stripes, blue triangles and squares of 
yellow. If you’re a fan, you’ll recogniseCamille Walala 
<http://camillewalala.com/>’s bright, geometric style instantly.

The private commission is just the latest piece of work by the French-born 
designer, who is inspired bythe Memphis Group <https://designmuseum.org/memphis>
, a collective of designers creating colourful post-modern designs in early 
1980s Italy. “I grew up in the 80s and my dad had some nice Memphis pieces,” 
says Walala, 41. “I like the playful graphics, and for years I’ve tried to take 
elements of that and do it my way.” Now, though, she is looking for a new 
direction. “I’m trying to move into something more simplistic, and researching 
artists such as the abstract painterAuguste Herbin 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/auguste-herbin-1275>.” She also cites 
African patterns and prints as an inspiration, particularly from the South 
AfricanNdebele tribe <http://www.krugerpark.co.za/africa_ndebele.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbc4971257dbaf99dec263e78a4790e3dfd528b1%2F0_0_3450_4913%2F3450.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbc4971257dbaf99dec263e78a4790e3dfd528b1%2F0_0_3450_4913%2F3450.jpg>
 The designer’s living room – the coffee table is from Habitat, the sofa and 
rug from Ikea. On the wall above the sofa, she has put up diagonal yellow vinyl 
stripes that can be easily peeled off. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the 
Guardian 
It’s all a long way from rural Provence, where Walala grew up before she fell 
in love with the UK. She studied textile design at Brighton University, then 
worked at a French deli in London while making cushions on the side, which she 
sold online. In 2012, the owner of an east London nightclub asked her to 
decorate a space at the venue, giving her carte blanche and a £20,000 budget. 
“It was pretty scary because I’d never done an interior, but he trusted my 
taste,” she says. “It was then I realised I wanted to push myself to go bigger.”

Since then, Walala’s career has snowballed, from taking over a local cafe for 
the evening to big brand collaborations with the likes of Converse and Facebook 
(she has painted murals in both offices), rugs for Floor Story (available at 
Heal’s <https://www.heals.com/fixed-rug.html>) and fashion hook-ups with 
Caterpillar and Gorman. Not to mention the buildings: in London’s Old Street, 
she hasemblazoned one 
<http://www.coolhunting.com/culture/camille-walala-dream-come-true-building>, 
home to a post-production company, with spectacular zigzags.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaa9a8f8e596737edb0f836f5e1689c865007757%2F0_0_3473_5417%2F3473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaa9a8f8e596737edb0f836f5e1689c865007757%2F0_0_3473_5417%2F3473.jpg>
 An alcove with shelves made by a friend. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the 
Guardian 
As you’d expect, her one-bed, split-level flat in Hackney is an extension of 
her work. What’s more surprising is that it’s rented. “My landlord said I could 
do whatever I want, as long as it’s left white when I leave.” By chance, her 
new next-door neighbour was a painter and decorator, so within days the 
magnolia paintwork and brown carpet were gone, replaced by white walls and 
stairs, and a grey carpet in the bedroom.

Then she set to work: diagonal yellow vinyl stripes behind the sofa; a 
black-and-white geometric rug; a black confetti-style pattern in a living room 
alcove; and black chevrons along the edge of shelving. Her own bold prints are 
everywhere, and furniture – from a lemon yellow coffee table to a blue 
sideboard – is painted in bold colours. In the bedroom, she has spray-painted 
plant pots and a kitchen towel holder (which display her thick stacks of 
bangles), and turned a fabric print from her university days into curtains that 
shield her clothes rail. In the kitchen, some of the cupboard doors have been 
removed and the insides painted mint green.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f7e04d95926704d3c572c6a8b5e98fa8b20dc88%2F0_381_3506_4306%2F3506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tenant%E2%80%99s%20extras%3A%20Camille%20Walala%E2%80%99s%20dazzling%20interiors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcamille-walala-design-flat-hackney-emma-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f7e04d95926704d3c572c6a8b5e98fa8b20dc88%2F0_381_3506_4306%2F3506.jpg>
 Walala in her living room; she has promised her landlord that she will paint 
everything white before she moves out. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the 
Guardian 
Having spent the previous seven years in flatshares, Walala owned no furniture 
of her own. She picked up the basics at Ikea and Habitat, scoured charity shops 
for small finds such as plates and candle holders, and picked up a vintage 
Scandinavian cabinet for the living room on eBay.

“I’m quite happy renting because I like the freedom,” Walala explains. She 
loves travelling, and for several years has spent part of the winter with 
friends in Australia. (“I don’t know if I’ll stay in London much longer,” she 
says. “I miss the sun.”) She often works when away, using the time to research 
and sketch, and earns commissions by letting her more than 60,000Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/camillewalala/?hl=en> followers know where she’ll 
be. “Sometimes I’ll put up a post telling people where I’m travelling to and 
asking if anyone wants me to paint a wall.”

This month, as part of the London Design festival 
<http://www.londondesignfestival.com/>, she is creating a temporary zebra 
crossing near Tate Modern; has designed a pop-up store in Clerkenwell, where 
she is hosting a workshop on 17 September; and will be customising a classic 
recliner for Italian furniture makerNatuzzi <http://www.natuzzi.co.uk/>. After 
that, she’s off to a street art festival in Miami in November. Wherever she 
goes, she’ll be making her mark.

 * instagram.com/camillewalala <https://www.instagram.com/camillewalala>
 