
1. The Soulmates survey prize draw (the "Competition") is open to residents of 
the UK aged 18 and over.

2. The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited ("GNM"), their group companies or family members, freelance 
contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Competition.

3. Entry into the Competition is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions.

4. To enter the Competition you must be a Soulmates subscriber or member who 
has been invited to take part in the survey. You must also complete the 
Soulmates survey and provide your contact details at the end. If you have any 
questions about how to enter or in connection with the Competition, please 
e-mail us at soulmates.feedback@theguardian.com with "Soulmates survey prize 
draw" in the subject line.

5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us.

6. No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt.

7. The Competition closes at 23.59 on 30 September 2012. Entries received 
after that date and time will not be considered.

8. The winner will be chosen from a random draw of those who provided their 
contact details at the end of survey.

9. One winner will receive a voucher for Â£200 to a Michelin-starred restaurant 
in London. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the 
prize and not specifically included in the prize.

10. The winner will be notified by phone or email on or before 31 October 2012 
and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to 
GNM within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner's prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that winner 
will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days or else 
they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize, then the 
winner's prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another 
winner.

11. The prize will be sent to the winner by GNM by 1 December 2012.

12. Details of the winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed 
envelope to the following address: Guardian Soulmates, Guardian News & Media 
Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

13. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes.

14. GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of 
similar value in the event the original prize offered is not available.

15. The winner may be required for promotional activity.

16. No purchase necessary.

17. Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence.

18. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person's computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition.

19. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into.

20. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure.

21. The Competition will be governed by English law.

22. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 