
Quick crossword No 11,096 for November 16 raised an issue of some difficulty. 
It is the question of how far is slack, but generally current, use of language 
permissible in the crosswords. The original clue for 21 across was "Termite 
(3)", intended to produce the answer ANT.

Leading the army of protest that day was Paul Headon, who knew what he was 
talking about because his dissertation had been on ants. Both termites and 
ants, he said, are insects but that does not mean that one is a definition of 
the other, any more than would be the case with a human and a cow on the basis 
that they are both mammals. The only biological link between termites and ants, 
he continued, lies in some of their social and behavioural habits, not in their 
genetics. As every GCSE biology student knows, ants are most closely related to 
bees and wasps (Hymenoptera), while termites are closer to cockroaches 
(Isoptera).

So far, so clear. And, to avoid further charges that crossword setters and 
editors are biased against the sciences, the clue on the website has been 
changed to "Social insect (3)". But the complainant then went on to make an 
unsettling concession. People, he said, sometimes refer to termites as "white 
ants". This, Paul said, while still highly inaccurate, would be acceptable 
enough in a crossword clue/answer.

This crack in what until then had been a non-negotiable position led me to 
consult the dictionaries. For "termite", Chambers leads off with "a so-called 
white ant", though it then does go on to say that it is "only superficially 
like an ant".

The answer to the offending clue, of course, was ANT, not WHITE ANT. But, if 
you look up "ant" in Chambers, after all the stuff about a small social insect 
living in colonies comes this bombshell: "loosely, a termite".

So we are left with this problem: if something is sufficiently "so called" to 
make it into Chambers, is that good enough for it to be allowed into the 
Guardian? Or, to put it another way, if a meaning is loose, but not so loose as 
to be blackballed by Chambers, is it right that we should apply stricter 
membership rules? All this is the stuff of sleepless nights.

_____

I have made this request before in this monthly column, but only as a footnote.

For your complaints, comments or cries for help, we are now offering two email 
addresses:subshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> and 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> (which is me, or - for 
purists - I). If you could direct all your questions of a technical nature, or 
about your subscription details, to the "subshelp" address, you will get both a 
quicker and a more intelligent response than you will get from me. This is 
because I am often away for quite long periods and because, usually, I have no 
idea what the answer is. All non-technical/financial brickbats should, of 
course, continue to be thrown straight at me.

One frequent complaint has been about the difficulty of downloading the 
cryptic puzzles onto a single sheet of A4, resulting in an annoying waste both 
of paper and ink. As a result of tinkering with the layout, the puzzles should 
now print out on a single page. But I know that this is still not the universal 
experience at the subscriber end. We think that the problem, where it persists, 
will have to be tackled on an individual basis. So could I ask those of you who 
are still suffering from this infuriating condition to get in touch directly 
withsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> for a personal 
consultation.

_____

To end on a more positive note: a number of you have noted that for a period 
last month the crossword website was sponsored by Cisco Systems, which allowed 
free access to the puzzles to all and sundry, so that they could see what they 
are missing. A number of you asked why, as a subscriber, you should be asked to 
pay for what others could have for nothing. An email should have reached you 
explaining the situation, but if it did not, what it said was that your 
subscription was being automatically extended by the length of the Cisco 
sponsorship, so that you, too, will get a free month at the end of your current 
term.

_____

May I wish you all happy puzzling over Christmas. The traditional Araucaria 
special puzzle will be uploaded for December 24. There will be no normal 
Cryptic or Quick puzzle for December 26, as the paper will not come out on 
Boxing Day. But the Quiptic for the week after Christmas will appear in the 
usual way.

Â· Hugh Stephenson is the crossword editor
 