
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has reduced the price of 
women’s standard razors to match that of men’s in the latest victory in the 
battle to eliminate gender discrimination in high street products.

A newspaper investigation at the start of last year showed that women were 
paying an average of 37% more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/19/the-sexist-surcharge-how-women-get-ripped-off-on-the-high-street>
 for gender-targeted items, ranging from toys to beauty products. Razors were 
found to beamong the more marked-up products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/boots-alters-prices-accusations-of-sexist-pricing>
, with women often paying a premium just because the product was a different 
colour – pink.

Tesco was charging £1 for a pack of five women’s twin-blade razors, twice the 
price of the men’s equivalent. The Labour backbencher Paula Sherriff, who 
recently persuaded Boots to trial donation boxes where customers could leave 
sanitary products for distribution to food banks, put pressure on Tesco to 
reduce women’s disposable razor prices.

In a letter to Sherriff, which has been passed to the Guardian, Tesco’s 
commercial director for packaged products, Kari Daniels, said the supermarket 
had reviewed its products to make sure it was not guilty of 
gender-differentiated pricing following a parliamentary debate.

Boots revises cost of two products over accusations of sexist pricing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/boots-alters-prices-accusations-of-sexist-pricing>
Daniels said the disparity in price was not the result of gender bias, but 
added: “In the instance of our twin-blade razors, the difference is driven by 
the fact that male razors are produced and sold in significantly higher 
volumes, which reduces the price we pay for them.

“However, following an internal review and discussions with our suppliers, we 
have acted on concerns about the difference in price of our female and male 
disposable twin-blade razors, in line with our commitment to ensure 
consistently low, simple and affordable pricing.

“We have aligned the prices of these products so that the male and female 
razors are the same price per unit. We have done this by reducing the cost of 
the women’s razors and keeping the cost of the men’s razors the same.”

Both sets of razors now cost 10p per unit. Daniels also insisted that Tesco 
had changed its pricing strategy so it was “moving away from large, short-term 
promotions to focus on prices that are consistently low and affordable, and 
simpler to understand”.

Sherriff’s most significant parliamentary triumph since entering the House of 
Commons last year wasforcing the government to confront the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/tampon-tax-supermarkets-pledge-tax-saving-women>
 over the 5% VAT it makes countries impose on sanitary products. Ministers 
climbed down over the issue after Sherriff secured significant Eurosceptic 
Conservative support to demand that VAT be scrapped as part of any EU 
membership renegotiation package before the referendum on 23 June 2016.

The former NHS worker, who also convinced WH Smith to reduce the cost of 
products in hospital shops to be in line with its high street prices, said: 
“This is a welcome step from Tesco, and I hope other companies will identify 
and correct similar disparities.

“The government has refused to act on gender pricing so we have had to take a 
lead. I’d encourage anyone who sees examples to get in touch and I’ll take it 
up.”

Although gender-based pricing became a major issue in 2016, there had been 
concerns about the practice for several years. A2012 study by Development 
Economics <http://www.developmenteconomics.co.uk/tag/gender-based-pricing/> for 
insurer Aviva found that women were paying £200 extra a year for what were 
basically the same consumer goods and services.
 