
You may not necessarily associate bobble hats and thermal underwear with 
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> but they will be out 
in force at the Circuit de Catalunya next week.

Even Barcelona is a bit chilly on an early morning in February, when most of 
us will be gathering for the start of the testing season. Thenew team Haas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/14/f1-new-track-driver-politics-bernie-ecclestone>
 are launching their car at 7.50am, which will be a challenge, and not only for 
them.

There are only two testing sessions this year instead of three, which means 
eight days in all, four for each driver, and much less than that if there are 
teething problems.

Red Bull’s Christian Horner hopes Renault reconciliation can revive team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/red-bull-christian-horner-f1-renault-engine>
There are treats in store for the early birds. There will be cars with plumes 
of smoke coming out of the back and there will be prangs, the worst outcome for 
drivers and teams with time so short. Which is why the cars will, mostly, be 
driven at 80-90%, with perhaps a bit more ambition in the following week, also 
in Barcelona.

Testing has changed so much, as have the car launches, which are now mostly 
done online. Teams hit the track following a great deal of simulation work 
complete with all the data they have gathered from their wind tunnel and other 
work. But even then, no one can be certain what will happen on the track.

The strong teams – and Mercedes are clear favourites for the title following 
their swaggering domination of the past two years – will be looking to pound in 
the laps before finishing with some qualifying simulations with a low fuel load 
at the end of the week.

But I will be spending more time watching Ferrari, McLaren and Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> in an attempt to assess how much 
progress they have made. I will also be keen to see the first runs from Haas, 
who look like being the best prepared new team of recent years, which is not 
saying a great deal.

During testing a struggling team can fall further and hopelessly behind. Last 
year,McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> put in less than a 
third of the miles clocked by Mercedes because of the awful problems they had 
with the Honda engine.

Red Bull, with their Renault engine, are still expected to have problems this 
year, at least in the first half of the season but the team principal,Christian 
Horner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/red-bull-christian-horner-f1-renault-engine>
, is looking to football for inspiration.

Rio Haryanto joins Manor to become Indonesia’s first F1 driver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/rio-haryanto-manor-racing-first-indonesian-f1-driver>
“Who could have imagined that Leicester City would be winning the Premiership 
at the moment and that Chelsea would be in the position they are?” he said at 
the team’s livery launch in London on Wednesday. “Things change. That’s part of 
sporting cycles and I hope we’re coming out of a difficult cycle and about to 
re-emerge into a positive upward trend.”

“I’m a Coventry City man,” Horner added, as if to underline the resilience of 
his optimism.

Horner, like everyone else, surely, would like the drivers to become the stars 
of the show. “Formula One needs to be more about the drivers. The drivers need 
to be a bigger differential within the whole package,” he said. “And we have a 
great opportunity to address that for 2017.”

Horner agreed Lewis Hamilton is once again the driver to beat, despite coming 
second best to his team-mate Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/f1-2016-lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-mercedes-ferrari>
 in the concluding races of last season: “How high was Lewis’s motivation in 
those last few races? He’s a multiple world champion. But he’s had a winter off 
to go away and reflect, recharge and goes into the season absolutely as the man 
to beat.”

Barcelona is unlikely to tell us anything new about Hamilton. But for the 
rookies, such as Renault’sJolyon Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/08/jolyon-palmer-renault-formula-one-debut-season>
 and the Manor drivers, Pascal Wehrlein and the IndonesianRio Haryanto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/rio-haryanto-manor-racing-first-indonesian-f1-driver>
 – who was named on Thursday morning to complete the 22-man grid – there is 
much to learn.
 