
So, it’s over then, the worst of the 15 European Championships to date, a 
tournament so bereft of quality thatWales’s mildly diverting win over an inept 
Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
 was raised to the status of minor classic. Of 51 games, perhaps one,France’s 
victory over Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/germany-france-talking-points-euro-2016-semi-final>
, will be remembered by neutrals – and it, in truth, was utterly 
unrepresentative of the rest of the tournament.

Euro 2016: a bloated tournament where dour defence eclipsed the fairytales | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-fairytales-wales-iceland-defence>
Many have questioned whether Portugal were worthy winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 but in a sense they are the most worthy of winners: no champion ever, perhaps, 
has been so representative of the ethos of a tournament. Two forwards left to 
their own devices in advance of an eight-man citadel that conceded one goal in 
420 knockout minutes and won only one game in normal time in the entire 
tournament: this is modern international football.

Yes, there were rousing performances from a handful of minnows, and the people 
of Iceland and Wales will rightly remember France 2016 with fondness. But this 
felt like another staging post in the death of international football being 
regarded as in any way elite. Still, hurrah for the underdog!

Although really, this was only David against Goliath if Goliath had turned up 
knackered from a long season of lucrative fighting for Gath United in the 
Philistine Premier League wondering what he was doing there when the quality 
and financial rewards of the club game were so much greater.

The question of what we’ve learned tactically from the tournament is always 
asked, but this is not 1958, with a back four bursting forth to change the 
world. It’s not even 1974 and the Netherlands confirming the efficacy of the 
Total Football of Ajax and Feyenoord. It’s not even 1986 and the wonderment of 
the back three. Euro 2016’s relation to the club game was indirect and perhaps 
more psychological than tactical.

Along came Barcelona under Pep Guardiola, tiki-takaing their way to possession 
stats that frequently hit 70% or more. At first everybody panicked and tried to 
work out ways of getting the ball off them, and then, in the wake of
Internazionale’s success in the 2010 Champions League semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/apr/28/barcelona-internazionale-champions-league>
 it was recognised that the way to beat them was to let them have the ball. So 
José Mourinho’s radical non-possession challenged Barça’s radical possession 
and a new paradigm emerged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Feuro-2016-death-possession-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d8cab26a4db54d6c9f7d46520681c4bcaff4d3%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Question%3A%20was%20Euro%202016%20the%20death%20of%20possession%20football%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Feuro-2016-death-possession-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Question%3A%20was%20Euro%202016%20the%20death%20of%20possession%20football%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Feuro-2016-death-possession-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d8cab26a4db54d6c9f7d46520681c4bcaff4d3%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Mario Gómez, far left, celebrates scoring for Germany against a Northern 
Ireland team that defended very deep and in great numbers. Photograph: Charles 
Platiau/Reuters 
Teams at this tournament have been eager to take on the reactive role. Many 
games have seemed almost a battle not to take the initiative, a slow bicycle 
race of non-possession. Games of cut-and-thrust, of two teams actually going at 
each other – which is what makes for the most thrilling spectacle – have been 
rare almost to the point of nonexistent, a situation exacerbated by the glut of 
moderate teams, the height of whose ambition is to pack eight men behind the 
ball.

Stats are slippery beasts but, as a rough indication of that, 49% of games in 
this tournament featured one side having 60% possession or more, as opposed to 
37% of games in last season’s Premier League. Half of games, in other words, 
were essentially attack against defence.

That’s not necessarily a problem – Germany had 66.8% possession against France 
– and if the reactive side has a clear idea of how to attack, as France did in 
Marseille, a disparity in possession can still produce stirring football. But 
when a team essentially sets itself up as a punchbag, the results are rarely 
worth watching.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20story%20of%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20story%20of%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation&media=>
The story of Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jul/11/the-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation>
. 
This is also the FA Cup’s dirty secret: people don’t watch the early rounds 
because they’re not very good. The shocks that are its lifeblood are, by 
definition, rare even with Premier League sides often playing weakened sides, 
and the games that aren’t shocks are often stultifying. But at international 
level it’s worse because attacks aren’t as well-drilled as they are at club 
level, the lack of time making it impossible to generate the slickness of 
thought and the mutual understanding that would help a side cut through a 
massed rearguard.Germany were able to do it against Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/germany-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 because they have a creative core – Toni Kroos, Thomas Müller and Mesut Özil – 
who have played together for years. But they are a rarity.

This will be taken as elitism. It is not. Everybody has a chance to qualify 
for the Euros. The smaller sides who made an impact – Wales, Iceland, even 
Northern Ireland – would have qualified for a 16-team tournament because they 
were good enough. Take France plus the best 15 teams from qualifying (allowing 
for a couple of sides easing off having already secured their place in the 
finals) and the only differences to the last 16 that did emerge are swapping 
Hungary and Ireland for Austria and the Czech Republic: 36 games, most of them 
dull, over a two-week period for that.

Euro 2016: The Guardian’s team of the tournament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-team-of-tournament>
This will be taken as complaining at teams defending. It is not. Weaker teams 
should defend, they must defend. Their obligation is to get the best result 
possible, or it is no longer a sport. That can be uplifting, but when attacks 
are poor it tends to be dull.

Instead, this is a lament for the best of the international tournaments, 
three-and-a-half weeks of sustained quality and interest destroyed by greed, 
political expediency and the woolly-minded give-everybody-a-go mentality that 
breeds mediocrity. Just because Euro 2012 was also a disappointing tournament 
doesn’t change that: the previous three Euros were all excellent. International 
football is drowning in the dilution of quality.

Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, perhaps, will be 
remembered as the first homeopathic tournament.
 