
Off the coast of San Diego, America’s eighth largest city, commercial 
fishermen harvest about 1,100 metric tons of seafood from the Pacific every 
year.


That sounds like a lot. But it isn’t much to Don Kent, who says he can do 
better with just one fish farm.

If Kent gets his way, he would raise 5,000 metric tons of yellowtail jack and 
white sea bass in a grid of net pens measuring about a square mile, anchored 
four miles off San Diego in federal waters. The species are prized in Southern
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> sushi restaurants, 
which now serve their customers imported fish almost exclusively, most of it 
from China, Japan, Greece or Chile.

The US imports <http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/aquaculture/aquaculture_in_us.html> 
about 91% of its seafood. Whether consumers know it or not, about half of that 
is farmed in aquaculture facilities much like the one Kent wants to build. 
While the federal government has permitted shellfish farming for years, it 
didn’t allow farming of finfish such as bass and salmon until earlier this year.

This Colorado poet is disrupting Alaska’s commercial fishing industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/15/wild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing>
“Why are we buying all of our yellowtail from farms in Japan when I could grow 
them four miles off our coast and lower the carbon footprint and the trade 
deficit at the same time?” says Kent, president and CEO of Rose Canyon Fisheries
 <http://rosecanyonfisheries.com/>, which aims to build the project. “This is 
done around the world. It’s just not done here.”

But Kent isn’t likely to get approval soon, because the location is all wrong. 
The government is eager to promote offshore fish farming to alleviate pressure 
on overfished wild species. But it wants that to happen first in the Gulf of 
Mexico. The National Marine Fisheries Service adopted its first rules for 
finfish farming in federal waters for the gulf region in January this year. 
Next up is the Pacific Islands region around Guam, Hawaii and Samoa, where in 
August the agency began preparing a report to analyze the environmental impact 
of aquaculture.

The mismatch between the proposal’s location and the new rules reflects the 
government’s difficulties in incubating a new industry. Kent’s proposal, first 
submitted in October 2014, is the only fish farm proposal that the federal 
government has received so far. A lawsuit filed in February contends the new 
rules for the Gulf of Mexico could significantly harm the environment and 
commercial fishing, and it may be keeping away potential applicants who want to 
wait for the case’s resolution before filing plans.

“We shouldn’t be doing this on an industrial scale until we have better 
information,” says Marianne Cufone, a professor of environmental law at Loyola 
Law School in New Orleans. “It’s very possible the Gulf of Mexico will be 
altered forever if we move forward.”

Raising fish in coastal farms isn’t a new phenomenon. It just hasn’t happened 
yet in federal waters, which range from 3-200 miles offshore. Several states 
allow aquaculture in coastal waters under their control, which extend out three 
miles from shore, including Maine, Washington and Hawaii.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5028941c1cc18ce4c6bb32da715ab8e2abdf853c%2F0_0_1024_731%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20government%20wants%20more%20offshore%20fish%20farms%2C%20but%20no%20one%20is%20biting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20government%20wants%20more%20offshore%20fish%20farms%2C%20but%20no%20one%20is%20biting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5028941c1cc18ce4c6bb32da715ab8e2abdf853c%2F0_0_1024_731%2F1024.jpg>
 Aquaculture net pen operated by Blue Ocean Mariculture near Kona, Hawaii. 
Photograph: NOAA Fisheries 
Sales by the US aquaculture industry totaled about $1.3bn in 2013, according 
to a periodic census 
<https://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2012/Online_Resources/Aquaculture/> 
by the US Department of Agriculture. That’s a 25% increase over the prior 
census in 2005. Finfish account for about half the total, with catfish and 
trout – both freshwater species – dominating the industry.

Offshore aquaculture works mostly the same everywhere: fish live in an 
enclosure created with nets that dangle underwater from floating rings or 
platforms on the surface. The whole apparatus is anchored to the ocean floor.

The fish remain in the nets for as long as two years, from the time they are 
fingerlings. They are fed a diet that may include other fish – waste from 
canneries and commercial fishing – and processed pellets that may include corn, 
soybeans and other vegetables along with fish byproducts.

The US is currently a small player in running coastal fish farms, though its 
long coastlines and appetite for seafood could change that 
<http://www.afdf.org/wp-content/uploads/14d-The-Political-Economics-of-Marine-Aquaculture-in-the-US-Knapp-and-Rubino-2016.pdf>
. Norway leads the world <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5798e.pdf>, followed by 
China, Chile, Indonesia and the Philippines, according to the UN Food and 
Agriculture Organization.

Opening up the far offshore could ease the nation’s trade imbalance in fish 
commerce and rebuild waterfront industries that have slipped away as a result 
of overfishing, says Dianne Windham, aquaculture coordinator for the West Coast 
region of the National Marine Fisheries Service.

“I think we actually have a great opportunity here to pursue the responsible 
and sustainable development of offshore aquaculture, and set the standard for 
what it ought to look like,” Windham says.

The opportunity was slow to materialize, though. The new rules for the Gulf of 
Mexico took 14 years to complete. Congress repeatedly considered – and then 
failed – to pass legislation to legalize offshore fish farming. So the 
fisheries services stepped in to regulate the industry under the 
Magnuson-Stevens <http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/sfa/laws_policies/msa/> Fishery 
Conservation and Management Act, a law passed in 1976 to govern commercial 
fishing.

“It’s a wonderful opportunity for the Gulf of Mexico, but it’s been a long 
time coming,” says Joe Hendrix, president of Seafish Mariculture in Houston, 
Texas, an aquaculture consulting group. “It’s difficult to implement these 
things because of a lot of ignorant people who have misplaced concerns.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a78db4ff6663346b00f21f9c74b26be46a0f87%2F0_0_3072_2064%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20government%20wants%20more%20offshore%20fish%20farms%2C%20but%20no%20one%20is%20biting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20government%20wants%20more%20offshore%20fish%20farms%2C%20but%20no%20one%20is%20biting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Foffshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a78db4ff6663346b00f21f9c74b26be46a0f87%2F0_0_3072_2064%2F3072.jpg>
 Adult yellowtail, one of the species Rose Canyon wants to farm off the San 
Diego coast. Photograph: Rose Canyon Fisheries 
Hendrix is referring to critics who say their concerns are very real. This 
includes the risk of farmed fish escaping from their nets and breeding with 
wild fish and competing for food; water contamination “hot spots” caused by 
fish excrement leaving the nets; and pharmaceuticals and genetic modifications 
used in some aquaculture operations. (The US Food and Drug Administration allows
 18 different drugs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/319323/Opinion_on_the_welfare_of_farmed_fish.pdf>
 to be used on farmed fish).

For instance, the new federal rules for the Gulf of Mexico require permit 
holders to report to the government only “major escapement events”, defined as 
10% or more of cultured fish escaping from a pen. Anything less doesn’t require 
reporting but may still disrupt the feeding and breeding of wild species.

Interbreeding is a concern because farmed fish become a weaker genetic line, 
less able to avoid illness and parasites and to survive the hardships of the 
open ocean.

“To date, we’ve been unsuccessful in preventing escape from aquaculture 
facilities,” says Cufone, who is also executive director of the Recirculating 
Farms Coalition <http://www.recirculatingfarms.org/>, a nonprofit that promotes 
aquaponics, a type of aquaculture in which fish and food crops are grown 
together. The group is also a plaintiff in the lawsuit to halt the aquaculture 
rules for the gulf. “There’s no reason to think we would be 100% successful in 
the Gulf of Mexico, either.”

Examples of escapes are plentiful. In January 2015, for example, some 51,000 
farmed Atlantic salmon escaped 
<https://www.asf.ca/public-kept-in-dark-on-aquaculture-isa-and-escapes-in-nb.html>
 from their pens off the coast of New Brunswick, Canada. In another case, 
farmed salmon have been found in Canada’s Magaguadavic River and the rivers of 
British Columbia during spawning season.

Hendrix and others in the industry counter that escaped fish are not a problem 
because, raised in pens and hand-fed, they lack the “fitness” to survive for 
long in the open ocean. In other words, they’ll be eaten by wild fish before 
they have a chance to compete for food or interbreed.

The new aquaculture rules for the Gulf of Mexico also have no conditions 
governing fish welfare or humane treatment of fish. Other nations, including 
Great Britain 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/319323/Opinion_on_the_welfare_of_farmed_fish.pdf>
, have recognized that fish feel pain and stress, and that aquaculture 
facilities should be designed and managed to prevent such suffering.

Reeling it in: global sustainable seafood market hits $11.5bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/11/seafood-industry-sustainable-fishing-salmon-overfishing>
The US federal government should have fish welfare rules in place before 
opening the sea to aquaculture, says Bernard Rollin, a professor of ethics and 
animal sciences at Colorado State University.

“It’s well known by fish biologists that fish are enormously susceptible to 
stress, noise and crowding,” says Rollin, a pioneer in the field of 
agricultural animal welfare. “If you screw it up, they’ll all die.”

The fight over developing a sustainable industry means a longer wait for fish 
farm developers like Kent, who grew up in San Diego and remembers the city 
waterfront was once known as “Tuna Town” because it served a huge tuna fishing 
fleet with businesses that built boats, repaired equipment, caught and 
processed fish. That work mostly left for Asia when regulations and public 
sentiment arose in the 1970s against the bycatch of dolphins by tuna fishermen.

“So you’ve got a working waterfront where the only work it’s doing is 
entertaining people. It’s not feeding people,” says Kent, who is also CEO of 
Hubbs-SeaWorld Research Institute, a nonprofit arm of SeaWorld Parks and 
Entertainment.

Kent says his $50m Rose Canyon project would generate 200 jobs for the region 
and employ newer cage technology that is submersible, a design that prevents 
the cages from getting destroyed by tussling waves during storms.

Rose Canyon already faces opposition from environmental groups, and commercial 
fishermen are concerned that aquaculture could affect the wild fishery.

Peter Halmay, a commercial fisherman based in San Diego and founder of the San 
Diego Fishermen’s Working Group 
<http://communityfisheriesnetwork.net/SDFWG.html>, worries that farmed fish 
could develop viruses during captivity that would be released into the ocean 
and devastate native fish.

He’d rather see the government continue working to revitalize commercial 
fishing. For example, catch limits have been in place for years to limit 
harvest of important species, especially numerous varieties of rockfish. These 
programs have been successful, he says, and it will soon be time to increase 
catch limits again, a move that holds a lot of promise for the industry.

“Our vision is for a vibrant working waterfront based on the capture of wild 
fish,” Halmay said. “Only if this project is a supplement to this vision will 
it work.”
 