
From the moment I arrived at the Guardian as a young writer, I knew I was 
joining a special place of open, independent, courageous journalism, free of 
political or commercial masters. And I knew that the reason the Guardian was 
not like any other newspaper was largely because of the Scott Trust, its sole 
owner.

The trust’s very existence is a daily reminder that Guardian staff are not 
here to serve some proprietor’s interest or to squander the power of a great 
media company on short-term gain at the expense of reputation and purpose. 
Guardian journalism often takes time, costs a lot of money to produce and runs 
risks, but our journalists know they will be supported in their work. The 
return on investment for the trust is the quality of the journalism – not a 
financial dividend.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djn4wAy1Xs5M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djn4wAy1Xs5M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djn4wAy1Xs5M&media=>
The Guardian’s Scott Trust explained – video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jn4wAy1Xs5M&feature=youtu.be> 
 Becoming the trust’s sixth chair in 1998 was an extraordinary honour and one 
I shall cherish always. The generosity of the Scott family in giving their 
fortune away in 1936 was extraordinary. But the double blessing was that they 
did it with only the lightest of instructions as to how the money should be 
spent and only the example of CP Scott, one of the greatest editors in the 
history of journalism – born 170 years ago this week – to guide its trustees.

The Guardian has no proprietor in the normal sense of the word

The result is an exceptional, if not unique, form of governance for a news 
publisher. The Guardian has no proprietor in the normal sense of the word. 
While many of our readers would not know the Scott Trust from a bar of soap, 
its job is to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian 
in perpetuity and to uphold the values laid out byCP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>, which 
underscore all we continue to pursue today in our journalism: honesty, 
integrity, courage, fairness and a sense of duty to the reader and to the 
community.


The Scott Trust is the sole shareholder of the Guardian Media Group, which 
publishes theguardian.com, and the Guardian and the Observer newspapers. This 
means all the resources of the company belong to the trust, but it delegates 
the operational running of the business to theGuardian Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> board which invests that 
money, first and foremost, in theguardian.com, the Guardian and the Observer, 
and then in any other businesses designed to bring in income, increase capital 
value or help in some other way to develop the company.


The trust never distributes a dividend but ploughs back profits into the 
business. It does not run the Guardian Media Group. It does not represent the 
journalists. It does not have any say in the leader line or the content of the 
journalism. It does not protect the Guardian from the need to be commercially 
efficient.

CP Scott's leader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust/2015/sep/14/a-hundred-years-an-essay-by-cp-scott>
While, to an outside eye, this structure can appear opaque and confusing, when 
it works well it acts as an exceptional form of governance. The trust has 
important responsibilities – it appoints theeditor-in-chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/20/guardian-appoints-katharine-viner-new-editor-in-chief>
 and the chair of theGMG board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gmg/2015/jul/23/gnm-board>, and has the right to 
see and know anything about the business – but its impact is more subtle and 
harder to pin down.



The trust ensures that the priority for the whole business is the journalism. 
The editor-in-chief walks side by side with the chief executive but “an inch or 
two in advance” as CP Scott put it inhis great centenary leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust/2015/sep/14/a-hundred-years-an-essay-by-cp-scott>
 (the nearest the Guardian gets to holy writ).

In order to secure the Guardian’s financial and editorial independence “in 
perpetuity”, however, it’s essential that our journalism is matched by an 
efficient and profitable company that takes a long view of how to deploy 
resources – for instance, in managing the difficult transition from the print 
marketplace to the turmoil of the digital world.

The trust has a sizeable investment portfolio which it uses partly to support 
the journalism year on year and partly to invest in long-term structural change 
to keep up with digital transformation. But these are particularly challenging 
times for all those in the media industry, and there are increasing pressures 
on the other sources of income, such as advertising, upon which the Guardian 
has traditionally relied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95f925efa613ae3f644fc3505940678145bd7c30%2F2334_0_3929_4912%2F3929.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Scott%20Trust%3A%20why%20the%20Guardian%20is%20unique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Scott%20Trust%3A%20why%20the%20Guardian%20is%20unique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95f925efa613ae3f644fc3505940678145bd7c30%2F2334_0_3929_4912%2F3929.jpg>
 Guardian content is accessible online via a growing range of platforms. 
Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
While we now have, thanks to the internet, millions of readers around the 
world, a much smaller proportion of them pay to read the Guardian. So with 
advertising revenues falling fast, we are asking our many readers who can to 
help support our journalism, and the role it plays in reporting honestly on 
world affairs and holding the powerful to account.

We are at the start of an exciting new chapter in which some of our most 
committed readers become Members and move into a closer than ever relationship 
with the Guardian, its values and its journalism, crucially helping to fund us 
so that the Guardian’s future is more secure. The trust warmly welcomes you.


In my 13 years as chair, I have witnessed many developments. The flexibility 
of the trust deed has allowed us to change everything, from the name of the 
paper (the Manchester Guardian became the Guardian in 1959) to the medium in 
which we publish (print on paper to electronic words and moving pictures); from 
the basic business model (a single UK newspaper to a global media business) to 
the definition of a journalist, which now embraces the two-way relationship of 
a digital news operation.

We have even turned the trust itself into a company to safeguard its purposes 
into the future. The trust has had its highs – stopping the sale of the 
Guardian to the Times at one particularly low ebb in our fortunes, buying the 
Observer, supporting a far-seeing editor in the vanguard of digital technology 
and bringingEdward Snowden’s revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files> to light. The lows have 
mostly been of a financial nature.

At times, we have needed to be quick on our feet, but the deep foundations of 
trust values, purposes and priorities leave me in no doubt that, in our bones, 
we haven’t changed.

When I joined the Guardian, the company consisted of one print-on-paper 
newspaper that lived by selling display and classified advertising, and being 
read by a few hundred thousand people in the UK, plus an abridged version, 
Guardian Weekly, that was treasured in a handful of liberal outposts abroad.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197bf584b39dae0c8c507569bb3da9cdd8753be6%2F2062_427_1512_1889%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Scott%20Trust%3A%20why%20the%20Guardian%20is%20unique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Scott%20Trust%3A%20why%20the%20Guardian%20is%20unique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fscott-trust-guardian-owner-journalism-newspaper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197bf584b39dae0c8c507569bb3da9cdd8753be6%2F2062_427_1512_1889%2F1512.jpg>
 Alex Graham, the new chair of the Scott Trust. Photograph: Frank Baron for the 
Guardian 
Thirty eight years later, the Guardian is a paper, an app, a video producer, a 
sister paper, a weekly paper, and three online operations consumed by millions 
all over the world on platforms some of us have never heard of, with quality, 
public-interest journalism at our core.

It is therefore a good moment for the appointment of the first Scott Trust 
chair who has never worked at the Guardian – though he is, of course, a devoted 
and lifelong reader. I am shortly stepping down, and will be replaced byAlex 
Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/22/alex-graham-appointed-chair-scott-trust-guardian-media-group>
, who brings experience of both newspaper and television journalism together 
with outstanding national and international success as an independent 
television producer. He has been a Scott trustee for four years and his pro 
bono work in the industry and support for an aid charity fit perfectly with 
Guardian values.

I am delighted to be handing on this precious responsibility to him and I wish 
him and the trust every success.

•You can help make the Guardian’s future more secure by becoming a Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_Lizforganscotttrust_footer>
 or making aone-off contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_uk_editorial_footer_lizforganscotttrust>
 