
It was 1967, I was 17 and had already heard everything about Diana Vreeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/diana-vreeland> – that she was the empress 
ofVogue and was very difficult to meet as she was so particular. If you wanted 
to be in her presence, you had to have something special to offer.

I was at Vogue’s offices on Lexington Street in New York being sketched by 
Maning Obregon 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/09/27/obituaries/maning-obregon-50-illustrator-in-the-world-of-fashion-is-dead.html>
, Diana’s principal illustrator, when someone told me to go in and see her. I 
sat in the waiting area and a secretary appeared and said: “Now you can go in 
and see Miss Vreeland.” I could almost feel her grandeur seeping through the 
door.

I stood hesitantly in the doorway because I was overwhelmed by the room. I 
didn’t know what to do. I felt paralysed. Everything was bright red. There was 
so much art in there, and huge black and white photographs of beautiful girls 
likeMarisa Berenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/24/marisa-berenson-interview-stanley-kubrick-romeo-juliet-branagh>
 andVeruschka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/apr/07/from-vera-to-veruschka-the-unseen-photographs-of-johnny-moncada-in-pictures>
.

Suddenly I heard a voice. Diana was on the phone which was connected to a long 
wire. At that time the more important you were the longer the wire, so you 
could walk around. She was in one corner and I thought: “When I go in I want 
her to see me. I’ll do what I do best.” I got this burst of energy and leapt 
into the room like a dancer and landed as if I were in a ballet. Then I just 
stood there.

She hung up the phone, turned around and I saw her for the first time from the 
front. She had the brightest, red-painted cheeks, in two little circles, like 
Chinese opera make-up. Her hair was black and she had long bony fingers with 
extremely red nail polish, and ivory bracelets up to her elbows. Her face was 
powdered white and she had an amazing profile, almost like a cockatoo.

She said: “My dear…” and stopped talking while she lit a cigarette in an ivory 
holder. She took a long puff and then looked up in the air as if contemplating 
something. Then she looked back at me. It was dramatic. I thought my heart was 
going to stop. I knew how important she was and I thought: “Oh my God, she’s 
looking at me.”

Darling, you must always be rooted like a tree

She took a few more puffs, came out from behind her desk and straightened her 
skirt. She reached out her long arms, bracelets clinking, and looked me in the 
face. I was terrified. Then she pushed down on my shoulders, so I wasn’t on my 
toes, and said: “Darling, you must always be rooted like a tree.”

I said nothing back. But that meeting led to me being shot for Vogue which was 
how I got to pose forIrving Penn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/irving-penn> and Avedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/02/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
. After that there were parties and going to her house. But that first moment 
was magical. I was so happy she’d touched me and told me to have roots, and I 
kept that with me forever.

Walking with the Muses: a memoir by Pat Cleveland is published by Simon & 
Schuster at £16.99
 