
As the summer slips towards its close with the triumph of our aquatic athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/13/swimming-rio-2016-leisure-cuts>
 in Rio, there is a terrible contrast in the fate ofsix lost souls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/21/woman-dies-rough-seas-jersey-weather>
 around the British coast this past weekend. On the one hand, absolute control 
and exultation in what a human body can achieve in the water; on the other, the 
appalling tragedy that can result when we lose control – all the more awful 
because it can happen so quickly – in the act of having fun.

I never learned to swim until I was in my late 20s. Despite being born and 
brought up in a city by the sea, I feared it, and its power. I know many people 
share that trauma: pretending you’ve got a cold when everyone else goes to the 
swimming baths. Yet evenAdam Peaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/adam-peaty-european-swimming-championships-breaststroke-ross-murdoch-london>
, who proved himself to be one of the fastest swimmers on earth when he won his 
gold medal, wasscared witless of the water as a boy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-derbyshire-37008465>. That tension stays 
with us, in our relationship to the water.

There are many contradictions at work here. Some people who decline to take 
part in competitive sport – often because they were put off it for life by 
experiences at school – look to swimming not for exercise, but for a kind of 
meditation or release. This certainly lies behind the appeal of “wild 
swimming”. It speaks to our need for freedom from sedentary lives bound to blue 
screens –our need to leave them for the real blue world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/16/blue-mind-review-wallace-j-nichols-philip-hoare>
, if only for a while.

95% of British beaches clean enough to swim, EU tests show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/25/95-of-british-beaches-clean-enough-to-swim-eu-tests-show>
Indeed, in some sense, it is the very challenge of mortality that gives 
swimming its charge. That we are addressing the possibility of disaster, in 
those moments in which we feel at one with a planet that is mostly water, just 
as our own bodies are.

We are not always logical beings. I dislike swimming “between the flags” on 
public beaches. I feel as though I’m under surveillance, even in the wilderness 
offered by a wide open Cornish strand. But I know I’d thank God for the 
presence of a lifeguard if anything went wrong.

I swim in the sea, every day. I sometimes swim in the dark, if that’s when the 
tide falls. People tell me to be careful, to tell others where I’m going, to 
take a phone with me. What would be the point? Even if I did own a phone, you 
can’t put it in your trunks (which I don’t wear either). I was once caught in a 
rip tide off Brighton beach. I remember thinking, as I realised I may not make 
it back, how banal it would be to drown within sight of a dual carriageway and 
a row of fish’n’chip shops.

In winter storms we are warned not to go near the sea, for fear it might 
engulf us, as if its tentacles might reach out and drag us in. A Welsh quarry 
pond wasdyed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-36997347> this summer to deter 
potential swimmers. School swimming lessons are threatened by the lack of 
facilities. In the US, even asMichael Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/michael-phelps-olympic-career-swimming-gold>
 was winning yet another medal, a report was released showing that54% of the 
population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/american-swimming-heritage-michael-phelps-thoreau-hepburn>
 could not pass a swimming test.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg8bAbEFT_54&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg8bAbEFT_54>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg8bAbEFT_54&media=>
 A child takes a dive off the cliffs in prewar Torquay 
Fear of the water is institutionalised, and our sense of the wild and the 
outdoors has been steadily taken away from us. Contrast this sad cultural shift 
with a wonderfulPathé newsreel from the 1930s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g8bAbEFT_54>, showing a 13-year-old girl 
diving off the 69ft high Saddle Rock in Torquay – a feat which would never be 
allowed in today’s risk-averse climate.

The sea allows us to dream, and the water to aspire. It defines us and 
connects us. Without it, there would be little poetry to our lives on this 
planet. TS Eliot wrote, “We cannot think of a time that is oceanless.” “In 
civilisations without boats,” Michel Foucault observed, ‘“dreams dry up.” The 
summer may be the one time that we can remake that connection: to realise we do 
not yet have total control over the world, but at the same time to acknowledge 
its elemental power.
 