
1) 1968-69 Repco Brabham BT26

In May 1969 Jochen Rindt wrote a letter to his team owner, Colin Chapman, 
about the Lotus he was driving that season, with which he was some way from 
chuffed. “I can only drive a car in which I have some confidence,” he wrote, 
“and I feel the point of no confidence is quite near.”

These were the final days of Formula One’s experiment with elevated wings, of 
which Lotus had been at the forefront. It started the previous year at Rouen, 
whenJackie Oliver dramatically crashed his Lotus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOYq0PjH_5I>. The car’s wings had performed 
well in testing, but the effect of other cars’ slipstreams had not been taken 
into account. “While the wings provided extra downforce in clean air, the 
turbulence created by another car deprived part of the wing of downforce,” the 
Guardian reported, “and the subsequent imbalance sent Oliver’s car, among 
others, out of control.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8fd12754de71a9705270b8e5e5adb631e7d5216%2F0_0_3627_2400%2F3627.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1's%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1%27s%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8fd12754de71a9705270b8e5e5adb631e7d5216%2F0_0_3627_2400%2F3627.jpg>
 Jochen Rindt in his Brabham BT26 before the United States Grand Prix on 6 
October 1968. Photograph: Alvis Upitis/Getty Images 
Engineers responded to the problem by mounting the wings on struts, which grew 
and grew in size to now-comic effect. Over the following year the Repco-Brabham 
“bi-plane” – with elevated wings at front and back – battled the Lotus-Ford 49b 
and the Ferrari Tipo 312, among others, for supremacy in both speed and height. 
But the struts could either be light or strong, not both at the same time, and 
engineers repeatedly picked weight over strength. It all came to a head at the 
1969 Spanish Grand Prix in Barcelona in which theLotuses of both Rindt and 
Graham Hill self-destructed wing-first at the same spot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ne4pEDUqC30>, the Austrian’s car lasting a few 
laps longer but then hitting the wreckage of the Briton’s after flying across 
the course.

The Joy of Six: formula one season finales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/oct/30/jox-of-six-formula-one-lewis-hamilton>
Somehow neither driver sustained any injury more serious than Rindt’s broken 
nose, though a course marshal lost an eye. “These wings are insanity and should 
not be allowed on racing cars,” Rindt raged, “but to get any wisdom in Colin 
Chapman’s head is impossible.” The wings were promptly banned, and fatefully 
Rindt kept faith with Chapman. At Monza the following year, driving a wingless 
version of the Lotus 72 in which he had already secured four of his five race 
wins that season, Rindt crashed as he approached the Parabolica. He had 
deliberately failed to fasten the crotch strap on his six-point harness, and 
was killed as a result of neck injuries inflicted by his seat belt, but 
posthumously won the driver’s title.

2) 1971 March 711

Frank Costin’s obituary in the Guardian noted that “there were occasions when 
his solutions to a given aerodynamic problem gave rise to technically 
effective, but visually awkward, designs”. The March 711 was a classic of its 
type, bearing an exaggerated front wing that made it capable of excelling at 
not one but two great British passions, namely high-speed driving and the 
delivery of tea and cake.

It was duly nicknamed the “flying tea tray”. Sadly the tray was shortlived, 
but the car proved successful: Ronnie Peterson came second in the drivers’ 
championship in 1971, albeit without ever winning a race (though he came close, 
missing out on victory in the Italian Grand Prix by just a hundredth of a 
second).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F329804a67a8c35e8ea12731688513bd525461f66%2F0_0_5315_3564%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1's%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1%27s%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F329804a67a8c35e8ea12731688513bd525461f66%2F0_0_5315_3564%2F5315.jpg>
 Ronnie Peterson’s March 711 before the 1971 Monaco Grand Prix. Photograph: 
Rainer W. Schlegelmilch/Getty Images 
3) 1972 Eifelland Type 21

Luigi Colani wasn’t the conventional type. A glimpse of his moustache would be 
enough to tell you that. His route toFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> was unusual, starting as it did 
with him studying sculpture, before adding a qualification in aerodynamics and 
moving into the design of cars, boats, motorbikes and aeroplanes. He later 
sprinkled his magic upon a bewildering array of products including sunglasses, 
headphones, a computer mouse, office furniture, cameras, water bottles and 
police uniforms.

At the core of his design philosophy was a basic distrust of corners. “The 
earth is round, all the heavenly bodies are round; they all move on round or 
elliptical orbits,” he said. “This same image of circular globe-shaped mini 
worlds orbiting around each other follows us right down to the microcosmos. We 
are even aroused by round forms in species propagation related eroticism. Why 
should I join the straying mass who want to make everything angular? I am going 
to pursue Galileo Galilei’s philosophy: my world is also round.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e63d8bf1b25ab691d9cf939f608000344d65f06%2F0_0_4315_3258%2F4315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1's%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1%27s%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e63d8bf1b25ab691d9cf939f608000344d65f06%2F0_0_4315_3258%2F4315.jpg>
 Rolf Stommelen drives the Eifelland Type 21 in the rain during the Monaco 
Grand Prix on 14 May 1972. By this stage the sweeping rear wing had disappeared 
but the periscope mirror remained. Photograph: Rainer W. Schlegelmilch/Getty 
Images 
The car he designed was not completely round, but it did have some pleasing 
curves, including a one-piece rear wing that curled upwards behind the driver’s 
head like a particularly high wave. But what most caught the eye was the rear 
view mirror, handily mounted atop a pillar less handily positioned directly in 
front of the driver’s eyes. Colani proudly demonstrated his design to members 
of the press, boasting that his “biodynamic” approach make his rivals appear 
antiquated as they disappeared into his creation’s eye-catching mirror.

But the experience peaked for Colani before the car he created did any actual 
racing. Amid disappointing test results his innovations were gradually ditched, 
and by the time the Eifelland lined up on the grid for the first race of the 
season the sweeping wave had crashed. The rather handsome one-piece front wing 
went too, to be briefly replaced with a March-style tea tray. The all-white 
livery became predominately blue. Through it all, though, the periscope-style 
mirror remained in place, carrying with it a smeared partial fingerprint of 
Colani’s original vision. In the end Eifelland had but a single season in 
Formula One, entered only eight of the 12 races, and finished only six of 
those. It did not become one of the great names of the sport, and Colani moved 
on to alternative challenges. 

4) 1976 Ligier JS5

Most of the cars on this list, while veering dangerously between the ugly and 
the idiotic, could be vaguely explained by an enterprising engineer, but the 
only possible reason for the existence of the Ligier JS5, particularly given 
the car’s colour scheme, is as a knowing tribute to the Smurfs. It was Ligier’s 
first ever F1 car, but there’s beginner’s error and then there’s lumbering your 
car with a cross between a grain silo and a seagull’s anus.
Luca (@Digione_79) 
Jacques Laffite - 1976 - Ligier JS5 #oldschoolf1 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/oldschoolf1?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/oLLeNPwsrC 
<https://t.co/oLLeNPwsrC>
 <https://twitter.com/Digione_79/status/774331838567485440> September 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Digione_79/status/774331838567485440> 
It was, strictly speaking, an elevated air intake vent, but among other 
versions Matra had experimented with one of those six years earlier, and theirs 
had been both significantly sleeker (while still, just to be clear, being very 
ugly) and also not very successful, the team managing one podium finish with it 
in each of the 1971 and 1972 seasons before abandoning F1 altogether.

Ligier’s effort was thankfully shortlived – they went the full Noddy only for 
a few weeks, and by the fifth race of the season in Belgium the vent had been 
modified downward very significantly – but remains remembered with a 
combination of reverence and horror by the sport’s fans. The Smurfs’ headgear 
should properly be called a Phrygian cap, but as Ligier discovered the fact 
that its first syllable is “fridge” doesn’t make it good at cooling. Or moving 
quickly. The initials in the car’s name stood in homage to Jo Schlesser, the 
French driver and close friend of Guy Ligier who died in the French Grand Prix 
of 1968.

5) 1978 Brabham BT46B

The outsized fan at the back pulled air from under the car so that, as the 
Guardian described it at the time, “it literally sucks itself on to the road”, 
a novelty that allowed it to reach unrivalled speeds. Less helpfully, at least 
according to rivals, it also sucked up pebbles from the track and then fired 
them out again like a machine gun. “It’s a bloody great vacuum cleaner,” raged 
Mario Andretti. “It throws muck and rubbish at you at a hell of a rate.”

Before it had received its race debut the CSI debated it, decided not to ban 
it, debated again, then tried to ban it by nixing “anything that has an 
aerodynamic effect and is not fixed”, but Brabham were not minded to obey them. 
“There has been a ban on moving aerodynamic devices for the past two years, and 
we respect it,” insisted their owner, a certain Bernie Ecclestone. “If we 
decide to go ahead and run this car, it will comply with the Formula One rules 
and we will race it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51039f6b0a12f0094c8a56b696f1cc628a8f344f%2F0_0_4194_2516%2F4194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1's%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1%27s%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51039f6b0a12f0094c8a56b696f1cc628a8f344f%2F0_0_4194_2516%2F4194.jpg>
 The fan-assisted Niki Lauda on his way to victory in the Swedish Grand Prix at 
Anderstorp on 17 June 1978. Photograph: Keystone/Getty Images 
And race it they did, at the Swedish Grand Prix in June. Mario Andretti led 
the race in his John Player Lotus for the first 38 laps, but then Niki Lauda’s 
fan-assisted Brabham took over. “Lauda built up a lead of more than a minute, 
an astonishing margin in modern grand prix racing,” the Guardian reported. 
Lauda and his fan blew his rivals away, winning in some comfort, which was when 
the excremental matter genuinely struck the suspicious rear-mounted cooling 
device.

Ecclestone was already an important character in the sport, as head of as the 
recently-renamed Formula One Constructors’ Association (the old name, Formula 1 
Constructors’ Association, had been abandoned when it was realised that F1CA 
looked very much like a crude Italian slang word for a certain part of the 
female anatomy), and was not at all happy with the kerfuffle the fan caused, 
claiming that the sport always protested against great design novelties, such 
as the notoriousTyrell P34 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Tyrrell+P34&safe=off&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjogdCwv8HQAhWrDMAKHc90BTIQ_AUICCgB&biw=2294&bih=1236#imgrc=2AU1f7QKsZ_p7M%3A>
 that debuted a couple of years earlier. “It’s always the same when someone 
comes up with something new in motor racing,” he harrumphed. “They wanted to 
stop the six-wheeled cars too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39159ff13c226641e398a3252ea5c7fd543d61c%2F0_0_3868_2625%2F3868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1's%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20F1%27s%20strangest%20racing%20cars%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-joy-of-six-f1s-strangest-racing-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39159ff13c226641e398a3252ea5c7fd543d61c%2F0_0_3868_2625%2F3868.jpg>
 The Tyrrell P34. Photograph: Getty Images 
Brabham and Ecclestone insisted the fan was there to cool the engine, and was 
thus perfectly legal. Rivals insisted it was an aerodynamic device, and thus 
wasn’t. “Bernie must think we are all children, asking us to believe that,” 
said Andretti, whose engineer at Lotus, Colin Chapman, calculated that the fan 
was 10 times bigger than would be necessary purely to cool the engine. Gordon 
Murray, the car’s designer, later admitted “55% of the fan’s energy was cooling 
the car, 45% was sucking it down to the ground”. “I had no idea it would be so 
fast. I mean, it was embarrassingly fast,” he said. “Bernie made the guys 
qualify on full tanks to try and slow them down. I think Niki still qualified 
on the front row.”

Lauda later described driving the thing: “Whenever the car failed to respond 
going into a corner, you had to put your foot down rather than ease off,” he 
said. “This way, the car would be sucked down tighter against the track and 
would corner at incredible speeds.” When the International Sporting Commission 
(a precursor to the current FIA) debated the issue after the Swedish Grand Prix 
they came to the puzzling if politically expedient conclusion that the fan was 
not illegal – indeed, its president, Pierre Ugeux, called it “an admirable 
device” – but that it was unsafe, so it couldn’t be used anyway. Lauda managed 
to win one more race that season, and Brabham came third in the constructors’ 
championship but the fan was never seen again.

6) 1979 Ensign N179

The Forgotten Story of ... Jochen Rindt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/03/formula-one-motor-sport-jochen-rindt-scott-hunt>
The giant fan might have looked odd, but it was at least a good idea. The 
triple-layer radiator panel on the front of the Ensign N179looked like someone 
had accidentally welded a step-ladder to the front of the car 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Ensign+N179&safe=off&espv=2&biw=2075&bih=1254&site=webhp&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj0kfSe28HQAhXEIsAKHRrjDmkQ_AUIBigB#imgrc=cf4oTM1jvhwrzM%3A>
, and its performance did nothing to convince anyone that it had in fact been a 
visionary innovation.

Soon enough it was ditched, and with a smooth nose the car proved itself, 
well, very slightly faster. “Morris Nunn produced his latest car, that takes 
the prize for the oddest-looking racing machine,” wrote MotorSport. “The whole 
front is one tall, vulnerable-looking block of radiators, water and oil, the 
object being to provide a clear passage along the sides of the monocoque for 
the all-important ‘ground effects’ air-flow.”
Niki Rahim Lauda (@nikilauda3001) 
The 1979 Ensign N179. Those were radiators if you were wondering. To keep the 
car cool.#f1bizarre <https://twitter.com/hashtag/f1bizarre?src=hash> #f1 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/f1?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/BL8ycuRS0A 
<https://t.co/BL8ycuRS0A>
 <https://twitter.com/nikilauda3001/status/686700301701660672> January 12, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/nikilauda3001/status/686700301701660672> 
The season started (comparatively) well, with the team’s one car finishing 11th
(out of 11 finishers) in Argentina and 13th (out of 14) in Brazil, and it was 
after this second race that the new, uglified car was introduced. Of the 13 
remaining races they failed to qualify for nine, failed to finish three, and 
had another 13th place (out of 13), by then with a smooth nose, at the British 
Grand Prix.

… and a bonus ball: the 1976 Surtees TS19

The only car on this list whose appearance was so shocking British 
broadcasters refused to show it to the nation lest it offend their refined 
sensibilities. One of the Surtees team described the livery of the TS19 as 
being “beautiful – nice and white, with aconite letters and gold trimmings”. 
Beauty however is in the eye of the beholder, and as far as the BBC was 
concerned this was unsuitable for public viewing.

The problem was that it was sponsored by London Rubber, whose most well-known 
brand name,the one carried by their car, was Durex 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=1976+Surtees+TS19&safe=off&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjT3rur28HQAhUMJMAKHeD_AvoQ_AUICCgB&biw=2075&bih=1254#imgrc=seNWCXK3ain-dM%3A>
. They had been involved in motor racing for a while, despite an inauspicious 
debut in Denmark in 1969 when – particularly galling for a manufacturer of 
condoms – their car suffered two punctures. And they had already had a run-in 
with the BBC, who had refused to broadcast Formula 5000 races the previous year 
because of the Durex logo on Richard Scott’s car.
Zdravko (@zdravkost) 
#OnThisDay <https://twitter.com/hashtag/OnThisDay?src=hash> In 1976 in the 
#CanadianGP <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CanadianGP?src=hash>, @AlanJonesMBEASM 
<https://twitter.com/AlanJonesMBEASM> in Surtees TS19 made his 20th #F1 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/F1?src=hash> start. © Norm MacLeod 
pic.twitter.com/c1EKnOaOrd <http://t.co/c1EKnOaOrd>
 <https://twitter.com/zdravkost/status/650088044368953344> October 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/zdravkost/status/650088044368953344> 
Durex had also tried to move into horse racing, only for the Jockey Club to 
refuse to register any horse with the word Durex in its name. An attempted move 
into show jumping failed to get off the ground. When they announced their 
link-up with Surtees the BBC immediately admitted their concern, saying their 
name “causes concern to some of our viewers” and that they “will again consider 
all the implications of this new sponsorship before it confirms its decision to 
cover” races. Bob Hall, marketing director of London Rubber, understood their 
reticence. “We are still the most widely used method of family planning,” he 
said. “Our trouble has been that, because we were the first method of 
contraception, we arouse some high degree of embarrassment, which can be traced 
back to Victorian attitudes.”

With the BBC’s decision unknown, Durex volunteered to practice the withdrawal 
method. “We got in touch with them to say, look, if you’ve got a hang-up, 
rather than not have it televised we’ll do something about covering up,” said a 
spokesman. “They came back and said, thank you very much but we are worried 
about one or two other things. Durex are in the position of the scapegoat but 
we don’t want to make a nuisance of ourselves – we understand their feelings.”

In the end the logo stayed, and the BBC departed. There were no live 
broadcasts that season, but with fans gagging for a glimpse of James Hunt and 
Niki Lauda as they battled for the drivers’ title both the BBC and ITV 
eventually agreed to broadcast highlights. Durex, having garnered as much 
publicity as a company could hope to get from sponsoring a car that hardly 
anyone was able to look at, pulled out at the end of the year.
 