
‘I hallucinated, of course. I always do,” Pat Seabrook says. She is 76 and has 
spent the past 24 hours running round a 400m athletics track in Tooting, south 
London. She sits in the front seat of her car, peeling plasters off her toes. 
“At some point I began to think the white lines on the track were ropes, rising 
up around me, and I was pushing them away.” She laughs: “Usually I run with my 
friend and we take turns to hallucinate.”

Along with 44 other runners, Seabrook has just competed in the Sri Chinmoy 
Self-Transcendence 24-hour Track Race <https://uk.srichinmoyraces.org/london-24>
. Ultra-running, in which competitors take part in races longer than a marathon 
and often 100 miles or more, is one of the fastest growing sports in the world, 
with new races launching all the time; the biggest ones have been forced to 
introduce lottery systems to cope with the numbers who want to enter. But part 
of the appeal of these races is that they usually take place amid some of the 
world’s most remote and scenic landscapes, such as the Sahara or the Rockies. 
Not around a track in Tooting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32076a018f587181515729ca13ee2bb0d9a37c91%2F0_0_4016_6016%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20'It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20%27It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32076a018f587181515729ca13ee2bb0d9a37c91%2F0_0_4016_6016%2F4016.jpg>
 Paul Corderoy: ‘You can get into that space; a few laps go by and you don’t 
realise it.’ Photograph: Marietta d'Erlanger for the Guardian 
The winner, James Stewart, runs a mind-boggling 160 miles over the course of 
the day. It’s hard to grasp, watching him plug away, lap after lap: 160 miles, 
without going anywhere. He could have run all the way to Cardiff, but he’s 
still here, on the track in Tooting.

Seabrook is the oldest competitor here and covers 83 miles during the race. 
“It’s not that great,” she says, pulling off another plaster. “Last year I ran 
87.” As well as countless 24-hour races, she has also run 456 marathons. She 
didn’t even start running until her late 40s, when all her children had grown 
up and left home. “I needed something to keep me busy,” Seabrook says. “What 
else am I going to do on a Saturday?”

Yet in spite of her low-key attitude, something else is going on here. The 
race was started almost 30 years ago by followers of the late Indian spiritual 
teacher Sri Chinmoy, who believed that running was integral to a spiritual life.

In 1977, Chinmoy started a marathon team 
<https://us.srichinmoyraces.org/resources/history>, which began putting on 
races in New York and is now one of the biggest organisers of endurance events 
around the world. While most of the volunteers and organisers in Tooting are 
followers of his teachings, only one of the runners, Mahasatya Janczak from 
Poland, is part of the Sri Chinmoy team. He has done the race twice before. 
Does he find self-transcendence through it? “At moments, definitely,” he 
replies, a glint in his eye. “It’s really something. You can only understand it 
if you try it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24cfc9de168f23924b3d5cb743155b92526b3090%2F0_1022_4016_4994%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20'It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20%27It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24cfc9de168f23924b3d5cb743155b92526b3090%2F0_1022_4016_4994%2F4016.jpg>
 Pat Seabrook, aged 76, is the oldest competitor. ‘I needed something to keep 
me busy.’ Photograph: Marietta d'Erlanger for the Guardian 
Diana Celeiro has come all the way from Argentina for the race. It’s her 
second time here. Her husband, Gustavo, acts as her support crew. Most of the 
runners have someone who stands diligently by the track watching, offering 
encouragement, preparing snacks or helping with any issues that arise, from 
blisters to emotional breakdowns. Some of the support crews have brought tents; 
one family even has a motorhome parked up on the edge of the track. A few of 
the runners have no crew and have just set up a table on the grass – or, in one 
runner’s case, an ironing board – laden with their supplies.

Some supporters disappear home or to a hotel during the night for some sleep. 
Gustavo, though, stands vigilant throughout, always smiling. “This is different 
from running 100 miles in the mountains,” he says. “When you run 100 miles all 
around a track, it is a battle with your mind.”

I ask how his wife is, after completing a race like this. “Very quiet,” he 
says. “Almost dead.”

In Japan, monks on Mount Hiei run 1,000 marathons in 1,000 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/31/japanese-monks-mount-hiei-1000-marathons-1000-days>
 in a effort to reach enlightenment. One of the monks once told me that the 
idea behind the constant movement is to exhaust the mind, the body, everything, 
until nothing is left and you are almost dead. “When you are nothing, then 
something – pop! – comes up to fill the space,” he said, miming a bubble 
popping. That something, he told me, is the vast consciousness that lies below 
the surface of our lives – a sense of oneness with the universe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31e6c596eb3939b80fbf2b6d023c2f53df4719e2%2F0_543_4016_5473%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20'It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20%27It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31e6c596eb3939b80fbf2b6d023c2f53df4719e2%2F0_543_4016_5473%2F4016.jpg>
 Diana Celeiro has travelled from Argentina for the race. Photograph: Marietta 
d'Erlanger for the Guardian 
None of the runners here in Tooting vocalises it quite so lucidly, but there 
are glimpses of something deeper than PBs and course records. “Sometimes, you 
can get into that space; a few laps go by and you don’t realise it,” Paul 
Corderoy says.

“There’s a nowness to it, that’s for sure,” says Jamie Holmes, a management 
consultant who lives less than a mile from the track. He has recently completed 
the legendarySpartathalon ultra-marathon <http://www.spartathlon.gr/en/> in 
Greece, which is 153 miles. When I ask why he keeps doing such long races, he 
says he can’t really explain it, but thinks he’s trying to break himself. “I 
suppose I’m trying to find my limit,” he says. “Maybe when I find it, I’ll 
stop.”

‘My body convulses – I’ve reached my limit’: can I handle SAS training?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/07/body-convulses-limit-sas-training-jungle>
Shankara Smith, the race director, says that the biggest challenge is 
yourself. “Sri Chinmoy used to say it’s not mind over matter, but heart over 
mind. If you can’t silence that mind, then you can’t do it, because your mind 
will tell you you can’t. Here, you can’t tell yourself it’s you versus that 
mountain, because there is no mountain. It’s just you versus you.”

Smith has watched the race every year since it started in 1989, when her 
father was the race director. “I love it,” she says. “If you’re here at 3am, 
the city is quiet, nothing is going on, but on the track, the atmosphere is 
zinging. But also peaceful.”

I spend a few hours watching the runners lap the track. Everyone seems in good 
spirits; it’s a chilly, overcast afternoon, which is fine for the runners, and 
while a few have gone off fast at the front, most are running well within 
themselves, chatting to each other and joking with the officials. I decide to 
get some food and rest.

Driving back to the track at 3am, I find it hard to imagine they are all still 
going but, sure enough, out on the floodlit track 15 hours after they started, 
the runners are still going around and around. About 10 (mostly those who 
started at the front in the first few hours) have dropped out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09c60e4457edefb50ad166497578798067a61632%2F0_365_5790_3475%2F5790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20'It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20%27It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09c60e4457edefb50ad166497578798067a61632%2F0_365_5790_3475%2F5790.jpg>
 Many competitors are walking, often with difficulty, by the time darkness 
falls. Photograph: Adharanand Finn for the Guardian 
Some of those left look as if they’re in pain, their running styles twisted 
and contorted. Many are walking, but even that looks difficult. One man with a 
shaven head is walking slowly with his fists clenched; he looks as if he wants 
to punch someone. They have nine hours left to go.

Some people stand out, calm and composed. One of them is 68-year-old Ann Bath. 
She’s not very fast, she’s a little bent over, but she is unrelenting. While 
others occasionally stop for a massage, or to eat something, she presses 
serenely on, never stopping. In the end, she runs an incredible 116 miles, an 
age-group world record.

Holmes, the management consultant, smiles when he sees me again. He is now 
walking gingerly and his knee is heavily strapped. “I think I’ve found my 
limit,” he says. At the end of every lap, the runners pass a tent full of 
people with big clipboards and lists of numbers. The lap counters have to wave 
to their runner each time to show they’ve registered the lap, and the runners 
usually wave back to double check their lap has been counted. As the hours 
progress, an intimacy builds up. They get to know each other well, and there’s 
lots of laughing and joking. The runners say it gives them a lift.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f9007a5ddbc5b278aaa2b08a8f969ef91c20c9%2F0_113_945_1105%2F945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20'It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2024-hour%20race%3A%20%27It%20is%20a%20battle%20with%20your%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fultra-running-south-london-24-hour-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f9007a5ddbc5b278aaa2b08a8f969ef91c20c9%2F0_113_945_1105%2F945.jpg>
 Ann Bath runs 116 miles, an age-group world record. Photograph: Marietta 
d’Erlanger for the Guardian 
“Some races, you have a chip counter tied to your shoe,” one runner tells me, 
“but what I like about this race is that you have people doing it.”

Another runner and his counter are trying to name a new animal each lap. After 
a while, the runner, his brain frazzled, stops and leans on the table edge. “I 
can’t think of any more,” he says. “I’m done. No, wait, flamingo!” And, with 
that, he’s off again.

“You’re looking great,” one of the lap counters shouts to Holmes.

“You’re looking beautiful,” he replies, his dazed smile now fixed permanently 
across his face, perhaps shielding the pain. When I catch him along the back 
straight, he tells me he misses his friends. “Normally I run with friends,” he 
says. “Without them here to tell me to stop being an idiot, I can’t find the 
will to try running again.” So he walks. But he doesn’t stop.

Around the track, many of the support crews are sleeping on chairs or on the 
floor. Lauren Howes, whose boyfriend, Cameron Humphries, is doing his first 
24-hour race, is struggling to understand what she’s doing here. “I don’t get 
it,” she says. “It’s like a cult. His heroes are notBrad Pitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> or George Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, but some ultra-runner guy.”

“Kilian Jornet <http://www.kilianjornet.cat/en/>?” I venture. He’s just about 
the most famous ultra-runner I can think of; he runs up and down mountains.

“Yes, that’s it. He’s got four pairs of his shoes.”

Some of the crew are race veterans who can’t stay away. One tells me she was a 
marathon runner when someone at her club told her he had seen a race where 
people were eating sandwiches while they were running. “I didn’t believe it,” 
she says, “so I went to watch. I turned up in the morning and there was a group 
of people wandering around the track like zombies. I’ve been hooked ever since. 
If I’m not running, I’m crewing.”

Here, you can't tell yourself it's you versus that mountain, because there is 
no mountain. It's just you versus you

Although at times it seemed that it would never come, finally, at just before 
midday, we get the bell marking the last five minutes of the race. For the 
final few laps, the runners are joined on the track by family and friends. 
Fathers run holding hands with their children, couples run, or walk, arm in 
arm. One man decides to start sprinting, his support crew struggling to keep 
up, while another carries his young daughter. One woman, clearly in agony, is 
accompanied by her concerned husband and two teenage sons. When the hooter goes 
to signal the end, she bursts into tears. Others collapse on the ground where 
they are, or hug the nearest person. I find myself close to tears.

One runner, the shaven-headed man with the clenched fists – he didn’t unclench 
them the entire race – is walking back alone across the infield. I ask if he’s 
OK. He looks at me blankly for a moment, as though I’ve just appeared out of 
the ground. “I just need to lie down,” he says in the meekest voice I’ve ever 
heard.

And so it ends. I guess they’ll all go back to their jobs and people will ask 
them if they’re mad. “Why?” people will ask. “Why would you do such a thing?” 
And they’ll probably be unable to answer. But they’ll be back next year to do 
it all over again.
 