
A distaste for colour runs through western culture like a ladder in a 
stocking. Many classical writers were dismissive. Colour was a distraction from 
the true glories of art: line and form. It was seen as self-indulgent and, 
later, sinful – a sign of dissimulation and dishonesty.

The bluntest expression of this comes from the 19th-century American writer 
Herman Melville <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hermanmelville>, who wrote 
that colours “are but subtle deceits, not actually inherent in substances, but 
only laid on from without; so that all deified nature absolutely paints like a 
harlot”.

But arguments like these are very old indeed. Protestants, for example, once 
expressed their intellectual simplicity, severity and humility in a palette 
dominated by black and white; bright colours like red, orange, yellow and blue 
were removed both from the walls of churches and their wardrobes. The pious 
Henry Ford refused for many years to bow to consumer demand and produce cars in 
any colour other than black.

In art, the tussle over the respective merits of disegno (drawing) versus 
colore (colour) raged on through the Renaissance and, although somewhat muted, 
into the present day. Disegno represented purity and intellect; colore the 
vulgar and effeminate. In an imperious essay from 1920, tellingly entitledPurism
, the architectLe Corbusier  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier>and his colleague wrote: 
“In a true and durable plastic work, it is form which comes first, and 
everything else should be subordinated to it. Let us leave to the clothes-dyers 
the sensory jubilations of the paint tube.”

The pious Henry Ford refused for many years to bow to demand and produce cars 
in any colour other than black

Even among those who accepted the value of colour, the ways in which they were 
conceptualised and ordered had an impact on their relative importance. The 
ancient Greeks saw colours running along a continuum from white to black: 
yellow was a little darker than white and blue was a little lighter than black. 
Red and green were in the middle. Medieval writers had great faith in this 
light-to-dark schema, too. It was only in the 17th century that the idea 
emerged of red, yellow and blue as primary colours, and green, orange and 
purple as secondary ones. Most iconoclastic of all was Newton and his spectrum, 
an idea he wrote about in 1704 inOpticks. Suddenly white and black were no 
longer colours; the spectrum no longer ran from light to dark. Newton’s colour 
wheel also imposed order on colour pairs – for example, green and red, blue and 
orange – that were found to resonate strongly with each other when placed side 
by side. The idea of complementary colours would prove to have a profound 
effect on the art that followed. Artists including Vincent van Gogh and Edvard 
Munch used them to give structure and add drama to their paintings.

As colours came to take on meanings and cultural significance, attempts were 
made to restrict their use. The most notorious expression of this was through 
the sumptuary laws. These were passed in ancient Greece and Rome – with 
examples in ancient China and Japan, too – but found their fullest expression 
in Europe from the mid-12th century. Such laws could touch on anything from 
diet to dress and furnishings, and sought to encode the social strata into a 
clear visual system. The peasants, in other words, should eat and dress like 
peasants, craftsmen should eat and dress like craftsmen, and so on. Colour was 
a vital signifier in this language – dull, earthy colours like russet were 
explicitly confined to the meanest rural peasants, while bright, saturated 
ones, like scarlet, were the preserve of a select few.

The Secret Lives of Colour 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-lives-of-colour.html> by Kassia St 
Clair is published by John Murray at £20. To order a copy for £16.40, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-lives-of-colour.html>
 