
Amber Rudd has been accused of “grotesque hypocrisy” today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/climate-action-isnt-preserve-of-the-leftwing-says-energy-minister>
 for claiming the government is leading on climate change while overseeing a 
string of attacks on green policies. Some environmentalists say it’s the worst 
period for environmental policyin three decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/green-policies-conservative-tory-attacks-environment>
s.

We’ve rounded up the green measures that have been axed or find themselves in 
the firing line, to show the breadth and scale of the changes.

Scrapping support for onshore wind

Amber Rudd, the energy and climate change secretary said she was halting new 
subsidies 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-on-ending-subsidies-for-onshore-wind>
 to onshore wind farms on the grounds that the technology should stand on its 
own feet and save bill payers money.


In fact the writing had been on the wall for onshore wind farms since February 
2012 when 101 backbenchConservative party MPs wrote to David Cameron 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9061997/101-Tories-revolt-over-wind-farms.html>
 demanding “dramatic cuts” in subsidies.

A moratorium on more onshore wind was rejected by the Tories’ coalition 
partners, particularly the Lib Dem energy and climate change secretary, Ed 
Davey. But theConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>
 went into the election promising to “halt the spread of onshore wind farms”.

Ironically onshore wind has attracted a lot of investment and can be the most 
cost-efficient way of producing low carbon energy.

Solar subsidies to be axed too

Ministers have targeted larger solar installations 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/controlling-the-cost-of-renewable-energy> 
of less than five megawatts – enough to power 2,500 homes – in a consultation 
on the early closure of the renewable obligation (RO) subsidy aimed at April 
2016.

But the government also announced a review of another subsidy, the feed-in 
tariff, to make further significant savings in a move that could threaten state 
support for solar panels on domestic roof tops.

The solar power sector has grown dramatically over the past 18 months, leading 
ministers to panic about a forthcoming potential budget overspend on support 
schemes of £1.5bn by 2020. It later admitted the benefit of scrapping support 
for this nascent industry at this stagewould only save energy consumers 50p a 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/22/solar-power-subsidies-to-be-cut-under-plans-to-reduce-green-energy-costs>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437392821822%2FKP_360735_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20sun%20cool%20down%20Earth%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20the%20sun%20cool%20down%20Earth%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437392821822%2FKP_360735_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Can the sun cool down the earth? 


Biomass hit too

The government also confirmed this week that it was removing the guaranteed 
level of RO subsidy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/controlling-the-cost-of-renewable-energy> 
for coal or other fossil fuelled-power stations which are converting to wood or 
another biomass fuel.

Killing the flagship green homes scheme

On Thursday, the government effectively killed off the green deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/23/uk-ceases-financing-of-green-deal>
, its“transformational” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/23/not-heard-green-deal-poll> 
way of helping homeowners bring down their energy bills through installing 
insulation, and fitting new boilers and draught-proofing. Few will mourn the 
scheme, which provided loans to homeowners to fund the measures – butas the 
Guardian reported many times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/21/green-deal-energy-saving-scheme>
, take-up was very low.

But what’s striking is Rudd has nothing to replace it with. So, apart from 
poorer households, who get support through the separateECO scheme 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/environmental-programmes/energy-company-obligation-eco/information-domestic-consumers>
, there is now no serious energy efficiency policy for homes, which account for 
around a third of UK carbon emissions. A review of all remaining energy 
efficiency schemes is currently underway with details expected in the autumn 
budget.

Selling off the green investment bank

Launched in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/28/green-investment-bank-vince-cable>
 to help green projects with an initial injection of £3.8bn of public money, 
the green investment bank is probably the example cited most often by George 
Osborne and David Cameron in their defence of the government’s environmental 
record. But last month the business secretary, Sajid Javid, saidhe would be 
selling off as much as 70% of the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/25/green-investment-bank-tories-14bn-sell-pay-down-deficit>
.

Whether that harms the energy efficiency, waste and offshore wind power 
projects that the bank invests in remains to be seen. But even the influential 
Tory thinktank Bright Blue was unimpressed by the move,saying it was the “last 
thing we need” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/25/senior-tories-slam-governments-green-investment-bank-sell-off>
.

Watering down the incentive to buy a greener car

The summer budget ripped up the current system of taxation for new cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/budget-2015-osborne-unveils-green-car-tax-overhaul-to-fund-roadbuilding>
 (vehicle excise duty, oftenerroneously referred to as road tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2011/nov/22/cycling-road-tax-confused>
). Anyone who currently buys a new carpays a different rate for the first year 
based on how polluting the car is 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/419799/V149_Budget_2015_Final_version.pdf>
, a system which continues every year thereafter, ranging from free for 
electric cars to £505 for the dirtiest.

But from 2017, after the first year, all cars will pay the same £140 annual 
fee, so a Porsche will be taxed the same as a Prius. The car industry says the 
change takes away the incentive to buy a low-emissions car, while Friends of 
the Earth says a greener car will now cost £1,000 more over seven years.
 VED bands Photograph: Treasury 
Giving up on zero carbon homes

A decade-long plan to force all new homes to be ‘zero carbon’ from 2016 was 
binned by the Treasury earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/10/uk-scraps-zero-carbon-home-target>
, prompting the former Lib Dem energy secretary Ed Davey to say David Cameron 
“may as well hug a coal power station”. Major housing developers said the 
decision was “extremely disappointing”, a view that was echoed by planners, 
green groupsand the designer of a new ‘carbon positive’ house that just opened 
in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/britains-first-energy-positive-house-opens-in-wales>
.
Edward Davey (@EdwardJDavey) 
Conservatives ditch Zero Carbon standards for new homes after killing onshore 
wind: Cameron may as well hug a coal power station
 <https://twitter.com/EdwardJDavey/status/619495261317033985> July 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EdwardJDavey/status/619495261317033985> 
Fracking in Britain’s most important nature sites

Rudd said in January that fracking wouldn’t be allowed in sites of special 
scientific interest (SSSIs).Last week she changed her mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/16/government-makes-outrageous-u-turn-over-fracking-in-precious-wildlife-sites>
, opening the door to fracking in thousands of SSSIs in England, Wales and 
Scotland, if the shale companies can get past planners. Green party MP, 
Caroline Lucas, said the u-turn was outrageous.




Goodbye green tax target

A target set during the last government to keep increasing the proportion of 
revenue from environmental taxes was dropped in Osborne’s emergency budget.

Tidal power in the firing line?

There has already been speculation that one talismanic project, the Swansea 
Bay Tidal Lagoon, currently awaiting a subsidy offer from the Treasury,could be 
being lined up for the chop 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3165273/Solar-power-subsidies-slashed-Tory-plans-big-reset-green-taxes-pushing-energy-bills.html>
.

This £1bn scheme is expensive but was name-checked positively by chancellor 
George Osborne in the spring budget. Its supporters have always argued it would 
trigger a whole new industry that could lead to 30 similar projects starting 
around an island country perfectly suited for this low carbon technology.

What’s left – and safe?

Nuclear power certainly. The government – like its predecessors of all 
political stripes seem mesmerised by atomic power and are willing to provide 
extremely generous financial support and other help to kickstart a renaissance.

Britain’s first planned new nuclear plant for over 25 years at Hinkley Point 
in Somerset is backed by government but faces all sorts of other hurdles such 
as uncertain equity investors, legal challenges and ever-increasing costs and 
delays, which could scupper it yet.

Offshore wind, much more expensive than onshore farms, has so far escaped the 
axe although there are plenty of Tory critics willing to decry the cost and 
claim it is a blot on the seascape.

How long will this pioneering industry survive unscathed? 
 