
Returning from Mexico, a land whose food heritage is Unesco-protected, 
travellers share tales of life-changing meals – and no one does this more than 
chefs. Indeed,René Redzepi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/rene-redzepi>is so enamoured of the 
nation’s cuisine thatNoma <http://noma.dk/>’s final residency will take place 
in Tulum next year. And judging by the number of Mexican chefs invited to guest 
at top UK restaurants (includingEnrique Olvera <http://www.enriqueolvera.com/> 
ofPujol <http://www.pujol.com.mx/> and Jorge Vallejo of Quintonil 
<http://www.quintonil.com/>), ours are equally fond of the country’s cooking.

It’s been nine years since Thomasina Miers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/thomasina-miers> launched Wahaca 
<http://www.wahaca.co.uk/> with the intention of introducing British palates to 
Mexican flavours. This year, the group fed more than three million people. The 
rest of this restaurant sector has also expanded at pace, largely due to 
mushrooming burrito bar chains. In 2016, Waitrose’s website witnessed hits on 
Mexican recipes increase exponentially, up 867% for pork fajitas; while Tesco 
reports that 50% of UK households plump for Mexican due to its relative ease 
and family friendliness.

We feel one of the joys of Mexican eating is you get a taco and then start 
adding good things to it

Except, what with fajitas being Tex-Mex, and burritos barely known outside the 
far north it seems we’ve mostly been scoffing an ersatz US take on its 
neighbour’s plates. But with three Mexican restaurants opening in London within 
weeks, are these imposters soon to be found out?

The new disparate bunch includes El Pastor <https://www.tacoselpastor.co.uk/>, 
by the Hart brothers ofBarrafina <http://www.barrafina.co.uk/>-fame, and 
Crispin Somerville;Breddos Taqueria <http://breddostacos.com/>, the concrete 
incarnation of the street food outfit; and Corazón by Laura Sheffield, a former 
manager atCorbin & King <http://www.corbinandking.com/>.

“It’s like buses, three come along when you’ve been waiting ages for one,” 
says Breddos’s Nud Dudhia. Their first permanent site sees them take years of 
street experience and feed it into a menu that nods to regional fare, yet 
remains theirs.

“Essentially what we’re doing is take ancient recipes and techniques and apply 
modern flavours and ingredients,” he says. “We’ve mostly gone with the 
Yucatanian style of cooking, so no electricity or gas, just fire.” Alongside 
familiar items such as their signature rib-eye and Baja fish tacos, Breddos’s 
menu features Oaxacan pizzas known as tlayudas.

El Pastór, a dream of the Harts and Somerville since they ran El Colmillo 
nightclub in Mexico City decades ago, boasts an entire floor devoted to 
tortilla production, including nixtamilisation, which ensures smoothness of 
texture via a soaking in limestone solution. “It’s this corn tortilla thing 
that is so massive,” says Sam Hart. “We’ve got a handmade grinder with volcanic 
stone rocks and criollo corn, sourced through a third-generation tortilla-maker 
who works directly with farmers. Criollo is under pressure as hybrid varieties 
have higher yields, so, in a tiny way, we hope to keep the native breeds alive.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-mexican-food-wave-sweeping-across-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab40acdec54444a1fc7c72dd27564f8eaf195d9%2F0_48_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Mexican%20food%20wave%20sweeping%20across%20Britain%20%7C%20Suze%20Olbrich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-mexican-food-wave-sweeping-across-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Mexican%20food%20wave%20sweeping%20across%20Britain%20%7C%20Suze%20Olbrich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-mexican-food-wave-sweeping-across-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab40acdec54444a1fc7c72dd27564f8eaf195d9%2F0_48_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
 Down Mexico way: Chris Whitney and Nud Dudhia of Breddos Taqueria. Photograph: 
Kris Kirkham 
El Pastór’s menu centres upon Mexico City’s famed al pastor taco, a result of 
Lebanese migration, which led to the vertical schawarma method being applied to 
a tower of pork known as a “trompo”. Other dishes include chicharrón de queso, 
a rolled cheese crisp, and sopa de tortilla. “At El Pastór there will be 10 or 
12 freshly made salsas. They’re a big part of what we’re doing, as we feel that 
the joy of Mexican eating is that you get a taco and then start adding things 
to it.” says Hart. “It’s like a friendly competition of who can turn theirs 
into the most delicious thing.”

For Corazón, Laura Sheffield says: “This is the food I grew up eating. I felt 
there was room for someone to do it with a little more style; stripping away 
the Chihuahuas and sombreros and tapping into a part of Mexico that’s beautiful 
in a way Londoners will appreciate.” Wary Brits barely know the cuisine. 
Sheffield selected Corazón’s menu accordingly. “We are serving pozole [pork 
stew] and sikil pak [pumpkin seed dip], really authentic dishes, but then we 
also have a steak tartare taco.”

As well as this trio of restaurateurs others, such Edson Diaz-Fuentes, are 
hoping Britain falls for the full scope of the country’s cookery. Last summer, 
he openedSanto Remedio <http://www.santoremedio.co.uk/>, with that very 
purpose. “My aim was to offer things no one had tried, or expected, like 
aguachile, green ox tongue or pig’s ear confit. I want to change not only 
perceptions of Mexican food, but also people’s lives by supporting local 
farmers.” Sadly, following stellar reviews, an electrical fault forced him to 
close, but he hopes to reopen soon. In the meantime, he’s cheering on the 
others: “The trend seems unstoppable, and that’s good for everyone. Mexican 
food can be so healthy and nutritious. Hopefully, with Noma in Mexico, they 
will show how diverse it is.”
 