 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F946b98b5db667a22c1a97dca5c4472874db3db3b%2F452_1041_2801_3501%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F946b98b5db667a22c1a97dca5c4472874db3db3b%2F452_1041_2801_3501%2F2801.jpg>
 Sarah Millican. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
Sarah Millican

After winning the best newcomer award at the Edinburgh festival in 2008 with 
Sarah Millican’s Not Nice, a show inspired by her divorce, the South 
Shields-born comedian has toured four successful standup shows, had two Bafta 
nominations for her BBC2 seriesThe Sarah Millican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sarah-millican> Television Programme and was 
voted queen of comedy at the 2011 British comedy awards. Her most recent show,
Sarah Millican: Outsider, is out now on DVD.

1 Raising Arizona

Joel and Ethan Coen, 1987 

I love the Coen brothers generally, but this is one of my favourites. So 
beautifully shot, so lean, so wonderfully acted by Nicolas Cage – before he had 
to save the world in everything – and ace Holly Hunter. Its farcical, it’s 
slapsticky, it’s daft, it’s brilliant. Former criminal Cage falls in love with 
cop Hunter. They want a baby. The local furniture magnate and his wife have 
just had quintuplets. Surely they wouldn’t miss one?

2 The Nutty Professor

Jerry Lewis, 1963 

 Not the multi-Eddie Murphy fart-tastic spectacular. Rather the far superior 
1963 version with the genius of Jerry Lewis. The story is much the same but 
Jerry Lewis plays an uber-nerd who becomes suave sophisticate Buddy Love once 
he’s knocked back his concoction. Much preferred to the fat shaming of the 
later version. The scene with the pocket watch gets me every time. I almost 
forgive Jerry Lewis’s views on female comedians. Almost, but not quite.

3 Bridesmaids

Paul Feig, 2011 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1275965b031ffd019475831f371de45978c1acaf%2F0_96_3563_2139%2F3563.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1275965b031ffd019475831f371de45978c1acaf%2F0_96_3563_2139%2F3563.jpg>
 Melissa McCarthy, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Ellie Kemper, Kristen Wiig, Maya 
Rudolph and Rose Byrne in Bridesmaids. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
 Every now and again, a brilliant film chock full of excellent women threatens 
to change things for actresses in Hollywood. Look, we can be loads of things, 
not just wives and victims and strippers and dead bodies! Look, women of all 
ages and faces have value! Of course it never takes off but we are still left 
with these excellent milestones of awesome. I loveBridesmaids. And everyone in 
it – Wiig, Rudolph, Byrne, McCarthy, Kimmy Schmidt! It’s rude, it’s very funny 
and has the best diarrhoea scene.

4 When Harry Met Sally…

Rob Reiner, 1989 

 I was a naive 15-year-old when it came out at the cinema and had no interest 
in a film about relationships. We only went – me, my sister and parents – 
becauseTurner & Hooch (a dog that has witnessed a murder, yes please!) had sold 
out. But I loved it. I don’t think I’d trust anyone who didn’t love this 
classic romcom. Most romcoms don’t have enough “com” but Nora Ephron was a 
wonderful comedy writer. My sister and I used to go to a film class where we 
studied films and dissected them. When the lecturer announced next week’s film 
wasWhen Harry Met Sally… my sister and I stopped going.

Leave it alone.

Also picked by David Baddiel <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/david-baddiel>
, who says:
Nora Ephron’s masterpiece, I’ve noticed, just gets better with every viewing. 
It’s the best ever romantic comedy, because it recognises that relationships 
are also about friendship. Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal have the finest chemistry 
ever seen on screen, and the dialogue is fantastic, particularly in the (now 
impossible to imagine, a producer would insist on it being cut) – long opening 
driving scene: “So you’re saying a man can be friends with a woman he finds 
unattractive?” “Naah, you pretty much wanna nail them too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781161a76ce6364d6f3978aac35be645ecf3d20f%2F0_76_1971_2462%2F1971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781161a76ce6364d6f3978aac35be645ecf3d20f%2F0_76_1971_2462%2F1971.jpg>
David Baddiel

Born in New York and raised in London, David Baddiel first came to fame on 
BBC2’sThe Mary Whitehouse Experience, in partnership with Rob Newman, before 
collaborating with Frank Skinner on projects including the hit ITV showBaddiel 
and Skinner Unplanned. Since then, he has written screenplays, sitcoms and 
stage shows, including 2016’s one-man showMy Family: Not the Sitcom. A prolific 
novelist and children’s author, his latest book for kids,AniMalcolm, is out now 
(HarperCollins, £12.99).

5 Pitch Perfect

Jason Moore, 2012

 I’m going to begin with a curveball. I don’t think this will be on that many 
other lists: those who have not seen it will assume it’s a musical (which it 
is), and a teenage girl’s film (which it is – I went to see it, not expecting 
that much, with my teenage daughter). But none of these things stop it from 
being brilliantly funny. Zinger for zinger, it’s up there with the best, Rebel 
Wilson is hilarious and the singing is accamazing. Just don’t bother with the 
sequel.

6 Play It Again, Sam

Herbert Ross, 1972 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2496ed621709c09801ea504f400f0abbfa325e5%2F0_223_2664_1598%2F2664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2496ed621709c09801ea504f400f0abbfa325e5%2F0_223_2664_1598%2F2664.jpg>
 Woody Allen in Play it Again, Sam. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Paramount 
Pictures 
 The perfect point of Woody Allen, just when he was stopping being a total 
slapstick clown but before he became too serious. The scene where he meets his 
blind date near the start may be the funniest in all cinema. And the final 
scene, where he does a speech you half-recognise, and Diane Keaton says: 
“That’s beautiful” and Woody says: “It’s fromCasablanca – I waited my whole 
life to say it,” always makes me cry and laugh at the same time, a place I like 
to live in, comically, these days.

7 Team America: World Police

Trey Parker, 2004

 When the dust has settled, we may discover that Trey Parker and Matt Stone, 
withThe Book of Mormon, South Park and this ultra-funny potty-mouthed puppet 
adventure, have won comedy for all time. I started watching this with my son 
the other day and just wanted to keep watching it with him, but following the 
Aids musical sequence, his mum insisted it wasn’t appropriate. She was right, 
of course, but at some level I think a film this funny will always be an 
appropriate education for my children.

8 Borat

Larry Charles, 2006 

This is No 1 for me because I can remember more laughs watching this than any 
other movie. And I’m not even thinking of the naked wrestling scene, which, to 
be honest, makes me feel a bit dizzy and sick. Sacha Baron Cohen finds in Borat 
a classical, eternal clown – like Homer Simpson, no matter how wrong he is, you 
can’t help rooting for him – but also something unbelievably modern about 
globalisation and ethnicity and outsider culture and America. Plus it makes 
antisemitism hilarious, both in the scene whenBorat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/borat> thinks the Jewish B&B owners have 
turned into cockroaches and, in the (imaginary) Kazakhstan-set opening, the 
extraordinary Borat-commentated Running of the Jew ceremony: “Wait, here comes 
Mrs Jew!!!”

Also picked by Sarah Millican, who says:
Yes, Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat is hilarious. But the day I saw it at the 
cinema, it wasn’t the only funny thing happening. Before the film started, my 
friend placed his massive tub of chocolate Ben & Jerry’s on the seat while he 
took off his jacket. He forgot he’d done that then threw himself fully down on 
to the ice-cream. I was crying with laughter before the film even started. He 
scraped the bulk of it off his jeans and we watched the film, knowing full well 
that at the end, as we left the cinema, he would look like he’d shat hisself. 
The film was still funnier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d8d8028940169f766b28dd0d4737c161ae4a24%2F941_276_2219_2774%2F2219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d8d8028940169f766b28dd0d4737c161ae4a24%2F941_276_2219_2774%2F2219.jpg>
Stewart Lee

Observer columnist and a stalwart of the standup circuit, Stewart Lee also had 
a Bafta-winning solo show that ran for four series on BBC2:Stewart Lee’s Comedy 
Vehicle. Born in Shropshire, he began performing standup aged 20 and in the 90s 
formed a comedy duo with Richard Herring. In 2001 he co-wroteJerry Springer: 
The Opera, which went on to win four Olivier awards. His current show, Stewart 
Lee: Content Provider, is at Leicester Square theatre until 28 January and 
touring throughout 2017. Seestewartlee.co.uk 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/live-dates/> for details.

9 Carry On Screaming!

Gerald Thomas, 1966 

 The League of Gentlemen all cite the same 70s TV screening of Carry On 
Screaming! as an influence. Because it was parodying a cinematic milieu – 
British 50s and 60s horror – of which I as a little boy knew nothing, it seemed 
utterly unanchored, occurring in an incomprehensibly surreal world of 
saturated-colour Frankensteins, Wolfmans and Draculas. Kenneth Williams, 
Fenella Fielding, Charles Hawtrey and Harry H Corbett are all superb. And, 
while remaining tonally accurate, the script bubbles with great stupid jokes. 
The banquet scene inCarry On Up the Khyber is the series’ highlight, but this 
is the funniestCarry On film and its Victorian gothic milieu protects it from 
the ravages of squeamish social revisionism, which have rightly rendered many
Carry Ons unwatchable.

10 Festen

Thomas Vinterberg, 1998 

 The first time I saw Festen’s family reunion gone wrong I found it 
unremittingly bleak. Then, years later, I watched it again and laughed my head 
off. It’s possible to viewFesten as the blackest black comedy ever made. If you 
thought your family parties were bad, try this one. Violent beatings, abuse 
revelations, racist songs and suicides are all relayed via the puritanical 
dictates of the Dogme 95’s manifesto in a lucid, watery, midnight sunlight. 
It’s the cinematic equivalent of the standup who refuses to crack a smile but 
gets you in the end.

11 Get Santa

Christopher Smith, 2014
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2a1b7d463057b29dd73754b63f1a2ed7496920a%2F0_55_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2a1b7d463057b29dd73754b63f1a2ed7496920a%2F0_55_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Jim Broadbent (centre) in Get Santa. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros. 
 A family film that pleases everyone on the sofa without being remotely 
patronising is a joyful thing and a relief for parents. Jim Broadbent, in a 
career-defining performance, is Santa, who crashes his sleigh into a shed, 
leaving estranged ex-con father Rafe Spall and his son to save Christmas and 
round up the reindeer. The scene where Santa, now in jail, talks to the 
prisoners about their childhoods deftly avoids sugary sentiment. Santa’s 
delight at meeting jailbird Warwick Davis, whom he naively mistakes for an elf, 
is brilliantly handled. It’s the funniest film no one has seen, except parents 
with young families, desperate for a moment’s respite at Christmas.

12 Who Dares Wins

Ian Sharp, 1982 

 Why not watch this reactionary anti‑CND action thriller while imagining it is 
actually aComic Strip parody and pretending it stars Keith Allen instead of 
Lewis Collins? In one of the nastiest films ever made, coming off like Richard 
Littlejohn writingThe Professionals, married SAS man Collins goes undercover 
with peaceniks to gallantly probe their firebrand leader (an admirably 
committed and oddly out of place) Judy Davis, only to murder her in cold blood 
later. Fairport Convention appear as some kind of beardo commie new wave band, 
playing a weird boingy protest music that never existed anywhere except in the 
imagination of the makers of this hilarious atrocity. Wine’s Oz Clarke has a 
small role as a man looking suspiciously through a window, but refused my 
requests to appear on stage when I screenedWho Dares Wins in the Barbican’s Bad 
Film Club season.

13 The Unbelievable Truth

Hal Hartley, 1989

 When I was twentysomething, Hal Hartley seemed to speak directly to me. I was 
a fan of his in the way I’d been a Smiths fan in my teens, eager for his next 
release.The Unbelievable Truth is his first and funniest film and stars the 
luminous, now late, Adrienne Shelly. Few of Hartley’s subsequent movies are 
really comedies and I really like his mid-period stuff where he experiments 
with movement and dance, but his sense of the absurd persists into his current, 
crowd-funded and criminally neglected work. InThe Unbelievable Truth, 
small-town American parent-child conflict is realised with a kind of Chekhovian 
minimalism. Deadpan characters spew out lengthy standup soliloquies in crimped 
cul-de-sacs. Nobody works the jokes. They just lie there, asking for your 
consideration, indifferent to your approval.

14 Thundercrack!

Curt McDowell, 1975
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd79c251bc2c2f218b429e06a3ff53467cc5cee%2F0_92_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd79c251bc2c2f218b429e06a3ff53467cc5cee%2F0_92_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 George Kuchar and Marion Eaton in Thundercrack! 
 McDowell took porn money to fund George Kuchar’s weird comedy noir script. 
Today, I don’t know if I’d stomach the hairy 70s hardcore scenes he was obliged 
to include, butThundercrack! remains a work of deranged genius. Harsh lighting 
and ponderous piano frame six storm-tossed travellers pursued by an amorous 
ape, sheltering in the home of a crazy lady whose sexually deformed son is 
locked in the cellar. In 1994 I turned away from Kuchar’s San Francisco door, 
having failed to pluck up the courage to congratulate him on his ludicrous 
vision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fec3e65387eb79f048a4ab3d2f6784d4e4936fe%2F656_125_919_1149%2F919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fec3e65387eb79f048a4ab3d2f6784d4e4936fe%2F656_125_919_1149%2F919.jpg>
 Photograph: Dan Wooller/Rex/Shutterstock 
Stephen Merchant

Best known for co-creating the award-winning sitcoms The Office and Extras 
with Ricky Gervais,Stephen Merchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-merchant> began his comedy career 
doing stand-up in his home town of Bristol. In 2010 he and Gervais co-wrote and 
co-directed the filmCemetery Junction and he has since worked extensively, both 
writing and performing, in TV and film. He has won four British comedy awards, 
three Baftas and an Emmy.

15 Monkey Business

Norman Z McLeod, 1931 

 There’s a punk-like anarchy to the Marx Brothers that I really admire and 
find very funny. This is my favourite of their films. It’s essentially plotless 
– it’s just them as stowaways on a cruise liner running amok, briefly hitting 
the land, then running amok again at the end. Most comedy acts try to live 
within the parameters of society, but the Marx Brothers are like crazy animated 
characters walking over furniture and over conventions. Everything is fair game 
for them to mock and they have no respect for anything: authority, people, 
danger or each other.

16 MacGruber

Jorma Taccone, 2010 

 I almost never laugh out loud when I’m on my own but while channel-surfing in 
a hotel room I happened to find this film and was in hysterics. It stars Will 
Forte, who’s aSaturday Night Live alumnus. He had this character on the show 
called MacGruber, who was essentially a pastiche of action movie hero 
characters, like Bruce Willis inDie Hard. The sketches were quite popular and 
then they made a film, which was essentially considered a flop at the time. But 
as time’s gone on it’s got a cult following. I’m not even a big fan of spoof 
movies – I always think it’s a bit easy to spoof something – but this is just 
giddily funny in the way that I rememberAirplane! was for me as a teenager. It 
never seems to go for the obvious joke.

17 Meet the Parents

Jay Roach, 2000
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d2a0ab50ac60d82a5592db3e8d2b3e83b16443%2F0_289_2154_1292%2F2154.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d2a0ab50ac60d82a5592db3e8d2b3e83b16443%2F0_289_2154_1292%2F2154.jpg>
 Robert De Niro and Ben Stiller in Meet the Parents. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto/Allstar 
I love a film built on a very real-life anxiety like meeting your partner’s 
parents. Here, the father is a former CIA agent and the young man’s got to 
impress him. They squeeze every drop of funny out of it; you never feel 
shortchanged. When we were makingThe Office, around the same time this film 
came out, we also played a lot on discomfort and awkwardness, and I think they 
did that really well in this film. Being given a polygraph test by your 
prospective father-in-law is just such a great idea for comedy.

18 The Wolf of Wall Street

Martin Scorsese, 2013

 Martin Scorsese for me is one of the great underrated comedy directors. When 
he goes for laughs, he’s really good. I really likeAfter Hours, and The King of 
Comedy makes me laugh harder every time I watch it. But The Wolf of Wall Street
, though not a comedy, has one of the funniest sequences in recent history: the 
bit where the Jordan Belfort character, played by Leonardo DiCaprio, has taken 
drugs and they’ve zombified him, but he has to get home in his Lamborghini. The 
scene where he is trying to get down some stairs to his car is one of the best 
pieces of comedy I’ve ever seen. And because the stakes are raised – the FBI 
are on to him, he desperately has to get back – it’s just twice as funny. Then 
there’s that great gag where he thinks he drove back seamlessly and you 
discover he totalled his Lamborghini.

19 The Road to Utopia

Hal Walker, 1945

 I grew up watching Bob Hope films with my dad. The rapport that he had with 
Bing Crosby in this film is just delicious. He’s lambasted now, seen as a sort 
of dinosaur of comedy, but when he first came along there was something 
effortless, cool and contemporary about him. He wasn’t just slapstick, he was 
joking about sex and modern life. He was subversive. There’s lots of looking at 
the camera, breaking the fourth wall and talking to the audience; all the 
things that we associate with postmodern comedy that came later, like Monty 
Python. You can see he influenced Woody Allen and I’m sure Chevy Chase and Tom 
Hanks, too.

20 Swingers

Doug Liman, 1996
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d22ab10e43518d5ed8d508343577c47b6139fa1%2F0_354_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d22ab10e43518d5ed8d508343577c47b6139fa1%2F0_354_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 Vince Vaughn in Swingers. Photograph: Pictures/Alfred/Rex/Shutterstock 
 I first saw Swingers when I was reviewing films for a magazine in Bristol. I 
didn’t know who any of the actors were, no one knew them at the time, it was 
this small, independent film. Within five or 10 minutes, I was completely 
enamoured of the actors and their world. It captured something about the way 
that men speak to each other in their early 20s, the attempts at machismo and 
the vulnerability behind that. I watched it again recently. It absolutely nails 
everything about those times when you were trying to be cooler than you were or 
sexier or wittier or smarter. It has so many great lines, such as when they’re 
in a club and it’s really going off, it’s totally wild, and someone says: 
“Let’s get out of here” and the other says: “Yeah, this place is dead anyway, 
man.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf5f0b4e5acfb328dc07589cb859604a5b76ec7%2F905_0_2818_3520%2F2818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf5f0b4e5acfb328dc07589cb859604a5b76ec7%2F905_0_2818_3520%2F2818.jpg>
 Photograph: Chris Floyd 
Bridget Christie

In 2013, after years on the comedy circuit, Bridget Christie won the Edinburgh 
comedy award for best show with her feminist-themedA Bic for Her.  Christie, 
now 45, studied at the Academy of Live and Recorded Arts in Wandsworth and 
later fell into standup. Her debut book,A Book for Her, was published last year 
and her live show,Because You Demanded It, is at Leicester Square theatre 31 
January to 11 February then touring until June. Details atbridgetchristie.co.uk 
<http://www.bridgetchristie.co.uk/>.

21 Best in Show

Christopher Guest, 2000

 I love this mockumentary comedy film so much I can watch it again and again. 
It’s laugh-out-loud funny but also profound and moving. And it has dogs in it. 
It follows five entrants (four couples and one man) as they travel to, and 
compete in, a dog show with their beloved pets. Knowing that much of the 
dialogue was improvised makes it all the more impressive. Eugene Levy and Jane 
Lynch are especially sublime, but all the performances are glorious.

22 The King of Comedy

Martin Scorsese, 1982
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29fc792d125bb22f2657eee50099c3e65bdcb7b7%2F0_11_1776_1066%2F1776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29fc792d125bb22f2657eee50099c3e65bdcb7b7%2F0_11_1776_1066%2F1776.jpg>
 Robert De Niro in The King of Comedy. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex 
 This black comedy stars Robert De Niro as Rupert Pupkin, an aspiring, 
unsuccessful standup comedian and fantasist. Pupkin, a stage-door autograph 
hunter, briefly meets the famous comedian and talkshow host Jerry Langford 
(Jerry Lewis) when he is mobbed by fans. Pupkin sees this chance meeting as his 
“big break”. He turns up at Langford’s offices with a tape of his standup 
begging for a slot on the show. After constant rejections from Langford, Pupkin 
becomes increasingly psychopathic and eventually kidnaps him. It’s equal parts 
hilarious and horrifying and Sandra Bernhard is outstanding.

Also picked by Tim Key <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tim-key>, who says:
Scorsese and De Niro have a crack at comedy here and it turns out pretty well, 
actually. The lengths our hero goes to to make his dreams come true are 
hilarious and underneath it all there’s a grim prescience of the 
celebrity-worshipping times we are stuck with now. One of their greatest 
collaborations.

23 This Is Spinal Tap

Rob Reiner, 1984
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdab96fe567cec75f1e20fc4a15a495f7a8f105e%2F0_0_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdab96fe567cec75f1e20fc4a15a495f7a8f105e%2F0_0_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
 A satire on the behaviour of heavy metal bands and a parody of rock 
documentaries of the time, this classic follows a fictional British heavy metal 
band, Spinal Tap, on tour. Mainly improvised, and directed by Rob Reiner, it is 
a comedic masterpiece from start to finish. My family and I were obsessed with 
it in the 1980s. My brother, who I rarely see because he lives in Sweden, will 
send a text now and then just saying: “Who’s in here? No one” or: “These go to 
11” or: “Do you wear black?” I’ll probably quoteSpinal Tap on my deathbed.

24 The Aristocrats

Paul Provenza, 2005 

The Aristocrats is a documentary comedy in which 100 comedians tell variations 
on the same joke that’s been told by comedians since the vaudeville era. The 
set-up (a family pitching an idea for an act to a talent agency) and the 
punchline – “We call the actThe Aristocrats” – leaves the middle section free 
for the comedian to think of the worst, most obscene, offensive and taboo act 
they can imagine. I laughed so much watching this film I was exhausted and 
covered in sweat by the end; Gilbert Gottfried’s decision to tell the joke at 
the 2001 roasting of Hugh Hefner is one of the most awe-inspiring pieces of 
standup I’ve ever seen.

25 Men in Black

Barry Sonnenfeld, 1997

 While Men in Black certainly isn’t the most hilarious film ever made, Vincent 
D’Onofrio as Edgar the Bug, an alien bug who crashes on to Earth and steals a 
farmer’s skin, is the funniest piece of physical comedy I’ve ever seen. It is 
astounding how in control of his body D’Onofrio is and how he manages 
realistically to convey a bug alien trying to get to grips with the human form. 
While I’m in awe of how superb and hilarious his performance is, I am also 
jealous I wasn’t asked to do the part.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe848063b0d65029b74031de4d4c405ae1885e4%2F791_1957_2085_2606%2F2085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe848063b0d65029b74031de4d4c405ae1885e4%2F791_1957_2085_2606%2F2085.jpg>
Romesh Ranganathan

Raised in Crawley, Ranganathan was a maths teacher before becoming a comedian 
in 2010. He was nominated for best newcomer award for his 2013 Edinburgh show
Rom Com and in 2015 presented BBC3’s Asian Provocateur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/21/asian-provocateur-romesh-ranganathan-travel-tv-sri-lanka>
, in which he explored his Sri Lankan roots. His standup showIrrational is out 
now on DVD and digital download.

26 Planes, Trains and Automobiles

John Hughes, 1987

 Steve Martin and John Candy play two terribly matched travelling companions 
trying to get home for Thanksgiving. This film is the perfect odd couple road 
movie. It has two stunning performances from the leads and manages to transform 
a familiar comic set-up into something that feels completely new and exciting. 
The film would be brilliant even without the emotional gut punch of the finale.

27 Ghostbusters

Ivan Reitman, 1984
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0945218d606f408266e470e1f25e425d481134c%2F817_0_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0945218d606f408266e470e1f25e425d481134c%2F817_0_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
 Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man, Harold Ramis, Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd and Ernie 
Hudson in Ghostbusters. Photograph: Alamy 
 Three scientists and a regular fella form a team of paranormal investigators 
and save the world. I haven’t been able to watch the remake, less because of my 
misogyny and more because I cannot bear to see it tampered with. The acting is 
superb – Bill Murray manages to make someone bordering on predatory feel 
charming and hilarious and Dan Aykroyd manages the near impossible task of 
making puppy-dog enthusiasm funny. Harold Ramis is note perfect as Egon and 
Annie Potts is great as Janine. I will even forgive the one-dimensional and 
racially dodgy nature of Winston’s character as he has the best line in the 
film: “Ray, when someone asks you if you’re a god, you say yes!”

28 Bad Santa

Terry Zwigoff, 2003

 Billy Bob Thornton plays a horrible, horrible conman using a job as a 
department store Santa to rob the stores. What I love about this film is that 
Thornton is so completely unlikable and horrid, yet you still root for him and 
the inevitable turnaround of attitude doesn’t feel too saccharine. The 
bickering between him and his elf (Tony Cox) is achingly funny and the 
relationship with the child he befriends is beautifully and hilariously played 
out. I wasn’t too keen on the bizarre scene involving an Indian man struggling 
with his sexuality who starts shouting at Santa in a car park, but that aside, 
it’s pretty much perfect.

29 Coming to America

John Landis, 1988

 This film is Eddie Murphy at his very best, playing a range of characters, 
and not in a rubbish way like inThe Nutty Professor. Arsenio Hall is excellent 
as his right-hand man and James Earl Jones nails comedy with gravitas. The film 
is littered with catchphrases – “The royal penis is clean, your Highness”, 
“Freeze, you diseased rhinoceros pizzle” – and there is a call-back toTrading 
Places that blew my mind. It has some issues with stereotyping, of course, but 
if you can forgive that, it really is testament to Murphy’s comic talents and 
almost made me forgive him for makingNorbit. 

30 Dumb and Dumber

Peter and Bobby Farrelly, 1994
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606af37839d6085cf4afaad533cf44265569142a%2F0_57_1760_1056%2F1760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606af37839d6085cf4afaad533cf44265569142a%2F0_57_1760_1056%2F1760.jpg>
 Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels in Dumb and Dumber. Photograph: New Line 
Cinema/Everett/Rex 
 Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels play two idiots. On paper, I should hate this 
film, a story of a quest undertaken by two nuclear-level morons, but it is 
brilliant. The Farrellys say that the script sat on their shelf for years, when 
they would occasionally bring it out and read it to friends. They knew bits 
weren’t funny enough when they would rush through them to get to good bits, so 
they went back to those bits and reworked them. This development process was 
obviously effective, as the gag rate on the film is astonishing. When Harry had 
to deal with a failing toilet at the beginning of a date I had to pause the 
film because I was laughing so much. It is lowbrow for sure, but excellent. 
Shame the sequel was so breathtakingly dire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09408d67ead62e4cd3bb7eb1ff47a100c7d27a3e%2F1013_1260_1777_2221%2F1777.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09408d67ead62e4cd3bb7eb1ff47a100c7d27a3e%2F1013_1260_1777_2221%2F1777.jpg>
 Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Tim Key

Brought up in Cambridgeshire, actor and poet Tim Key won the 2009 Edinburgh 
comedy award forThe Slutcracker and has since toured several acclaimed standup 
shows. He also works in theatre, TV, radio and film, including as 
poet-in-residence onNewswipe and as Sidekick Simon to Alan Partridge in Alpha 
Papa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/08/alpha-papa-review>. He is 
currently starring inArt at the Old Vic, London SE1, until 18 February.

31 Safety Last!

Fred C Newmeyer and Sam Taylor, 1923

I used to have that iconic image on my wall of Harold Lloyd dangling off that 
clock. I never really considered what the feature film it came from might be 
like until a couple of years ago. Well, the feature is calledSafety Last! and 
it’s phenomenal. A sweet, sweet tale about a young man trying to earn money in 
the big city to send back to his fiance. Working hard. Being sneaky. And 
ultimately hanging off a clock in the type of death-defying stunt that was 
Lloyd’s trademark. Wonderful film. Even better than the poster.

32 The Apartment

Billy Wilder, 1960

 The little guy, getting hosed down by the alpha males at the office, as they 
borrow the keys to his apartment and romance their mistresses in there. Poor 
old Jack Lemmon. He plays the underdog to a T, bumbling, put upon, kicking his 
heels in the streets as these fiends enjoy his central heating. And, 
ultimately, Lemmon winning. It’s inch-perfect stuff – laughter through tears.

33 Nuts in May

Mike Leigh, 1976
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0141a9b840445a2a83b00cb6c4cdd52847d60930%2F0_37_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0141a9b840445a2a83b00cb6c4cdd52847d60930%2F0_37_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 Alison Steadman and Roger Sloman in Nuts in May. Photograph: Channel 4 
I love Nuts in May. A simple tale about a couple of well-meaning campers, 
determined to have a nice time in the country but thwarted by that classic fly 
in the ointment: “other people”. Alison Steadman and Roger Sloman are 
breathtaking as the self-righteous holidayers. You watch grinning as they plod 
around Corfe Castle and sing their songs and Steadman says: “It’s not fair, 
Keith”, then, whoops, your smile evaporates as it all goes a bit pear‑shaped.

Also picked by Aisling Bea, who says:

I came late to Nuts in May. I saw it on the BBC as an adult already working in 
comedy and it just felt so ahead of its time in terms of its underplayed comedy 
performances, which we would later see inThe Office. It’s such a glorious 
exploration of character and British manners, especially by Alison Steadman, 
who I love. I think Mike Leigh left with some actors who have nothing to do but 
put up with each other is Mike Leigh at his best.

34 Man Bites Dog

Rémy Belvaux, André Bonzel and Benoît Poelvoorde, 1992
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40900457f6e65c966ae5c126381f0624ed192fb%2F126_57_3054_1832%2F3054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40900457f6e65c966ae5c126381f0624ed192fb%2F126_57_3054_1832%2F3054.jpg>
 Benoît Poelvoorde in Man Bites Dog. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
 This is that classic comedy staple, the Belgian serial killer mockumentary. A 
mockumentary before mockumentaries had been done to death, this is a jet-black 
comedy about a skeleton crew of Belgian students following a murderer as he 
kills people and disposes of bodies. It’s diabolical stuff and gets more 
appalling and funnier the more blood is spilled and the more our killer, Benoît 
Poelvoorde, spews his philosophies and opinions about the world and about the 
weight necessary to keep a corpse on the bed of a canal.

35 Carry On at Your Convenience

Gerald Thomas, 1971

 There has to be a Carry On in my list. In terms of laughter coaxed out of me 
these films win hands down. Largely because I was a little boy and I couldn’t 
believe what was going on on our telly, but also because I remember the whole 
family laughing. Also, this scoops up some of the great comedians of the day, 
Williams, James, Jacques and my favourite, Bernard Bresslaw, plodding about 
with his high-pitched voice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4883285b40bfff169e7972d98cd963e806577c86%2F853_117_1232_1540%2F1232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4883285b40bfff169e7972d98cd963e806577c86%2F853_117_1232_1540%2F1232.jpg>
 Photograph: © Karla Gowlett 
Aisling Bea

Born in County Kildare, Ireland, Aisling Bea is an actor, comedian and writer. 
After training at Lamda she moved into comedy and in 2012, won the So You Think 
You’re Funny? award for new standups at the Edinburgh festival, only the second 
female winner in its 25-year history. The following year, she was nominated as 
best newcomer in the Edinburgh comedy awards for her debut solo show. She has 
appeared in the sitcoms Dead Boss and Trollied and this year joined the cast of 
BBC2 dramaThe Fall (series 3 out now on DVD).

36 Happy Gilmore

Dennis Dugan, 1996

 There are people who will crucify me for putting an Adam Sandler movie in my 
list, but the pure silliness ofHappy Gilmore gave a teenage me such joy. It is 
one of the few movies that I have re-watched. There is a sense with all the 
actors, particularly Christopher McDonald playing baddy character Shooter 
McGavin, that he is playing his performance to make the crew laugh and that he 
himself is on the cusp of laughing and not getting through the take.

37 Sisters

Jason Moore, 2015
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F578e72cc202e43a927f777941356ee66ef54632b%2F0_500_3151_1891%2F3151.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F578e72cc202e43a927f777941356ee66ef54632b%2F0_500_3151_1891%2F3151.jpg>
 Tina Fey and Amy Poehler in Sisters. Photograph: Allstar/Universal Pictures 
I went to watch this Tina Fey and Amy Poehler funstravaganza last Christmas 
with my mother and sister to get us out of the house. Its premise isn’t very 
complicated – they throw a party – but what I love about simple plots is that 
they give the actors time to play and explore the characters; even all the side 
characters are hilarious. My favourite is Greta Lee, who plays Hae-Won, who 
owns what could have been an “Asian stereotype character”.

38 Big Business

Jim Abrahams, 1988

This is from Bette Midler’s comedy heyday. I’m a big fan of her acting. It is 
an 80s movie that myself and my sister would have gotten out on VHS in the 90s. 
The premise is as old as time: a mixed-up pair of twins swapped at birth, town 
mouse and country mouse. Midler and Lily Tomlin each get to play very different 
sets of twins and you can practically feel their enjoyment and delight about 
getting two different parts in one movie buzzing through the screen.

39 SuperBob

Jon Drever, 2015

One of my best friends, Brett Goldstein, is the writer and star of this movie, 
yet I still managed to be just an audience member and got lost watching it, 
which is often hard to do with friends’ work. It is so bloody funny and warm! 
It is a romcom superhero movie and even though the ideas have not reinvented 
the wheel, it feels original. It is one of my favourite films that I’ve seen 
this decade.

40 Mrs Doubtfire

Chris Columbus, 1993
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2da7f075b680cfda82204b9af98028c3abf751a8%2F402_17_2580_1548%2F2580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2da7f075b680cfda82204b9af98028c3abf751a8%2F402_17_2580_1548%2F2580.jpg>
 Robin Williams in Mrs Doubtfire. Photograph: Snap/Rex Features 
Robin Williams was such a huge influence on me. This is a family movie, but if 
you rewatch the film as an adult, his performance has layers that are revealed 
the more life stages you go through. It seems particularly pertinent now, 
seeing the masks Williams uses to amuse and hide behind in the movie, and 
knowing the sadness he experienced while making so many people laugh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d2e0ffc61cc30b8d5b7504734dead4a737a8d6%2F1448_161_2201_2752%2F2201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d2e0ffc61cc30b8d5b7504734dead4a737a8d6%2F1448_161_2201_2752%2F2201.jpg>
 Photograph: Cartel/REX/Shutterstock/Cartel/Rex/Shutterstock 
Alan Davies

In 1991, aged 25, Alan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-davies> was named best young 
comic byTime Out magazine. Now 50, the Essex-born comedian, actor and writer is 
best known for his role as BBC1’s amateur sleuthJonathan Creek and as a 
panellist on the quiz showQI. His latest standup show, Alan Davies – Little 
Victories, is out now on DVD and download.

41 Monty Python’s Life of Brian

Terry Jones, 1979

 Graham Chapman was probably my favourite Python but at different moments they 
were all hilarious – that was the great thing about them. I think this is out 
on its own as the funniest, cleverest and most interesting film. It came out 
when I was about 13 and a lot of us were quoting from it. It’s such a good 
idea, so brilliantly executed, and still holds up completely as quite an 
important piece of work as well as being a laugh-out-loud funny film. When 
Brian addresses a huge crowd and says: “You are all individuals” and one person 
shouts: “I’m not!”, I still think that’s the best joke that’s been written.

42 Animal House

John Landis, 1978
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c24e2f47f0e66a2007518839da9631c3234ff9d%2F0_38_1750_1050%2F1750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c24e2f47f0e66a2007518839da9631c3234ff9d%2F0_38_1750_1050%2F1750.jpg>
 John Belushi (centre) in Animal House. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar 
 This is a kind of superior frat house comedy made by the National Lampoon 
magazine people, so there’s some quite sophisticated comic minds behind it. At 
one point, they decide to have a toga party. They’re in real trouble, the dean 
of the university is going to shut them down, they’ve got terrible grades, 
they’re having unruly, drunken parties and one of them says: “Well there’s only 
one thing to do at a time like this” and someone else says: “Toga party!” When 
I was 16, my parents went away and my friends and I had a toga party – we 
propped up a portable record player in the corner and danced around in the 
garage wearing sheets! I absolutely loved that film.

43 Jackass: The Movie

Jeff Tremaine, 2002

 This is the film I’ve laughed most loudly at. I like Jackass, Johnny 
Knoxville and all the original gang. There’s a scene in it where they go to a 
posh golf course and hide in the bushes with an air horn and every time this 
guy goes to hit a shot they let the air horn off. There was a sort of raucous 
atmosphere in the cinema in a way that you never get – it was joyous. There’s 
something that goes past your analytical mind, past your brain almost; 
something primeval about the laughter, howling with laughter at the stupidity 
of these people.

44 Broadway Danny Rose

Woody Allen, 1984

 It’s so difficult to choose one Woody Allen film, but I think this is my 
favourite. It’s about a theatrical agent, shot in black and white, and all of 
his acts are terrible. As soon as any one of them gets good they leave him for 
a bigger agent, but he’s incredibly loyal to them and he believes in them. It’s 
got Mia Farrow in it and there’s a scene where she’s telling him about someone 
who got shot in the eyes and he says: “He’s blind?” and she says: “Dead.” I’ve 
been saying that for years. He’s the greatest to me in terms of comic films, 
he’s incomparable.

45 Dead Men Don’t Wear Plaid

Carl Reiner, 1982
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9045f9267748210d908243ad7ef343c29fb536%2F0_45_2466_1479%2F2466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9045f9267748210d908243ad7ef343c29fb536%2F0_45_2466_1479%2F2466.jpg>
 Steve Martin in Dead Men Don’t Wear Plaid. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar 
 It’s very hard to have a list of my favourite funny films that doesn’t have a 
Steve Martin film. This is a black-and-white spoof of a 50s, private detective 
film. Steve Martin’s funny all the way through it. He’s not doing the wild and 
crazy, wacky nutcase, he’s doing this kind of Bogart, gumshoe thing. He makes a 
fool of himself but tries to style it out all the time and it’s really funny. 
It’s something I watched over and over with my friends when I was young.
 Photograph: Jonathan Hordle/Rex/Shutterstock 
Andi Osho

After a career in TV production, east Londoner Andi Osho turned to acting and 
comedy in the mid 00s. She made her solo Edinburgh festival debut in 2010 with 
her show Afroblighty and regularly appears on Michael McIntyre’s Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> Roadshow and Live at the 
Apollo. Her latest film role is Emma in the supernatural horror Lights Out, 
which is out now on DVD.




46 Back to the Future

Robert Zemeckis, 1985

 I was infatuated with Michael J Fox for a solid two years, so that’s probably 
partly why this is on the list. But it’s also brilliantly structured, the 
characters are so well drawn and it’s full of well-written gags. One of the 
best is when, quite near the beginning, they set up that Marty’s Uncle Joey is 
in prison and then when Marty goes back in time, he meets his Uncle Joey as a 
baby in a crib on the floor and whispers to him: “Better get used to these 
bars, kid.” But there’s so much good slapstick too, like when Marty plays 
guitar and gets catapulted across the room.

47 Trading Places

John Landis, 1983

 I’ve watched this film so many times. It’s from a bygone era when Eddie 
Murphy was still making funny films, so I hold it very dear to my heart. Dan 
Aykroyd is an amazing comic actor as well. He plays this snooty, entitled rich 
guy who unwittingly swaps lives with Eddie Murphy’s homeless conman. Dan 
Aykroyd does what some people find hard in comedy: he totally commits to the 
absurdity of the role, so he makes it funnier and more ridiculous. When he gets 
arrested, it’s the worse thing that could happen to somebody like him, but when 
Frank Oz, the police officer, is going through the stuff in his wallet and he 
mispronouncesLa bohème, he corrects him. It’s like, he’s just found drugs on 
you and you’re worrying about the fact that he’s mispronounced the name of an 
opera!

48 Shaun of the Dead

Edgar Wright, 2004

Shaun of the Dead combines my two favourite things: comedy and zombies; I’m a 
huge fan ofThe Walking Dead. What I like about those sorts of films is what 
such extreme situations make people become; they’re not really about the 
zombies, they’re about people forced to act purely on instinct rather than 
making decisions. Then to put a comic spin on that is just perfect for me. 
Simon Pegg is great as the everyman; he’s completely relatable as this person 
who is going nowhere in his job, he’s on autopilot in his life, so when the 
zombie apocalypse starts he doesn’t even notice. Nick Frost and Simon Pegg are 
such a great combination, they’re always fun to watch together. But I didn’t 
like the follow-ups as much.

49 The Truman Show

Peter Weir, 1998
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2077dd9511ad9b7cb8e5deb4416b74fb32ebe20e%2F0_0_1756_1054%2F1756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20funniest%20films%E2%80%A6%20chosen%20by%20comedians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-50-funniest-comedy-films-chosen-comedians-stewart-lee-sarah-millican-david-baddiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2077dd9511ad9b7cb8e5deb4416b74fb32ebe20e%2F0_0_1756_1054%2F1756.jpg>
 Jim Carrey in The Truman Show. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar 
 This film holds up a really good mirror to the highly individualised world we 
now live in, with our relationship to social media and how we interact with the 
world. It’s central theme is “This world isn’t what you think it is” and I love 
that the lead is a great comic actor, Jim Carrey, in a kind of serious role but 
with comic moments. One of my favourite scenes is when Truman goes into a 
building and they haven’t yet put the facade up so he sees the backstage area 
and they quickly cover it up. The comedy comes out of the truth of the 
situation that he’s in.

50 Jerry Maguire

Cameron Crowe, 1996

 This was such a different role for Tom Cruise – a successful sports agent who 
falls from the top – and we didn’t really know who Renée Zellweger was at that 
time. I just love how quotable this film is. There are probably about 20 I 
could recite for you: “You complete me”; “Show me the money”; and “I love black 
people!” But that line from Cuba Gooding Jr as Rod Tidwell about Jerry having 
sex with a single mother – “a real man wouldn’t shoplift the pootie from a 
single mom” – is just brilliant.
 