
Think of Greek tragedy and we tend to think of sad stories of the death of 
kings <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VEk1thwejzQ>. Or, if not their deaths, 
then at least their comeuppances: Agamemnon killed in his bath by his wife; 
Ajax made mad and murderous by the gods; Oedipus blinded by his own hand; Jason 
destroyed after his wife, Medea, kills their children.

But only 32 complete plays survive, by just three playwrights – out of 
hundreds, or perhaps as many as 1,000 texts by around 80 authors. And, 
according toMatthew Wright 
<http://humanities.exeter.ac.uk/classics/staff/wright/>, professor of Greek at 
the University of Exeter, the works we have by Aeschylus, Sophocles and 
Euripides are neither necessarily the best plays of their time, nor especially 
representative. Some of these lost works, he believes, were likely to have been 
masterpieces: “There is no evidence that quality played a part in the 
transmission of the surviving texts.”

In one version, Medea was a kind of ​expert ​personal trainer who 'took on 
weak and feeble people'

According to his scrutiny of the remaining fragments, quotations and 
descriptions, the lost texts of fifth- and fourth-century BC Athenian plays 
display a vastly broader range of plot and tone than those that survive, with 
stories covering incest, sex, love, magic – and happy endings. Had more 
survived, we would have a “radically different” understanding of the nature of 
Greek tragedy as a genre.

Alexander the Great’s favourite play, for example, was decidedly jolly: in 
Euripides’s lost Andromeda, which told the story of the heroine’s rescue from 
death by the hero Perseus, the two marry. AnotherEuripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/euripides> play, Protesilaus, about the 
first hero to be killed in the Trojan war, told of the dead man’s being brought 
back to life for a day because his wife loved him so much.

Aeschylus’s lost The Myrmidons also appeared to have had sexual and romantic 
love, between Achilles and Patroclus, at its heart. A physical relationship 
between the two heroes of the Trojan war is not spelled out in the main source 
for the story, Homer’s Iliad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde3ccaab7564a9e6a52f3962607a69e1e06ceb6b%2F0_183_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20one%20where%20Medea%20saves%20her%20kids%3A%20lost%20classics%20of%20Greek%20tragedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20one%20where%20Medea%20saves%20her%20kids%3A%20lost%20classics%20of%20Greek%20tragedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde3ccaab7564a9e6a52f3962607a69e1e06ceb6b%2F0_183_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 What if Oedipus didn’t blind himself? Ralph Fiennes in the National Theatre’s 
2008 production. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The fragments Wright has studied and analysed in his new book, The Lost Plays 
of Greek Tragedy 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/the-lost-plays-of-greek-tragedy-volume-1-9781472567789/>
, show that stories now often regarded as canonical myths were often highly 
inventive takes on basic storylines – and that there was no “authentic” version 
of the story of, say, Oedipus.

“I’m trying, in the book, to give a sense of the cauldron of stories and myths 
that tragedians were drawing on,” he said. “They were using the same basic 
stories, but reworking and rewriting them in completely different ways, so that 
audiences never really knew what they were going to get … All tragedy is 
‘inauthentic’, in that the plays weren’t based on a fixed version of myths.”


For example, Wright believes he has identified “around 19 tragedies” that 
featured the heroine Medea – who, in the one surviving play about her, by 
Euripides, takes revenge on her faithless husband by killing their children. In 
a version by the playwright Carcinus, on the other hand, she sends the children 
away for safekeeping, and the fourth-century Diogenes of Sinope, best known for 
his founding of the school of Cynic philosophy, wrote a version in which her 
role as a sorceress was downplayed. Instead, she was a kind of personal trainer 
who “took on weak and feeble people, whose bodies had been ruined through 
overindulgence, and she made them strong and vigorous again through gymnastic 
exercises and steam baths”, according to a summary by the Byzantine 
anthologist, John of Stobi.

Diogenes was also the author of a shocking text, condemned by ancient critics, 
about Oedipus in which – unlike the version of the story that survives, by
Sophocles <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sophocles> – incest and parricide 
were defended. Euripides also wrote a play about Oedipus, in which the hero did 
not blind himself and, judging from the scraps and fragments studied by Wright, 
“put the erotic relationship between Oedipus and his wife Jocasta at the centre 
of the plot”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e4510617cf52987fac2e6d05cf88fc027923e2%2F0_235_4610_2770%2F4610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20one%20where%20Medea%20saves%20her%20kids%3A%20lost%20classics%20of%20Greek%20tragedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20one%20where%20Medea%20saves%20her%20kids%3A%20lost%20classics%20of%20Greek%20tragedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-one-where-medea-saves-her-kids-lost-classics-of-greek-tragedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e4510617cf52987fac2e6d05cf88fc027923e2%2F0_235_4610_2770%2F4610.jpg>
 From left, Luke Thompson, Lia Williams, Annie Fairbank and Jessica Brown 
Findlay in a 2015 production of Oresteia by Aeschylus Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
Among the most tantalising of the playwrights whose work has disappeared is 
Agathon – who appears as a character in both Plato’s philosophical dialogue The 
Symposium and Aristophanes’s comedy Thesmophoriazusae. Thirty-four fragments of 
his works remain, which convey, said Wright, “a Wildean wit – they are so 
beautiful, so elegant and so epigrammatic”. (In fact, he suspects Oscar Wilde, 
who studied classics, of having read fragments of Agathon – he certainly 
admired him, describing him as “this brilliant man of letters and of fashion in 
the wittiest period of Attic social life”.)

The winnowing-down of the corpus of Greek tragedy, said Wright, started in 
fourth-century Athens, with the politician Lycurgus establishingAeschylus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aeschylus>, Sophocles and Euripides as the 
“official” tragedians of the city state, with fixed texts deposited in the city 
archives and statues of the men erected in the theatre.

Nevertheless, other playwrights were read and valued through antiquity, but in 
the Byzantine period a few plays by the big three writers became dominant, 
perhaps having been selected to be used for educational purposes – and perhaps 
accounting for the fact that what survives now “are on edifying subjects, and 
with no dodgy sex”.

Hundreds of years later, some of these texts were still being copied in 
monasteries, and our earliest surviving manuscripts date from around the 10th 
and 11th centuries. But along the way, there had been a catastrophic loss of 
hundreds of works. According to a somewhat wistful Wright: “It’s not impossible 
that other plays survive in libraries – miscatalogued, perhaps.” He would like 
to find a particular trilogy by Xenocles – the now utterly obscure playwright 
who won first prize in the Great Dionysia, beating Sophocles’s Oedipus into 
second place.

 * The Lost Plays of Greek Tragedy (Volume 1): Neglected Authors 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lost-plays-of-greek-tragedy.html> by Matthew 
Wright is out now.
 