
The Eagle Huntress review – Kazakh falconry was never so family-friendly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-eagle-huntress-review-otto-bell-kazakh-falconry-mongolia>
At first glance, Otto Bell’s The Eagle Huntress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-eagle-huntress> looks like one of those 
archetypal ethnographic documentaries with which Robert Flaherty kicked off the 
whole history of documentary film-making a century ago. Just like in 1922’s 
Nanook Of The North, Bell tackles a vanishing way of life – an ancient people 
in a harsh, unforgiving climate – and one might be forgiven for thinking it 
celebrates a wilful anachronism as it slides over history’s horizon. But you’d 
be wrong: there is enough of the new and the now to make this enthralling 
viewing.

Thirteen-year-old Aisholpan is the daughter and granddaughter of champion 
eagle-hunters. She looks after her little brothers and sisters on the land her 
family works in the frigid Altai Mountains of Mongolia, but mostly wants to 
learn the family trade of using eagles to hunt foxes for their fur, as her 
nomadic people have done since time immemorial. So far, so Flaherty: an ancient 
set of tribal skills and rituals, documented in a way that makes one vaguely 
suspicious that this is all being falsely maintained in its ancient forms. 
(Much of Nanook was staged, and signs of modernity were erased in favour of 
showing “the old ways”.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVfi5JS6HTH0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVfi5JS6HTH0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVfi5JS6HTH0&media=>
From Weiner to Making A Murderer: this is the golden age of documentaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/14/golden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer>
But here modernity creeps in: we glimpse a motorbike, a solar panel, 
transistor radios, and Aisholpan herself, who wants to be the first female 
eagle-hunter ever. Much to the consternation of the conservative old men who 
govern the sport (as it is now): too weak, too young, too inept, they say, she 
should be cooking and cleaning.

Tell that to Aisholpan! She and her dad scale a mountain, and in one stunning 
sequence, capture an eaglet from its nest – a female, too – and training is 
under way. At the end of the summer, at the annual eagle festival, she and her 
eagle triumph, and the parade of bigots reappears, pulling an idiotic 
180-degree about-face: “Of course it helps that she’s a girl!” It doesn’t at 
all, but she can’t win with these myopic old fools. And so she has to prove 
herself all over again, this time in the wild.

Aisholpan is such a winning character that the movie works as a kind of 
heroine’s quest. Alone among the men, her father and his father are behind her 
100% as she achieves each goal, bearing on her tiny padded forearm a vicious 
predator weighing more than a Thanksgiving turkey.

And the modern appears in the techniques of the film as well: drone cameras 
and GoPros that do things Flaherty would envy, making the Kes-like taming of a 
wild beast the most entrancing thing you’ll see all week. Go for the 
eagle-hunting, stay for the huntress.

The Eagle Huntress is in cinemas from Friday 16 December
 