
My last ten years, according to the Scriptures, ought to have consisted of 
labour and sorrow, but in fact I have had less of both than in most previous 
decades. The world takes a lot of getting used to, and I have only lately begun 
to feel more or less at home in it.

My early youth was passed at the very summit of the Victorian epoch. I saw 
Disraeli driving to the opening of Parliament in 1879. In Paris, I went to tea 
with Whistler and there met the poet Mallarmé.

England in those days was still aristocratic. Country houses and town houses 
retained all their pomp. Democracy had begun to exist as a theory, but not as 
something that coloured people's everyday thoughts. There was an old Duchess of 
Cleveland whom I knew, who was outraged by the institution of Bank Holidays and 
exclaimed acidly, 'What do the poor want with holidays? They ought to work.' 
This was thought a little extreme even in those days.

I well remember the first crack in the imposing aristocratic façade. It was 
when Keir Hardie came to the House of Commons in a cloth cap instead of a top 
hat. When it was found that no thunderbolt struck him down for this impiety, 
strange new doubts began to germinate in men's minds. The flood of revolution 
was let loose. The landed aristocracy was reduced to a ruin which began with 
Lloyd George's Budget. Those who had thought that the poor ought to work became 
themselves poor.

The revolution which has taken place in the social life of England has been 
accomplished without the use of the guillotine or the concentration camp, 
though it has been more profound that anything that the guillotine achieved in 
France. And as the great have lost status in England, so England has lost 
status in the world. For old people like myself, the mental adjustments 
involved have not been easy. I have two entirely different visions of the 
future, according as I happen to feel cheerful or the reverse.

On gloomy days, I foresee a third world war in the near future, lasting for 
years and ending indecisively after unparalleled destruction. In the course of 
these struggles I see Western Europe with its cities reduced to rubble and its 
countryside transformed into a radioactive desert. I see the total expulsion of 
all white men from Africa, and Asia rendered even poorer than at present by 
internal strife. I see Latin America throwing off the yoke of the United States 
and reverting to barbarism. I see the United States shorn of power, surviving 
like the Byzantine Empire as the last fading glimmer of a more civilised age, 
endeavouring to survive behind defensive walls and living on old ideas which 
the rest of the world will regard as archaic. This is what I see on a gloomy 
day.

On cheerful days, I see quite a different vision. I see Russia and America 
gradually growing less suspicious of each other, and arriving at last at the 
point where a genuine accord is possible. I see an international authority more 
capable than the United Nations of enforcing its will upon recalcitrant 
members, and therefore able to make world peace secure. I see communism losing 
its fierceness and white men learning to acquiesce in equality for those of 
different pigmentation. I see science at last allowed to bring to mankind the 
happiness it is capable of bringing, instead of the universal death and 
destruction which is now threatened.

I do not know which of these two visions has the greater likelihood of being 
realised. What does seem to me nearly certain is that things must get either 
much better or much worse. Man has survived hitherto because his ignorance and 
incompetence have made his folly ineffective. Now that science has shown us how 
to make folly effective we must abandon folly or perish.

 Bertrand Russell, philosopher, mathematician and pacifist, wrote this 
article aged 80. He died in 1970 at the age of 98
 