
TSG 1899 Hoffenheim <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hoffenheim> are 
playing the long game, and it’s about time. Over the last couple of weeks, the 
club’s new head coach Julian Nagelsmann has become more renowned 
internationally than any of his players. At 28 years old, he is the youngest 
Bundesliga head coach in the league’s history and is being asked to save the 
club from relegation. For some, this appointment shows the naivety of a 
nouveau-riche village team trying to cope in the Bundesliga, like a lottery 
winner joining an exclusive country club. But in reality it more resembles a 
return to the joined-up, forward thinking that has helped transform the club 
over the last two decades.

Whereas many clubs in Hoffenheim’s position would have appointed another 
firefighter manager with the simple remit of avoiding relegation at all costs, 
the club from rural Baden-Württemberg have put their trust in youth and 
long-termism and have taken a very bold step towards the future, regardless of 
what the next six months bring.

Based in a village of approximately 3,000 inhabitants, TSG Hoffenheim was 
initially formed in 1899 and never went higher than the fifth tier of German 
football until the turn of the 21st century, when an alumni of the club put his 
money where his heart was. Dietmar Hopp, billionaire and co-founder of German 
multinational software company SAP, grew up in the village and was not just a 
prominent resident, but also played in TSG’s youth team. It was his financial 
investment that was the catalyst for an extraordinary transformation from 
Kreisliga A, the ninth tier of the national football pyramid toBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> outfit in just 18 
years.

Hoffenheim appoint 28-year-old Julian Nagelsmann as head coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/hoffenheim-appoint-julian-nagelsmann-youngest-coach>
Shortly after the second world war, in 1945, the modern-day club began life as 
TSG Hoffenheim, when the Turnverein Hoffenheim gymnastics club (which was 
founded in 1899) and the Fussballverein Hoffenheim football club united. TSG 
were placed in the Kreisklasse, the lowest peg on the footballing hierarchy – 
and remained there or thereabouts for decades, until league restructuring and 
promotion led to the heady heights of the Kreisliga. The return of Hopp, a 
striker in his younger days, led to a rapid ascent through the leagues with 
three promotions in six seasons.

Hopp made it clear from the beginning that he was in it for the long haul and 
furnished the club with a new 5,000-seat stadium, completely financed by his 
private wealth and finished in time for the club’s centenary year, 1999. The 
imaginatively named Dietmar Hopp Stadion (well, he did pay for it, after all) 
was officially opened with a match against the mighty Bayern Munich, with star 
names such as Oliver Kahn, Lothar Matthäus, Stefan Effenberg, Mehmet Scholl, 
Bixente Lizarazu and Giovane Élber. As ambitious as the new-look Hoffenheim 
were, even they couldn’t have imagined just how quickly such a fixture would 
become commonplace.

The new stadium reflected the transformed image of the club, from amateur 
village outfit to a professional team on an upward trend. Back-to-back 
promotions in 2000 and 2001 thrust Hoffenheim into the Regionalliga, just one 
tier below the 2. Bundesliga, the foyer to the promised land of the Bundesliga. 
Naturally, local interest in the club grew. An average attendance of 
approximately 300 fans doubled to over 600 in 2000, and to around 1,500 the 
season after – an impressive increase in terms of percentage, but still figures 
that did little to belie the club’s rural roots.

Nevertheless, the upward trend of the team and the attendances reached a 
plateau in the Regionalliga. In an attempt to combat this, the club slowly 
started to add players with top-level experience to a squad of largely locally 
recruited personnel. Still, Hoffenheim continued to struggle and it looked as 
though they had reached their limits, which, although frustrating, were still 
impressive for a club of their size, history and infrastructure.

Hopp, though, instilled with the qualities that brought him his fortune, 
sought a way of bringing professional football to the Rhein-Neckar region 
forward. His idea was to form a merger of three teams, TSG Hoffenheim, and 
regional neighbours FC-Astoria Walldorf und SV Sandhausen. But despite his 
intentions, the proposed formation of FC Heidelberg 06 never came to fruition 
due to a number of reasons, chiefly among them disagreements on the team’s 
stadium, and the fact that both Sandhausen and Walldorf would essentially 
assume the role of feeder clubs.

A lesson from SC Freiburg in Germany: back your manager and give him time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2015/dec/03/sc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager>
Undeterred, Hopp and Hoffenheim marched on, yearning for promotion, and into 
full-time professional football. An air of ruthlessness hung over the club and 
the 2005-06 season saw a great upheaval in personnel. Head coach Hansi Flick 
(later to become Joachim Löw’s World Cup-winning assistant) lost his job once 
promotion looked to have slipped away again, with replacement Lorenz-Günther 
Köstner stepping down at the end of the same season.

Despite the renewed disappointment of another season treading water in the 
Regionalliga, the club did make one important step on their path to success. 
That summer Hopp appointed Ralf Rangnick as head coach. As ex-manager of VfB 
Stuttgart, Hannover 96 and most recently Schalke 04, where he had fought 
toe-to-toe with Bayern Munich for the title, Rangnick was a real coup for 
Hoffenheim and showed intent on Hopp’s behalf. The upstarts from rural 
Baden-Württemberg could no longer be ignored.

Rangnick brought with him self-imposed expectations and duly delivered, 
winning promotion to the 2. Bundesliga at the first time of asking. Ready to 
mix it with the big boys, the TSG (Turn- und Sportgemeinschaft) was dropped 
from the name as it apparently gave off too much of a rural, old-fashioned 
whiff. And it wasn’t just the name. The entire image of the team was altering 
and with it the view from outside.

Hopp aimed to put a sustainable plan in place, with great emphasis on 
nurturing young talent, but many simply could not look past the vast sums of 
money oozing from every corner of the club. In football, the one thing money 
definitely does not buy you is love. Due to the club’s previously obscure 
nature, the majority of the football world – fans, players, managers and 
journalists – had no prior-relationship with Hoffenheim, no point of reference. 
The first time the club appeared on many peoples’ radar was as this 
manufactured boyband of a team rampaging through the leagues. As soon as they 
were seen to be taking the place of other, more traditional clubs, the disdain 
increased.

In German football the issue of tradition carries a lot of weight. Clubs will 
often be referred to by commentators, players and journalists as a “
Traditionsverein” a badge of honour. In contrast, clubs such as Hoffenheim, and 
latterly RB Leipzig and, to a lesser extent, FC Ingolstadt, are generally 
tarnished as “plastic” clubs who are often reviled by opposing fans and even 
coaches and managers. As Hoffenheim became more prominent, so too did the 
scrutiny. Hopp was constantly forced to bat away comparisons with Roman 
Abramovich, arguing, and rightly so, that the Russian had not spent 15 years in 
Chelsea’s youth set-up. Things became so bad that Hopp felt compelled to write 
a letter to German football association demanding that the open 
“discrimination” towards his team be treated with the same consequences as 
racism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fhoffenheim-bundesliga-germany-julian-nagelsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e69fc880bb0129504cbd04400886e51a59df431%2F395_108_3231_1941%2F3231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20of%20TSG%20Hoffenheim%3A%20from%20ninth-tier%20amateurs%20to%20the%20Bundesliga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fhoffenheim-bundesliga-germany-julian-nagelsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20of%20TSG%20Hoffenheim%3A%20from%20ninth-tier%20amateurs%20to%20the%20Bundesliga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fhoffenheim-bundesliga-germany-julian-nagelsmann%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e69fc880bb0129504cbd04400886e51a59df431%2F395_108_3231_1941%2F3231.jpg>
 Hoffenheim’s new coach Julian Nagelsmann Photograph: Carmen Jaspersen/EPA 
On the pitch, Rangnick and Hoffenheim had no intention of spending as long in 
the 2. Bundesliga as they did trying to get into it. Rangnick quickly added 
quality with players such as Demba Ba, Carlos Eduardo and Chinedu Obasi as the 
team spent more than the rest of the league put together. No surprise then that 
in the 2007-08 season Hoffenheim were promoted to the Bundesliga at the first 
attempt, only 18 years after playing amateur football in the ninth tier.

And once they came up they never looked back, continuing the momentum from the 
previous season. Not content to sit back and acclimatise to the Bundesliga, 
Ragnick’s team flew out of the blocks and ripped into their opponents with 
direct, attacking football. They had a real swagger about them, a swashbuckling 
style, often of the mindset that if the opposition scored two, they would score 
three, four or five. The attacking trident of Demba Ba, Chinedu Obasi and Vedad 
Ibisevic tore through the first half of the season, helping the promoted team 
to a haul of 42 goals from the first 17 matches, confirming them as unofficial 
winter champions in front of Bayern Munich on goal difference.

Although the nature of the club’s rise on Hopp’s coattails still displeased 
many fans, people could not help enjoying the cavalier spirit of the team. Week 
after week, home and away they would continue to shock, upset and show contempt 
to the league’s natural order. They may not have been everyone’s second team, 
but they were becoming more associated with their football than their finances. 
And it wasn’t just the attackers; the team was full of talent. Arguably 
Rangnick’s best signing was Brazilian midfielder, Luis Gustavo, who arrived as 
a 20-year-old from Corinthians for just €1m. The stylish and calm youngster 
quickly became a point of reference in the Hoffenheim midfield, beside Sejad 
Salihovic, the Bosnian with a lethal left foot and a real dead-ball connoisseur.

The first half of that maiden Bundesliga season was all about momentum and the 
winter break came at a bad time. Not only did it stop them in their tracks, but 
it also brought about a cruel twist of fate, as Ibisevic, the league’s top 
scorer with 18 goals in 17 matches, ruptured his ACL during a friendly match 
and was ruled out for the rest of the season. Their form suffered and although 
Hoffenheim finished the season in seventh – a remarkable achievement for a 
promoted team – the second half of the season was disappointing and included a 
12-match winless streak.

Why Pep Guardiola's time at Bayern Munich can only be seen as a success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2016/jan/21/pep-guardiola-bayern-munich-success-champions-league>
Despite failing to reach those highs again, TSG Hoffenheim managed to 
stabilise themselves as a mid-table Bundesliga outfit and even began to see 
some of their players called up for the national team. However, just as a sense 
of stability and sustainable progress began to settle over Sinnsheim, huge 
upheaval arrived. Infuriated by the club’s decision to sell Luiz Gustavo to 
Bayern Munich – albeit for an impressive profit – Rangnick stepped down as 
manager with immediate effect on the same day.

Unbeknown to Rangnick, Hopp had been negotiating the midfielder’s transfer 
with Bayern for some time. Rangnick’s ambition with Hoffenheim was not just to 
be a Bundesliga club, but to compete on the European stage. And, even though 
Hopp shared the vision, he couldn’t shake off his business background and saw 
the sense the deal made financially.

Since Rangnick – who took the club from the Regionalliga to the Bundesliga in 
three years – left the club so dramatically at the beginning of 2011, TSG 
Hoffenheim have had six managers, and have recently appointed their seventh, 
28-year-old Nagelsmann. The appointment sees Hopp and the club return to a key 
part of their original remit: to be vanguards for youth. Credit must be given 
to Hoffenheim for the faith placed in Nagelsmann, who started coaching junior 
teams in 2008 after persistent knee problems ended his playing career at the 
age of 20.
TSG Hoffenheim EN (@achtzehn99_en) 
Official! 28-year-old Julian #Nagelsmann 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Nagelsmann?src=hash> takes over as #tsg 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tsg?src=hash> head coach. Good luck, Julian. 
#tsg1899 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/tsg1899?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/GmPjrSc6ys <https://t.co/GmPjrSc6ys>
 <https://twitter.com/achtzehn99_en/status/697774745375395840> February 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/achtzehn99_en/status/697774745375395840> 
Before joining the Hoffenheim, Nagelsmann was well known as a talented coach. 
He had worked as Thomas Tuchel’s assistant at Augsburg, aged just 21 and Bayern 
Munich were apparently very keen for the young coach to join them last summer 
and take control of their U17 outfit, undoubtedly with a long-term future in 
mind. To their credit, Hoffenheim were aware of the young coach’s talent and 
have given him a three-year contract. When he takes his examinations over the 
coming weeks, it will be in the knowledge that, in the eyes of the people who 
matter, he has already made the grade.

As for the club, it remains to be seen to what extent Hopp’s dream will be 
realised. But one thing is for sure: the appointment of Nagelsmann has the 
potential to lay the foundations for the tradition he and the club have craved.

• This article is from Englische Woche <http://englischewoche.com/writing/>
• Follow Englische Woche on Twitter <https://twitter.com/englische_woche>
 