
You're probably not familiar with the name John Carlos. But you almost 
certainly knowhis image 
<http://www.dallassouthnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/TommieSmithAP276.jpg>
. It's 1968 at the Mexico City Olympics and the medals are being hung round the 
necks ofTommie Smith <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tommie_Smith> (USA, gold), 
Peter Norman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Norman> (Australia, silver) 
and Carlos (USA, bronze). As the Star-Spangled Banner begins to play, Smith and 
Carlos, two black Americans wearing black gloves, raise their fists in the 
black power salute. It is a symbol of resistance and defiance, seared into 
20th-century history, that Carlos feels he was put on Earth to perform.

"In life, there's the beginning and the end," he says. "The beginning don't 
matter. The end don't matter. All that matters is what you do in between – 
whether you're prepared to do what it takes to make change. There has to be 
physical and material sacrifice. When all the dust settles and we're getting 
ready to play down for the ninth inning, the greatest reward is to know that 
you did your job when you were here on the planet."

Carlos's beginning was, to say the least, eventful. Raised by two involved, 
working parents, he learned to hustle with his friends in Harlem and fight his 
way out of and into trouble. As a teenager, he used to chaseMalcolm X 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/malcolm-x> down the street after his speeches 
and fire questions at him. Carlos always knew he was good at sports and 
originally wanted to be an Olympic swimmer, until his father broke it to him 
that the training facilities he needed were in private clubs for whites and the 
wealthy. He used to steal food from freight trains with his friends and then 
run with it into Harlem and hand it out to the poor. When the police gave 
chase, he was often the only one who never got caught. Running came so 
naturally, he never thought of it as a skill.

That single moment on the podium cost Carlos dear. More than four decades 
later, you'll find him at his desk in a spacious portable building behind the 
basketball courts atPalm Springs High School <http://schools.psusd.us/ps/> in 
California, where he works as a counsellor. Among the family photographs on the 
wall are the vaguest allusions to his moment in history. Pictures of Malcolm X 
and African-American writerZora Neale Hurston 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zora_Neale_Hurston>, the pledge of allegiance, 
which American schoolkids must say to the flag every day, and a small poster 
saying Go For Gold Olympics.

For all its challenges, Carlos loves his job. "Being a counsellor, you have to 
talk to the children as though you're talking to a thousand people," he says. 
"Sometimes you say, 'I love you' and they say, 'I don't want your love' and you 
say, 'Well, it's out there, so you're going to have to deal with it.' And I 
learn a lot from them, too."
 John Carlos: 'It's what I was born to do,' he says of his salute. Photograph: 
Michael Steele/Getty Images 
Bald, tall, with a grey goatee, Carlos has glided into old age with a 
distinguished air and convivial manner, and more than a passing resemblance to 
the late activist and intellectualWEB DuBois 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._E._B._Du_Bois>.

"The first thing I thought was the shackles have been broken," Carlos says, 
casting his mind back to how he felt in that moment. "And they won't ever be 
able to put shackles on John Carlos again. Because what had been done couldn't 
be taken back. Materially, some of us in the incarceration system are still 
literally in shackles. The greatest problem is we are afraid to offend our 
oppressors.

"I had a moral obligation to step up. Morality was a far greater force than 
the rules and regulations they had. God told the angels that day, 'Take a step 
back – I'm gonna have to do this myself.'"

The image certainly captures that sense of momentary rebellion. But what it 
cannot do is evoke the human sense of emotional turmoil and individual resolve 
that made it possible, or the collective, global gasp in response to its 
audacity. In his book,The John Carlos Story 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781608461271>
, in the seconds between mounting the podium and the anthem playing, Carlos 
writes that his mind raced from the personal to the political and back again. 
Among other things, he reflected on his father's pained explanation for why he 
couldn't become an Olympic swimmer, the segregation and consequent 
impoverishment of Harlem, the exhortations ofMartin Luther King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/martin-luther-king> and Malcolm X to "be true 
to yourself even when it hurts", and his family. The final thought before the 
band started playing was, "Damn, when this thing is done, it can't be taken 
back.

"I know that sounds like a lot of thoughts for just a few moments standing on 
a podium," he writes. "But honestly this was all zigzagging through my brain 
like lightning bolts."

Anticipating some kind of protest was afoot, the International Olympic 
Committee (IOC) had sentJesse Owens <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesse_Owens> 
to talk them out of it. (Owens's four gold medals 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2011/dec/21/jesse-owens-four-gold-medals>
 at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin themselves held great symbolic significance, 
given Hitler's belief in Aryan supremacy.) Carlos's mind was made up. When he 
and Smith struck their pose, Carlos feared the worst. Look at the picture and 
you'll see that while Smith's arm is raised long and erect, Carlos has his 
slightly bent at the elbow. "I wanted to make sure, in case someone rushed us, 
I could throw down a hammer punch," he writes. "We had just received so many 
threats leading up to that point, I refused to be defenceless at that moment of 
truth."

It was also a moment of silence. "You could have heard a frog piss on cotton. 
There's something awful about hearing 50,000 people go silent, like being in 
the eye of a hurricane."

And then came the storm. First boos. Then insults and worse. People throwing 
things and screaming racist abuse. "Niggers need to go back to Africa!" and, 
"I can't believe this is how you niggers treat us after we let you run in our 
games."

"The fire was all around me," Carlos recalls. The IOC president ordered Smith 
and Carlos to be suspended from the US team and the Olympic village. Time 
magazine showed the Olympic logo with the words Angrier, Nastier, Uglier, 
instead of Faster, Higher, Stronger. The LA Times accused them of engaging in a 
"Nazi-like salute".

Beyond the establishment, the resonance of the image could not be overstated. 
It was1968 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/observer/gallery/2008/jan/17/1>; the 
black power movement had provided a post-civil rights rallying cry and the 
anti-Vietnam protests were gaining pace. That year, students throughout Europe, 
east and west, had been in revolt against war, tyranny and capitalism.

Martin Luther King had been assassinated and the US had been plunged into yet 
another year of race riots in its urban centres. Just a few months earlier, the 
Democratic party convention had been disrupted by a huge police riot against 
Vietnam protesters. A few weeks before the Games, scores of students and 
activists had been gunned down by authorities in Mexico City itself.

The sight of two black athletes in open rebellion on the international stage 
sent a message to both America and the world. At home, this brazen disdain for 
the tropes of American patriotism – flag and anthem – shifted dissidence from 
the periphery of American life to primetime television in a single gesture, 
while revealing what DuBois once termed the "essential two-ness" of the black 
American condition. "An American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two 
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged 
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder."

Globally, it was understood as an act of solidarity with all those fighting 
for greater equality, justice and human rights.Margaret Lambert 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gretel_Bergmann>, a Jewish high jumper who was 
forced, for show, to try out for the 1936 German Olympic team, even though she 
knew she would never be allowed to compete, said how delighted it made her 
feel. "When I saw those two guys with their fists up on the victory stand, it 
made my heart jump. It was beautiful."

As Carlos explains in his book, their gesture was supposed, among other 
things, to say: "Hey, world, the United States is not like you might think it 
is for blacks and other people of colour. Just because we have USA on our chest 
does not mean everything is peachy keen and we are living large."

Carlos understood, before he raised his fist that day, that once done, his act 
could not be taken back. What he could not have anticipated, at the age of 23, 
was what it would mean for his future. "I had no idea the moment on the medal 
stand would be frozen for all time. I had no idea what we'd face. I didn't know 
or appreciate, at that precise moment, that the entire trajectory of our young 
lives had just irrevocably changed."

During the Jim Crow era <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jim_Crow_laws>, life for 
even the most famous black sportsmen past their prime was tough. After his 
celebrated Olympic victory, Owens ran a dry-cleaning business, was a gas pump 
attendant, raced horses for money and eventually went bankrupt. "People say it 
was degrading for an Olympic champion to run against a horse," he said. "But 
what was I supposed to do? I had four gold medals, but you can't eat four gold 
medals."

Joe Louis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Louis>, a world champion boxer on 
whose shoulders rested national pride when he fought GermanMax Schmeling 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Schmeling> shortly before the second world 
war, greeted visitors at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas and went on quiz shows. 
And these were sporting figures who tried to keep in with the establishment. 
Carlos was still in his prime, but that single act of defiance ensured his 
marginalisation.

Paradoxically, the next year was the best of his career. In 1969, he equalled 
the 100 yard world record, won the AmericanAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Union 220-yard dash and led San 
Jose State to its first National Collegiate Athletic Association championship.

The trouble was, in the years before lucrative sponsorship deals, running 
didn't pay and few would employ him. In the years immediately following his 
protest, he worked security at a nightclub and as a janitor. At one point he 
had to chop up his furniture so he could heat his house. The pressure started 
to bear down on his family. "When there's a lack of money, it brings contempt 
into the family," he says. Moreover, his wife was facing constant harassment 
from the press and his children were being told at school that their father was 
a traitor. The marriage collapsed.

He tried American football for a few seasons, starting in Philadelphia, then 
moving north to Toronto and Montreal. He is keen to emphasise that the one 
thing that never happened, despite claims to the contrary, is that he had his 
medal confiscated. It's at his mother's house. And while he does not cherish it 
as you'd expect an Olympian might, he's adamant that this part of the story is 
set straight. "The medal didn't mean shit to me. It doesn't mean anything now… 
The medal had no relevance. The one way it had relevance was that I earned it. 
So they never took my medal away from me. I'd earned it. They can't take it."

As time passed and the backlash subsided, Carlos was gradually invited back 
into the fold. He became involved as an outreach co-ordinator in the organising 
committee for the group bringing the Olympics to Los Angeles in 1984 and worked 
for the US Olympic Committee.

Did he worry, as the picture for which he was famous started to adorn T-shirts 
and posters, that his readmission into the Olympic world meant his radicalism 
was being co-opted and sanitised? "The image is still there," he says proudly. 
"It keeps getting wider. If you look at the images of the last century, there's 
nothing much like it out there. And 'the man' wasn't the one that kept this 
thing afloat for 43 years. The man was the same man whupping my arse. And the 
Olympics are part of my history. I'm not going to run away from that."

Carlos remains politically engaged. Late last year he addressed Occupy Wall 
Street protesters in New York. "It's the same fight as it was 43 years ago. We 
fought unemployment; for housing, education. It's the same thing as people are 
fighting for today."

He defends Barack Obama <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/barack-obama>, who he 
believes has not been given a fair shake. "Mr Obama didn't get us where we are. 
He's trying to get us out. Someone fabricates shit to get us into wars, then 
makes ordinary Americans pay for them. Now someone else is trying to make it 
right. If George W Bush can have two terms to put this country into this mess, 
we should give Obama two to get us out of it."

But, unlike during the 1960s, today Carlos sees little hope of resistance 
emerging through sport, which is awash with too much money and drugs. "There 
wasn't a whole bunch of money out there back then," he says, "so just a few 
people were ever going to be shakers and bakers. But today, if an athlete 
doesn't have a view of their history before them, then they have a view of just 
that big cheque in front of them. It's not the responsibility of the oppressor 
to educate us. We have to educate ourselves and our own. That's the difference 
betweenMuhammad Ali <http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/muhammad-ali> and Michael 
Jordan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Jordan>. Muhammad Ali will never 
die. He used his skill to say something about the social ills of society. Of 
course, he was an excellent boxer, but he got up and spoke on the issues. And 
because he spoke on the issues, he will never die. There will be someone else 
at some time who can do what Jordan could do. And then his name will just be 
pushed down in the mud. But they'll still be talking about Ali."

Eight years earlier, during a different phase of anti-racist activism in the 
US, a 17-year-old student,Franklin McCain 
<http://www.blackpast.org/?q=aah/mccain-franklin-eugene-1941>, had gained his 
place in the history books when he sat at a Woolworth's lunch counter in 
Greensboro, North Carolina, with three friends and refused to move until they 
were served. Many years later, McCain was philosophical about how that 
experience had affected him. "On the day that I sat at that counter, I had the 
most tremendous feeling of elation and celebration," he told me. "Nothing has 
ever come close. Not the birth of my first son, nor my marriage. And it was a 
cruel hoax, because people go through their whole lives and they don't get that 
to happen to them. And here it was being visited upon me as a 17-year-old. It 
was wonderful, and it was sad also, because I know that I will never have that 
again. I'm just sorry it was when I was 17."

Carlos has no such regrets. He's just glad he could be where he was to do what 
he felt he had to do. "I don't have any misgivings about it being frozen in 
time. It's a beacon for a lot of people around the world. So many people find 
inspiration in that portrait. That's what I was born for."
 