
The cast of Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> wants 
American voters to be in the booth where it happens.

On Tuesday, the cast joined forces with Jimmy Fallon and Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> to encourage Americans to 
vote in a video called Hamilton’s America Wants You To Vote.

“If you can vote, there is nothing more important than to vote,” said 
Lin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/25/lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem>
, the creator of the musical. Hamilton tells the story of Alexander Hamilton, 
one of the country’s founding fathers and its first treasury secretary. “Lots 
of people lived and died so that you could do that.”

“Bring your friends, bring your mama, bring your daddy. Get it done,” added 
Christopher Jackson, who was cast as America’s first president, George 
Washington, in the musical.


“If you are inspired by Hamilton, if you are inspired by our founders, 
understand that the system of government they designed only works if you 
participate,” Obama said.

If you are inspired by our founders, understand the system of government they 
designed only works if you participate
Barack Obama 
Obama has long been urging Americans to partake in US elections. In his speech 
at the Democratic national convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/dont-boo-vote-barack-obamas-2016-democratic-convention-speech-in-full>
, he told the audience booing Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump: 
“Don’t boo – vote.” After hitting the campaign trail to stump for Democratic 
nominee Hillary Clinton, he has often repeated the line.

The video was released by the Tonight Show and in addition to featuring the 
Hamilton cast also includes speaker of the House Paul Ryan, Senator Elizabeth 
Warren, former president George W Bush and former first lady Laura Bush.

“Our future depends upon you casting a ballot,” Bush said

In case musical theatre is not your cup of tea, Hollywood has put together 
another video packed with celebrities urging America to vote. And as a reward, 
Hollywood is offeringa scene featuring a naked Mark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/21/joss-whedon-super-pac-save-the-day-video-donald-trump>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Downey%20Jnr%20offers%20up%20a%20naked%20Mark%20Ruffalo%20to%20encourage%20Americans%20to%20vote%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Downey%20Jnr%20offers%20up%20a%20naked%20Mark%20Ruffalo%20to%20encourage%20Americans%20to%20vote%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video&media=>
Robert Downey Jr offers up a naked Mark Ruffalo to encourage Americans to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/22/robert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video> 