
It looks as though Australians will receive a reasonable amount of attention 
on the international stage this awards season, with performances from Nicole 
Kidman and Joel Edgerton, as well as Mel Gibson’s locally made war pic,Hacksaw 
Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/03/hugo-weaving-and-rachel-griffiths-on-hacksaw-ridge-mel-gibsons-never-made-a-bad-movie>
, which has netted three Golden Globe nominations. As usual, however, the best 
Australian films of the year were generally not the same ones wooing the 
glitterati in Tinseltown.


Chasing Asylum first look review – asylum seeker documentary is vital and 
gut-wrenching
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/29/chasing-asylum-first-look-review-asylum-seeker-documentary-is-vital-and-gut-wrenching>
According to data from Screen Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/protesters-gatecrash-aacta-awards-red-carpet-chanting-end-the-sausage-party>
, a measly 16% of feature film directors in this country are women. Sadly, this 
top 10 list reflects that to a certain extent, though it does show female 
film-makers punching above their weight (three films, or 30%, were directed by 
women).


After last year’s record haul for Australian cinema 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/28/the-10-best-australian-films-of-2015>
 at the box office, this year’s crop has collectively received a smaller 
audience share. There was much to like about Australian cinema in 2016, 
however, including a particularly strong lineup of documentaries. Quality docos 
that didn’t make this list includeThe Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/04/i-was-five-when-i-was-kidnapped-powerful-new-documentary-turns-heartbreak-into-hope>
 andThe Animal Condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/24/animal-collective-ow-four-filmmakers-expose-of-the-meat-trade-became-as-fair-to-farmers-as-the-food>
.


10. Chasing Asylum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/29/chasing-asylum-first-look-review-asylum-seeker-documentary-is-vital-and-gut-wrenching>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DocgNZRIEyyY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DocgNZRIEyyY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DocgNZRIEyyY&media=>
Academy, Emmy and now Aacta award-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
 film-maker Eva Orner’s detention centre exposé plays out like a compendium of 
shame, captivating for all the wrong reasons. The director separates herself 
from the political debate about whether the boats carrying asylum seekers to 
Australia have stopped. Her stance is they have; her remit is to examine the 
human cost.


Social and support workers recount stories of working at the Australian-run 
detention centre on Manus Island, secretly recorded footage helping set the 
scene. Those who are knowledgeable on the asylum seekers debate in Australia 
won’t discover much new information in Chasing Asylum, but to have this long 
and politically twisted story threaded together in a such a way – coherent, 
cogent, powerful – is a vital yet heart-wrenching experience.


9. Broke
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuHJcl-0j9tY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuHJcl-0j9tY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuHJcl-0j9tY&media=>
Why do we look to football players to be our role models? Are we putting too 
much pressure on them; and what happens if they buckle under it? Steve Le 
Marquand delivers one of the best performances of the year as a once great 
former star Origins player who took a fall from grace and kept on falling. 
Homeless, asking for change and clutching a near-deplete goon bag, the 
protagonist is broke in more ways than one.


A kind elderly man tries to help him turn his life around, but will he make 
it? This story of (maybe) redemption is very well handled by writer/director 
Heath Davis who, in his feature film debut, is enormously effective at painting 
a protagonist you root for but are simultaneously wary of. My kingdom for a 
more satisfying ending: after a marvellous first two acts the last bit drifts 
away. Still, the journey is very much worthwhile and the film – particularly Le 
Marquand – will stay with you.


8. Ecco Homo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/ecco-homo-review-an-intense-surreal-look-at-elusive-australian-artist-troy-davis>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVWhKucliqd4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVWhKucliqd4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVWhKucliqd4&media=>
Who exactly was Peter Vanessa “Troy” Davies? What significance does he have in 
the Australian cultural landscape? The career of the late cross-dressing artist 
was etched in the post-punk haze of Melbourne in the 80s, coming to sort-of 
prominence around the time friend and collaborator Michael Hutchence rose to 
fame. This handsomely made, slightly surreal-looking documentary (executive 
produced by Bono and Ben Mendelsohn) answers many questions and poses many 
others.


Co-directors Richard Lowenstein (Dogs in Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/08/dogs-in-space-rewatched-michael-hutchence-in-a-couch-crashing-classic>
,He Died With a Felafel in His Hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/01/he-died-with-a-felafel-in-his-hand-rewatched-a-tour-of-sharehouse-excess>
) and Lynn-Maree Milburn (In Bob We Trust, John Safran’s Race Relations) treat 
their subject as one giant mystery: a puzzle with pieces scattered everywhere, 
including across the planes of time. With interviewees reflecting mixed 
feelings and memories, Ecco Homo is not so much This Is Your Life as What Was 
Your Life and Why? The vibes feeling oddly funeral; like taking acid at a wake.


7. Remembering the Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/i-just-sat-there-and-cried-the-making-of-remembering-the-man>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-b_cz1E0rlQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-b_cz1E0rlQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-b_cz1E0rlQ&media=>
The late Timothy Conigrave could never have known he would one day be 
posthumously narrating a documentary about his relationship with the love of 
his life, John Caleo. In 1993, when Aids was sweeping across Australia and no 
effective treatment for it existed, the actor, writer and activist took part in 
an oral project created by the National Library of Australia.


Fast-forward two and a half decades and co-directors Nickolas Bird and Eleanor 
Sharpe use a beyond-the-grave Conigrave to kick off Remembering the Man. It is 
a moving portrait of their relationship – equal parts romantic and tragic – 
matched with wider exploration of social issues. The tenderness of the first 
act gives way to an enthralling second, exploring the local 90s gay rights 
movement, and a shocking third, examining the human cost of Aids in Australia.


6. Red Dog: True Blue
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dys9njXUXCIk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dys9njXUXCIk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dys9njXUXCIk&media=>
How do you get another Red Dog movie when (spoiler!) they killed off the pooch 
in the first one <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/10/red-dog-review>? 
A prequel, of course, set when the lovable canine was a sprightly scallywag 
getting up to all sorts of mischief with his young owner (Levi Miller). Back 
then he was actually not Red but Blue (new dog-actor Phoenix) – named after 
being discovered covered in paint.

In these days when Australian family films that intelligently explore light 
and dark elements are few and far between, the beautifully burnished Red Dog: 
True Blue joins a beloved pantheon that includesStorm Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/storm-boy-rewatched-heartfelt-portrait-of-a-boy-and-his-pelican>
,The Silver Brumby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/the-silver-brumby-rewatched-a-natural-beauty-that-doesnt-age>
,Babe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/17/babe-rewatched-the-smash-hit-story-of-the-little-pig-that-could-20-years-on>
 and its massively successful predecessor. This thoughtful, entertaining origin 
story is underscored with a sense of Australiana that feels, well, true blue – 
without trading in hackneyed or cringe-inducing stereotypes.


5. Girl Asleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/girl-asleep-review-rosemary-myers-bethany-whitmore-harrison-feldman>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9lJSjVbTvDs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9lJSjVbTvDs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9lJSjVbTvDs&media=>
Theatre-cum-cinema director Rosemary Myers must surely be tired of comparisons 
to Wes Anderson. And yet the gorgeous diorama-like texture of her first feature 
film Girl Asleep, with its homemade dollhouse-esque aesthetic, unquestionably 
has more than a few Anderson-isms in its kitschiness – likewise in its erratic 
bubblehead characters.


Sherpa: Norbu Tenzing on the Everest 'circus' and the inevitability of another 
disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/sherpa-norbu-tenzing-on-the-everest-circus-and-the-inevitability-of-another-disaster>
Halfway into this 70s-set coming-of-age story, structured around the 15th 
birthday party of Greta (a delightful Bethany Whitmore), the film really comes 
into its own, fusing the tumultuous emotions of a puberty blues protagonist 
with equally enigmatic lost-in-the-woods atmospheria. It’s Paul Jennings by way 
of the Brothers Grimm. Trippy, fun, sweet, and – despite some similarities to 
the idiosyncratic style of a certain somebody – refreshingly different.


4. Sherpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/20/sherpa-review-frosty-clashes-on-everest>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139654857&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139654857>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F139654857&media=>
Films about industrial disputes don’t get any more majestic-looking than 
director Jennifer Peedom’s documentary about tourism on Mount Everest and the 
careers of Sherpa people, who escort foreigners up the mountain.Peedom was on 
location 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/sherpa-norbu-tenzing-on-the-everest-circus-and-the-inevitability-of-another-disaster>
 in 2014 when tragedy struck and an avalanche killed 16 Sherpas (at the time 
the worst tragedy in Everest’s history).


The film-maker readjusted her focus, using the tragedy as means to kick-start 
a discussion about how and why Nepalese guides take a disproportionate amount 
of risk for a disproportionate share of the reward (and who profits from their 
endeavours). The sleety, white and blue, almost spiritual background of Everest 
is awe-inspiring: a mighty contrast to the ant-sized humans who visit it – 
bringing greed, games and political chicanery with them.


3. Hacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/hacksaw-ridge-review-mel-gibson-finds-a-conscience-in-gruesome-war-story>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2-1hz1juBI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2-1hz1juBI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2-1hz1juBI&media=>
In the thunder, roar and stink of war Mel Gibson is very much at home – at 
least when it comes to directing a movie. His fifth venture behind the camera 
tells the real-life story of a US pacifist who became a hero on the second 
world war battlefield. TheAacta-scooping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
 Hacksaw Ridge is set in the US and Japan but filmed locally, deemed by the 
Australian Film Institute a co-production (thus eligible for this list).


Aactas 2016: Mel Gibson's Hacksaw Ridge wins major awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
The first half is a reasonably sedate affair. Its medic protagonist (Andrew 
Garfield) is in military training, fighting for the right to be shipped off and 
fed to the slaughter. The second is something else, with a gruesome attention 
to detail we have come to expect from Gibson the film-maker. Morality, decency 
and no small measure of God-loving shines through the bloodbath, which includes 
a visceral stretch of cinema among the best-directed war sequences so far in 
the new century.


2. The Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/29/the-daughter-review-sam-neill>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTaC-SrFdRZg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTaC-SrFdRZg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTaC-SrFdRZg&media=>
Australian theatre enfant terrible Simon Stone launched his feature film 
career with a dramatic reworking of Henrik Ibsen’s 1888 play The Wild Duck, 
transplanting the setting to present-day rural New South Wales. If it seemed as 
though Australian cinema had exhausted its supply of family squabble dramas set 
in non-city locations, The Daughter applied the proverbial defibrillator and 
shocked the genre back to life.


An off/off the wagon alcoholic (Paul Schneider) returns to town for the 
marriage of his father (Geoffrey Rush) to a much younger woman. With him comes, 
eventually, a revelation that shocks two families. Produced by the great Jan 
Chapman – whose extraordinary CV includesThe Piano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/21/the-piano-rewatched-re-examining-the-erotic-via-sexually-charged-music-lessons>
,Lantana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2013/dec/13/lantana-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
,The Babadook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/02/the-babadook-scariest-film-exorcist-william-friedkin>
 and Love Serenade – Stone’s moody drama is a great exercise in building and 
sustaining tension. Also an acting masterclass, with note-perfect performances 
from a dream cast including Miranda Otto, Odessa Young, Ewen Leslie and Sam 
Neill.


1. Goldstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/goldstone-review-a-masterpiece-of-outback-noir-that-packs-a-political-punch>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWbk3-gEBRU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWbk3-gEBRU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWbk3-gEBRU&media=>
One-man film-making powerhouse Ivan Sen defies that old adage: “Jack of all 
trades and master of none.” In the best film so far in his career, a 
western/neo-noir hybrid set in the outback, the all-purpose auteur wrote, 
directed, produced, edited, composed and shot it. Talk about an overachiever.


Ivan Sen on his outback thriller Goldstone: 'Action shouldn’t be thought of as 
trash'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/08/ivan-sen-on-his-outback-thriller-goldstone-action-shouldnt-be-thought-of-as-trash>
When a filthy drunk detective (Aaron Pedersen: what an actor; what presence) 
arrives in the titular town looking for a missing Chinese woman, he exposes 
corruption and becomes a magnet for lines like “don’t rock the boat”.

This big-thinking and technically magnificent production, dripping with 
outback eye candy, lights up a powder keg of allegorical meaning: Goldstone is 
a country, not a town, and its name is Australia. Sen, part of anew wave of 
Indigenous Australian film-makers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/08/ivan-sen-on-his-outback-thriller-goldstone-action-shouldnt-be-thought-of-as-trash>
, mixes the 60,000 years of storytelling in his DNA with the tropes of 
contemporary genres – making an instant one-for-the-ages classic.

 