
At a fine dining restaurant in Panama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> City, customers are tucking into 
kalalu, a tropical fern with an earthy flavour, blanched like an asparagus, and 
brushed with olive oil and grilled. Next on the menu;boda, a palm flower that 
looks and tastes like baby corn, pickled and wrapped in banana leaf tamale-
style.

From wild red rice grown in the isolated Darién province, to the flor 
eléctrica herb on the slopes of the country’s tallest volcano, unusual 
rainforest plants are a critical part of the menu for 33-year-old Panamanian 
chef and restaurateur Mario Castrellón. His restaurantMaito 
<http://www.maitopanama.com/> has undertaken the mission of exploring 
Panamanian biodiversity, while also bringing indigenous and traditional 
ingredients to the fine dining scene. While Panama City’s most popular 
restaurants were serving Italian pastas and Peruvianceviches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/07/ceviche-recipe-fit-new-world-feasting>
, Castrellón has been incorporatingpixbae, a starchy peach palm fruit, and ñame
, a root vegetable, into his menu at Maito.

Amazingly, it has worked. In fact his success has been such that last year 
Maito becamethe first Panamanian restaurant to enter the prestigious Latin 
America’s 50 best restaurant list 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/latinamerica/en/The-List/31-40/Maito.html>. He 
has not only managed to “open the doors” for other chefs, as one restaurateur, 
José Olmedo Carles of Panama City’sDonde José <http://www.dondejose.com/> put 
it, but he is trying to change the way high class restaurants source their 
ingredients from indigenous farmers.

“It was hard for [other chefs] to understand what he was doing, but he never 
gave up,” says Olmedo Carles. “Now there are a lot of us working with these 
kinds of ingredients.”

Castrellón’s mission has become the spark for, and a huge part of a growing 
“rainforest to table” movement 
<http://www.newworlder.com/article/4957/amazon-cuisine-can-spark-a-new-rainforest-to-table-movement>
 across Latin America, exploring how the forest’s myriad ingredients can be 
sourced sustainably and benefit the indigenous communities. In Peru, the chef 
Pedro Miguel Schiaffinosources a fermented yuca paste called ají negro 
<http://elpais.com/elpais/2016/01/21/estilo/1453414376_467974.html> from a Bora 
community in the Amazon for his restaurants, which has transformed their 
economy. In Bolivia,the restaurant Gustu is working with the Wildlife 
Conservation Society to help Tacana hunters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/08/bolivia-madidi-national-park-chefs-sustainable-ingredients>
 earn an income by sustainably harvesting the meat and selling the skin (to 
Gucci, no less) ofcaimans <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caiman>.
 ‘Now there are a lot of us [chefs] working with these kinds of ingredients,’ 
Olmedo Carles. Photograph: Nick Gill 
As Castrellón started to work with Panama’s flora and fauna to develop his 
menus, he found that indigenous farmers were losing out in the production and 
distribution process: much of the produce was lost or sold at low prices 
because of improper distribution channels. Intermediaries would take most of 
the profits by the time the produce reached his restaurants, and the farmers 
saw little revenue.

“The indigenous people are always left behind or looked down upon,” says 
Castrellón. “From my point of view they are the real owners of this country. 
They have survived here without using up all of the natural resources. I just 
want to help empower them so they can live better lives.”

Since 2013 Castrellón has been working with NGO Nutre Hogar who are engaged in 
a project to help prevent child malnutrition in Ngäbe-Buglé comarca, a 
territory in the highlands of Boquete, near the Costa Rica border. It is one of 
three indigenous provinces in Panama. The NGO approached him after he tweeted 
his frustration at the “middleman” situation, and suggested that he could buy 
directly from micro-producers. The NGO works with Castrellón’s restaurant group 
in a programme where he purchases, at fair prices, whatever extra crops are 
being grown or collected, eliminating the middlemen and keeping profits in the 
community.

The indigenous people are always left behind or looked down upon

Much of the project revolves around the overproduce, the surplus crops, grown 
by 450 families in the mountainous districts of Nole Duima and Ñurum within the 
territory that are not used for feeding themselves.

Growing organic greens, herbs and fruits, as well as more sustainable farming 
practices has all been part of Nutre Hogar’s teaching practice, as well as 
collecting indigenous rainforest plants likekalalu and boda that are now 
popular in Panama City’s growing set oflocavore 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_food> restaurants. This is especially 
important in a country that has some of the highest malnutrition rates among 
indigenous communities acrossthe region 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/10/program-targets-food-security-concerns-among-panamas-indigenous-women/>
, with19% of indigenous children facing chronic malnutrition 
<http://www.diaadia.com.pa/el-pa%C3%ADs/19-de-ni%C3%B1os-ind%C3%ADgenas-de-panam%C3%A1-sufre-desnutrici%C3%B3n-cr%C3%B3nica-274753>
, according to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization.

“It’s a group effort,” says Castrellón. “Through Nutre Hogar they get them the 
tools and energy to make it happen. For me it is an honour to have their 
produce in the city and show Panama and the world how lucky we are to have 
these organic, natural and unique products.”
 Chefs in the cities are increasingly working with indigenous communities to 
source local ingredients. Photograph: Mario Castrellón 
While families in the area typically live on US$26 (£21) a month, many of 
those who are working with Nutre Hogar have seen their incomes jump to as much 
as $150 (£123) a week. So far the programme has been effective and is 
expanding: Castrellón has supplied recipes to a solar powered bakery in the 
community of Kankintú, another area where Nutre Hogar is working. These recipes 
are based on using the overproduce to bake bread made withyuca (a root 
vegetable) or flavoured withcilantro (coriander).

Related: If you want to tackle carbon emissions let indigenous people control 
their land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/16/indigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change>

“It was a great help he gave me and my family,” says Margarita Arias, one of 
the 19 women who run the bakery. She credits it for changing her economic 
situation. “Before I had nothing – no money; every month coming up short.”

As roads are poor within the territory, consistent deliveries of produce to 
Panama City and Castrellón’s restaurants can be an issue. “I was recently 
supposed to get an order of produce, but because of rain in the mountains it 
hasn’t come for two weeks,” he says. He prepares for lags in deliveries by 
buying more than he needs when it’s available or pickling some of the plants so 
they can be preserved.

A few years ago it was almost impossible to find Panama’s native flora and 
fauna in restaurants. Since Maito came along other restaurants have been 
inspired to do the same, likeIntimo <http://www.intimorestaurante.com/> in 
Panama City,Panga <https://www.facebook.com/restaurantepanga/> on the Azuero 
Peninsula andReceta Michilá 
<https://www.facebook.com/Receta-Michil%C3%A1-1495699930711817/> in Bocas del 
Toro. As the interest in native foods has developed, so has the work with 
indigenous groups, who hold the knowledge of the native ingredients.

“The organic products market in Panama is now very big,” says Vanessa Vicuña, 
the executive director of Nutre Hogar. “We are hoping to add many more families 
to be able to supply to bigger brands that are now interested in these 
products.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter
 