
Hospital (BBC2) | iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088rp75>
Spy in the Wild (BBC1) | iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088t67m>
The Great Indoors ITV 2 | ITV Hub 
<http://www.itv.com/hub/the-great-indoors/2a4793a0001>
Chewing Gum (E4)| All 4 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/chewing-gum/on-demand/60534-001>
Let It Shine (BBC1) | iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p04cm2tt/let-it-shine-episode-1>

A timely and astonishing six-part documentary series, also infuriating and 
partly terrifying, arrived last week in the shape of BBC2’sHospital 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088rp6x>. As well filmed, as honest, as 
Channel 4’s24 Hours in A & E, this also told the tales of the unhappier 
outcomes – and woke us up, like a rabbit-punch to the back of the neck, to the 
fearsomely parlous state of today’s NHS: the headlines don’t have us anything 
like worried enough.

The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, this first outing to St 
Mary’s, Paddington, revealed, is in whatshould be rude health. Dedicated, 
almost wondrous staff, insanely clever little life-saving innovations; even 
management emerged bathed in some wash of glory, most of them having trained 
once as nurses and doctors and now exuding blistering organisational wizardry. 
The problem is – so prosaically, mundanely, chillingly – one of beds. No one 
can be operated on until there’s a guaranteed bed for them to rest up in, 
preferably in intensive care or at least a dedicated ward.

For almost the entire October week in which this was filmed, St Mary’s was on 
“code red”: full to the brim, unable to take one more trauma patient lest the 
hospital simply burst like a badly lanced boil. Much-needed surgeries – 
thrice-scheduled cancer ops and the like – had to be put on hold, though some 
surgeons take laws into their own hands: one manager ruefully admitted their 
ruse when she said “after the knife’s through the skin there’s nothing you can 
do about it”. For a good bit of this searing opener, an unnamed “patient from 
Norfolk” slowly began to take on the ominously disruptive proportions of the
“person from Porlock” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/07/hilary-mantel>: her aneurysm 
meant the one remaining ICU bed would be taken. Unless she died in the 
ambulance on the way. If shedid, the oesophegal cancer patient’s eight-hour op 
could go ahead. Twistingly impossible ethical dilemmas and twistingly 
impossible frustrations, along every step of the corridor.

Just sticking fur on an electronic skeleton and plonking it in the savannah 
wasn’t going to fool anyone. Yet it did

It’s infuriating, because there are no simple answers. Possibly money, and, 
yes, it surely couldn’t hurt to ramp up corporation tax and spend the gains on a
bed. Yet it soon became clear that’s vaultingly expensive, especially so in the 
ICU: those beds simply trail electronic spaghetti, and even normal wards 
require porters, cleaners, bed-changers, never mind the wizards who keep us 
alive. One can’t (infuriatingly) blame it all on Theresa May, who increasingly 
appears to bear precisely the resemblance to a human being as does UHT to cool 
fresh milk. But Jeremy Hunt’s been there a while now. Since 2012, in fact. Had 
it not been for his myopic anti-union stance, he might have seen even some of 
this coming. Goodness knows, every single one of the 1.5 million staff did.

Spy in the Wild <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088t67m> was very 
differently, but equally, astonishing. It won’t – quite – knock Attenborough 
off his god-spot, though much of the filming was equally winning. But the 
insights vouchsafed us, by the simple premise of animatronic spycams disguised 
as wee beasties, were truly remarkable.
 ‘Truly remarkable insights’: a wild dog pup gets up close to his animatronic 
playmate in Spy in the Wild. Photograph: Philip Dalton/John Downer 
Productions/BBC 
Who knew that penguins were so capable of jealousy, giraffes so capable of 
grief, monkeys and elephants such sage empaths? This is a gilded winner of a 
series, because we saw it all – not just because of the real human filming, but 
because of the cuckoos in the nest – a spy hatchling, a spy prairie dog, best 
of all a spy tortoise, which made for some fabulous insights. It was remarkable 
too for the revelation that the animal-cams, egg-cams, pebble-cams were so… um, 
I’m sure the robot-makers tried their skilled best, but just sticking fur on an 
electronic skeleton and plonking it in the savannah wasn’t going to fool 
anyone. Yet it did. The langurs grieved over the “dead” monkey-camas for one of 
their own <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vaIH5tLmC8U>, even though it looked 
as real as Roland Rat. So, the animal world – full marks for love, fierce 
tenderness, skilled tail-swinging, family values. Not yet so clever at 
recognising a wall-eyed gonk Pritt-Sticked to a tree. Cranially, a while to go, 
methinks.

Chewing Gum <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/chewing-gum> was gamey meat 
indeed. Michaela Coel sassed and swore her way to a clutch of deserved awards 
in 2015, and returns with a second series that certainly doesn’t rely on lazy 
stereotypes. Her character, Tracey, is – I’m fairly sure this is unique – an 
exuberantly dysfunctional twentysomething, ex-religious, black, mouthy virgin 
with a great line in backchat and an endless capacity for self-deception. Its 
relentless energy leaves one’s limbs akimbo on the sofa, pebble-dashed with 
loud, flirty vomit. First watching, I hated it. Second, I loved it, and got it. 
Third – who’s to know? A constant blithering surprise, and thus to be truly 
cherished in TV-land.
 Michaela Coel returns as Tracey in Chewing Gum. Photograph: Mark 
Johnson/Channel 4 
In contrast, The Great Indoors 
<http://www.itv.com/hub/the-great-indoors/2a4793a0001> (ITV2) features, 
bizarrely enough, Stephen Fry in a run-of-the-mill US sitcom which lifts itself 
from mediocrity by being possibly the first comedy specifically mocking, yet 
ever so gently, the “snowflake generation”.

The premise is that a rugged outdoorsman, back from the wilds on a rare visit 
to the tame offices of the magazine for which he writes rugged outdoorsy 
pieces, finds to his horror that the founder (Fry) has reluctantly moved it all 
online. Cue much non-hilarity as rugged beardy from an analogue world – 
actually a bit of a macho boor – meets to his horror the new staff: the “online 
content curator” and “social influencer” and so on, and gets warned about 
inappropriate language, making geeks cry and not kicking “emotional support 
pets”. But – guess what? – they all learn from each other, backwoodsman and 
backroom boys and girls, and find shared value in courtesy and mutual respect. 
It’s not awful, and might be fun to see where it goes, but what it isn’t is 
funny. Way too mild: call me an analogue boor, but some of the characters 
deserve to have their ubiquitous smartphones tweeted up their perennials. First 
bite, and it’s Satire 0, Snowflakes 1, and Fry gets no good lines whatsoever. 
Whatever was our national treasure doing? Had he just been wandering past the 
set?
 Judges Amber Riley, Gary Barlow, Dannii Minogue and Martin Kemp on Let It 
Shine: ‘gruesomely awful’. Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
Talking of which, how very much does Gary Barlow yearn to become a national 
treasure, an aim that by itself should rightly disqualify him from that status 
for ever? His new show, hyped for only about half a year by the BBC – whose 
proud claim to non-advertising is looking increasingly shonky – was, of course, 
a talent contest, this time for putative boy-band members.Let It Shine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04cm25y> (must be careful not to mistype that 
third word) was – and I’m well aware of the fact I’m about as far from the 
target demographic as you could get, being of an age and ugliness where I’m 
allowed out on me own of a Saturday night and everything – of course gruesomely 
awful, insultingly saccharine, even when the chaps could sing. Actually, it was 
probably worse then, because you just thought of the many better songs they 
could be singing. Much has been made of its relative success – between it and 
ITV’s poachedThe Voice, they garnered about 12m viewers – but that doesn’t 
necessarily mean either of them were actually watchable, or that we hanker 
moistly for spangly wall-to-wall sub-Adele wailing. It might simply mean that 
there was, so rudely of both broadcasters,nothing else on.
 