
Eight months to the day after Taulant Xhaka anchored Albania’s midfield as 
they sealed a place at Euro 2016 with a 3-0 win over Armenia – while his 
brother, the Swiss international Granit, sent supportive messages on social 
media – the pair face a scenario neither could have seriously expected when 
cheering one another on in the qualifiers. Albania and Switzerland face one 
another in Lens on Saturday and, while that is not unusual in itself, two 
brothers have never before played against each other at a European 
Championship. (The Boatengs,Germany’s Jérôme and Ghana’s Kevin-Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2015/apr/22/jerome-george-kevin-prince-boateng-football-brothers>
, have twice faced each other in World Cups, though they are only 
half-brothers.)

Northern Ireland’s Jonny and Corry Evans on being brothers at Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/northern-ireland-jonny-corry-evans-brothers-euro-2016>
Saturday’s confrontation is difficult to play down and last month the 
brothers, whose parents migrated toSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> from the largely ethnically 
Albanian Kosovo in 1989 when it was still a part of Yugoslavia, could be found 
holding court at a table within the Fifa Museum in Zurich.

“We’ve made a bet [on the outcome] but have not yet decided on the reward,” 
Granit said, before seeking to lend some sort of normality to the situation. “I 
will give my best for Switzerland just as Taulant will forAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania>,” he said, but truisms will not 
be enough to deflect the attention and it is a very modern European football 
story that will place them in opposite halves of Stade Bollaert-Delelis.

Both brothers, who were born in Basel within 18 months of one another – 
Taulant in March 1991, Granit in September 1992 – represented Switzerland at 
youth levels after showing exceptional ability with their hometown club but by 
April 2011 the question of their future was coming to a head, with Swiss media 
clamouring for them to show long-term commitment.

“I find it difficult to understand why no one at the Albanian football 
federation has reacted to express concern that we should wear [Albania’s 
colours] red and black,” Granit told the Kosova Sot newspaper. “We are 
Albanians and it is normal that our will and desire is to play for the national 
team. But nobody has called us, while the Swiss interest is extraordinary 
because they do not want to lose two players raised in their country.”

Switzerland Euro 2016 team guide: tactics, key players and expert predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/03/euro-2016-switzerland-team-guide>
Granit proceeded to talk with the Swiss federation and, with Albania still 
apparently asleep, had made his full debut in a2-2 draw at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/04/england-switzerland-euro-2012>
 within two months. Whatever the reasons for that inattention, Albania’s loss 
has since been made resoundingly clear: Granit is close to his 50th cap, has
scored at a World Cup finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/20/switzerland-france-world-cup-group-e>
 andhis move to Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 from Borussia Mönchengladbach last month spoke eloquently of hisrise to the 
top level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/26/granit-xhaka-arsenal-leader-borussia-monchengladbach>
.

He is tasked with helping Switzerland reach a similar stratum this summer, but 
his relationship with his compatriots has not always been easy. In May Granit 
attended Basel’s match in Lucerne and was interviewed on the pitch. He was 
booed by the home crowd – probably with his well-known support forKosovo’s 
admittance to Uefa and Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/kosovo-accepted-uefa-member-vote-congress>
, both of which had recently been confirmed, in mind.

Granit’s team-mates Valon Behrami, Xherdan Shaqiri, Shani Tarashaj, Blerim 
Dzemaili and Admir Mehmedi are also of Albanian descent, which will give 
Saturday’s game a derby-like feel. There are concerns that the Kosovans may 
look to persuade some of the Swiss contingent to switch allegiance afterEuro 
2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, but there is no sign 
that Granit will agree to do so. He has reiterated his commitment to 
Switzerland, but a strong performance this summer might thaw a few relations.

Albania Euro 2016 team guide: tactics, key players and expert predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/albania-euro-2016-team-guide> 
Taulant is one of nine Albania squad members to have been born or raised in 
Switzerland. He is regarded by his brother as the better player but was an 
occasional troublemaker in his youth. He made his debut for Albania in 
September 2014, settled immediately and added to his popularity when, at the
infamous “drone” game in Belgrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/10/albania-serbia-match-abandoned-drone>
, he was among the first to seize the “Greater Albania” flag that had been 
piloted towards the pitch, subsequently starting a riot.

Taulant, a defender by trade but a commanding, dogged force further forward 
for Albania, has been integral to their rise and should make his own move from 
Basel before long, with Fiorentina among those linked.

Watching on Saturday, and almost certainly wincing when their offspring fly 
into their first tackle, will be the Xhakas’ parents, Ragip and Elmaze. “Our 
parents often dressed us alike when we were children,” Granit told Schweiz am 
Sonntag in December 2012. It would have been easy, he suggested, to regard the 
Xhakas as twins back then; in Lens, though, there will be one very easy way to 
tell the difference between them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feuro-2016-england-and-wales-get-their-campaigns-underway-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20England%20and%20Wales%20get%20their%20campaigns%20under%20way%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feuro-2016-england-and-wales-get-their-campaigns-underway-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20England%20and%20Wales%20get%20their%20campaigns%20under%20way%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feuro-2016-england-and-wales-get-their-campaigns-underway-video&media=>
Euro 2016: England and Wales get their campaigns under way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/11/euro-2016-england-and-wales-get-their-campaigns-underway-video> 