
Following the engine failure that cost him victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
 at theMalaysian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/02/f1-malaysian-grand-prix-live>
, an understandably frustrated Lewis Hamilton suggested that “somebody, or 
someone, doesn’t want me to win this year”. Quite who he was alluding to was 
unclear, so in the interests of team harmony he later clarified his remarks by 
confirming he was referring to a “higher power”. Following his antics at two 
subsequent press conferences in Japan, it is hardly outrageous to surmise this 
unnamed higher power might not be not alone in hoping the Englishman is 
unsuccessful in this year’s title tilt.

Hamilton's troubles continue as Rosberg wins Japanese F1 Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/hamiltons-troubles-continue-as-rosberg-wins-japanese-f1-grand-prix>
A quick recap: at Thursday’s pre‑race press conference for Sunday’s Japanese 
Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/hamiltons-troubles-continue-as-rosberg-wins-japanese-f1-grand-prix>
, Hamilton whiled away the timeuploading videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
 of himself and fellow driver Carlos Sainz on Snapchat, embellishing themwith 
cartoon ears, noses and whiskers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-snapchat-during-formula-one-press-conference-video>
. The Mercedes driver was seen to be crying with laughter while doing so and in 
the accompanying caption wrote “this shit is killing me” before wiping tears of 
mirth from his cheek with his sleeve. Lewis Hamilton is 31 years old.

It is difficult to imagine a legend of the sport such as Ayrton Senna ever 
having behaved in such a fashion – and not only because he was racing cars in 
the days before camera phones. Despite being as prone to brooding 
introspection, temper tantrums and sulks as Hamilton, one can’t help but feel 
that even if the Brazilian had decided to amuse himself during media 
assignations by, say, drawing Hitler moustaches and glasses on newspaper 
photographs of Alain Prost, he would almost certainly have showcased the 
resulting doodles with more of a flourish and a modicum of wit.

To be clear, press conferences before or after any sporting event can be 
extremely soul‑crushing experiences for all involved and this is no pompous 
slap-down of a petulant athlete for refusing to play the game. Truth be told, 
any driver attempting to liven up a chat about engine swaps, torque figures and 
rubber compounds by making impromptu videos of a rival transformed into a 
cartoon fox or rabbit ought to be applauded but it is a testament to Hamilton’s 
apparently bottomless reserves of childishness that he somehow contrived to 
emerge from what should have been a relatively amusing wheeze looking utterly 
charmless.

At a subsequent press conference, the loud clanging of his brass balls almost 
drowned out his accusation that some sections of the media were disrespectful 
towards him before hewalked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/lewis-hamilton-walks-out-japan-gp-press-conference>
 without answering any questions. He is not the first sporting figure to have 
abandoned a press conference in a fit of pique and almost certainly won’t be 
the last but few can have or will ever do so with less elan. His petulance 
called to mind an occasion a few years ago, when a couple of disgruntled 
Sunderland fans prompted much amusement by announcing in a vox pop conducted 
outside the Stadium of Light that the sole reason they continued to turn up for 
games was so that they could show their dissatisfaction by walking out shortly 
after kick-off.

Hamilton’s behaviour at Saturday’s press conference was almost identical, 
except where the protest of our Mackem friends was soundtracked by 
self-deprecating laughter at the absurdity of it all, his was played out over 
an entitled whine. That he chose to act with such rudeness in a country where 
such a high premium is placed on good manners seems to have gone largely 
unremarked upon but within the cloistered bubble of the travellingFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> circus one tedious media 
engagement is probably much the same as another.

It shouldn’t be like this. Hamilton is a young, fit, handsome multimillionaire 
who races fast cars for a living. He is very good at it and has been doing so 
for long enough to earn himself a place in the pantheon of national treasures 
in a nation he has chosen not to live in. With his increasingly lesser-spotted 
winning smile, pristine white racing suit and on-again, off-again, 
which-one-is-she-again girlfriends he has all the trappings of a much-loved 
sporting hero but seems to remain resolutely unadmired outside the coterie of 
petrolheads and media types he praised for being so “super-supportive” before 
excusing himself from Saturday’s media duties. Increasingly prone to conducting 
himself in the manner of a man who believes he is some sort of riddle wrapped 
in a mystery inside an enigma, more often than not his attempts to appear 
brooding and inscrutable come across as the childishness of a paranoid brat.

Lewis Hamilton under fire after fiddling on Snapchat in F1 press conference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
Of course we all have bad days and Hamilton has endured plenty of them in a 
season dogged by what appears to be far more than his fair share of rotten 
luck. Arguably Britain’s most successful sportsman, it really shouldn’t be 
difficult to like him but huge numbers of his compatriots appear, at best, 
indifferent and, at worst, openly hostile to his incredible achievements in a 
sport where death or serious injury is a constant threat.

In an article written two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/24/lewis-hamilton-lack-popularity-black-formula-1-champion>
, a Guardian colleague posited the theory that Hamilton’s lack of popularity 
compared with that of his compatriots Damon Hill and Nigel Mansell before him 
might be down to his colour. While the 3,000 or so reader comments that greeted 
that particular article are not an entirely scientific barometer of public 
opinion, the heartwarming consensus seemed to be that far from polarising 
opinion because he is a black man, Hamilton does so because he can be a bit of 
a surly git.
 