
Temperatures in the Arctic in the last two months have hit more than 20C above 
normal for the time of year. Temperatures that unusual in the UK and Europe 
would produce 45C summers. As a result, sea ice has shrunk to levels that
scientists describe as “off the scale” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
. Mapping the changes to the extent of sea ice over the last 40 years confirms 
that: on a graph, the lines are clustered together like threads in a hank of 
silk, warming and cooling in line with each other – until this year.This year’s 
line drops down like a thin thread dangling into the void 
<http://neven1.typepad.com/blog/2016/12/the-11th-key-science-moment-of-2016.html>
.

Arctic ice melt 'already affecting weather patterns where you live right now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/19/arctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now>
Extrapolating data from a single year must be done with caution. When El Niño 
boosted global temperatures to make 1998 the hottest year on record, a position 
it held until 2014,deniers claimed that this showed that global warming had 
“paused” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming_hiatus>. In fact, 
several years after 1998 came within 0.3C of the record. The rise of a huge 20C 
over normal in the Arctic, the region that acts as one of the most important 
regulators in the global climate system, means that all expectations must now 
be rewritten.

Arctic snow and ice reflect heat back into space – the albedo effect. When 
there is less ice, less sunlight is reflected and the sea, newly exposed, 
absorbs more heat, which melts more ice, and so on in a cycle. This is of vital 
importance: it could represent a tipping point, beyond which the Arctic ice 
cap, by some projections, might soon disappear altogether in summer. This is 
not the only crucial climate role theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> plays. Sea and air currents swirling 
over and under the ice cool the globe and affect weather systems on the other 
side of the world, sometimes in ways that are still not fully understood.
Sea ice extent line graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-22T11:07:25/embed.html>
Arctic sea ice has recovered in extent from previous lows. But that does not 
tell the whole story. When temperatures are less volatile, sea ice forms in 
layers over multiple years to a thick and solid mass. Ice that forms under this 
year’s conditions is likely to be thinner and less stable than what it 
replaces, more vulnerable to another year’s warming and less effective as a 
temperature regulator. For these reasons, the current drastic melting of the 
Arctic cannot be regarded merely as an outlier. While the effects of an 
ice-free Arctic on global weather systems are still in the realm of known 
unknowns, it is a known known that they will be disruptive. The current Arctic 
temperature and sea ice charts look like the beginning of a whole new trend, 
one that could change the global climate system for ever.

The imperative for action is therefore overwhelming. Reducing carbon dioxide 
is vital, and it is encouraging thatannual emissions have been flat for three 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/fossil-fuel-co2-emissions-nearly-stable-for-third-year-in-row>
. But now it isnecessary to move further, faster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/18/ice-scientists-arctic-ice-disappearing-reduce-emissions-peter-wadhams>
. Some experts advocate cutting the amount of black, unburnt carbon – soot – as 
a matter of urgency. Much of this soot is borne by air currents to the Arctic,
depositing it on pristine snow that turns black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/05/dark-snow-speeding-glacier-melting-rising-sea-levels>
, and so more heat-absorbent. Some measures to stop soot, like capping 
coal-fired power stations and banning agricultural burning, are relatively 
easy. Others – cleaner vehicles and spreading the use of solar cookers in 
developing countries – might take longer.
Sea ice then and now 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/2066d3b9138ae3815a3962ecaf37bd0523a251da/0_0_2048_1536/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/2066d3b9138ae3815a3962ecaf37bd0523a251da/0_0_2048_1536/1000.jpg&label_before=September%201984&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c93b16a63f0343eef55c993b3456074bf9eb0687/0_0_2048_1536/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c93b16a63f0343eef55c993b3456074bf9eb0687/0_0_2048_1536/1000.jpg&label_after=September%202016&>
Getting rid of potent hydrofluorocarbon gases, commonly used in refrigeration, 
has the broad backing of governments and industry, and will buy time.Methane, 
often a byproduct of fossil fuel exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/12/rapid-rise-methane-emissions-10-years-surprises-scientists>
, should be used as an energy source, or at least flared, which is less 
harmful. Cutting these “short-lived climate pollutants” could prevent 0.5C of 
warming over the next 30 years, the research suggests. These are opportunities 
that must be taken; they are necessary, though not sufficient. So governments 
should also convene an Arctic council to explore other ways of protecting the 
region.

Driving progress demands just the kind of leadership that looks very much to 
have disappeared from the global scene. Vladimir Putin’s Russiahas been laying 
claim to vast Arctic areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/04/russia-lays-claim-to-vast-areas-of-arctic-seabed>
, anticipating the realms of new possibility for commerce – new shipping lanes, 
cutting thousands of miles from current journeys – as well as oil and gas 
exploration that an ice-free Arctic would open up. For Donald Trump, such an 
unfrozen Arctic might allow the US to controlkey shipping routes, and find new 
oilfields and gas fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/16/drilling-oil-gas-arctic-alaska>
. Mr Trump’s choice ofRex Tillerson, former head of Exxon Mobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
 and cheerleader for Mr Putin, as secretary of state is deeply worrying. Two 
friendly world leaders facing one an other across a vanishing Arctic ice cap. 
The thawing of the cold war is no longer a metaphor.
 