
When Eddie Obeid delivered his maiden speech to the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> parliament 25 
years ago, he recounted what now seems a prescient passage from Lebanon’s famed 
poet, Khalil Gibran.

“Are you a politician asking what your country can do for you, or a zealous 
one asking what you can do for your country?” Obeid asked,translating Gibran’s 
question to the chamber 
<http://23.101.218.132/prod/parlment/hanstrans.nsf/V3ByKey/LC19911113?open&refNavID=HA3_1>
.

Sitting in the NSW supreme court on Thursday, finally sentenced for wilful 
misconduct in public office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/eddie-obeid-sentenced-to-five-years-in-jail-for-misconduct>
, it is unlikelyObeid <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eddie-obeid> cast his 
mind backto the start of his parliamentary career 
<http://23.101.218.132/prod/parlment/hanstrans.nsf/V3ByKey/LC19911113?open&refNavID=HA3_1>
 all those years ago.

Eddie Obeid sentenced to five years in jail for misconduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/eddie-obeid-sentenced-to-five-years-in-jail-for-misconduct>
The moment was another step forward in Obeid’s inexorable rise to power. 
Thursday’s sentencing was the final plunge in his tumbling fall from grace.

Obeid came to Australia from Lebanon as a six-year-old, after leaving his 
small village of Matrit in the country’s north and crossing to Alexandria in 
Egypt in a small boat.

Once in Sydney, his life was that of a “typical migrant” among a community of 
new Australians, he said, and he retained nostalgia aboutgrowing up in a 
terrace home in Redfern <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eddie-obeid>. 

“There was a sense of belonging to a community, a sense of mutual self-support 
and helping each other out,” Obeid recalled in his maiden speech. “We had 
respect for law and order: the man in blue was a friend who only gave us a clip 
behind the ear or a roasting when we deserved it, and we did not fear him.”

Obeid joined the Labor party in his late 20s and achieved significant success 
as a businessman, coming to jointly own theArabic-language newspaper El 
Telegraph 
<https://books.google.com.au/books?id=qq9rGnoKRxIC&pg=PA150&lpg=PA150&dq=Arabic+language+newspaper+El+Telegraph+obeid&source=bl&ots=lTT89ws0rO&sig=904BIFOpr3ksaXm1Npx_B4_z7nU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiyhIvFxfDQAhUMx7wKHU8fCqYQ6AEIMjAE#v=onepage&q=Arabic%20language%20newspaper%20El%20Telegraph%20obeid&f=false>
.

He spent years developing close relationships with senior NSW Labor figures, 
throwing lucrative fundraisers for the party andforming a friendship with the 
powerbroker Graham Richardson 
<http://newsstore.fairfax.com.au/apps/viewDocument.ac;jsessionid=83735AD0507001ED3577357B20BD085F?sy=afr&pb=all_ffx&dt=selectRange&dr=1month&so=relevance&sf=text&sf=headline&rc=10&rm=200&sp=brs&cls=8970&clsPage=1&docID=SHD1302101C5EC5LPQQO>
.

Obeid was eventually installed in the Legislative Council, NSW’s upper house, 
in 1991. He and a fellow Labor right faction heavyweight, Joe Tripodi, began to 
wieldsignificant influence over the caucus and cabinet 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/obeid-and-an-unseemly-blame-game-20130315-2g618.html>
, while Obeid and his family continued to build a network of business interests.

Their political subfaction became known as “the Terrigals” 
<http://icac.nsw.gov.au/newsletter/issue43/documents/Jasper-Investigation-Report-July-2013.pdf>
, named after the central coast town where Obeid’s holiday home was used for 
invite-only meetings of politicians and union officials.

Obeid, still a backbencher, was notorious for being able to make or break 
premiers and cabinet ministers. Thefederal Labor stalwart John Faulkner 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2013/03/11/3710124.htm> summed up the 
nature of Obeid’s power on Four Corners in 2013.

“I’ve been a pretty senior figure, really, in the New South Wales branch of the
Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>,” Faulkner 
said. “I’ve never met him, never spoken to him and I’ve never heard him make a 
public speech.

“But regardless of all that, he ran the New South Wales Labor party and ran 
Labor governments in New South Wales.”

The wounds of Icac run deep and now it has been miserably compromised | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/the-wounds-of-icac-run-deep-and-now-it-has-been-miserably-compromised>
In 1999, eight years after his maiden speech, Obeid was appointed to cabinet 
as mining and fisheries minister. Several years later he washauled before the 
pecuniary interests committee 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/DBAssets/InquiryReport/ReportAcrobat/6016/Committee%20Report%2031%20October%202002%20-%20Inquiry%20into%20th.pdf>
 to explain a series of undeclared conflicts of interest but blamed the 
failures on his accountant.

The parliamentary privileges committee declared him unfit to serve as a 
minister 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/DBAssets/InquiryReport/ReportAcrobat/6016/Committee%20Report%2031%20October%202002%20-%20Inquiry%20into%20th.pdf>
, and the premier Bob Carr dumped him from his cabinet after winning the 2003 
election. But Obeid survived Carr andcontinued to wield influence under the 
next premier, Morris Iemma 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/labor-dumps-its-kingmaker/2006/07/01/1151174437023.html>
.

It was a court case involving Obeid’s son, Moses Obeid, that proved the 
beginning of the end.Moses was in court battling the City of Sydney council 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/city-of-sydney-settles-longrunning-legal-battle-with-moses-obeid-over-street-poles-20140725-zws3y.html>
, which was arguing he owed it $12m for breaching a contract over multifunction 
streetpoles. Documents tendered in the case showed the true extent of the 
family’s business interests.

A 2012 Fairfax Media investigation 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/exposed-obeids-secret-harbour-deal-20120518-1yw0w.html>
 showed that the family controlled prime harbourside cafes in Circular Quay 
through a series of opaque trust accounts. Obeid had concealed those interests 
while lobbying a senior bureaucrat from the state maritime authority, Steve 
Dunn.

Obeid was seeking to have the leases renewed without a competitive tender, but 
Dunn had believed the politician was acting for constituents – not his family’s 
interests.

The leasing policy was changed to allow Circular Quay leases to be renewed one 
time without a tender, although Dunn said he was not involved in the decision 
and was not influenced by Obeid. Dunn has never been accused of wrongdoing.

The revelations prompted a hearing in the Independent Commission Against 
Corruption, whichmade adverse findings against Obeid 
<http://icac.nsw.gov.au/newsletter/issue43/documents/Jasper-Investigation-Report-July-2013.pdf>
. At the time he famously remarkedthere was a 1% chance that he would be charged
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/20/eddie-obeid-prosecuted-circular-quay-corruption-allegations>
.

Obeid remained implacable when he was in fact charged, saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/20/eddie-obeid-prosecuted-circular-quay-corruption-allegations>
: “I have no concern whatsoever that, in a court of law, we’ll be able to fight 
the evidence, and I’m very confident.”

A jury took less than a day to find him guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/eddie-obeid-guilty-misconduct-public-office>
 of misconduct in public office during his supreme court trial in June.

Eddie Obeid's $120,000-a-year pension under threat after guilty finding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/eddie-obeids-120000-a-year-pension-under-threat-after-guilty-finding>
His sentencing, an exercise with few precedents, was repeatedly pushed back, 
largely so the court could consider a significant volume of medical evidence, 
which Obeid used to argue that he was too old and ill to spend considerable 
time in custody.

But the end was inevitable. Obeid was on Thursday sentenced to five years in 
jail, with a three-year non-parole period.

Gilbran, the poet Obeid quoted in his 1991 maiden speech, was writing to 
Lebanese MPs in 1925 after the fall of the Ottoman empire, urging them to be 
strong and act for the country, not for themselves.

Obeid didn’t include the next line of Gibran’s letter during his speech to 
parliament. But, after Thursday’s sentencing, he will have plenty of time to 
reflect on the force of its conclusion.

Are you a politician asking what your country can do for you or a zealous one 
asking what you can do for your country?

If you are the first, then you are a parasite; if the second, then you are an 
oasis in the desert.
 