
To celebrate the 500th episode of The Simpsons, which airs on 19 February in 
the US, we asked youto nominate your favourite episodes ever 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jan/13/simpsons-500-favourite-episodes>
 so we could put together The Simpsons Guardian Readers Top 10. Rather than 
deploy some complex Eurovision style ranking system, we kept it simple and each 
episode mentioned in the 1002 comments received one vote – and no that didn't 
mean people who nominated "the one with Dustin Hoffman" (Lisa's Substitute) 
were ignored. So here, in reverse order, is what you voted for …

Number 10: A Streetcar Named Marge (Season 4, Episode 2 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/simpsons/episodeguide/season4/page3.shtml>)

This episode has it all. Great songs ("you can always rely on the comfort of 
strangers"); dozens of film parodies (including a subplot involving Maggie's 
Great Escape at the Ayn Rand School for Tots); Marge channeling her anger at 
Homer into some top drawer amateur dramatics and, as @alitadepollo notes, "the 
revelationthat Flanders is buff! 
<http://kevintor.blogspot.com/2009/02/stupid-sexy-flanders.html>".

Number 9: Homer Badman (Season 6, Episode 9 
<http://www.snpp.com/episodes/2F06.html>)

Poor Homer is wrongly accused of sexual molestation and hounded by the press 
but is proved innocent when Groundskeeper Willie reveals that his hobby is 
secretly filming couples in cars. "I dinna come forward because in this country 
it makes you look like a pervert," he tells Homer. "Butevery single Scottish 
person does it 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/comedy/civic_war_centres_on_simpsons_star_1_135299>
!" It is "simply the most sublime 22 minutes of television ever," says 
@shellsuitwarrior.

Number 8: Homer the Heretic (Season 4 Episode 3 
<http://www.thesimpsons.com/#/recaps/season-4_episode-3>)

According to @bunnymen this episode is "Homer's finest hour". He quits church, 
develops his own religion, invents moon waffles and gets to dance in his 
underpants likeTom Cruise in Risky Business 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ATTjGKJwhFI>.

Number 7: Lisa's Substitute (Season 2, Episode 19 
<http://www.tvfanatic.com/quotes/shows/the-simpsons/episodes/lisas-substitute/>)

Dustin Hoffman voices Mr Bergstrom, a substitute teacher Lisa falls in love 
with. "As sweet and touching asThe Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons> was once funny," 
commented @powkin.

Number 6: Deep Space Homer (Season 5 Episode 15 
<http://www.tv.com/shows/the-simpsons/deep-space-homer-1381/>)

"The whole episode was funny," says @discobox, "but the super-smart chimp on 
roller-skates with the plummy Lord Haw Haw accent had me laughing until it 
hurt."

Number 5: El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (Season 8 Episode 9 
<http://simpsons.wikia.com/wiki/El_Viaje_Misterioso_de_Nuestro_Jomer_(The_Mysterious_Voyage_of_Homer)>
)

Homer eats a couple of "Guatemalan insanity peppers" and goes on a fantastical 
hallucinatory journey 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vEZovPVHio&feature=related> upon which his 
spiritual guide is the Space Coyote voiced by Johnny Cash. Brilliant. "Probably 
the most beautifully animated and realised sequence that they've done," thinks 
@Finkfloyd. "Homer as the big-shot chili taster is hilarious too."

Number 4: Marge vs. The Monorail (Season 4 Episode 12 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/simpsons/episodeguide/season4/page13.shtml>)

Simpsons fans are very passionate about this Conan O'Brien-penned episode 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jF_yLodI1CQ>. Possibly because it includes the 
best dialogue of all-time — as quoted by @DingleDangel:

Marge: "Homer, there's someone here who can help you!"

Homer: "Is it Batman?"

Marge: "No, he's a scientist"

Homer: "Batman's a scientist!"

3: Last Exit To Springfield (Season 4 Episode 17 
<http://simpsons.wikia.com/wiki/Last_Exit_to_Springfield>)

@JamieTheCFH thought this the "perfect example of the new 'darkness' The 
Simpsons developed by season 4". Mr Burns tries to bribe Homer as head of the 
union, but Homer mistaking his move as a homosexual advance from Burns – with 
the result that Burns thinks he's a great negotiator: "Sorry, Mr. Burns, but I 
don't go in for these backdoor shenanigans. Sure, I'm flattered, maybe even a 
little curious, but the answer is no!"

Number 2: Cape Feare (Season 5 Episode 2 
<http://www.simpsoncrazy.com/episodes/cape-feare>)

"Every second line is the most brilliant gag," thinks @Saint1976. "The rakes, 
the letters, the Thompsons, Hannibal crossing the alps, the chainsaw and hockey 
mask, the cactus patch, Grandpas pills and the wolves, the score to HMS 
Pinafore, bake him away toys. I could go on. I'm giggling at my desk just 
trying to remember them all."

Number 1: You Only Move Twice (Season 8 Episode 2 
<http://simpsons.wikia.com/wiki/You_Only_Move_Twice>)

"You Only Move Twice is not only the best Simpsons episode ever but one of the 
best episodes of ANYTHING ever," reckons @WilburWhateley, a view that's far 
from unique. It is written by the most prolific, celebrated and reclusive 
writer from The Simpsons early years, John Swartzwelder – a man who when 
smoking was banned from his local diner, bought the booth in which he used to 
sit, smoke and write and installed it in his own home. Spoofing Bond, with 
brilliant sight gags, featuring the fantastic supervillain/ entrepreneurHank 
Scorpio <http://globex.frinky.com/> and a relentless string of classic gags, 
it's the one Simpsons episode everyone agreed they loved.

Scorpio: "By the way, Homer. Which is your least favourite country? Italy or 
France'?

Homer: "...France"

Scorpio: "Nobody ever says Italy..."

Interestingly, all of your top 10 come from the first decade of The Simpsons - 
in fact of the 100 or so episodes voted for, only a handful were from the 21st 
century. So just for our own amusement – no chart this time – what are your 
favourite Simpsons episodes from the past 12 years?
 