
One of my rules in life is that I say to someone, every day, the words: “I 
played withDiego Maradona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-maradona> 
you know.” I have done it every day since I did so, 10 years ago in the first
Soccer Aid <http://socceraid.unicef.org.uk/>, and I will do so every day till I 
die. I have played in a charity game with Pele, too, but Maradona is the Number 
One for me.

I had almost an hour just kicking a ball around with him

Because of my Scottish background I chose to play for the Rest of the World 
rather than England, my birthplace. So we spent a week training with the likes 
ofSchmeichel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/kasper-schmeichel-fractured-hand-out-month>
,Desailly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/jun/13/marcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000>
,Matthäus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/18/lothar-matthaus-bayern-munich>
,Zola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianfranco-zola>, Ginola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/david-ginola-hospital-collapsing-match>
 andDunga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/dunga-sacked-by-brazil-after-copa-america-exit>
. Then two days before the game the organisers told us Maradona was coming. 
Never mind the non-footballers like me, these pros were just as excited. I 
remember Desailly almost fainting because Maradona said, “Hi Marcel.” “He knows 
my name!” said Desailly. I replied: “You did win the World Cup, Marcel.”

Our manager was Ruud Gullit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/ruud-gullit-holland-football-euro-2016-johan-cruyff>
 and the day before the match at Old Trafford he told me I would be starting. I 
couldn’t sleep. I got up early. Maradona’s lawyer was up and we had a coffee 
together when Maradona sent the guy a text saying he fancied going to the 
stadium for a kick-about. “Do you want to come with us?” the lawyer said. Er, 
yes. We headed up to Old Trafford and the ground staff weren’t happy about us 
going on the pitch. In the end they said OK, but only Maradona and I could go 
on. So I had almost an hour just kicking a ball around with him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fthe-day-i-played-at-old-trafford-with-maradona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a7987e6eecb6186faa524c0f946c9a38b62c49%2F0_0_1241_1840%2F1241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20day%20I%20played%20at%20Old%20Trafford%20with%20Maradona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fthe-day-i-played-at-old-trafford-with-maradona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20day%20I%20played%20at%20Old%20Trafford%20with%20Maradona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fthe-day-i-played-at-old-trafford-with-maradona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a7987e6eecb6186faa524c0f946c9a38b62c49%2F0_0_1241_1840%2F1241.jpg>
 Come on the blues: Robbie Williams meets Maradona, with (left) Peter 
Schmeichel and (right) Alastair Campbell at the Unicef Celebrity Soccer Aid 
match at Old Trafford in 2006. Photograph: Mark Campbell/Rex/Shutterstock 
He was “visualising”. He asked me how many people would be there. I told him 
72,000. He looked so happy. Then he practised shooting and at one point smashed 
the ball into the corner of the net and ran around the stadium as if he had won 
the World Cup final. “What was that about?” I asked him. “Visualisation of the 
victory,” he said. He just loved the whole thing. We went back to the dressing 
rooms to get changed and it was one of the most surreal moments of my life… I 
am talking football in the showers at Old Trafford with Diego Maradona! He has 
a tattoo of Castro on his calf by the way, so I imagine he is a bit sad right 
now.

Back at the hotel the other players were so jealous it was ridiculous. He sat 
next to me on the team bus to the stadium and he was so excited it was 
fantastic to watch. Gullit had asked me to take my bagpipes to play before we 
went out and Maradona jumped on the physio table and started dancing. He played 
the whole 90 minutes – and scored, though we lost 2-1. He still had it. He and 
Gazza were the two stars, really.

At the end my son Rory said to me: “Dad, you were so out of your depth it was 
embarrassing.” I said, “I don’t care. I have played in front of a packed Old 
Trafford withDiego Maradona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-maradona> and I am going to talk 
about it till the day I die.”

Alastair Campbell’s Winners and How They Succeed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/winners-377738.html>, and the latest volume 
of his diaries,Outside, Inside 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/alastair-campbell-diaries.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
are both available from bookshop.theguardian.com
 