
Fifty-seven channels and there's only one thing on: Real Madrid. This summer, 
Álvaro Negredo became the most expensive footballer in Sevilla's history, 
Nilmar became the most expensive player in Villarreal's history andsomehow 
David Villa didn't become the most expensive Spanish player in anyone's history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/aug/12/david-villa-valencia-worlds-best-striker>
. Instead, Valencia busied themselves getting taken over by a company that got 
its logo from a kiddies' colouring-in book and its 'money' from a fairytale, 
ditched them, got rid of the man who sunk them, issued €95m (£83m) worth of new 
shares and grabbed a lifeline. But no one seemed to notice.

Real Valladolid signed Pelé. Atlético Madrid kept Maradona's son-in-law. 
European Golden Boot winner Diego Forlán stayed. And Zaragoza found the money 
to give Jermaine Pennant £40,000-a-week but not to keep their captain Alberto 
Zapater. Mallorca finally got a new owner – andit wasn't Freddy Shepherd or 
Paul Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2008/dec/22/football-la-liga-real-mallorca>
. Espanyol finally got a home of their own after more than a decade in exile as 
tenants at the Olympic Stadium. And Xerez, whose president resigned after a 
drive-by shooting at a brothel last season, finally became aprimera team for 
the first time. But no one seemed bothered.

The former Manchester United striker Manucho pitched up at Valladolid 
promising "30 to 40" goals only for his coach to snap: "Hasn't anyone told him 
that we hardly saw the goal last season?" Villarreal almost reached that tally 
in a single game, winning 27-0 in apre-season friendly against Navata 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/europe/8158802.stm>. But still no one 
seemed to care. The summer was all about Madrid; this season is all about 
Madrid. "You put the telly on and Madrid are the first thing on," says 
Barcelona's Gerard Piqué. It's not just the telly either. The day after the 
Espanyol captainDani Jarque died of a sudden heart attack 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=1&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2009%2Faug%2F09%2Fespanyol-dani-jarque-dies&ei=ukKVSoCvE9fajQegkqX6DQ&rct=j&q=Dani+Jarque+Guardian&usg=AFQjCNExe_Jq5UbThjVX9p-n4zbK8iG2lA>
 at the age of 26, AS's front cover ran with the sensational story that Raúl 
was playing quite well. In training.

Even Barça couldn't match them. They won the most rapidly forgotten treble in 
Spanish football history – and not just because it was the only treble in 
Spanish football history. Barely a week after beating United in Rome, they'd 
beenblown away by Florentino Pérez's return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jun/11/cristiano-ronaldo-real-madrid>
. Kaká and Cristiano Ronaldo hadn't even played a game and already they had 
delivered what Pérez craves most of all: attention. €150m in four days and 
everything changed, getting them squealing in Catalunya.

A smug shrug, a quick have you seen my medals? would have done the trick. So 
Joan Laporta leapt up and down on his hat, attacking Madrid for being 
"imperialist" and "arrogant". The Catalan media screamed "scandal!". Even the 
Catalan church expressed its distaste. How dare they throw away such colossal 
quantities of money in times of crisis? The key word was 'they'. Madrid. Few in
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> complained when 
Maradona became the most expensive player ever at £3m in 1982. Or when Barça 
signed Johan Cruyff nine years earlier for 6m guilder. Or when they bought 
Romário, Ronaldo and Ronaldinho. When that had happened, it was the Madrid 
press that whinged, appealing for parliament to intervene. Now, they're loving 
it.

Barcelona boast Leo Messi, the best player in the world; Andrés Iniesta, the 
man Wayne Rooney declared the best player in the world; Xavi Hernández, the man 
named player of the tournament at Euro 2008, as well as last year's Champions 
League; and Dani Alves,the man some eejit declared the second best player in 
the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/26/dani-alves-barcelona-leo-messi>
. They signed Zlatan Ibrahimovic for €45m said Sport, €70m said El Mundo 
Deportivo, or €87.5m said Marca. They sold Samuel Eto'o, the striker who has 
scored more goals than anyone else in Spain over the past five years and got 
his side's vital first intwo Champions League finals. But still it was all 
about Madrid. No wonder Piqué was scowling at his set. Hell, Alves even had his 
ears pinned back andstill all eyes were trained on Madrid. Still Barça couldn't 
compete.

Only they can of course. Better than anyone else. It's surely going to be a 
two-horse race. Madrid finished seven points clear of third last year and they 
weren't even very good; Barcelona finished nine points ahead of them. Although 
the decision to swap Ibrahimovic for Eto'o and €45m in cash looks like the 
worst deal ever, Barcelona believe they've solved a problem as well as signed a 
great striker who can offer them a Plan B they occasionally lacked. With only 
19 players, their squad is short, Pep Guardiola isn't happy, and they can 
ill-afford injuries. But they still have phenomenal players, continuity anda 
clear identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/apr/28/pep-guardiola-barcelona-champions-league>
. Madrid have to build a team, Barcelona already have one.

Madrid have the players but they're still searching for that identity. So far, 
they've not convinced. There have been lots of goals – Karim Benzema in 
particular looks impressive – but there's been little real fluidity. Manuel 
Pellegrini appears to be playing a weird kind of 4-2-2-2 formation, with 
Ronaldo in a narrow left-sided role, crowded out and some way from goal. Ramos 
hasn't been fit, Pepe will be suspended for the first four league games of the 
season, and Kaká's role isn't entirely clear yet. They say that patience is a 
virtue but Madrid don't have the time. The problem with signing €258m worth of 
players and buying the last two Ballon d'Or winners is that you have to win, 
win quick, and win big.

Or, failing that, come up with a big excuse. Which is why, before a single 
game has even been played, AS are already whinging about the refs. WhenReal 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> win things, the 
president of the Spanish Football Federation forces Raúl to climb the steps up 
to the directors' box and collect his trophy; when Barcelona win things, he 
goes down to the pitch to hand it over. Proof, says AS, that Angel María Villar 
is in cahoots with the Catalans – and not that the Bernabéu has steps up to the 
directors' box and the Camp Nou doesn't.

It's set to be all about Madrid and Barcelona again, but what about the other 
18 teams? Predictions are a mug's game, so here goes …

Almería: Negredo got almost half their goals last season – and more assists 
than anyone else too. Mid-table and a few worrying moments await.

Athletic: Back in Europe thanks to finishing runners-up in the Copa del Rey, 
they have an entertainingly strange coach and good enough players to survive 
comfortably but they do have a tendency to flirt with relegation.

Atlético: With Forlán, Agüero, Simão and Maxi all surprisingly still there, 
the president Enrique Cerezo described Atlético's forward line as "the best on 
the planet". Have a decent goalkeeper at last, too. Add a good central 
midfielder and they'd be an exceptional side but likely to be wildly erratic. 
Third.

Barcelona: Small squad, long season (World Club Cup, European Super Cup, World 
Cup at the end of it), but still brilliant. Last season Messi and Xavi stayed 
fit; if that doesn't happen this year, they could pay for it. Will lose Keita 
and Touré to the African Cup of Nations, leaving them with only three 
midfielders. Really should be favourites but something somewhere suggests they 
won't be. Second.

Deportivo: Whatever happened to SuperDepor? No money, few decent players. 
Should survive comfortably but don't expect much more than that. And don't 
expect to be entertained. Except by Riki's attempts to win free-kicks.

Espanyol: Within the club, everyone was convinced that the move to Cornellá 
after over a decade away would be worth an extra 10 to 15 points a season and
Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> finished last year 
brilliantly. But it's impossible to know what kind of impact the death of 
Jarque will have. Don't score enough goals, either. Mid-table.

Getafe: Míchel talks a good game but hasn't always coached one – commitment to 
nice, tidy football didn't prevent him having dreadful times at Castilla and 
Rayo. Loss of Granero and Uche could be significant but will be fascinating to 
see Parejo properly. Mid-table but anything could happen – sneaking feeling 
they might actually be pretty good.

Málaga: Hard to imagine them repeating last year's miracle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/feb/16/sid-lowe-liga-malaga>, 
especially without Eliseu and Duda. Could even flirt with relegation but should 
get away with it.

Mallorca: Oh dear. New owners should have brought stability but instead coach 
Manzano has been busy falling out with his bosses. Lost six starters from last 
year, with departure of Jurado and Arango especially important. Always do sell 
players but this time could be fatal. Relegation.

Osasuna: Survived on the final day last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jun/01/la-liga-real-betis-relegation>
, largely thanks to facing collapsing Madrid and already-given-up Barcelona in 
the final two weeks. Should have the aggression and competitiveness to stay up 
again.

Racing: Eight players have gone, 11 have come in – along with a new coach. 
There's a sense of optimism about the Sardinero but comfortable survival (plus 
a cup run) is all they can really expect.

Real Madrid: Higuaín, Robben, Van Nistelrooy, Sneijder, Diarra … and that's 
just the players on the bench. (Although Madrid would like to get rid of 
Sneijder and Robben still). Ronaldo, Kaká, Benzema, Xabi Alonso, Lass, Casillas 
… It might take a while to get it really right but they will score plenty of 
goals. And, contrary to popular belief, their defence isn't their weak point – 
certainly once Pepe is back. Champions.

Sevilla: Negredo is an excellent signing (if a tad expensive at €15m), not 
least because while Kanouté was superb last season he is physically a little 
brittle. Jiménez continuesbut many are still not entirely convinced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/12/football-seville-manolo-jimenez-la-liga>
 - and that includes people within the club. Role of Romaric/Renato in midfield 
will be key to how much they entertain. Fifth.

Sporting: Survived on the final day last season and the same again would do 
for a club with little cashbut great fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/22/sportinggijon.barcelona> 
and a wonderfully potty-mouthed, terrifically-'tached coach. They'll survive. 
Just.

Tenerife: Promoted last season after eight years away. A lot may depend on 
Nino. Scored 29 goals last season but has only ever played in the first 
division once – scored one in 19 and went down with Levante. Close but 
relegation.

Valencia: The company that had supposedly bought the club never stumped up the 
cash but, under the new president Manuel Llorente, they've stayed afloat and 
staved off the sale of Villa, leaving them with an impressive 
Silva-Mata-Villa-Joaquín (or Pablo Hernández) front four. Big creative hole in 
central midfield behind Silva but a good side. If only they could stop 
hammering on that self-destruct button. Fourth.

Valladolid: The Pelé they signed was Vítor Hugo Gomes Passos not Edson Arantes 
do Nascimento. And while Manucho rates himself, his goalscoring record isn't 
that good yet. Good coach, limited squad. Mid-table.

Villarreal: Pellegrini has gone but they still have an excellent side with 
technique all the way through it. New coach Ernesto Valverde is impressive too, 
despite the disaster that befell him atAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao>. Marcos Senna's fitness 
will be important and how good is Nilmar? Sixth.

Xerez: When the club began pre-season training they had only 11 players in the 
squad; at the last count it was still only 16. And not many of them are any 
good.Unlike their former president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/mar/23/sid-lowe-spanish-football-blog>
, they're going down.

Zaragoza: Jermaine Pennant! Great manager, some decent players. But a 
dreadfully run club. Luckily Marcelino has proven adept at isolating himself 
from that. Could even sneak a European place.
 