
A generation ago, Manchester United’s FA Cup win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
 on Saturday at Wembley would have guaranteed one of English football’s 
ultimate feelgood moments. The victory would have been a career climax for the 
players themselves and for their coach, Louis van Gaal. And the defeat of 
Crystal Palace would have guaranteed a hometown hurrah for the Manchester fans. 
Not any more.

Instead, by the time Mr van Gaal arrived in the press room to give his take on 
the game, the Cup win was already secondary. The big story about Manchester 
United was that he was about to get the chop and José Mourinho was about to 
replace him as manager of English football’s most garlanded club. On MondayMr 
van Gaal was duly sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/23/manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-jose-mourinho>
. Mr Mourinho will be installed this week, perhaps as soon as Tuesday.

It is hard to think of a more brutal illustration of how much Britain’s most 
popular sport has changed. In the past, a football club’s primary purpose was 
to win games and trophies and attract fans through the turnstiles. Under Matt 
Busby and, later, Alex Ferguson,Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> set postwar benchmarks 
for that. Leicester City’s wonderful season has been a stirring reminder that 
such things can still happen.

But Leicester may be the exception that proves the rule. In the Premier 
League, a club’s primary purpose is now to make money. For most, the key to 
making money is survival in the league itself, with its guaranteed access to UK 
television revenue. For the elite, the key is league success, opening the door 
to even more lucrative European income. It was Manchester United’s failure to 
finish in the top four, and thus to qualify for the Champions League, that 
guaranteed Mr van Gaal his P45 this week, irrespective of the weekend Cup win.

Yet that’s not the end of it. Attracting fans to games is a secondary part of 
Manchester United’s business plan. This year may be the first in which the 
majority of the club’s income comes from commercial sources.As one commentary 
put it 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/sport/soccer/english-soccer/jose-mourinho-and-manchester-united-a-perfect-match-in-ratings-game-1.2656918>
, the most valuable thing that Manchester United now sells is not the football 
it plays but the audience that the club can deliver for advertisers and 
commercial partners.

Football fans like to imagine that their loyalty is what animates the club. 
That is no longer true, if indeed it ever was. That’s why Mr Mourinho’s arrival 
at Old Trafford is so resonant. Manchester United’s grand self-image involves 
bringing on young British players and playing attacking football. Others may 
question that rose-tinted Mancunian view. But in any case Mr Mourinho is not 
interested in either of these things. For him winning is all. He is very good 
at it. He is alsobox office in his own right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-marriage-of-convenience>
. But the appointment shows where any club’s priorities lie – and it isn’t with 
the fans.

Rationally, Manchester fans should be in revolt. But that’s not going to 
happen. At Old Trafford, as elsewhere, the wheel has turned. The locally 
rooted, industrial-era world of football has passed, however much fans may 
claim to want it otherwise. At the top, 21st-century football requires a 
European, even global, frame. In a poignant symbol,a new poll 
<http://ourinsight.opinium.co.uk/sites/ourinsight.opinium.co.uk/files/op6789_square_in_the_air_football_politics_-_tables_for_website.pdf>
 shows that, by a narrow margin, football fans are in favour of Brexit. But the 
clock can’t be stopped, still less turned back, in football or in politics. For 
British football, staying in Europe is the only way forward. Just ask 
Manchester United.
 