
Enam Ali breaks off a small shard of poppadom in the dining room of his 
94-seat, oak-panelled restaurant, Le Raj, in Epsom. The story behind this curry 
staple, and many others, has a uniquely British twist.

“The poppadom does come from India, but it did not originate for the purpose 
used in Britain,” says the Bangladeshi-born restaurateur and champion of the UK 
curry industry. In India, he said, poppadoms were like a bowl of crisps, but in 
the UK they were used to replace bread rolls and butter to accompany a meal. 
“Such a great story,” says Ali.

He then turns to other dishes that have made the long journey from India to 
Britain – and changed along the way. “If you go to India they will not be able 
to make you an onion bhaji like a big ball, because an English onion is big. In 
India they’ve got a small shallot.”

This is the type of story that Ali, 56, wants to tell on a television channel 
he is launching in late March that is dedicated to the curry dining industry in 
Britain. The sector has been a huge British success and is worth around £4.2bn. 
British curry is even becoming an important export: Le Raj flew out 25 turkey 
tikka masalas this Christmas to an artist in Italy.

That success story, however, is under threat from a worker shortage that has 
been brought into sharper relief by the Brexit vote. The curry sector, which 
employs 100,000 people in the UK, was overwhelmingly pro-leave, according to 
Ali. Brexit campaigners suggested thata quid pro quo for restrictions on EU 
immigration would be more visas for workers from Asia 
<https://www.ft.com/content/e72be378-a0ee-11e6-891e-abe238dee8e2> who will have 
the skills to work in the establishments owned by Ali and thousands of other 
curry entrepreneurs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frestaurateur-britain-curry-houses-enam-ali-brexit-tv-channel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe88968fd1d31d896d7aa4004edf448796dbdea94%2F549_110_3417_2050%2F3417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20restaurateur%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20save%20Britain's%20curry%20houses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frestaurateur-britain-curry-houses-enam-ali-brexit-tv-channel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20restaurateur%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20save%20Britain%27s%20curry%20houses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frestaurateur-britain-curry-houses-enam-ali-brexit-tv-channel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe88968fd1d31d896d7aa4004edf448796dbdea94%2F549_110_3417_2050%2F3417.jpg>
 Enam Ali with David Cameron, then prime minister, at the British curry awards 
in 2013. Photograph: Sang Tan/AP 
“The majority of curry restaurant owners support Brexit. Look at the 
Birmingham referendum vote and you can see how much Asians voted for Brexit,” 
he says, referring to a city that saw 50.4% of the population vote to leave. 
“We see that Britain has a value of equality with the world, so why is it that 
European people can just walk in? We are not asking for priority to be given to 
anybody; we just want to have equal treatment.”

From Ali’s point of view, the EU jobs market is not producing the right staff 
for his industry. He is trying to set up a catering academy in partnership with 
a local college that will include training kitchens and an on-site restaurant, 
but says he cannot find the calibre of applicants from within the EU. “I’ve 
been advertising since July,” he says. “But I’m not finding anybody to train. 
It could start tomorrow, but we need four people to train.”

The reliance on overseas workers is characteristic of the broader hospitality 
industry. Recent figures from the global software group Fourth found that 57% 
of all restaurant workers came from outside the UK, while the British Beer & 
Pub Association has called for an immigration system that will prop up staffing 
numbers at a time when there is ashortage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/18/chef-shortage-could-change-way-we-eat-restaurants>
 of pub chefs. But the curry problem is more acute, because of the level of 
sophistication of modern Indian cuisine. It needs expert skills that are rarely 
found outside sub-continental Asia.

“Every day I’m hearing of a [curry] restaurant closing, because someone has 
said: ‘I’ve had enough. I’ll let it go,’” sighs Ali. As he speaks, a young 
Romanian waiter brings over a lamb shank dish, made from 22 spices that are 
freshly ground in the kitchen, at once demonstrating the difficulty in getting 
Asians into the industry and the level of sophistication that modern curry 
cuisine requires.

Meanwhile, tough immigration restrictions remain in place and they make it 
extremely difficult for curry restaurateurs to bring over the chefs they need. 
A chef from outside the EU must be paid £29,570 a year in order to qualify for 
a visa from the UK government, which becomes cripplingly expensive for 
restaurateurs once accommodation and meal costs are added. Worse still, sponsor 
licences cannot be granted to restaurants that have a takeaway service – a 
business model which is vital even to high-end curry houses like Le Raj.

Ali insists his proposal for a one- or two-year visa for chefs from 
sub-continental Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/curry-restaurants-crisis-immigration-rules-chefs>
, who would then return home having taken no welfare benefits from the UK, is 
gaining traction in government. This plan would add around 5,000 to net 
migration figures. Just before the referendum, Ali sat down with David Cameron 
in Downing Street to discuss his proposal and claims the then PM said “it was 
not right” that the takeaway rule was blocking appointments from overseas.

In his fight to keep the curry industry in a thriving state, Ali is also 
turning to the media. He is launching a 24-hour TV channel devoted to the 
sector, called ION, which will be based in a studio in east London.

“The channel will help the audience to understand the great British curry,” 
says Ali. “Our main target is industry news. It’s a new kind of channel to 
engage a new generation of hospitality.”

He also founded the British curry awards <http://britishcurryaward.co.uk/>, 
often referred to as the Oscars of the industry. Presenters this year included 
a sari-wearing Duchess of York, the James Bond actor Colin Salmon, transport 
secretary Chris Grayling, and DJ Pat Sharp, unrecognisable shorn of his 1980s 
mullet.

Those awards, Ali’s Spice Business trade magazine, and this new channel are, 
he believes, vital to encourage the next generations of British-Indians, 
Pakistanis and Bangladeshis to keep the industry alive. Ali’s son, Jeffrey, 
gave up a promising career with Apple to work in Le Raj, but other Asian 
families find their children are shunning a life in hospitality. This is a 
contributing factor to the curry crisis, which has seen hundreds of restaurants 
and takeaways close in the past two years, with fears that a further 4,000 
establishments –more than a third of the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/curry-restaurants-crisis-immigration-rules-chefs>
 – could soon follow.

After lobbying Cameron, Ali has a new incumbent to impress at No 10. He spoke 
to Theresa May when she was home secretary, and thinks Brexit and the need for 
new trade deals around the world will mark the “start” of the government 
getting to grips with the issue. Yet in a video message to the British curry 
awards last month, May did not mention the crisis.

Instead, she said: “Today curry is as close to the nation’s hearts as fish and 
chips. Right now there must be thousands of British families sitting down to a 
spicy meal at home and in local restaurants … This represents a great British 
success story which creates jobs, promotes growth, and contributes to the UK’s 
economy.”

Ali is hoping to get May as a first guest on his new channel. If she agrees, 
May will surely be asked to explain when she is going to lift those immigration 
restrictions to keep those restaurants, and that great British success story, 
going.
 