
Welcome to the crossword email update from theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>.

The new Genius is now available at theguardian.com/crossword/genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/genius>.

The solutions to last month's puzzle can be viewed at 
theguardian.com/crossword/solutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/solutions>. Congratulations to Hilary 
Brooks from Stockport, Cheshire, who is August's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any comments or queries, 
please send them tocrossword@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword@theguardian.com>.

_____

This being my first Monthly Column of the New Era, I should like to start by 
thanking the 5,000 plus subscribers from the Old Era for their support through 
thick and thin and to welcome all of you who are enjoying the online crossword 
experience here for the first time.

To the newcomers could I make what is one of my standard pleas? If you write 
to me atcrossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> with your comments, questions 
and complaints about the content of the crosswords, I shall do my best to 
respond. But if you are having technical difficulties with getting the puzzles 
onto your computer, printing them out, or anything of that nature, please don't 
write to me but tosubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>. 
It is not that I am by nature idle, but that I do not know the answers to these 
things and the subshelpers do, or can find out. One further message to 
newcomers: you can now get two kinds of extra puzzles not published in the 
paper itself; the first is a weekly Quiptic (designed as a quick, and 
reasonably simple, cryptic puzzle) and the second is a monthly Genius (designed 
to take you rather longer). The Genius is a prize puzzle and one that can only 
be entered online by pressing the correct button when you have completed it.

_____

To our old subscribers I have to report that the August Genius puzzle by 
Lavatch attracted 173 correct entries by the deadline. The first came from 
Middlesex at 0937 on the first Monday, with seven other correct entries that 
day. To old and new customers alike I would draw your attention to what I hope 
you will regard as an improvement. At the top of each cryptic and quick puzzle 
on the screen you are offered the option of printing off a PDF of the puzzle, 
thus giving you a version that looks the same as the one that appears in the 
printed paper. This PDF now also carries the solution to the previous day's 
puzzle (except, obviously, in the case of the solution to the Saturday prize 
cryptic, which comes a week later). Only one person, so far, has objected to 
this on the grounds that it is a waste of ink, but you can't please all the 
people all the time!

_____

A few weeks ago I got an email from a clergyman in Edenbridge on the subject 
of words that are kept alive by the fact that crossword setters find them 
invaluable for filling a difficult hole in a grid. He wrote about the okapi to 
say that he believed the natural home of this remarkable creature is 
threatened, though he had no such fears for the alpaca, "which in some parts of 
Kent now outnumber humans". His email coincided with my reading the proofs of a 
book by Sandy Balfour, which Guardian Books is to publish in October. Its title 
is A Clue to Our Lives and in it Sandy looks back on 85 years of crosswords in 
the Guardian; he has culled the paper's archives to provide a selection of the 
reactions and attitudes of readers/solvers to the puzzles over that time.

One passage in his book shows that the "okapi syndrome" has been there 
virtually from the start. In 1929 the Manchester Guardian offered two prizes 
(two guineas and one guinea) for the best original story of not more than 200 
words making the maximum use of words deployed only by crossword setters. The 
response was enormous and the prize went to a Mr RH Edmondson of Windermere for 
the following:

"Ena sat under the lee of a tor, singing an aria in Erse. Her molars gleamed; 
her ebon tresses shaded the tan on her nose. Idly she drew runes in the loam. 
An erne rose from the mere, and the evil cry of an otter rang o'er the lea.

"Beside her sat a gallant tar, full of ale and �lan. 'Fly with me,' he cried, 
'my liner is at the quay and I have a store of taels and liras.' And he talked 
on Eden and of far manors of taro and copra where errant emus are, and beys and 
emirs dine on dates and all the denes teem with irate asps and boas.

"But she must stay with her sire to ted the hay and ret the flax, tend the 
ewes and drive the bats out of the buttery. And what about her fianc�? A man of 
title, an Earl; he would slit his carotid with a snee if she eloped and she had 
no alibi.

"So she wended her way home, and the tar took his taels to some other damsel 
and the Earl jilted her. And she lived at home and did the crossword puzzles 
ever after."

Just to round off the plug, the book will be available from guardianbooks.co.uk
 
<http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/TopCategoriesDisplay?storeId=10401&catalogId=25501&langId=100>
 and all good bookshops in plenty of time for Christmas!
 