
When photographer Anton Rodriguez <http://antonrodriguez.co.uk/> started his 
blog “Barbican Residents”, a through-the-keyhole tour of London’s celebrated 
Brutalist housing estate, it was as much to satisfy his curiosity about who his 
neighbours were and how their homes looked as anything. “I’d been living here 
four years,” he says, “and I’d walk through the corridors and see different 
residents, and I wondered what their apartments were like.”

It’s the exclusively designed elements that are fetishised the most by 
Barbican enthusiasts

The notice he put on the Barbican’s online forum seeking candidates for his 
project, however, was met with less enthusiasm than he’d anticipated. “People 
are quite private in the Barbican. A lot of them said: ‘You can photograph my 
apartment, but you can’t photograph me.’” It was those who were most 
evangelical about life in theBarbican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/barbican> who managed to overcome their 
camera-shyness. “They were really proud of their homes and had a lot to say 
about them.”

Now Rodriguez’s blog has become a book, Residents: Inside the Iconic Barbican 
Estate, a more comprehensive overview compiled from shots that didn’t make it 
online. And while the residents do indeed put in an appearance, it’s the 
interiors that dominate: a showcase of architecturally sensitive urban 
middle-class taste.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749ce97302fe58ef633533f479985843790d256e%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749ce97302fe58ef633533f479985843790d256e%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 Modern classic: an open-plan dining and sitting room. Photograph: Anton 
Rodriguez 
If these interiors tell us anything about the residents, it’s that they have a 
proclivity for furniture pretty much as you might expect of people who love the 
Barbican. But there are occasional rebellions against Modernist restraint: a 
golden glitter curtain here, ceiling-height prints pasted to the wall there. 
Those who live in the 22 flats featured in the book work in design, finance and 
marketing, but most of them in architecture. “Architects always say this is 
their dream place to live,” comments Rodriguez.

A relatively recent convert to the cult of the Barbican, Rodriguez grew up in 
Liverpool, and had been looking to move from his home in east London when he 
heard there was a flat going on the estate. His response: “OK – what’s the 
Barbican? But as soon as I saw it, I took it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7393ab32c2c5397cec467a8cfe978edcd2350b53%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7393ab32c2c5397cec467a8cfe978edcd2350b53%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 The right note: a glass-walled corner flat. Photograph: Anton Rodriguez 
He enthuses about its light-filled homes and the “easy way of living” that the 
architects designed into them, from the underfloor heating to “the little 
double-access cupboard next to the front door where you put your rubbish, which 
gets collected every day from outside by Barbican staff.”

It’s these exclusively designed elements that are subjected to the greatest 
degree of fetishisation by Barbican enthusiasts – gracefully minimal knobs on 
kitchen hobs, hand basins and mirrors built into wall recesses – and they are 
duly treated to their own black-and-white portraits at the end of the book. The 
love they inspire also accounts for the high number of these original features 
that still remain. “I’ve got an original kitchen,” Rodriguez says proudly, 
“white and stainless steel, 40 years old and in really good condition.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5ad7cb3c2139d5da857c66bccd2fe7f1f9651a5%2F0_0_4829_2897%2F4829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Barbican%20laid%20bare%3A%20inside%20London%E2%80%99s%20most%20famous%20Brutalist%20housing%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbarbican-housing-photography-design-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5ad7cb3c2139d5da857c66bccd2fe7f1f9651a5%2F0_0_4829_2897%2F4829.jpg>
 Ahead of the curve: one of the Barbican’s roofline apartments. Photograph: 
Anton Rodriguez 
Even though Rodriguez achieved his objective of getting to know his neighbours 
– one of them ended up designing the book – his project is ongoing. The 
Barbican contains more than 2,000 flats, making it the largest housing scheme 
in Europe on its completion in 1982, and Rodriguez says he’d like to photograph 
them all.

He’s looking beyond the concrete walls of the Barbican, too. Interiors from the
Golden Lane estate <http://www.goldenlaneestate.org/> next door, a model 
council-housing scheme which secured the architects Chamberlin, Powell and Bon 
the commission for the Barbican, have started to appear on his blog. “It could 
grow into a series of studies of Brutalist estates. There are others I really 
love, such asthe Brunswick Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/oct/23/architecture.communities> 
in Bloomsbury.”

It would be a timely exercise, given that so many outstanding postwar council 
estates are in imminent danger of demolition, as shamefully betrayed as the 
working-class communities that live in them. “Back home in Liverpool there was 
plenty of Brutalist architecture around when I was a child,” says Rodriguez. 
“Now there’s none left and no photographs of it.” No such danger for the Grade 
II-listed Barbican though, whose residents recently launched a petition to 
further secure its preservation with conservation-area status.

Residents: Inside the Iconic Barbican Estate is published by The Barbican 
Centre, £30 (shop.barbican.org.uk 
<https://shop.barbican.org.uk/products/residents-inside-the-iconic-barbican-estate>
)
 