
High above me, veiled in a freezing mist, a woodsman is climbing up 
 a colossal spruce in the name of Anglo-Norwegian relations. I’m in the depths 
of Oslomarka, a network of coniferous forests on the edge of Oslo where, every 
year since 1947, a tree has been felled, to be shipped to London and presented 
as the Trafalgar SquareChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> tree. There it will stand, 
decorated in traditional Norwegian style, until 6 January. The “Queen of the 
Forest” (as locals call it) is given in gratitude for Britain’s assistance 
during the second world war. This year’s chosen one is 27 metres tall, weighs 
some 4 tonnes and is 95 years old. Oslo is surrounded by natural beauty; edged 
with woodland and a fjord, it is often described as “the blue, the green and 
the city in between.” It feels truly wild, populated with moose, lynx, roe deer 
and even the odd wolf. “Two wolves live out here now,” says Oslo mayor, 
Marianne Borgen. “They are not hunted, they are welcome.”

Oslo is edged with woodland and a fjord, it is often described as “the blue, 
the green and the city in between.”

 Locals love the proximity of the countryside. “In the winter, you can take 
your skis, get on the tram and be on the slopes in 20 minutes – and be back 
easily for city life in the evening,” says Borgen, as we warm ourselves with 
cups of Norwegian coffee. “You can walk around for hours without meeting 
anyone.”

Or try out a range of winter activities – hiking the many trails, mountain 
biking, ice skating, fishing, picnicking and, of course, skiing and tobogganing 
the timeworn runs. If you don’t want to head straight back to Oslo, you can 
stay in municipal sports cabins, very reasonably priced, and scattered 
throughout the woods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84119a38688fa9ce817d2342d0171967e0fda49f%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway's%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway%27s%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84119a38688fa9ce817d2342d0171967e0fda49f%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Light fantastic … the Norwegian spruce all lit up in Trafalgar Square. 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
More than 80% of Oslo inhabitants visit the forest, says head forester Jon 
Christiansen. “My father used the forest, my grandfather, my great 
grandfather.” Christiansen’s team scours the area, talent-spotting trees for 
London: the chosen few are then groomed likeX Factor hopefuls to encourage a 
strong and symmetrical growth. “We mark it and we tend them through the years,” 
he explains. “The most important thing is to clear the space around so it gets 
light from all angles.”

The forest was also a muse to Edvard Munch, who created etchings and paintings 
of vampires creeping about in its shadows

Standing on a snow-fringed track, we are surrounded by trees and ice. A 
half-frozen lake cracks and creaks, cubist rock forms jut out of the earth, and 
in every direction legions of pines dissolve into the white haze.

A 20-minute trip back into the city, and I’m sheltering from the rain in the 
National Gallery. I find familiar compositions of mossy boulders and sopping 
wet firs in the pen and watercolour works of 19th-century romantics Johan 
Christian Dahl and August Cappelen. The forest was also a muse to Edvard Munch, 
who created etchings and paintings of vampires creeping about in its shadows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588374de66103aeb0585e7322ee84a205bba978e%2F0_630_2000_2117%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway's%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway%27s%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588374de66103aeb0585e7322ee84a205bba978e%2F0_630_2000_2117%2F2000.jpg>
 Dragon style … the remarkable Holmenkollen Park Hotel. Photograph: Getty Images
From the city the T-bane train takes me north. It’s like getting from the 
Strand to the Cairngorms in 10 tube stops. I arrive at the Holmenkollen Park 
Hotel, north-west of Oslo and the unofficial gatehouse to the forest. Built in 
1894 as a sanitarium, this fairytale mansion typifies Dragestil – dragon style 
– which blends medieval stave church architecture and Viking woodcraft. The 
hotel’s planed-log interiors and pointed tower will soon feature in the film of 
Jo Nesbo’sThe Snowman.

The Holmenkollen Park Hotel's planed-log interiors and pointed tower will 
feature in the film of Jo Nesbo’s The Snowman

The following morning, the sky is cobalt blue and the air is sharp. Emboldened 
on a breakfast of rye toast and brunost – sweet brown cheese – I brave it to 
the top of the Holmenkollen ski jump. Looming dramatically behind the hotel, 
its launch platform is 200ft above the ground and delivers a knee-trembling 
panorama, from the crystal waters of the fjord to the rolling green woodland. 
Up in the Norse gods the view is humbling, almost spiritual.

Beneath the jump is the Ski Museum, which provides a good introduction to 
Norway’s national sport. There are skis made in 600AD, examples of trugers 
(snow shoes for ponies) that look like giant bagels, and a wind-force machine 
that can simulate the effect of a downhill slalom. And the museum’s stuffed elk 
is a masterpiece of taxidermy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0af6b0d204f4a5613a156a6063f301bd6b8ad3fe%2F0_2256_2685_1611%2F2685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway's%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hunt%20for%20Norway%27s%20perfect%20Christmas%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fhunt-for-norway-perfect-christmas-tree-trafalgar-square%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0af6b0d204f4a5613a156a6063f301bd6b8ad3fe%2F0_2256_2685_1611%2F2685.jpg>
 Forest retreat … Frognerseteren Photograph: Nancy Bundt/Visitnorway.com 
Leaving Holmenkollen, I set off on a two-mile ramble towards Frognerseteren, 
once a mountain dairy farm and now a popular restaurant. This is where the 
forest really takes over. Decent walking boots and thick socks are essential. 
The few hikers I encounter are sporting some serious kit. An ice-runner darts 
past with a fleeting “Hei-hei” as I continue on, tentatively, up the hill. The 
constant tinkle of streams is the only other sound.

During the winter, walkers need to keep an eye on the time, as dusk sets in 
about 4pm. For Christiansen’s foresters, the challenge is to manage this 
terrain in a way that pleases the public. Visitors want a scar-free and diverse 
landscape, with trees of “all ages and all sizes at the same spot”, rather than 
the uniform vistas created by commercial forests.

Arriving at Frognerseteren, I look back over the treetops to Oslo’s outlying 
homes. There is constant pressure from property developers to impinge on these 
woods but
 Mayor Borgen is determined it won’t happen. “We don’t want to build,” she 
says, simply. “We want to secure this for the people.”

Essentials

Norwegian flies from London to Oslo from £59 return (norwegian.com 
<http://www.norwegian.com/>). Rooms at the Scandic Holmenkollen Park Hotel 
start at £89 per night (holmenkollenparkhotel.no 
<http://www.holmenkollenparkhotel.no/>). The National Gallery is open Tuesday 
to Sunday, entry £9, and the Holmenkollen Ski Jump and Ski Museum is open 
daily, joint entry £12 (visitoslo.com <http://www.visitoslo.com/>)
 