
I wonder if Nike would loan me its famous brand slogan as a motto this year. 
After all, Just Do It is much more motivating than Just Don’t Do It – the 
traditional ethical living response…

Until now. Who can fail to be cheered by the way the Divest 
<http://gofossilfree.org/what-is-fossil-fuel-divestment/> movement has just 
done it? Starting only four years ago with a smattering of universities, the
Divest-Invest <http://divestinvest.org/> network recently reported that the 
value of organisations committed to ditching their holdings in fossil fuels is 
now greater than the value of all listed oil and gas companies.

A new app from iywto.com <https://iywto.com/> (If You Want To) points you to 
where you can purchase products and services with an eco-friendly footprint in 
your area, taking decisive action with your own funds.

To make a difference this year, be decisive in the face of contradictory 
policy-making. A good example of this is a recent investigation byInfluenceMap 
<http://influencemap.org/>. It reveals how the seriously wealthy are investing 
in “diesel farms” to leverage enormous tax breaks, contributing to the annual 
£6bn in subsidies awarded to the fossil fuel industry (meanwhile support for 
clean energy has been slashed).

Are you going to put up with this? I thought not. Changing your electricity 
tariff to areal green one (not one of the quasi-green offers associated with 
the Big Six dominant energy providers) is among the biggest ethical moves you 
can make for 2017.

In the UK the best ones are Good Energy 
<https://www.goodenergy.co.uk/?gclid=CNf8uajkgtECFWEo0wodfEQB4Q> and Ecotricity 
<https://www.ecotricity.co.uk/?gclid=CKOgjbXkgtECFdUy0wodVwoMKA> (renewable 
rivals, although Ecotricity now owns nearly a quarter of Good Energy). Expect 
to hear more from Ecotricity headDale Vince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/18/could-gas-from-grass-rival-fracking-to-heat-uk-homes>
 on grass gas as an alternative to fracking. As he puts it, if you don’t like 
the status quo, just disrupt it.

The big picture: restricting rosewood
 Park life: Masoala, Madagascar 
From today the guitar industry will have to learn to sing to a different tune. 
New restrictions on rosewood (the world’s most trafficked wild product) came 
into force last week and now it has to be sourced from sustainable forests. 
Here’s a glimpse of Masoala National Park in Madagascar, a hot spot for illegal 
rosewood logging. There are no official figures, but experts say the crime gets 
worse year on year.

Well dressed: ethical alpaca knitwear
 Bee’s knees: Ally Bee. Photograph: Rachel Manns 
One of the things that lifts January from the blues is great knitwear – 
preferably in the softest wool and the most beautiful neutral tones.

Ally-bee.com knitwear is just what the doctor ordered. Fortunately the ethics 
of these deeply desirable garments match the aesthetics.

Alison Baker, a former lawyer, has painstakingly developed this brand over the 
past three years, sourcing her yarn from the British alpaca herd (there are now 
more than 30,000 in UK fields). These llama-lookalikes are low-impact grazers, 
kept to the highest animal welfare standards.

The Ally Bee brand describes itself (with some pride) as ‘the antithesis of 
fast fashion’. And for that we’re very grateful. These softest of pieces will 
form the basis of your winter wardrobe for decades to come.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 