
The numbers were simply unprecedented. Never before had a Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> team broken the 100-point 
barrier, nor won 33 games in a single campaign. Never before had an Italian 
side posted a perfect home record in a 20-club top flight, nor found the net in 
37 out of their 38 fixtures.

Juventus did all of these things, and more, en route to their third consecutive
scudetto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/04/juventus-serie-a-title-hat-trick-roma-catania>
. It is the first time since the 1930s that the Old Lady has won so many 
back-to-back titles; on paper this was the most brilliant of them all.

And yet, not everyone was impressed. Rather than laud the Bianconeri’s 
achievements, many in Italy have questioned what such an outcome says about the 
overall state of Serie A. After all, this same Juventus teamcrashed out of the 
Champions League at the group stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/galatasaray-juventus-champions-league-match-report>
, and subsequentlyfailed to reach the final of the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/01/juventus-benfica-europa-league-match-report>
.

“Italy is no longer competitive [and not just at football],” wrote Fabio 
Licari in Gazzetta dello Sport after Juventus were eliminated from the latter 
competition in April. For the first time since 1984, the nation will fall to 
fifth inUefa’s country rankings 
<http://www.uefa.com/memberassociations/uefarankings/country/>.

Not that this comes as a surprise. There is a danger in reading too much into 
individual results, but Italian performances in Europe have been slipping for 
some time. SinceInternazionale won the Champions League in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/22/inter-champions-league-final-bayern>
, only three Serie A teams have made it into the quarter-finals of that 
tournament. They were eliminated there by a combined aggregate scoreline of 
14-4.

This year only Milan squeaked through to the knockout phase, where they were 
easily beaten by Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/atletico-madrid-milan-champions-league-match-report>
. The Europa League, too, was discouraging. Udinese failed to qualify for the 
group stage, before Lazio were defeated by Bulgaria’s Ludogorets Razgrad in the 
round of 32.

More troubling still for Italian football have been the persistent instances 
of fan violence. The tone for this season was set as early as September, when 
Verona’s team bus was ambushed byRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> ultras hurling rocks as it left the 
Stadio Olimpico. Gazzetta described an “almost military” level of precision to 
the assault, which damaged the vehicle so badly that Verona had to postpone 
their return home until the following day.

Eight months later, three Napoli fans were shot on their way to the Coppa 
Italia final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/05/juventus-scudetto-hat-trick-violence>
 at the same stadium. A Roma ultra, Daniele De Santis, stands accused of 
pulling the trigger, even though his team were not involved in the match.

Between those two incidents came many more. Milan were trapped inside their 
own stadium following a draw withGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> in November, hundreds of fans 
blocking the exits until they were granted an audience with players. Two months 
later, the Lazio owner Claudio Lotito would tell reporters that he was 
receiving 50-60 death threats per day since selling Hernanes to Inter.

This was also the year in which the phrase ‘territorial discrimination’ was 
thrust into the national consciousness. Adopting a hard-line interpretation of 
new Uefa guidelines on racism,the Italian Football Federation imposed stand and 
stadium closures on teams whose fans insulted the “human dignity” of supporters 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/_/name/espnfcunited/id/9624?cc=5739> from different 
parts of the country.

Rival ultra groups rallied together in solidarity against these new rules – 
ratcheting up the levels of abuse. At one point Napoli supporterseven unfurled 
a banner accusing themselves of having cholera 
<http://www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it/calcio/napoli/2013/articoli/1013170/gli-ultras-del-napoli-provocano-tosel-con-uno-striscione-napoli-colera-ora-chiudeteci-la-curva-160-.shtml>
, daring the authorities to punish them.

The sight of more games being played behind closed doors offered a dispiriting 
backdrop to a season which nevertheless served up plenty of entertainment. In 
another year Juve’s charge to the title might have made for dull viewing, but 
on this occasion things were kept interesting by Roma’s fearsome pursuit.

The Giallorossi were a revelation under new manager Rudi Garcia, winning their 
first 10 games and going on to post their highest-ever points total in Serie A. 
The Frenchman imposed his personality from the outset, stating his intention to 
“put the church back in the centre of the village”. Unlike his predecessor 
Zdenek Zeman, he would never criticise his players in public, instead reserving 
his ire for those fans who showed up to jeer them in preseason.

A rejuvenated Francesco Totti led the way for a group that was improved 
significantly by Kevin Strootman, Gervinho and Mehdi Benatia. A series of draws 
from November into December saw Roma fall behindJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, but it was not until May that 
Garcia finally raised the white flag, conceding the title only when his team 
found themselves eight points behind with three games left to play.

Roma could take pride in finishing comfortably ahead of third-place Napoli. The
Partenopei were sometimes brilliant in their first season under Rafael Benítez, 
beating Juventus, Roma, Borussia Dortmund and Arsenal,as well as winning the 
Coppa Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/03/napoli-fiorentina-coppa-italia-match-report>
, but at other times they were just immensely frustrating – dropping points 
against seven of the eventual bottom eight.

Despite this Benítez charmed his audience in Naples, conducting lively press 
conferences in which he manoeuvred around journalists to illustrate a tactical 
point, or handed out flowers to female journalists.Pizzas  
<http://1.citynews-napolitoday.stgy.it/~media/originale/51619174194371/pizza-benitez-2.jpg>
andlife-size terracotta statues 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/serie_a/177562/snapshot-life-size-terracotta-rafa-benitez-statue-on-sale-in-streets-of-naples.html>
 were made in his honour.

His life might have been more difficult were it not for the knee injury 
suffered by Giuseppe Rossi in January. The Italy striker had been Serie A’s 
leading scorer up to that point, driving Fiorentina’s challenge for third 
place. Without him,La Viola could not keep pace – although Vincenzo Montella’s 
side still finished fourth, playing some of the best football in the division.

They acquitted themselves far better than either of the two Milan teams. For 
Inter this season represented the end of an era, Massimo Moratti selling his 
majority share in the club to Erick Thohir after 18 colourful years.Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> also overhauled its leadership 
structure, as Barbara Berlusconi joined Adriano Galliani as co-vice-president 
in an uneasy power share.

As usual, Mario Balotelli dominated headlines. Billed on a preseason Sports 
Illustrated cover 
<http://sitracking.files.wordpress.com/2013/08/mario-balotelli-sicover.jpg> as 
“the most interesting man in the world”, he went on to score 14 goals in 30 
league appearances but collected nine yellow cards and much criticism along the 
way. He also found himself at the centre of a high-profile paternity dispute. 
In February a DNA test proved that he was indeed the father to Pia, the 
one-year-old daughter of his former girlfriend, Raffaella Fico.

This was a bumper year for gossip columnists, who also found plenty of 
material in Mauro Icardi’s relationship with Wanda Nara – the former wife of 
his former team-mate (and friend) Maxi López. The so-called ‘Wanda Derby’, when 
Icardi’s Inter thrashed López’s Sampdoria in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/14/maxi-lopez-sampdoria-wanda-derby-inter>
, will go down as one of the most memorable games of the season.

But the football itself provided plenty of juicy storylines, as well. This was 
the season when a new wave of talented young Italian forwards made their mark, 
from Ciro Immobile scoring 22 goals atTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> – and becoming the league’s 
Capocannoniere in the process – through to a teenage Domenico Berardi, who 
blasted three hat-tricks for newly promoted Sassuolo.

At the other end of the scale, 36-year-old Luca Toni enjoyed one of the finest 
seasons of a wonderful career, finding the net 20 times for Verona. On the 
sidelines, Roberto Donadoni’s managerial stature grew as he leadParma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parma> to an unexpected Europa League 
berth.

But of course, there was so much more. So without further ado, let us get into 
celebrating the best and worst of the season, with the 2014 Bandini awards.

Player of the season

“I do not judge an attacker on the basis of the goals that he scores,” 
insisted Antonio Conte back in March. The Juventus manager was protesting 
against media criticisms of Dani Osvaldo, arguing that the forward’s failure to 
find the net for his new team was irrelevant as long as he was working hard and 
contributing in other ways.

But in Carlos Tevez, the manager found his ideal – a striker who would both 
sacrifice himself for the team and bag his share of goals as well. The 
Argentinian was at his bustling best for Juventus this year, running 
tirelessly, harrying defenders and bringing team-mates into play.

He finished the season with 19 league goals – more than Zlatan Ibrahimovic, 
Michel Platini or David Trezeguet managed during their first seasons in Turin – 
but crucially also seven assists. If there is one knock on Tevez this season, 
it is that he failed to match such output in Europe – scoring just once in 12 
games. But domestically, he was invaluable to Juve’s record-shattering charge.

Honourable mention: Giuseppe Rossi had 14 goals in 18 league games prior to 
his injury. He finished with 16 in 21. Had he stayed fit for the whole season, 
there is a good chance that he would have been the runawayCapocannoniere, and 
winner of this award as well.

Goal of the season

5) You will not see a much prettier outside-of-the-boot volley than the one 
Paul Pogba teed himself up for against Napoli. 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/paul-pogba-volleys-home-a-stunner-for-3-0-juventus-v-napoli-gif>

4) Miralem Pjanic only scored six goals this season, but almost had more than 
one entry in this list.His chip against Verona in September 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vlv5S7OMYN4> was delightful, but I rank it 
just behindhis sensational run and finish against Milan. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Djq-MkbPh4o>

3) We had two contenders in the same weekend for greatest long-range blast. 
Mario Balotelli’s thunderbolt for Milan against Bologna 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWCd3MNQA8Q> had slightly more power, but 
Emerson’s strike for Livorno against Cagliari 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=soyLGHCvwqo> came from even further out.

2) Antonio Di Natale has not yet confirmed whether he will return for Udinese 
next season. But if he does indeed retire, then at least he went outwith a 
glorious turn and volley in his penultimate game 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZorBEFeErvU&t=1m31s>, against Verona.

1) Alessandro Lucarelli’s audacious backheel volley for Parma against Torino  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26ElMB933F8>looks all the better when you 
consider that he is, in fact, a centre-back.

Honourable mentions: Panagiotis Kone  
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/overhead-kick-golazo-panagiotis-kone-bologna-v-sampdoria>
,Alessandro Florenzi <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNy-iJzPdKI>, Antonio 
Cassano 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/goals/italy/10-man-bologna-hold-on-for-a-1-1-draw-at-parma/>
.

Miss of the season

Gervinho had a fine first season with Roma, scoring nine league goals and 
providing 10 assists, but there was still room in his game for the occasional 
mishap. Against Catania he contrivedto side-foot on to a post with an open goal 
at his mercy. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e5FbLaQhf7U>

Best save

Pepe Reina ended Mario Balotelli’s perfect career record from the penalty spot,
plunging to his right to push the ball around a post as Napoli beat Milan in 
September <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hF34gHl3lGQ>. The spot-kick was not 
brilliantly struck but for symbolic value alone, this deserves the award.

Best save by a septuagenarian

Former Parma goalkeeper Lamberto Boranga, just a few days shy of his 71st 
birthday,went airborne to deny Faustino Asprilla 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHiOE5JqziA> during an exhibition match to 
celebrate the club’s centenary.

Game of the season

For 65 minutes, it seemed like the same old story. Juventus arrived at the 
Stadio Artemio Franchi in October looking down onFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> in the league standings, and 
quickly blasted their way to a two-goal lead. They had not lost in Florence 
since 1998 – back when Gabriel Batistuta was starting up front for theViola. 
First Carlos Tevez and then Paul Pogba imitated his goal celebration, miming a 
machine gun with their hands.

The home team seemed to have no response, drifting towards an inevitable 
defeat. Then Matí Fernández went down in the area. Giuseppe Rossi converted the 
penalty, and suddenly everything changed. The striker scored twice more, either 
side of a goal from his team-mate Joaquín. Fiorentina won 4-2, becoming the 
first team to score four goals against a Conte-managed Juventus. Not to mention 
one of only two teams to beat theBianconeri in the league all season.

Honourable mention: There was no more decisive individual performance this 
season than the one provided by Domenico Berardi against Milan in January, when 
the 19-year-old became the first player ever to score four goals in a single 
game against theRossoneri. His efforts were enough to earn Sassuolo an 
improbable 4-3 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/13/domenico-berardi-milan-sassuolo-allegri-serie-a>
. Milan sacked their manager, Massimiliano Allegri, a day later.

Team of the season: (3-5-2)

Gianluigi Buffon (Juventus); Mehdi Benatia (Roma), Giorgio Chiellini 
(Juventus), Leandro Castán (Roma); José Callejón (Napoli), Kevin Strootman 
(Roma), Paul Pogba (Juventus), Arturo Vidal (Juventus), Juan Cuadrado 
(Fiorentina); Carlos Tevez (Juventus), Ciro Immobile (Torino)

Subs: Mattia Perin (Genoa), Gabriel Paletta (Parma), Boukary Dramé (Chievo), 
Andrea Pirlo (Juventus), Miralem Pjanic (Roma), Juan Iturbe (Verona), Luca Toni 
(Verona)

Manager of the season

Roma’s players had no idea what to expect when Rudi Garcia was appointed as 
their manager. In an interview with So Foot, Daniele De Rossi recalled typing 
the Frenchman’s name into a search engine, and then watching with bemusement as 
the first link he clicked on led him toa video of Garcia playing the guitar and 
singing Porompopero <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oPSggD8ghdo&feature=kp>. 
“I was with the national team at the time,” said De Rossi. “I called Pirlo over 
and said: Fuck, look who we’ve hired!”

But it was not long before De Rossi himself was singing the manager’s praises. 
“I thank God every day that we hired Porompopero,” continued the midfielder. 
“He can be a turning point in Roma’s history.”

That sentiment might be premature, but there is no question that Garcia did an 
exceptional job this season, taking a group that had just finished seventh and 
making them the No1 challengers to Juventus. In most seasons, they would have 
had a good shot at winning thescudetto. Coming in second to a record-breaking 
rival does not diminish the manager’s achievements.

Vital statistics

5: Number of games that Alberto Malesani lasted as manager of Sassuolo, after 
being hired to replace Eusebio Di Francesco in January.

0: Points collected by Sassuolo during Malesani’s tenure.

2: Occasions on which Rolando Maran got sacked by Catania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/catania> this season. After losing his 
job for the first time in October, Maran was re-appointed in January only to 
get it again in April – with his team bottom of the league.

The Timothy Dalton award for worst 007

In September, Genoa’s youth team goalkeeping coach Luca De Prà was found 
hiding in the woods that overlook Sampdoria’s Bogliasco training base –armed 
with a pair of binoculars and dressed in full military fatigues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/14/genoa-coach-spying-sampdoria-rambo>
. More amused than upset, Sampdoria posted a picture on their club website 
describing him as“a new Rambo, hiding out amongst the branches” 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/luca-de-pra-650x325.jpg>
.

“No prisoner has been taken” continued its accompanying article. “Nor has 
there been any needless spilling of blood. Once caught with his hands in the 
marmalade, the enemy soldier was allowed to return to his base. You must always 
pardon your enemies. Nothing annoys them more.”

But De Prà had the last laugh. Genoa disavowed any knowledge of his actions 
and suspended him from work for a week. But by the time he returned,his team 
had thrashed Samp 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/16/serie-a-roundup-genoa-luca-de-pra>
.

Most Italian metaphor

“A Conte Juventus team without rage is as credible as a tiramisu without 
mascarpone” – Luigi Garlando keeps our mind on dessert in the pages of Gazzetta 
dello Sport (hat-tip to the excellent Matt Barkerfor spotting this one 
<https://twitter.com/matthew_barker/status/407467491841937408>).

Best juggler

Before his team’s game against Napoli the Parma goalkeeper Antonio Mirante was 
seen spitting out a piece of chewing gumonly to flick it straight back up from 
his right boot into his mouth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UjItm_82qK0>.

Best cake

A close run thing, with a pair of excellent entries. Napoli’s Vesuvius-themed 
Christmas cake was impressive 
<http://www.calcionapoli24.it/zoom/fotogallery-pranzo-di-natale-del-napoli-torta-speciale-per-gli-azzurri-g158291-1.html>
, but it takes second place behindFrancesco Totti’s birthday cake 
<http://www.giallorossi.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/torta-totti.jpg>, 
featuring the Colosseum, a football and a centurion’s helmet. The latter 
weighed in at a reported 37kg – one for every year of the player’s life.

Best reaction to an offside flag

Most fans assumed that Antonio Di Natale intended to give the linesman an 
earful when he ran over towards the sideline after being flagged for offside 
during Udinese’s game against Roma in October. Insteadhe gave the official a 
kiss on the forehead. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lx3g1GdpPeM> Later in 
the same game,he pinched the referee’s cheek, too. 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/394492517841793026>

Best bargain

Back in October, one frustrated Milan fan offered his club’s then manager, 
Massimiliano Allegri, for sale on eBay. The price was just €1, but best of all 
was the accompanying special offer. “Buy now and receive a free [Mauro] 
Tassotti.”

Best human quote book

Sinisa Mihajlovic’s press conferences with Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> were often entertaining, the 
manager paraphrasing everyone from Dante to John F Kennedy. But he caused a few 
titters when he abandoned his literary and political heroes in favour of a 
footballing one. Responding to a question about the latest round of ground 
closures, Mihajlovic replied: “As [former Samp manager Vujadin] Boskov used to 
say: ‘A stadium without fans is a like a woman without breasts.’”

Worst corner

Oh, Alessio Cerci. 
<http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=2911015945001>

Adem Ljajic award for services to hazelnut chocolate spread

Reflecting on his enduring affection for Sampdoria and the city of Genoa, 
Antonio Cassano phrased things thus: “My relationship with that city is 
particular and goes beyond football. It is like Nutella: once you have tasted 
it, one spoonful could never be enough.”

Worst Christmas gift

Juventus, Milan, Lazio and Sampdoria were among the teams to feature a 
referee-shaped dog-chew toy in their official club stores 
<http://www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it/calcio/calcio/2014/articoli/1022480/dopo-le-polemiche-con-braschi-anche-la-sampdoria-ha-ritirato-il-pupazzo-arbitro-per-cani.shtml>
 over the winter break. Suffice to say, the refereeing community was not best 
amused. The product was hastily withdrawn amid laments about irresponsible 
“third-party suppliers”.

Eeyore emblem for most pessimistic pre-game proclamation

“If we find our rhythm, win our duels and have a bit of luck then maybe we 
could grab a draw. Certainly we would like to avoid conceding four goals” – 
Miroslav Klose prepares with the utmost confidence for a game against Juventus 
in January. As it turned out, hisLazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> team were unfortunate to settle 
for a 1-1 final scoreline.

Most embarrassing (but awesome) dad

The ballboy son of Atalanta striker Germán Denis did not look too thrilled when
dad ruffled his hair on the way out to the pitch 
<http://www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it/calcio/atalanta/2014/fotogallery/1003235/denis-un-figlio-raccattapalle-come-portafortuna.shtml>
 before a game against Napoli in January. But he was happy enoughto share a hug 
with his old man after seeing him score 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/430400096904019968> in the same game.

Best shinpads

Kaká’s lions 
<http://static.anygator.com.s3-website-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/static-anygator2/thumbs/us/72/7227366ea26b2ecc333ac9eea154455554e3ccc7/big.jpg>
.

Worst transfer

Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> sold Alessandro 
Diamanti to Guangzhou Evergrande in February, days after the European transfer 
window had closed. Shorn of their top scorer, they managed just eight goals in 
the next 15 games, and were relegated as a consequence.

Best chant

Milan supporters showed solidarity with Liverpool on the 25th anniversary of 
the Hillsborough disaster, launching intoan English-language chorus of “You’ll 
never walk alone” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7lM5rB1Y5i0>.

Best free-kick technique

Andrea Pirlo moved up to second in Serie A’s all-time free-kick goalscoring 
charts, taking his career tally to 25. He needs three more to catch Sinisa 
Mihajlovic, although the Serb has already thrown down the gauntlet – 
challenging the Italy midfielder to a one-on-one to find out who is really the 
best. Mihajlovic already beat two of his Sampdoria players – Angelo Palombo and 
Enzo Maresca –in a similar contest this January 
<http://www.ilsecoloxix.it/p/sport/2014/01/12/AQeWPzVB-maresca_palombo_punizioni.shtml>
.

But Pirlo deserves extra credit for revealing the secrets to his technique in 
his autobiography, translated into English this year. In it he recalls his 
fixation with learning how to copy Lyon’s Juninho Pernambucano, andthe magical 
moment in which he finally understood what he had been doing wrong 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2032144-andrea-pirlo-remains-a-free-kick-master-thanks-in-part-to-a-trip-to-the-toilet>
:
 “The best ideas come about in moments of total concentration … My own Eureka 
moment arrived when I was sat on the toilet. Hardly romantic, but there you go. 
The search for Juninho’s secret had become an obsession for me, to the extent 
that it occupied my every waking thought. It was at the point of maximum 
exertion that the dam burst, in every sense of the term.” 
The Zdenek Zeman award for services to the tobacco industry

Hats off to Inter president Massimo Moratti for helping his employees to get 
back into their bad habits. “I had stopped smoking for eight months but during 
Inter’s training camp I went back to it,” said Walter Mazzarri during an 
interview with Sky this February. “President Moratti smokes a lot, and he gave 
me a hand with getting started again during one of our very first 
conversations.”

Lifetime achievement award

Where else could we finish this year’s awards but with a salute to Javier 
Zanetti, bowing out of professional football after 1,114 games played? I 
already wrote a profile of the playerhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/07/javier-zanetti-internazionale-argentina-retires>
, so I shall limit myself here to a memory – from a game between Inter and 
Juventus back in March 2008.

Receiving a pass near the right-hand corner of his own six-yard box, Zanetti 
quickly found himself under pressure from Pavel Nedved. It was a situation that 
should have ended in disaster, both because Zanetti’s first touch was too 
casual and because Maicon had been foolish to play him the ball there to begin 
with. But Zanetti somehow kept possession, wrestling his way back to his own 
goalline before finally turning Nedved, wrong-footing another opponent and 
passing clear.

It was not an especially artful moment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YajqyjuIkRI>, but then the Inter captain was 
never an especially artful player. The beauty of Zanetti was in the 
relentlessness, the consistency, the absolute refusal to give up on a lost 
cause. And of course those glorious, thundering charges up and down the flanks, 
every hair in its place but limbs churning with a fury that promised imminent 
chaos.

Sundays will not be the same without him. Grazie di tutto Pupi, we look 
forward to seeing how the next chapter unfolds.
 