
The Nigel Farage Show | LBC 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/nigel-farage/>
Answer Me This! | podcast <http://answermethispodcast.com/>
Life on Egg (Radio 4) |iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088nzc1>

Oh God. As if things couldn’t get any worse, LBC has given Nigel Farage 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/nigel-farage/> a radio show. Monday to 
Thursdays, 7pm-8pm. Naughty Nigel uses this time traditionally – he’s a 
traditional guy – meaning, in the time-honoured radio phone-in manner: he asks 
a question at the top of the show and listeners call in to answer it. On 
Monday, he asked if Theresa May should get a move on with Brexit. On Tuesday, 
he wondered if the Labour party was all over. And on Wednesday, his question 
was: is Trump right to cosy up to Putin? You may notice confirmation bias in 
some of these queries.

Farage (below) is not bad as a radio host. He’s a fluent speaker, he knows his 
own mind. He and his producers have chosen well with their topics, too: not 
much nuance, straight for the water-cooler discussion point. (Perhaps not the 
water cooler. Too liberal elite. Farage fans probably gather round customs 
desks or over an £8 pint.) But what the programme lacks is nimbleness. You may 
not agree with Nick Ferrari orJames O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/08/james-obrien-radio-people-still-talk-lbc-presenter>
 or even James Whale, but they are sharp thinkers, quick reactors; they know 
when to ask a devil’s advocate question, when to sympathise, when to hold back. 
Farage, though, never moves the argument along. He talks a lot, but says no 
more in his so-called “final thought” than at the beginning of the show. He’s a 
pub bore.

Life on Egg was properly funny: I found myself giggling out loud as I jogged 
around the park

Still, listeners are calling in. Most are supportive, but some are angry. On 
Wednesday, Peter from the Ukraine said it “beggars belief” that Farage thinks 
we should play nice with Putin. Nige argued that he knew more about the Ukraine 
than Peter, who grew up there, so there. Anyhow, Farage seems quite energised 
by his new appointment, possibly because “the Donald” (Farage’s favoured name, 
as though Trump is a beloved family pet) is also a media hound, and look at him 
now. Not only is he president, but he’s also one of the most retweeted men on 
the planet! Amazing! I noted that Farage presented from Brussels on Tuesday. I 
thought he’d renounced that particular pay packet (€98,556 a year), on 
principle, but no. He has different principles to many of us.
 ‘Beautifully relaxed’: Olly Mann, left, Martin the soundman and Helen 
Zaltzman producing Answer Me This!. Photograph: Teri Pengilley 
Anyway. If you don’t fancy that particular programme, may I recommend a couple 
of alternatives?Answer Me This! <http://answermethispodcast.com/>, Helen 
Zaltzman and Olly Mann’s podcast of joy, recently celebrated its 10th birthday 
and its 346th programme showcased all the reasons to love it. Zaltzman, Mann 
and Martin the sound guy (he chimes in, with an echo on his voice) are such 
experienced broadcasters as to be beautifully relaxed. Their funniness comes 
from their familiarity with one another, but their research, editing skills and 
lack of patience with waffle means thatAnswer Me This! is never boring. They 
reminisced, a little, about recurring questions of yore (eg why we don’t we get 
white dog poo any more). Robert Sledge, of Ben Folds Five, provided a little 
tune. Mann dissected Disney films. Thoroughly delightful, always interesting 
and resolutely not about “the question of the hour”. Good.

And on Radio 4, Harry Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-hill> is back with Life on Egg 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088nzc1/episodes/player>, a joke-packed 
comedy about a prison in the middle of the sea. This was properly funny: I 
found myself giggling out loud as I jogged around the park; not a usual 
circumstance. Every line was a winner and Hill and his compadres deliver them 
with vim. I especially liked the jail’s janitor. I was about to sign up for the 
podcast feed, but then saw thatLife on Egg is only going to be two episodes of 
15 minutes. Boo. Come on, Radio 4, do the right thing. More silly, funny stuff 
to take our minds off Trumpageddon. Please.

 