
Overview


By Steve Vickers, founder of Sweden travel guide routesnorth.com 
<http://www.routesnorth.com/>
Best known for churning out heavy metal – in the form of ships, Volvos and 
bands such asIn Flames <http://inflames.com/> – Gothenburg has spent the past 
couple of decades reinventing itself. Industry is still important, but now the 
west coast’s biggest city looks at ease on the pages of glossy travel magazines 
and is giving Stockholm a run for its money in the city-break stakes.

The container ships still chug into Gothenburg’s blustery port (the biggest in 
Scandinavia) but are now joined by cruise liners full of tourists – 73 of them 
docked in 2014, compared with just nine in 2000. This autumn,British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/gothenburg/flights-to-gothenburg>
,Norwegian 
<http://media.norwegian.com/en/#/pressreleases/norwegian-to-double-flights-between-london-gatwick-and-gothenburg-this-winter-1182385>
 andRyanair <http://www.ryanair.com/en/flights-to-gothenburg/> are all adding 
extra flights from London to Gothenburg. And in Hisingen, just across the Göta 
river from the city centre, a new waterfront leisure area, theJubileumsparken 
<http://www.goteborg2021.com/jubileumsprojekt/jubileumsparken/>, is being built 
to celebrate the city’s 400th anniversary, in 2021. The first section, with a
free public sauna <http://www.goteborg.com/en/the-sauna-in-frihamnen/> made 
from recycled materials, is already open, but construction work will keep going 
in this area until at least 2035.
Gothenburg locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/travel_gothenburg/giv-30080CCGR4MU710XJ/>
And within the city the changes are huge: tumbledown shops and industrial 
buildings have been turned into galleries; bars selling organic ales have moved 
into once-rundown neighbourhoods; and the picture-perfect fishing villages that 
dot the coast north and south of the city have begun reeling in food critics 
with their fresh crayfish, lobster and prawns. Add in a blossoming local design 
scene, six Michelin-starred restaurants, a sprawling archipelago of low-slung 
granite islands, plus a new wave of cool independent coffee shops across town 
(the city still has only one branch of Starbucks, inside the central railway 
station), and it’s easy to see why visitor arrivals rose by almost 10% in 2014.

Nowhere is Gothenburg’s transformation more obvious than in the district of 
Haga on the south side of the Göta, once so rundown and rowdy that large parts 
were demolished in the 1970s, although many of the area’s old buildings have 
been renovated. The part left standing is now the city’s showpiece district, 
its cobbled lanes lined with cosy cafes selling plate-sized cinnamon buns to 
tourists andlattepappor <http://www.explorewestsweden.com/swedish-latte-dads/> 
(latte dads, or young fathers off work on parental leave). Locals seem to 
welcome the influx of visitors but, being a modest bunch, are often bemused as 
to why anyone would choose their city for a holiday.

The new bars and restaurants opening on Gothenburg’s grungy “long streets”, 
just west of Linnégatan (where Haga meets Masthugget), are increasingly swanky, 
specialising in everything from dim sum to tequila. Gentrification is pushing 
students, artists and musicians out towards neighbourhoods like Majorna, 
traditionally home to dockers and industrial workers, but classic watering 
holes such asPublik <http://publik.se/> and Kelly’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Kellys/182859791739456?_rdr=p> keep things 
feeling relaxed – think Acne jeans, arm-length tattoos and scuffed white 
Converses, rather than Stockholm’s slicked-back style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439552223060%2Fdff99ebd-109c-4171-bb3b-a658252e1935-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439552223060%2Fdff99ebd-109c-4171-bb3b-a658252e1935-2060x1374.jpeg>
 The old working-class district of Haga, once so rundown and rowdy, is now the 
city’s showpiece district. Photograph: Souvid Datta for the Guardian 
Top-end seafood restaurants such as Sjömagasinet <http://www.sjomagasinet.se/> 
tend to get most of the attention in travel guides, but you can eat and drink 
well in Gothenburg without going overboard, or even dressing up – try the food 
carts that set up on Magasinsgatan and Linnégatan streets, the new waterside 
bar-restaurants in Rosenlund, or the cluster of individualistic street-food 
outlets on Skanstorget. The city’s large student population means there’s a 
boozy late-night crowd, especially at weekends, with DJs, skateboarders, 
designers and doctors-in-training all cramming into the most popular venues.

Music/clubs scene


By Björn Wurmbach, German-Swedish music promoter and festival organiser
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439552483391%2F47c87a61-dd46-4859-9f62-a1c90dba11b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439552483391%2F47c87a61-dd46-4859-9f62-a1c90dba11b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A busy evening at the popular Publik bar on Andra Långgatan. Photograph: 
Souvid Datta for the Guardian 
I started doing parties on my 30th birthday, which we celebrated on an island 
in the archipelago off Gothenburg. I organised it with some friends and to 
start with a lot of things went wrong. Now, that island party has evolved into 
an exclusive festival calledSecret Island Nation <http://www.secret-island.eu/>
, which has just celebrated its 10th anniversary. Instead of complaining about 
the system and capitalism, we create our own nation, which is ours for four or 
five days. We live according to our own values. We don’t have security and we 
don’t have a cleaning team, because the people who come to the festival are not 
guests; they’re citizens and they look after themselves and the site. There’s a 
mix of around 40 acts from all around the world includingKSF 
<https://www.facebook.com/ksficeland?_rdr=p> from Iceland, Franco Bianco 
<http://francobianco.com/> from Argentina, Joel Alter 
<https://www.facebook.com/joelaltermusic?_rdr=p>, who’s local, and plenty of 
DJs spinning what I would call the Berlin club sound: house, tech-house and 
techno. Nobody gets paid, and we put a lot of effort and love into it.
 José Gonzalez’s Gothenburg playlist 
Music is so big in Sweden nowadays. I’d say it’s the country’s main export. 
But because of Sweden’s tough licensing laws, which control when “ordinary” 
clubs close, there’s a growing underground party scene. Amazing club nights do 
happen, but they’re very secretive and outside the centre in industrial areas. 
Facebook is the way things tend to spread. For Gothenburg,Nöjesguiden <> is the 
best source of into on mainstream nightlife, whileIllegal Ground 
<http://illegalground.com/> covers the city’s alternative venues and has 
extensive reviews.

A year ago, we discovered a big industrial location on Hisingen island (the 
area north of the Göta river) – very central, but psychologically off the map – 
that we rent out to different people. We have one customer calledMythos 
<http://www.mythos.dance/> that runs a big Berlin-style warehouse party once a 
month.

Nefertiti <http://nefertiti.se/> and Pustervik <http://pustervik.nu/> are good 
mainstream venues which have been around for ages with somewhat alternative 
bookings. To me they seem to be among the few clubs that have their focus on 
the music and not on maximising profits.Folk <https://www.facebook.com/Folkgbg> 
is a really cool bar with high ceilings, a nice cosmopolitan feel and a 
grown-up crowd. I’d also recommendMagnus & Magnus <http://www.magnusmagnus.se/>
, which is worth a visit on Wednesdays during summer. They’ve managed to 
attract a mixed crowd of hipsters, posh Swedes and underground people with 
their electronic music bookings and great food. Otherwise, you could try the 
Mexican-themedPuta Madre <http://www.putamadre.se/>, which has these crazy red 
interiors and does great cocktails on its open-air terrace. If I have friends 
visiting from London or Berlin, we’d probably start at the bars on Andra 
Långgatan, just west of Haga.

Where to eat and drink


By Jerker Furuskog, chef at Kooperativet <http://www.kooperativet.se/> (
Götaverksgatan 1 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/G%C3%B6taverksgatan+1,+417+55+G%C3%B6teborg,+Sweden/@57.6613867,11.938756,12z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x464ff35a67ea3149:0xd2dab8bd406256fe>
), Gothenburg
 Somm restaurant 
I’ve witnessed a lot of changes in the food scene in Gothenburg. There’s a far 
more professional atmosphere in the restaurants than there was before. The 
ingredients are better, and the customers are more aware of what they’re eating.

I moved from Småland to Gothenburg for college – and to become a chef. It was 
a way for me to move away from the small town I grew up in. I’ve now been 
working as a chef and head chef for 19 years, with stints everywhere from 
casual lunch places to one of the city’s Michelin-starred restaurants.

Today, a fairly ordinary restaurant in Gothenburg has the same quality of food 
that a fine-dining restaurant had 15 years ago. The thing that makes the city’s 
food scene special is the abundance of fresh fish and seafood, caught off the 
west coast. Some of the best places, such asSjömagasinet 
<http://www.sjomagasinet.se/en.aspx> (Adolf Edelsvärds gata 5 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Adolf+Edelsv%C3%A4rds+gata+5,+414+51+G%C3%B6teborg,+Sweden/@57.6897816,11.9136678,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x464f8ccb872743a1:0x5815ab0ffb76a551>
), the Michelin-starred restaurant, where I have worked, puts its entire focus 
on seafood. But restaurants here also use a lot of organic meat and vegetables 
such as wild boar, new potatoes and freshly picked mushrooms.

A big trend in Swedish cooking now is that, instead of using just the nice 
cuts of meat, like the tenderloin, you use the whole animal – just as they did 
in times gone by.Somm <http://www.somm.se/> (mains from 190SEK, about £14, 
Lorensbergsgatan 8 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Lorensbergsgatan+8,+411+36+G%C3%B6teborg,+Sweden/@57.7003786,11.9766788,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x464ff370f69439c7:0xbffb917b860b623b>
) is great for this, and one of the chefs there is part ofWest of Sweden 
<http://www.culinaryteamwestofsweden.se/> Culinary Team  
<http://www.culinaryteamwestofsweden.se/>, which promotes local, organic 
ingredients. Swedes also have a really big interest in beer, and there are lots 
of microbreweries popping up around Gothenburg, includingDugges Ale och 
Porterbryggeri <http://dugges.se/hem/> and Oceanbryggeriet 
<http://oceanbryggeriet.se/>.
 Långedrags Värdshus 
Visitors should try a “half special” (halv special in Swedish). It’s a hotdog 
loaded up with mashed potatoes and a lovely shrimp-and-mayo salad. My personal 
favourite place to eat isÖlrepubliken <http://olrepubliken.se/> (mains from 
about £11),Kronhusgatan 2B 
<https://www.google.se/maps/place/%C3%96lrepubliken/@57.7077471,11.9619409,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x464ff366c123cc55:0x707f918d29509a58?hl=sv>
) – for the atmosphere, the wonderful beer, and the reasonably priced food, 
from mussels to steak tartare.Långedrags Värdshus 
<http://www.langedragvardshus.se/> (mains from about £17, Talattagatan 24 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/@57.669197,11.849237,3a,15y,286.29h,83.5t/data=!3m6!1e1!3m4!1sPTwMrjVCWjg4gOjg0ttCjQ!2e0!7i13312!8i6656!6m1!1e1>
) is a beautifully situated restaurant five miles to the west of the centre, 
right by the sea, with good food and a mix of young families and businesspeople.
Upper House <http://upperhouse.se/restaurang/> (six courses from about £92, 
Mässans gata 24 <http://upperhouse.se/kontakt/>) is a bit more expensive but 
has a great view over Gothenburg, along with some of the best-quality food you 
can get in this part of Sweden right now – there are six-course menus featuring 
everything from fresh langoustines to fermented raspberries.

When it comes to coffee and cakes, try the wonderful old courtyard of 
Kronhusbodarna <http://www.kronhusbodarna.com/> (Kronhusgatan 1D 
<https://www.google.se/maps/place/Kronhusbodarna/@57.7103245,11.9721023,15.42z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x464ff366e873737d:0xda68f7c3ca5d328?hl=sv>
), in the one of the city’s most historic areas. It’s a good place for a 
traditional Swedish fika (essentially a chat over coffee with friends, and 
perhaps a slice of cake) in an old, cosy atmosphere. Another favourite of mine 
isBrogyllen <http://brogyllen.se/> (Västra Hamngatan 2 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Brogyllen+Konditori/@57.7054492,11.9633147,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x6dec4afcaa59594f>
), a regular fika place (coffee and a cake around £4) with some of the best 
sourdough cinnamon rolls you’ll find anywhere on Earth.

Where to go for art and design


By Annie Granath <http://anniegranath.se/>, designer and interior architect
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439553236795%2Fa7a177d4-4e0c-4097-8a90-da7dcc69b52f-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439553236795%2Fa7a177d4-4e0c-4097-8a90-da7dcc69b52f-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Friends gather at Oceanen bar. Photograph: Souvid Datta for the Guardian 
The design scene in Gothenburg is small compared with Stockholm. There aren’t 
masses of cool design studios and most designers know each other. The upside of 
this is that things are more relaxed and people tend to help each other out 
more. Gothenburg is also home to one of Sweden’s most renowned craft and design 
schools,HDK <http://hdk.gu.se/sv>. When something interesting involving design 
or craft takes place in the city, HDK has usually made a contribution in some 
way.Röhsska Museet <https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/rohsska.se/en> is 
the best design museum in Sweden. Every year it holds an exhibition featuring 
the winner of theTorsten and Wanja Söderberg Prize <http://rohsska.se/en/371/>, 
the biggest design award in the world. It also has a big collection of craft 
and design objects and some iconic furniture.

A recent addition is A-venue 
<http://ruc.gu.se/english/current/calendar/Event_detail/?eventId=2409877808>, a 
gallery opened by the University of Gothenburg on the city’s main street, 
Kungsportsavenyn. So far it has had one exhibition – of furniture, calledDeTour 
HDK <http://detourhdk.se/> – that had been shown during design week in Milan. 
A-venue is set to be a great place to see new and interesting art and design.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439556407213%2F3f0f99d3-2cd8-470f-8c7a-19e1c6a98955-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439556407213%2F3f0f99d3-2cd8-470f-8c7a-19e1c6a98955-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gothenburg’s most prominent graffiti artist Sarai, works on a new mural by the 
R da Sten Konsthall beside Älvsborg suspension bridge. Photograph: Souvid Datta 
for the Guardian 
For small galleries, Vasa is the part of town to head for. Here you’ll find 
places such as contemporaryGalleri Thomassen <http://www.gallerithomassen.se/> 
andGöteborgs Konsthall <http://www.goteborg.com/en/goteborgs-konsthall/>. Röda 
Sten Konsthall <http://rodasten.com/>is also worth a visit, among other things 
for its great location beside the Älvsborg suspension bridge.

For shopping, Artilleriet <http://www.artilleriet.se/> on Magasinsgatan has a 
great selection of furniture and some beautiful objects. It recently opened a 
new store calledThe Kitchen <http://www.artilleriet.se/> that’s full of cooking 
gadgets. Over Christmas, there are usually a lot of small markets and pop-up 
stores full of local crafts.

A perfect day for me would be to take the boat to one of the islands in the 
southern archipelago (Styrsö, for example). After that, I’d check out a photo 
exhibition at theHasselblad Center <http://www.hasselbladfoundation.org/>, then 
enjoy the sunset fromMasthuggskyrkan 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Attraction_Review-g189894-d2179590-Reviews-Masthuggskyrkan-Gothenburg_Vastra_Gotaland_County_West_Coast.html#MAPVIEW>
, where there’s a striking church, and have a beer at nearbyOceanen 
<http://oceanen.com/> on Stigbergstorget.

Readers’ tips and Instagram

There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations – from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to 
share their favourite experiences andInstagram pictures of Gothenburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/17/instagram-snapshots-gothenburg-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
 . Here are just a few –you’ll find more here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/17/the-best-of-gothenburg-sweden-readers-travel-tips>
.

Askimsbadet beach
To escape the hustle and bustle of the bars and clubs of Gothenburg, try a 
short journey south (less than an hour) to a beautiful beach at Askimsbadet, 
with its own official surf clubhouse as well.
goteborg.com <http://www.goteborg.com/en/askimsbadet/>
neilmccartney

Canal tour
The canals evoke a Scandinavian Amsterdam, softened by steamy cafes that could 
almost be in Vienna. Only when you tuck into wintry-white seafood, served by 
statuesque blondes, do you remember you’re in Sweden. Try a Paddan canal boat 
tour, which sweeps under 20 bridges, including Osthyvel, the “cheese-slicer” 
bridge, which is so low you have to lie flat to pass underneath it. In winter, 
rugs are provided, along with gingerbread biscuits and steaming glögg – hot 
mulled wine.
stromma.se 
<http://www.stromma.se/en/gothenburg/sightseeing/sightseeing-by-boat/the-paddan-tour/>
LisaGerardSharp


Marstrand

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439562572335%2F2bcb0dc6-455a-4975-bc87-234aacaa76f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Gothenburg%2C%20Sweden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fgothenburg-alternative-europe-cities-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439562572335%2F2bcb0dc6-455a-4975-bc87-234aacaa76f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fjord with sailing boat close to Marstrand Photograph: Hans Georg Eiben/Getty 
Images/LOOK 
An island north of Gothenburg, Marstrand is reached by bus or tour boats. The 
island has somewhat of a snobby reputation due to it being the centre of the 
sailing world in West Sweden, but it has good restaurants, cafes and boutique 
shops, and is a great place to walk or swim. Marstrand is also a must for 
discerning Abba fans, as the video forWinner Takes It All 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CLd-P6lZMms> was filmed there.
marstrand.se <http://www.marstrand.se/en/>
David Perrin

Free Ferries
If you get a one-day or three-day ticket for Gothenburg’s public transport, 
you can do a tour on the ferry for free. Hop on and hop off as many times as 
you like or just stay on the ferry all the way through. On a sunny day, it’s a 
summer must-do!
vasttrafik.se <http://www.vasttrafik.se/>
Sonja Irani
 