
“As I type, the full-time whistle has just blown at Villa Park where Liverpool 
have scored six goals, all by different players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/aston-villa-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, which seems unusual to me. So, what is the most goals scored in a game by one 
side, all by different players?” wondered Andrew Hill the other week.

Most of you chose to ignore Andrew’s question and simply send in some 
interesting, different-goalscorer trivia. We did the same; we’re not judging 
anyone. We’ll get to those later but first let’s answer the actual question: 
the most goals scored by one side, all with different goalscorers.

Did a football fan shoot the ball to stop the opposition scoring? | The 
Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/did-a-football-fan-shoot-the-ball-to-stop-the-opposition-scoring>
A few of you set the bar at seven. Charly Yver nominated Nantes 7-0 Nice in 
1996-97 <http://new.goalstream.org/match/122175/8ee672d4>, when Claude Makélélé 
was one of the goalscorers. Sveinn Sigþórsson citedManchester City 7-0 Norwich 
in 2013-14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/02/manchester-city-norwich-city-premier-league>
, while David McManus went all the way back toLeeds’s 7-0 shellacking of Chelsea
 <http://www.ozwhitelufc.net.au/07-10-1967%20LUFC%20v%20Chelsea.htm> in 1967-68.

But that great Leeds side must bow down at the feet of Clitheroe FC, who 
walloped Shelley 8-1 in 2014 
<http://www.clitheroeadvertiser.co.uk/sport/football/clitheroe-fc/eight-different-goalscorers-as-clitheroe-run-riot-1-6770789>
. Sure, it was a pre-season friendly but, well, look in the book. It has 
happened in a competitive game too: Brendan Slattery recallsVentspils 8-0 B68 
<http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuropaleague/season=2004/matches/round=1973/match=79061/index.html>
 in the qualifying rounds for the Uefa Cup of 2004-05.


Right, on to the trivia. Stephen Crisp wearily reminds us that Liverpool had 
eight different scorerswhen they beat Crystal Palace 9-0 in 1989 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liverpool_9%E2%80%930_Crystal_Palace_%281989%29>
; Steve Nicol ruined a great factgasm by scoring his second goal in the 90th 
minute. Liverpool went one better in 1974-75, with nine different scorers in an
11-0 defenestration of Strosmgodset 
<http://www.lfchistory.net/SeasonArchive/Game/815>. Thanks to Chris Carey and 
Stefan Glosby for that one.


There were nine names on the scoresheet during Tottenham 4-5 Arsenal in 2004-05
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/nov/14/match.sport4>, and 13 
different scorers on the inaugural Super Sunday –the astonishing FA Cup 
semi-finals of 1989-90 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1989%E2%80%9390_FA_Cup#Semi-finals>, which were 
both shown live on the BBC for the first time (thanks, Graham Upton). If you 
include the replay, there were 16 goals scored by 16 different gentlemen in 
that round of the Cup.

PLAYER … [lengthy pause] … MANAGER


“Neil Warnock has just become boss of Rotherham United a mere 45 years after 
last playing for them. My question is thus: can anyone even approach this in 
term of length of hiatus between playing for and managing a club?” asks Phil 
Rebbeck.

As Chris Wardle, Michael Gahler and Matthias Gläfke pointed out, Otto Rehhagel 
can see Warnock’s 45 years and raise it. “It looks like Rehhagel’s ill-fated 
2012 return to Hertha Berlin has Warnock beaten, but only just,” writes Chris. 
“I can’t find the exact date in 1966 that Rehhagel left Hertha for 
Kaiserslautern, so let’s call it 10 September, the date of his debut for the 
latter. Warnock was at Rotherham for their 1970-71 team photo, andthis fan site 
<http://www.rotherhamunited1925.co.uk/#/19701971/4544150708> reckons he was 
still around to score against Torquay on 20 October. If date and scorer are 
both accurate, Rehhagel beats Warnock by a month and a half.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fmost-goals-scored-different-players-single-game-football-the-knowledge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb30ae2dca68493fc03402a18bae73abb601ead1%2F0_0_2362_1335%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20goals%20scored%20by%20different%20players%20in%20a%20single%20game%20of%20football%20%7C%20The%20Knowledge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fmost-goals-scored-different-players-single-game-football-the-knowledge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20goals%20scored%20by%20different%20players%20in%20a%20single%20game%20of%20football%20%7C%20The%20Knowledge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fmost-goals-scored-different-players-single-game-football-the-knowledge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb30ae2dca68493fc03402a18bae73abb601ead1%2F0_0_2362_1335%2F2362.jpg>
 Otto Rehhagel in happier times with Greece at Euro 2004. Photograph: Martin 
Rose/Bongarts/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, if being in a club’s youth system rather than the actual first team 
counts, Harry Redknapp could be your man, as Marcos Garcia points out. Redknapp 
was spotted by Tottenham as an 11-year-old, playing for East London Schoolboys 
against Wandsworth Boys, and trained there for a while before eventually 
signing schoolboy forms with West Ham. “I trained there as an 11-year-old, 
12-year-old, so I know the history of the club,”he once said 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/7691457.stm>. Quite when Redknapp 
last played in a Tottenham youth team is unknown, but if it was when he was 12 
it would have been some time before March 1959. He eventually returned to 
Tottenham as manager in October 2008, very nearly (and possibly over, 
depending) a full half-century later.

TO DART IS TO DO

Following on from the news of Sam Allardyce’s brief and inglorious flirtation 
with professional darts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/knowledge-sam-allardyce-darts-tournament>
, Stephen Ryan got in touch to tip us off about the adventures of Kevin Kyle …

Now 34, Kyle’s playing career included notable stretches at Sunderland, 
Coventry, Kilmarnock and Rangers – as well as 10 international caps for 
Scotland – before he retired at the end of the 2013-14 season because, 
according to his then manager at Ayr, he felt victimised by Scottish referees. 
“I can see why he’s annoyed by it,” said Mark Roberts (though he made a brief 
comeback that August to play a single game in the South ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> League for Newton Stewart, 
against Crichton, in which he scored a hat-trick).


Which Premier League manager tried to qualify for a pro darts tournament?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/knowledge-sam-allardyce-darts-tournament>
Kyle, who struggled with a gambling addiction during his playing career, was 
last heard from later that year, when he was revealed to be earning £400 a week 
working as a storeman on a former ferry being used to house oil workers in the 
North Sea, where his duties included cleaning toilets and making beds. “I’m 
trying to provide for my family,” hetold the Daily Record 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/former-10k-a-week-scotland-rangers-star-3871174#O4poB6ClKSVBgOTb.97>
. “I have to work at some point to put food on the table.”

Kyle has recently taken to darts, with some success. “It was just something I 
did to pass the time and it’s spiralled from there,”he said 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/sport/14277122.Ex_Rangers_star_becomes_darts_hit__knocking_out_Richard_Veenstra_in_Scottish_Open/>
. “I started with 20 minutes a day, then decided to push it a bit further. It’s 
just a hobby really. I have three kids so I can’t really push it much further. 
And there’s so many levels to darts I could never get near enough to the top.”

Earlier this month Kyle stormed to the third round of the Scottish Open, 
beating the ninth seed – and 2016 World Championship semi-finalist – Richard 
Veenstra along the way. “I’ve played at Wembley in front of 60,000 fans but 
being up there was much more scary,” he said. “You’re out there on your own. I 
was excited when I saw I could face Veenstra and it was an amazing feeling 
beating him. I’d definitely missed that competitive edge after I finished with 
football.”

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

“A few years back, I saw a match at my adopted team Northampton abandoned due 
to a waterlogged pitch with just 22 minutes left on the clock,”wrote Jamie 
Shoesmithback in November 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/nov/11/latest-abandonments-the-knowledge>
.“Opponents Millwall weren’t happy one bit, as they had been leading 1-0 for 
most of the game, but the Cobblers faithful were delighted with the ref’s late 
call after it started teeming with rain at Sixfields. At 68 minutes, is this 
the latest ever call for an abandonment, or have there been instances of games 
which have been called off with seconds to go?”

As one eagle-eyed reader pointed out, we have covered this before 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2007/jan/10/theknowledge.sport>. But the 
Knowledge inbox was filled with such a rich variety of tales we reckon it’s 
well worth revisiting. So, in ascending order, here are the juiciest cuts from 
the mailbag”

75th minute “When Everton played Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> at the Manor Ground, Plumstead, 
in November 1904 the referee’s decision to abandon the game due to fog just 15 
minutes from time, with the away team leading 3-1, had important 
ramifications,” wrote Gavin Buckland. “Everton lost the replayed game 2-1 and 
missed out on the title by a point to Newcastle, so it could be argued that the 
referee’s action effectively cost the Toffees the title.”

76th minute “On 9 October 1961 Gillingham’s game at Barrow was called off 
after 76 minutes due to poor light, with Barrow leading 7-0,” noted James Tong. 
“This is the first (and I believe, only) time the result of an abandoned game 
has been allowed to stand by the Football League – the game having kicked off 
late due to the somewhat farcical journey there by the Gillingham squad.” [In 
brief: their coach to Euston got stuck in traffic, they missed their train, 
chartered a plane and then drove 70 miles from Blackpool airport under police 
escort, arriving 15 minutes after the scheduled kick-off]

79th minute “Way back in 1991 Hapoel Ramat Gan 
<http://www.hapoel-ramatgan.co.il/> were playing Maccabi Acco in the Israeli 
second division and leading 6-1,” wrote Eran Rabl. “Rain started falling at the 
beginning of the second half. The sandy field turned into a little lake and at 
the 79th minute the match was abandoned. The FA voided the result and ordered a 
replay which was held in nice sunny weather and ended goalless.”

82nd minute “Nuneaton Boro’s game against Worcester City in January 2008 in 
the Blue Square North was abandoned with 82 mins on the clock due to floodlight 
failure,” recalled Mathew Williams. “Nuneaton were leading 2-0 at the time, but 
went on to lose the rematch.”

88th minute “Real Madrid v Real Sociedad was abandoned after a bomb threat 
with only a few minutes to go in December 2004 at 1-1,” wrote Vincent Ramirez. 
“Interestingly, Spanish rules are such that the match was not technically 
abandoned, but postponed, with the score kept as such, and only the remaining 
time to be played. Both teams had to play for a few minutes to finish the game 
off and Real won 2-1.”

89th minute “The Derby v Fulham game of 2 May 1983 was abandoned with 78 
seconds remaining, however the result stood,” emailed Edward Gilbert. “It was 
the last home game of the season and Derby needed a win to stay up, Fulham 
needed a win for promotion as I recall. There were fans all around the pitch 
and the ref blew his whistle a really long time for a free-kick convincing the 
fans the game was over.The fans invaded the pitch and play could not begin again
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FW0mNuQPokQ>. Malcolm McDonald complained, 
but the result stood.”

100th minute “Wismut Karl Marx Stadt qualified for the first round of the 
1958-59 European Cup on a coin toss, after their play-off against Gwardia 
Warszawa was abandoned with the result at 1–1 after 100 minutes due to 
floodlight power failure,” wrote Justin Horton.

103 minutes And it was back to Mr Buckland for the latest abandonment: 
“Tranmere’s second-round replay at Blyth Spartans in 1951 was abandoned after 
103 minutes due to total darkness with the score 1-1. The match should have 
been replayed at Blyth but their application to stage the fixture was lost in 
the Christmas post. The teams were incorrectly instructed by the FA to replay 
at Carlisle and after a 2-2 draw, a fourth game at Goodison Park was in danger 
of being postponed after an epidemic of boils in the Blyth camp. Three players 
were hospitalised and a weakened team lost 5-1.”

For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>

CAN YOU HELP?

“When Messi scored his 488th goal for Barcelona against Sporting Gijon, it was 
also the club’s 10,000th in all competitions, meaning Messi has scored a little 
under 5% of all the club’s goals since their creation in 1899,” notes Ralf 
Dekker. “Ignoring clubs that have only recently been established, is there 
anyone one else that can come even close to that percentage?”

“Twenty-four games into the season, Eran Zehavi has already scored 26 goals. 
The Israeli Premier League isn’t exactly filled with prolific goalscorers, and 
the second best in the league (Elyaniv Barda) has only 12 goals to his name. 
What’s the biggest difference between the two top scorers in a league? Has 
anyone ever managed to score more than twice as much than the second best 
scorer?” muses Ravid Alon.


“We just had an A-League match (Perth v Brisbane) that was 4-3 at half-time,” 
mails Tom Frost. “What is the highest half-time score in any major league?”

“Linfield (NI) have played a team from the Faroe Islands in European 
qualifiers four years in a row,” tweets Richard Hunter. “Is this a record?”

“Crystal Palace have won three cup ties against Premier League opposition but 
failed to win any of the intervening league matches. Has any other side managed 
a longer similar period of cup specialism?” asks Colin Bell.

Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com> or get in touch via Twitter @TheKnowledge_GU 
<https://twitter.com/theknowledge_gu>
 