
It was hailed as "superb" and "life-enhancing" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/may/19/theatre1> when it first opened 
at the National Theatre. Nearly a decade later, The History Boys has clearly 
kept its place in the public's affection as it has been named the nation's 
favourite play.

Alan Bennett's Olivier and Tony award-winning play about a bunch of clever 
northern schoolboys studying for Oxbridge entrance exams tops a poll organised 
byEnglish Touring Theatre <http://www.ett.org.uk> (ETT) to mark its 21st 
anniversary. The play made stars of the original cast including Russell Tovey, 
James Corden and Dominic Cooper.

Michael Frayn's farce within a farce, Noises Off, came second, followed by 
Shakespeare's Hamlet, Tom Stoppard's Arcadia, and Oscar Wilde's The Importance 
of Being Earnest.

ETT's director Rachel Tackley said the most astonishing thing about the poll, 
was that 1,400 plays featured. "I'm really delighted by the diversity," she 
said. "I thought there would be a few obvious suspects which would have a 
massive proportion of the vote but actually it has been spread so thinly – 
1,400 plays! I don't know that I could come up with that many."

There are four Shakespeare plays in the top 10 including Twelfth Night 
(eight), Macbeth (nine) and King Lear (10). Surprisingly, though, there's no 
Romeo and Juliet.

The list is completed by Jez Butterworth's Jerusalem at six and JB Priestley's 
An Inspector Calls at seven.

What the list says about the public and theatre is open to interpretation. "It 
maybe says something about the range of work that is available for UK 
audiences," said Tackley. "It might also say that, with there being no tidal 
wave for one play, that audiences are saying 'there's lots of things we like – 
we like new stuff, we like old stuff, we want to be challenged, we want to 
laugh, we want to be made to feel intelligent'.

"The negative view would be 'we don't know what we want.' The positive one is 
'we like lots of things'."

Tackley had been gunning for Conor McPherson's The Weir, which failed to make 
even the top 20, and Twelfth Night.More than 7,000 people voted. They were also 
asked to say where in the UK they were from, meaning a regional breakdown could 
be revealed.

The History Boys, which has toured extensively and was made into a film in 
2006, came top in the east of England, the Midlands, the north-east, and the 
north-west. In London and the south-east it was Jerusalem; in the south-west 
and Northern Ireland, Hamlet; in Scotland, An Inspector Calls; and in Wales, 
not Under Milk Wood, but Arcadia.

The ETT plans to incorporate as many of the top 10 plays into its 2014 
schedule as possible which may mean full performances or readings.
 