
Six more films in the Guardian’s Shakespeare Solos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-solos> series have been 
released online. The videos feature outstanding actors performing speeches from 
Shakespeare’s plays. Joanna Lumley stars as Twelfth Night’s Viola, David 
Threlfall performs Prospero’s “Our revels now are ended” from The Tempest, 
Samuel West is Henry V, Daniel Mays is Macbeth, Camille O’Sullivan portrays 
Constance from King John and Sacha Dhawan plays Parolles from All’s Well That 
Ends Well.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch Daniel Mays as Macbeth 
For Mays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/daniel-mays-football-just-gateway-betrayal-loss-ambition-patrick-marber>
, who is about to appear in a revival of Harold Pinter’s The Caretakerat the 
Old Vic in London <http://www.oldvictheatre.com/whats-on/2016/the-caretaker/>, 
his solo marks his first Shakespearean performance since leaving drama school. 
“I saw it as a great exercise in getting the monkey off my back,” he said. “I 
left Rada in 2000. The Macbeth speech [“Is this a dagger which I see before 
me?”] was something I did in the second year, when you give a Shakespearean 
speech to a panel and they dissect it.” He said: “I love how dynamic the speech 
is, how packed full of tension. There is a great journey from the beginning to 
the end of it ... Macbeth is in such a state of panic that he is hallucinating. 
His mind is playing horrendous tricks on him. As the speech unfolds he goes 
through this process of psyching himself up [for the murder of Duncan]. There’s 
an amazing sense of foreboding.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch David Threlfall as Prospero 
The solos, directed by Dan Susman, were mostly filmed in the multimedia 
studios at the Guardian’s London offices. “I didn’t fancy taking a carving 
knife with me round London on the way to the studio,” said Mays. “I walked in 
and said, ‘I sincerely hope that someone here has got a dagger.’ They had a 
selection of kitchen knives. I picked the biggest one.”

For his solo, Shameless star David Threlfall was cast as Prospero in 
Shakespeare’s late play The Tempest. Threlfall, who kicked off his stage career 
with Shakespearean roles at the RSC in the late 1970s, arrived at the 
Guardian’s studio with a flowing beard grown for his current role asDon Quixote 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/don-quixote/about-the-play> in the RSC’s adaptation of 
Cervantes’ comic novel. For her solo, Joanna Lumley chose Viola’s monologue “I 
left no ring with her” from the comedy Twelfth Night. “I love Viola, and all 
Shakespeare’s cross-dressing heroines,” said Lumley. “There is something bold 
and sly about them, able to think like a man and swoon like a woman.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch Joanna Lumley as Viola 
Two of the films were shot on location. Sacha Dhawan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/30/sacha-dhawan-not-safe-for-work>
, star of Channel 4’s comedyNot Safe for Work 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/not-safe-for-work> and one of Alan 
Bennett’s originalHistory Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/11/the-history-boys-britain-favourite-play-poll>
 at the National Theatre, filmed his speech in a bar in King’s Cross. A version 
ofParolles’s lines about virginity from All’s Well That Ends Well 
<http://www.opensourceshakespeare.org/views/plays/play_view.php?WorkID=allswell&Act=1&Scene=1&Scope=scene&LineHighlight=113#113>
, the solo marks Dhawan’s Shakespearean debut on screen. Samuel West, Dhawan’s 
co-star in the TV series Mr Selfridge, gave Henry V’s “Upon the king” soliloquy 
while walking along the South Bank. West, who will appear in the upcoming 
second series of the BBC’s Shakespearean adaptationThe Hollow Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jun/29/the-hollow-crown-shakespeare-bbc2>
, said he picked his speech because “it’s a much more layered and complex 
portrayal of kingship than we see elsewhere in Henry V. A lot of the time, 
Henry has to be the man people need him to be ... a lot of the time he is 
producing rousing rhetoric or propaganda. This soliloquy is a rather modern 
view of kingship. It’s basically about a man who can’t sleep the night before a 
big battle, a big test. I like that we shot it outside parliament, because 
nowadays that’s where the decision to go to war is made.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch Sacha Dhawan as Parolles 
West continued: “I’m a republican and I play quite a lot of kings. I like the 
moments when they go, ‘You’ve put me in a throne but it’s basically just a 
chair and you’ve covered me in this oil that makes me semi-divine but basically 
it’s just olive oil. Then you give me all your problems and I have to carry 
them. What have I got that you haven’t, except this frock, this fur? It’s a 
peculiarly modern and rather human way of looking at majesty. I think that’s a 
good antidote to what we get of Henry V usually, which is all bluster and 
violence.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch Samuel West as Henry V 
Some of the actors chose their own solo speeches, while others were cast in 
certain roles by the Guardian. The singerCamille O’Sullivan 
<http://www.camilleosullivan.com/>, who plays Constance in King John for her 
solo, took her cue fromElizabeth Freestone 
<http://www.pentabus.co.uk/elizabeth-freestone-1>, who directed O’Sullivan when 
she performed Shakespeare’s poemThe Rape of Lucrece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/23/rape-of-lucrece-edinburgh-review>
 for the RSC in 2012. “I reached out to Elizabeth, who has such an incredible 
mind when it comes to his work. She came back swiftly and said this is a 
fantastic speech and is kind of unknown. It’s a play and a character I didn’t 
know much about, which allowed me to come at the speech completely new. That’s 
how I felt with Lucrece. You can come with your own instinct.”

“With Shakespeare’s female characters you get the clever, the jovial, the 
dark, the evil. You get the measure of many of them quite quickly,” said 
O’Sullivan. In comparison, Constance’s speech “Thou art not holy” shows several 
different colours of the character. It also proves Shakespeare’s skill at 
getting into the mindset of someone who is suffering. “Constance is trying to 
explain the grief she has gone through and the loss of her son. Probably 
everybody she is addressing thinks she is crazy, but she explains very 
succinctly the reasons why she is not.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch Camille O’Sullivan as Constance 
The films feature a sound design by Pascal Wyse <http://pascalwyse.net/> that 
gives them what he calls “a sense of space and place”. For Mays’s performance 
as Macbeth, Wyse stretched the sound of a church bell, “effectively making one 
strike of the bell last minutes rather than seconds. I laid that underneath as 
a kind of drone, like the ghost of a bell.”

The Shakespeare Solos project marks the 400th anniversary of the playwright’s 
death.The first six films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/01/shakespeare-solos-watch-the-first-six-films>
, released last month, star Adrian Lester, David Morrissey, Joanna Vanderham, 
Ayesha Dharker, Roger Allam and Eileen Atkins.
 