 The protest to the M.C.C. cabled by the Australian Board of Control is an 
unprecedented event in cricket history. Never before has a responsible 
authority in the game accused its opponents of an 'unsportsmanlike' action and 
when such an accusation is accompanied by an implicit threat of a downright 
rupture in relationships between the parties concerned, it is not to be 
wondered at that it should have set the world of English cricket by the ears.
It is naturally impolitic to anticipate the answer which in due course, and no 
doubt after the fullest deliberation, the committee of the Marylebone Club will 
present to this attack, but it is unthinkable that they will be coerced by it 
into dictating to the captain who represents them the tactics he is to adopt on 
the field, or into admitting for a moment that those tactics are not 
legitimate. Themselves distinguished and experienced cricketers, they will be 
under no delusion as to the facts of the case. These facts are very different 
from the complexion which the board's cable would put upon them.

In the three Test matches so far played, only one man, the Australian captain, 
has received any real injury that could in any way be directly attributed to 
the new form of attack. Every one of the leading Australian batsmen, the 
captain himself, Bradman, McCabe, Ponsford, Fingleton, and Richardson has, at 
one time or another, made a considerable score against this 'menace', and 
without any ill-effects.

That they have more often failed to do so is explainable in very simple terms: 
in some few cases they have, on the explicit evidence of one of their own great 
players, been 'frightened out', i.e. intimidated into playing the wild hook 
stroke, which most batsmen to their shame know all too well, played with the 
head and body pulled away from the line of the ball and landing it quietly into 
short leg's hands.

But in the majority of cases they have been just clean bowled out by bowlers, 
keyed up to the highest pitch of effort, and faster than any that Australians 
have known since Gregory's breakdown in 1928.

The Wickets 

It is moreover significant that our fast bowlers have not found conditions 
even normally favourable to their methods: the normal Australian wicket, if 
less likely than the average English ground, is yards faster, yet both at 
Melbourne and Adelaide the pitches provided curiously belied their usual habit, 
and in the last day's play Mr. Armstrong tells us that Larwood failed to make 
the ball get up even waist high! And yet the Board of Control says that 
'body-line bowling has assumed such proportions' as to make 'the protection of 
his body the batsman's main consideration'; and Brutus is an honourable man.

If we investigate these proportions, we again find facts that hardly tally 
with the implications. For the truth seems to be that the 'leg-theory' attack 
is for the most part confined to operating against the best batsmen when they 
threaten to become set, in much the same way as our opponents have in the past 
consistently bowled the off-theory, with the field so placed as to reduce to a 
minimum their opportunities for scoring shots. There is, of course, this vital 
difference: that to watch a succession of balls fly past wide of the off-stump, 
is a quiet pastime, demanding only persistent patience and relieved by the 
reflection that it is precious poor fun for the bowler, whilst to survive for a 
similar period against bowling of extreme pace directed at the leg stump and 
legs demands both batsmanship and courage of a high order.

But to sustain such an attack demands a tremendous effort from the bowler, 
both physical and mental, such as cannot be sustained for more than four or 
five overs at a stretch, and it is only because England for the moment commands 
three bowlers of real pace and class that is it possible for her captain to 
maintain this type of pressure virtually throughout the day's play.

There is nothing whatever to prevent Australia from following the same 
tactics, except the fact that she has not the requisite resources. But were she 
to develop and so employ them, it is highly improbable that they would meet 
with similar success.

Nothing New 

For the truth is that this method of attack is nothing new in English cricket; 
as long ago as 1900 George Hirst was bowling fast to a parade of short legs: 
eleven years later F R Foster in winning the county championship for 
Warwickshire inscribed a highly-coloured advertisement of his pace off the 
pitch on many a batsman's thigh and hip; and for the past two years Voce has 
been doing the same. No one has ever pretended that it was much fun to 
withstand this type of assault but no one has for a moment questioned its 
legitimacy.
 