
Tony Watt lasted 80 minutes of the game between Hamilton Academical and Heart 
of Midlothian on Monday. The only surprise for the 2,339 in attendance was that 
theHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> forward featured for 
that long. Watt could barely have been less effective, just as he could not 
have looked any less interested.

Watt’s struggle had sadly poetic timing. With Barcelona back in Scotland for a 
meeting with Celtic, memories are inevitably conjured of7 November 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/07/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-report>
. It was then Watt, as an 18-year-old substitute, burst through before blasting 
home the crucial second goal as Neil Lennon’s team defeated Barça 2-1. Even for 
a club so immersed in big occasions, this stood out asone of the finest in 
Celtic’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/07/celtic-barcelona-neil-lennon-vilanova>
.

Brendan Rodgers tells Celtic players not to live in past against Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/brendan-rodgers-celtic-barcelona-champions-league>
Watt left Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park that night 
with a message from Lennon: “Don’t let this be all you are remembered for.” 
Lennon wanted the goal to be a springboard. Watt had pace, power and the 
uncanny ability to keep the ball attached to his boot that separated him from 
other Scots.

By the following August Watt was dispatched on loan to the Belgian team 
Lierse, never to return to the club he had grown up supporting and who had paid 
around £100,000 to sign him from Airdrie after only a handful of first-team 
games. Tellingly for a player who made such an impact, there was no sense of 
lingering disappointment in Glasgow when he left. One of Celtic’s experienced 
international players predicted Watt would be driving a bus within a decade.

If that insult owed plenty to exaggeration, the underlying issue has been a 
recurring one. It relates to Watt’s attitude. His approach to training at 
Celtic was such team-mates were said to resent his lack of application. Despite 
the Barcelona intervention, Watt had not produced nearly enough to merit 
special treatment. A lack of fitness often seemed apparent in the latter stages 
of games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftony-watt-demise-celtic-teen-barcelona-2012%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F853660942938ec096cf0b02bbf066715104182dd%2F0_46_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Tony%20Watt%20conundrum%3A%20long%20struggle%20of%20Celtic%20teen%20who%20downed%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftony-watt-demise-celtic-teen-barcelona-2012%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Tony%20Watt%20conundrum%3A%20long%20struggle%20of%20Celtic%20teen%20who%20downed%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftony-watt-demise-celtic-teen-barcelona-2012%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F853660942938ec096cf0b02bbf066715104182dd%2F0_46_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 Javier Mascherano watches powerless as Tony Watt smashes in Celtic’s second in 
their famous win over Barcelona in 2012. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 
The Lierse chapter never looked like being a happy one. Stanley Menzo, their 
manager, branded Watt “physically not good enough”. Nine goals in a season 
attracted the attention of Standard Liège, who paid Celtic £1m for Watt’s 
services in the summer of 2014. The striker lasted six months of a five-year 
contract before Charlton Athletic brought him back to the UK.

The most profitable spell of Watt’s career followed. And still, he was on the 
move again last November, this time on loan to Cardiff City. Russell Slade, who 
took Watt to Wales, typifies thoughts towards him.

“The fans took to him really quickly, as did the players,” Slade says. “And he 
did well for me. We knew he was a talent. He is one of those – he picks the 
ball up, turns with it, gets at centre-backs when he is in a real positive 
mood. He is unpredictable.

“I had no problems at all with his attitude. All Tony needs is communication – 
that is important to him. He needs to know where he stands in everything. He 
needs to feel wanted and part of something.

“It hasn’t quite happened for him, for one reason or another but he still has 
time on his side. A lot came to him early, which doesn’t always have the most 
positive effect. If Tony retains a hunger, he could still go to the highest 
level. It is in his hands.”

A Cardiff transfer embargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/15/cardiff-transfer-embargo-football-league>
 meant Watt’s stay was short-lived. Cue another loan, this time to Blackburn 
Rovers, before a wish to move closer to home alerted Hearts this summer.

Celtic's Neil Lennon: I haven't bettered this Barcelona win in my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/07/celtic-barcelona-neil-lennon-vilanova>
By Slade’s testimony, and those at Watt’s current club, he is immensely 
popular. John Robertson, Hearts’ record scorer, regards Watt’s ability as 
“incredible”. Nonetheless, a promising start in Edinburgh has petered out with 
Watt’s desperation to have the ball taking him to areas where he cannot hurt 
opponents and, surprisingly for one so apparently extroverted, a lack of 
confidence in front of goal shining through. He has scored once this season.

The 22-year-old has been spared the limelight, with Hearts deliberately 
keeping him from media duties. Robbie Neilson is the latest manager to try to 
solve the Tony Watt conundrum. “Tony gives you something different from 
anything else in Scotland,” Neilson says. “He can turn a game in a split 
second. In training we see him go by three, four, five players. It is just 
about getting consistency from him. That’s the key to his development.

“When the ball goes forward, he just wants to be on the ball. He is a great 
kid, one you can’t help talking to and liking. The boys all love him. He played 
games in the Championship last year where he dominated. People couldn’t get 
near him. He still has that huge potential.”

Watt will turn 23 at the end of December. If he remains far too young to be 
drinking in the last-chance saloon, there is a question over what 
establishments will continue to serve him, and at what level. If not yet “Where 
did it all go wrong?” the direction of travel is ominous.
 