
WOLFSBURG v BAYERN MUNICH (Bundesliga, Saturday 2.30pm)

You don't need to be high on Scampi Fries to get excited about the outstanding 
Bundesliga title race 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=12>. One 
point separates the top four with nine games to go, and second and third – 
Bayern Munich and Wolfsburg – have identical records, even down to goals scored 
(53) and conceded (31). All of which adds greater intrigue to an already 
compelling contest: Wolfsburg, who wereninth during the winter break 
<http://www.statto.com/football/stats/germany/bundesliga/2008-2009/table/2008-12-14>
, have won seven in a row, while Bayerncut the gap to the leaders, Hertha 
Berlin, to one point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/mar/23/bundesliga-raphael-honigstein-bayern-munich-hertha-berlin>
 last weekend. Wolfsburg have taken more points at home than any other side 
this season; Bayern Munich have taken more points away than any other side. 
It's not only the Scampi Fries that have a serious sniff about them.

BLACKBURN v SPURS (Premier League, Saturday 12.45pm, Sky Sports 1)

The brilliant Sam Allardyce has, entirely predictably, done a superb job of 
cleaning up the mess Paul Ince left at Blackburn: since he inheriteda side in 
freefall 
<http://www.statto.com/football/stats/england/premier-league/2008-2009/table/2008-12-14>
 in December they have lost just three out of 13 league games, all to top-five 
sides, and taken 18 points in the process (that's 53 from a 38-game season, 
which would have secured a top-10 place in each of the last eight seasons). But 
Blackburn have developed an uncomfortable habit of not getting their just 
deserts – one of those defeats, at Old Trafford, should have been a draw, and 
on the balance of play they could quite easily have won eight and drawn three 
of the 13 games under Allardyce – and the consequence is that they are only two 
points off relegation. They should be fine, but with eminently losable games at 
Liverpool and Stoke next up, anything other than a win at home to an in-form 
Spurs would leave them vulnerable. Yet they are clearly too good to go down. 
Aren't they?

ATLETICO MADRID v OSASUNA (La Liga, Sunday 4pm)

One of the many things that make La Liga so superior to the Premier League 
(yes, we know the top four are stronger over here, but last time we checked 
there were 18 or 20 teams in the major European leagues) is the 
competitiveness. Whereas in England you almost need formal approval to move 
between the four tiers – Big Four, Everton and Villa, teams who won't go down, 
teams who might – from one year to the next, in Spain the league giddyups 
violently from season to season. Nothing is sacred. Sometimes they even have a 
different team in the top four! And sometimes, Big Teams go down. In the last 
decade, for example, five teams who have qualified for the Champions League 
have also been relegated (Atlético Madrid, Celta Vigo, Real Betis, Real 
Sociedad and Sevilla) as against just one, unusual case in England (Leeds).

It could soon be Spain 6-1 England, because Osasuna – who finished fourth in 
2005-06 – lie in the relegation zone. They have won six of their last nine at 
home to give themselves a chance of survival, but their away form (no wins in 
14) remains awful. This weekend they go to Atlético Madrid, who themselves need 
a win to potentially narrow the five-point gap to Villarreal in fourth. On the 
face of it, it's a home banker. But the lovely thing about La Liga, as we saw 
when Barcelona hosted Espanyol six weeks ago, is thatyou never really know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/feb/23/barcelona-espanyol-sid-lowe>
.

AZ v ADO DEN HAAG (Eredivisie, Saturday 6.45pm)

For the runaway leader there are two stages of winning the title. The first 
comes when the public declare you champions; the second when the mathematicians 
and the proverbial fat lady do so. After the heartbreak of 2006-07 – when they
went into the final day of the season top and finished third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/apr/30/europeanfootball.ajax> – AZ 
Alkmaar, chasing only their second title and their first since 1981, will only 
be interested in what the mathematicians and the fat lady have to say. They are 
nearly there: to be certain they need 10 points from their final six games, 
starting with Den Haag on Saturday. That's the same Den Haag who smashed AZ 3-0 
in September. That was their second defeat in the first two games on the back 
of finishing in the bottom half last season, when they were hungover and 
depressed after the brutally cruel ending to the 2006-07 campaign, and 
collectively not arsed about getting out of bed, never mind brushing their 
teeth and washing their special place.

Since those defeats, however, AZ have gone on a simply outrageous run of 22 
wins and four draws from 26 league games. This achievement is all the more 
remarkable given that their coach, Louis van Gaal, originally planned to leave 
in the summer, and thattheir squad 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AZ_(football_club)#Current_squad> has no truly 
big names: no AZ players started for Holland in their back-to-back World Cup 
qualifiers this week, and even the league's top scorer, Mounir El Hamdaoui, 
only made his Morocco debut two months ago. One name that is familiar is that 
of the visionary Van Gaal, who has introduced what our Dutch correspondent 
Leander Schaerlaeckens callsTotal Football 2.0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/feb/16/leander-schaerlaeckens-eredivisie-dutch-football>
. And after 27 years' waiting, it is surely going to bring them Title 2.0.

MATCH OF THE DAY (BBC One, Saturday 10pm)

It's almost worth staying in for again.
 