
They began as three struggling actors performing to an audience of four people 
above a pub in north London. Next year they will transfer their show toBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway>, helped by one of the most 
powerful men in Hollywood.

On Monday it was announced that Mischief Theatre company has partnered with JJ 
Abrams on a New York version ofThe Play That Goes Wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/10/play-that-goes-wrong-review>, a 
show Abrams came across by accident in 2014 while he was filming Star Wars.

The move continues the meteoric rise of Mischief Theatre, which has three 
productions being performed in the West End, one of which isdue to be a 
highlight of the Christmas TV schedules 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/peter-pan-goes-wrong-on-BBC-one-this-christmas>
.

It has been something of a rollercoaster, admitted Jonathan Sayer, who along 
with Henry Lewis and Henry Shields founded the company and came up with the 
idea for The Play That Goes Wrong, which joyously combines the physicality of 
silent movie slapstick with the “play what I wrote” comedy of Morecambe and 
Wise.

“We are in a wonderful position and have been given a wonderful opportunity,” 
said Sayer. “We are amazed really and delighted.”

The Play That Goes Wrong imagines the efforts of Cornley Polytechnic amateur 
dramatic society <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DOWO4gq-whg> putting on a 
clunky 1920s murder mystery. The acting is terrible, the script awful and 
everything does go wrong, but that is its joy. One newspaper reviewerwrote 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-reviews/11106181/The-Play-That-Goes-Wrong-Duchess-Theatre-review-delightful.html>
 that he had never “heard louder or more sustained laughter in a theatre”.

Sayer said there were several reasons for the show’s success, not least the 
grim times the world is going through. “We are in a time where people really 
need some levity, some laughter and a bit of fun,” he said.

“The fact that we really are having a huge amount of fun on stage communicates 
itself to the audience. Each show feels like an event,” Sayer added. “We are 
very happy to be laughed at, not with. A lot of the work is about being 
embarrassed and humiliated and I think audiences really enjoy that. Everyone 
has been there, there is a global empathy for things going wrong in front of a 
group of people.”

The play, seen by more than a quarter of a million people, has been licensed 
to 29 countries and in the last year has been performed in Japan, France and 
Hungary. It is soon to open in Rome, Shanghai, Bucharest, Warsaw, Johannesburg, 
Cape Town and Melbourne.

Audiences everywhere seem to laugh at the same bits, said Sayer. “I saw it in 
Budapest and it was identical apart from being in Hungarian.”


The success of The Play That Goes Wrong spawned Peter Pan Goes Wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/09/peter-pan-goes-wrong-apollo-theatre-london-review>
, which has returned to the West End for Christmas and next month will be shown 
on BBC One. After that cameThe Comedy About a Bank Robbery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/22/the-comedy-about-a-bank-robbery-review-criterion-theatre-london>
, which opened at the Criterion Theatre this year.

Lewis, Sayer and Shields are the youngest writers ever to have three shows 
playing simultaneously in theWest End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend>.

The trio founded Mischief Theatre <http://mischieftheatre.co.uk/> as an improv 
group in 2008 after they graduated from London Academy of Music and Dramatic 
Art (Lamda).


Like many young actors, they struggled and worked minimum wage jobs in a 
Gourmet Burger Kitchen, a call centre and behind a bar to help make ends meet.

But they persisted. The first performance of The Play That Goes Wrong, then 
called The Murder Before Christmas, was in front of four people at the Old Red 
Lion theatre pub in north London.

It transferred to the Trafalgar Studios and then Edinburgh and became a 
gradual word-of-mouth success, winning best new comedy at the 2014
whatsonstage.com theatre awards 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/news/02-2014/full-list-winners-of-the-2014-whatsonstage-awards_33594.html>
, which are decided by the voting public rather than panels of experts.

When it transferred to the Duchess it was seen by audiences including Joanna 
Lumley, Tom Hardy, Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins. And thenAbrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams>, in London filming his reboot of 
Star Wars. “I was washing my hair in the sink when he came in, so I still had 
flour all over me,” Sayer recalled.

Am-dram, thank you ma'am: the rise of good-bad theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/14/amateur-dramatics-theatre-importance-being-earnest-play-goes-wrong>
Abrams, best known for film (Star Trek, Mission Impossible III) and TV (Alias, 
Lost, Fringe), said he had been a fan of theatre all his life. He will 
co-produce the Broadway show.

“Embarrassingly, I still have every playbill, from the very first shows my 
grandmother took me to,” he said. “When I saw The Play That Goes Wrong on the 
West End, I hadn’t laughed that hard – seen something as preposterously absurd 
or wonderfully hilarious – in ages.

“To be part of the team bringing this inspired comedy to Broadway is a true 
honour. Whatever happens, I’m saving the playbill.”

The original cast of the play, including Lewis, Sayer and Shields, will appear 
in the New York transfer. A UK tour of The Play That Goes Wrong is also planned 
for the summer of 2017.

Doing things disastrously on stage has clearly taken over the lives of the 
three men, but Sayer said he would not have it any other way, and he did not 
lose sleep over not being able to deliver his Hamlet.

“I was brought up watching Morecambe and Wise with my family, watching Buster 
Keaton and Charlie Chaplin and going to comedy plays. I’ve always wanted to do 
that, I’m doing everything I’ve ever wanted. I can’t grumble. Maybe things will 
calm down by the time I’m 60 and I can do my Lear.”
 