
On 4 December 1965, the Beatles appeared at Newcastle-on-Tyne’s City Hall 
during what would be their last ever British tour. I was a 22-year-old reporter 
in the Newcastle office of theNorthern Echo. Orders from my newsdesk were: “Go 
along and try to get a word with them.”

I set out on the assignment with zero hope. This tour came in the wake of their
Rubber Soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/03/the-beatles-rubber-soul-50-still-ahead-of-its-time>
album, their second smash-hit filmHelp! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/jul/04/help-beatles-1965-film-video>
, their performance to 55,000 people at New York’s Shea Stadium and their 
investiture as MBEs by the Queen. I’d be competing not only with Tyneside’s own 
heavyweight media but also the national newspapers and broadcasters who had 
offices there. Even if I got close to them, why would they waste a second on 
some nobody from theNorthern Echo?

A few minutes before showtime, I was loitering backstage among a crowd of 
other would-be interviewers, including my friend Dave Watts from theEcho’s 
evening stablemate, theNorthern Despatch. In those more innocent days, the 
Beatles’ dressing room was without any security protection, yet no one dared 
knock on the door, let alone barge in.

Then suddenly Paul McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney> 
came along the passage. As he opened the dressing-room door, Dave said: “I know 
that face” and, as he paused with a grin, I managed to ask: “Can we come in and 
talk to you?”

“Sure,” he replied. So, scarcely believing our luck, we followed him.

At least I had a Beatles angle none of my rivals did: how Paul let me play his 
bass and told me he was a skinflint

Despite the endless floods of journalists the Beatles had to endure, they were 
astonishingly friendly and obliging. I started talking to Ringo, who was 
sitting in an armchair, then John, perched on one arm, joined in. On a nearby 
sofa lay the Hofner “violin” bass that had become Paul’s particular trademark. 
I asked him if it was heavy to wear onstage.

“No, it’s light,” he said. “Here… try it.” With that, he picked the bass up 
and tossed it over to me. For a few moments I found myself thumbing the same 
steel-wound strings that Paul McCartney did. I asked whether violin-shaped 
basses were more expensive than regular ones. “Only 52 guineas,” he said. “I’m 
a skinflint, you see.”

Just then, a hollow-cheeked man in a yellow shirt entered the room and noticed 
me. This was their roadie,Neil Aspinall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/25/news.uk>, one of whose main 
functions on the road was saying to journalists what the lovely, cuddly Fab 
Four couldn’t possibly say themselves… “You,” he said with a jerk of his thumb. 
“Out!”

As I made my ignominious exit, I consoled myself that at least I had a Beatles 
angle none of my rivals did: how Paul let me play his bass and told me he was a 
skinflint.


Paul McCartney: The Biography  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394819/s/paul-mccartney/>
by Philip Norman is published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson at £25. To order a copy 
for £20, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394819/s/paul-mccartney/>
 