
1) Aldershot beat Wolves (1987 Division Four play-off final) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uhaq6iCWYyU>

If Wolves fans think their recent relegation to League One 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/may/04/brighton-wolves-championship> 
was a crushing disappointment, they can at least console themselves with the 
knowledge that their team has endured worse agonies. Having dropped down to 
English football's fourth tier on the back of three successive relegations, the 
West Midlands club had survived a winding-up order 10 months previously and 
were attempting to begin the gradual ascent back towards former glories. They 
were doing so via a new wheeze called the play-offs, which had been adopted to 
increase competition and maintain fan interest by giving more clubs a chance of 
winning promotion towards the end of the season. Victory would prove a fitting 
end to one of the most eventful season's in the club's history.

The format for the play-offs was different to that which we're used today, 
contested as they were by the teams which finished fourth, fifth and sixth in 
the old Fourth Division, along with one team from the league above. In this 
case, Bolton Wanderers had battled unsuccessfully to retain their Third 
Division status, going out to Aldershot in the semi-finals. In the other 
match-up, Wolves had eliminated Colchester United, setting up the first 
play-off final in the history of English football, to be played over two legs 
at the Recreation Ground and Molineux (one-off finals at Wembley were not 
introduced until 1990).

Despite their recent financial woes Wolves went into the final as favourites, 
having finished nine points clear of Aldershot in the league table and by dint 
of the fact they were … well, the once mightyWolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves>. Besides, they'd already seen off 
the Shots twice that season: 3-0 at home and 2-1 away. Beating them over two 
legs was surely only a formality. What could possibly go wrong?

Quite a lot, as it happened. On a rain-sodden pitch in front of 5,069 fans 
(almost half of them supporting the men in Old Gold) at the Recreation Ground, 
Wolves contrived to lose the first leg 2-0, going down to goals from Ian 
McDonald and Bobby Barnes. Even with two sides of Molineux out of commission 
for the second leg three days later (the North Bank and Waterloo Road Stand had 
been closed down due to new safety laws implemented following the Bradford City 
stadium fire in 1985), many of the 19,962 who packed the John Ireland Stand and 
the South Bank terrace were confident their side, spearheaded bya young striker 
named Steve Bull 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/feb/05/steve-bull-small-talk> who would 
go on to score more than 300 goals for the club, could overturn the first-leg 
deficit. Their optimism proved misguided when Barnes struck his second of the 
tie and the only goal of the game to give Aldershot a 3-0 aggregate win, 
ensuring Wolves fans became the first in the country to endure the horrors of a 
play-off final defeat. Many of them didn't take it too well and, of the 42 
arrests made in violent post-match scenes, 41 of those who had their collars 
felt were home fans.

In an intriguing and sad footnote, the day ended badly for three Aldershot 
players, who were hospitalised on their way home when the car driven by 
centre-half Darren Anderson crashed into a tree. Anderson received stitches to 
a head wound, striker Glen Burvill broke an arm and playmaker Giorgio Mazzon 
needed surgery on internal injuries. The precedent for decades of subsequent 
play-off drama had been set.

2) Manchester City beat Gillingham (1999 Division Two play-off final)  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4SYe7Nyx18>

Sunday 30 May 1999. A second-place finish in the top flight and an FA Cup 
final defeat were the kind of "failures" beyond the wildest dreams of 
long-sufferingManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> fans. A nationwide 
laughing stock and punchline, their club had reached its lowest ebb the 
previous season, becoming only the second ever European trophy winners to be 
relegated to their country's third tier. In a win-or-bust one-off Wembley 
showpiece to escape from what is these days known as League One, City seemed 
destined to suffer further embarrassment.

Finding themselves 2-0 down in the final minute of a match that had been 
scoreless untilGillingham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> 
strikers Carl Asaba and Robert Taylor put their side two up inside the final 10 
minutes, City midfielder Kevin Horlock's low, left-footed drive through a 
thicket of legs from the edge of the penalty area looked to be little more than 
consolatory.

But deep into injury-time, City won a throw-in inside their own half, which 
Ian Bishop hurriedly played back to Gerard Wiekens. Opting to go long and 
agricultural in a style which would surely have pleased the then Gillingham 
manager Tony Pulis – had he not been so fraught with tension – the Dutchman 
thumped the ball forward, where Gareth Taylor got the crucial flick-on and the 
ball fell to Horlock with his back to goal. He shuffled it sideways to Shaun 
Goater, but the Bermudan's shot from outside the area was blocked by a 
desperate lunge before it had even left his boot. The ball, which could have 
gone anywhere, broke to Paul Dickov in the penalty area and the scurrying, 
snarly Scotsman made no mistake.

When his equaliser screamed past Vince Bartram – Gillingham goalkeeper and 
best man at Dickov's wedding – in to the roof of the net, the clock read 94:09. 
Even with Manchester City involved, only one team was going to winthe ensuing 
penalty shoot-out <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NfQZqQZFGxc>, although Dickov 
did put City fans through the wringer one more time by missing his spot-kick. 
DespiteSergio Agüero's Premier League-winning heroics of last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2012/may/13/manchester-city-qpr-premier-league>
, the Scot's equaliser remains the most important in Manchester City's history.

3) Charlton beat Sunderland (1998 Division One play-off final) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gHFkFqVcFGo>

It finished 4-4 after extra-time, Charlton won 7-6 on penalties and Mickey 
Gray took arguably the worst spot-kick in play-off history to end arguably the 
most thrilling football match in Wembley history. The former Sunderland and 
England full-back magnanimouslytalked us through his shame in great detail a 
couple of years ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/jun/02/football-championship-play-off-michael-gray>
, so feel free to click on the link to revisit the grisly details. In an 
intriguing addendum 15 years on, one of Gray's team-mates – who scored in 
normal time but had been substituted and was therefore unavailable to take a 
penalty that afternoon – is about to contest another play-off final with a 
berth in the Premier League up for grabs. He plays for Crystal Palace, is a 
sprightly 39 years old and his name is Kevin Phillips.

4) Crystal Palace beat Sheffield United (1997 Division One play-off final) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qjgYc71QMtY>

Having suffered heartbreak the previous season when Steve Claridge shinned 
home from 20 yards <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6764iSnVJPQ> in the final 
minute of extra-time to catapult Leicester City into the top flight at their 
expense, Crystal Palace supporters could have been forgiven for hiding under 
their beds rather than risk another trip to Wembley and the accompanying 
prospect of identical trauma 364 days later.

Incredibly, the play-off final was decided by another a last-minute mugging 
but this time it was Palace who prevailed, courtesy of a splendid individual 
effort from their skipper and player of the season, David Hopkin. With less 
than one of the regulation 90 minutes remaining Palace won a corner, which 
Sheffield United defender Carl Tiler cleared from the penalty area with a 
header that, with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight, could and should have been 
meatier. Chasing to pick up the ball a couple of yards outside the box in the 
left channel, Hopkin flicked the ball into position with a wave of his left 
foot, before settling himself and curling a quite exquisite and unstoppable 
right-footed shot that was still rising as it sailed past the desperate dive of
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 
goalkeeper Simon Treacy into the top right-hand corner. It was the most 
dramatic intervention by a flame-haired Scotsman since Groundskeeper Willie 
saved Bart's life by beating up a wolf on the Simpsons.

5) Swindon Town beat Leicester City (1993 Division One play-off final) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHCOMe8J7Ew>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnwnrenHu7gc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnwnrenHu7gc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnwnrenHu7gc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"Now the team knew they were meeting Tranmere in the play-offs. They were over 
two legs, home and away. If they beat them it was on to Wembley and the chance 
of promotion. I had started out wanting to question football and the prominence 
we give it, but from now on the glamour and the sheer spectacle of the game 
took over and swept the film along with it."

When documentary-maker Carl Ross was granted behind-the-scenes access to film 
That's Football <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwnrenHu7gc>, a season in the 
life of second tier side Swindon Town throughout the 1992-93 season, he hit 
paydirt. What he'd originally intended to be one quasi-jaded fan's examination 
into football's role in the cosmic scheme of things ended up being a 
fascinating and occasionally foul-mouthed warts-and-all diary of the Wiltshire 
side's white-knuckle ride into the Premier League. Three seasons previously 
they'd won promotion, only to have it snatched away from them as punishment for 
their part in a financial scandal.

Having seen off Tranmere over two legs in the semi-finals, Swindon Town's 
preparations for the Wembley showpiece against Leicester City were marred by 
newspaper speculation linking their player-manager Glenn Hoddle and his No2 
John Gorman with a move to Chelsea. But in yet another cracking showpiece, the 
Robins went 3-0 up, with Hoddle scoring the first courtesy of a beautifully 
placed shot from outside the penalty area, only for Leicester to launch a 
stunning comeback and pull level with goals from Julian Joachim, Steve Walsh 
and Steve Thompson. Six minutes from time, Swindon secured promotion courtesy 
of a penalty, won controversially by substitute Steve White as he tried to 
latch on to a splendidly weighted Hoddle pass from midfield and converted by 
left-back Paul Bodin. ForLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, it was heartbreaking; the 
second consecutive play-off final they'd lost to a controversial late penalty 
and their sixth defeat in as many trips to Wembley.

Like the pre-final build-up, Swindon's celebrations were again tempered by an 
increasingly loud and frenzied media buzz linking Hoddle with a move to 
Chelsea. It proved accurate and a few days after promotion had been secured, he 
parted company with Town, who appointed his good friend Gorman as their new 
manager. "Glenn left Swindon and John left Glenn," intoned Ross shortly before 
the closing credits rolled in his documentary. "As of now, a year later,Swindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> have been relegated from the 
Premier League."

 6)West Ham beat Preston North End (2005 Championship play-off final) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3e-Zt34VK1g>

Ah, Preston. Along the flat coastal plain of Fylde and the banks of the Ribble 
they speak of little else. From the tree-tops of the Forest of Bowland and the 
summit of Beacon Fell, they bellow it: no other team in England has as abject a 
history of play-off failure asPreston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> from Deepdale.

In no fewer than eight attempts to emerge from assorted divisions through 
these steely end-of-season tests of nerve and resolve, the Lilywhites have 
proved decidedly lily-livered, having failed to achieve promotion a single 
time. They've gone out at the semi-final stage on five occasions and lost three 
finals. Which is not to say that on several occasions they just weren't good 
enough, but let's not ruin the narrative with anything so dreary as facts here. 
In the the pantheon of play-off bottlers, Preston remain peerless. Ah, Preston.
 