
The role of the male model has changed dramatically in recent years. You have 
only to flick through the pages of some of the young style magazines to see men 
photographed wearing make-up and body-revealing clothing, adopting 
unconventional and often provocative poses.

The traditional male model stood perfectly still; the only evidence that he 
was alive could be seen in the smouldering of his deep-set eyes. His chin was 
square, his hair parted with a ruler and groomed with brilliantined perfection.

He remained in that position for years and only began to come to life with the 
increased interest in casual clothing. He then moved into a sitting position, 
astride either a rock or a horse, his rugged virility emphasised by the relaxed 
sprawl of his muscular legs and the firm set of his shoulders.

His eyes began to twinkle and crinkle at the corners, and his mouth moved into 
a facsimile of a grin, revealing snowy white, square-cut teeth.

That all happened way back when fashion was aimed exclusively at women, so 
there was very little call for men in photographs, other than as dumb escorts. 
In the past few years, however, attitudes have changed enormously and the boom 
in menswear has not only meant an increased interest from men fn fashion, but 
in modelling too.

The new breed of male models are as far removed from the stereotyped image of 
the ‘smoothie’ as female models are from the racehorse elegance of Suzy Parker 
or Barbara Goalen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0279d051bdb1f308b13b135025b4cd098b19eb72%2F0_0_2688_1231%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20of%20a%20male%20model%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20November%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20of%20a%20male%20model%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20November%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0279d051bdb1f308b13b135025b4cd098b19eb72%2F0_0_2688_1231%2F2688.jpg>
 Ralph Parsons, typical male model, 11 November 1984. Photograph: The Observer 
Ralph Parsons is a typical example. Although undoubtedly attractive, he is not 
conventionally handsome. He has high cheekbones but his eyes are rather too 
elongated and his nose not perfectly straight. He wears his hair shaved at the 
back and tufted on top and his fingers are covered with rings. He has virtually 
never seen a starched white shirt and suit, let alone worn one.

He is in great demand as a model, and works for the major fashion magazines 
and advertisers such as Levi. He travels between London, Paris, Milan and Tokyo 
and has been ‘doing the business’ as he puts it, for five years.

He doesn’t believe that he is particularly beautiful. ‘I feel pretty normal. I 
don’t think of myself as more handsome than other men. I know, however, that I 
can do better pictures than most people because I’m not embarrassed to pose 
dramatically or to look different. It’s really easy to stand and gape at the 
camera or look at a fixed point two inches above the lens and pretend you’re 
gazing out on a sunny beach.’

In fact, it’s not that easy. Most men turn to statues or grimace horrendously 
in front of a camera. Ralph Parsons is not only uncommonly photogenic, he also 
knows how to move well and wears clothes with instinctive assurance.

Those are not, however, the only qualities essential to a successful male 
model. For however masculine he may be, Ralph has in his work to suffer 
attitudes and behaviour that are far from conventionally masculine.

He is perfectly used to having his make-up done and his hair styled (it used 
to be long), cut or dyed. In Europe, according to Ralph, ‘every boy’ – for boy 
read model – has his make-up kit, his foundation and his eyebrow pencils. 
Make-up can be quite useful if you’ve had a late night or you’ve got a real 
blinder on the end of your nose. But some boys take it too far. They use 
eyeshadows and fill in their eyebrows for even quite straight jobs.’

According to him, they also take an obsessive interest in their bodies. For 
instance, he believes that he is much too thin, given the well-developed 
Californian streaked blonds who are now in vogue.

‘Most of the guys body-build, particularly those who work in Paris. The first 
thing they do when they arrive is find a gym. The best one is four miles out of 
the centre, but they all jog over there, work out for an hour, then jog home to 
eat their bran and unhusked grains.

They then, apparently, sit around and bitch about one another’s muscles and 
blond streaks just like women models are supposed to. Ralph maintains that they 
can be worse than girls: “There aren’t that many fashion magazines who use guys 
and there are more and more boys trying to model. If they’re not working they 
get desperate and start being mean about other people. There’s a lot of 
jealousy creeping in.’

There are also, he says, a lot of spoilt brats from America whose Mommies pay 
for them to go to Europe. ‘They just sit around in Paris or Milan doing their 
nails and their press-ups and maybe do one picture. ‘Then’, he said in scathing 
tones, ‘they call themselves models’.

A model is expected to behave, as well as look, charming. They should be seen 
in all the right places and be ‘nice’ to the powerful people known as the 
‘clients.’ There are, inevitably, those who abuse their power and believe that 
nice is simply a euphemism for a quite different sort of behaviour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb353905c56b63c9db04b22c2985a5abd249d1e9c%2F0_1435_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20of%20a%20male%20model%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20November%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20of%20a%20male%20model%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2011%20November%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmale-model-men-1984%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb353905c56b63c9db04b22c2985a5abd249d1e9c%2F0_1435_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 Glen Hoddle poses for a Hummel sports wear advertising campaign, 1986. 
Photograph: Debbie Sears/UIG via Getty Images 
As the fashion industry is populated by both men (sometimes gay), and women, 
(sometimes predatory), the consequences of being male and therefore of interest 
to both the sexes, can be rather alarming. Ralph shrugged philosophically and 
said that he’d attracted his fair share of offers but simply ignored them.

‘When I first started modelling I was a bit naive and really didn’t realise 
that they were after my body. You don’t have to deliver to get the work; it’s 
just that some boys do.’

Paris is the worst place for this kind of thing and there is, in that city, a 
woman who owns a model agency and has a penchant for low-cut dresses and well 
muscled boys. Ralph raised an eyebrow and said laconically: ‘ Some boys get alot
 of work’ before adding hastily, ‘but that never, ever happens in London.’
 