
When history books come to discuss the Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> year of 2016, expect some 
puzzlement. Some years tend to cohere around a few ideas or arguments. Some 
don’t. In its latter half, this one has seemed unusually fragmented, wrenched 
between innovation and provocation on the one hand and ineptitude and the easy 
sell on the other. At least we can all agree it was the first year producers 
saw fit to gussy up a love ballad with a chorus of drones wheeling overhead 
like mechanical pheasants.

Michelle Williams and Jeff Daniels on the scared, desperate tale of Blackbird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/04/michelle-williams-jeff-daniels-blackbird-broadway-belasco-theatre-interview>
The early part of the year, before the deadline for the Tony nominations 
closed, was a resolutely downbeat affair, with shows about dementia (The Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/14/the-father-review-frank-langella-devastates-study-dementia>
), pedophilia (Blackbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/10/blackbird-review-michelle-williams-and-jeff-daniels-stun-in-abuse-drama>
), sexual enslavement (Eclipsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/14/eclipsed-review-lupita-nyongo-searing-war-drama>
), economic anxiety (The Humans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/18/the-humans-review-helen-hayes-theater-new-york>
), mass hysteria (The Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/01/the-crucible-review-arthur-miller-salem-witch-trials>
), urban anomie (Hughie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/25/hughie-review-forrest-whitaker-plays-low-stakes-eugene-oneill-play>
), serial killing (American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/21/american-psycho-review-patrick-bateman-sings-strips-and-slashes>
), multigenerational alcoholism (Long Day’s Journey Into Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/27/long-days-journey-into-night-review-eugene-oneill-play>
), and pie (Waitress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/25/waitress-review-adrienne-shelly-sara-bareilles-musical>
). Just kidding. Domestic abuse and pie. Revivals of the sardine-obsessedNoises 
Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/noises-off-review-the-chemistrys-faulty-but-its-still-a-scream>
 and the restaurant-setFully Committed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/25/fully-committed-review-revival-90s-foodie-favourite>
 offered some brief farcical relief, but only a sublime production ofShe Loves 
Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/18/she-loves-me-musical-broadway-review>
 – with its art nouveau sets, trilling leads, and air of unabashed delight – 
meaningfully lightened the mood.


 Then things got very strange. The first show of the new season in May was 
Cirque du Soleil’s drone-happy Paramour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/26/cirque-de-soleil-paramour-review-muddle-miscalculation-mayhem>
, a feat of such staggering incompetence that it had its own perverse 
originality. Months later I still don’t understand what the zombies were doing 
there or the incestuous twin aerialists or the most of the musical numbers. 
Elements of what seemed a straightforward plot – will ingénue fall for 
machinations of ritzy movie director or stay true to her piano man sweetheart – 
still baffle me.

 Much of what’s followed hasn’t been a lot more explicable. There have been an 
unusually large number of short runs designed to fill empty theaters before 
spring shows move in: Black to the Future, Alton Brown Live, The Illusionists, 
Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons on Broadway, My Love Letter to Broadway. 
There was also a glut of revivals of shows that didn’t need reviving: An Act of 
God, Motown, Cats, an oddly unsexy Les Liaisons Dangereuses, and a frenetic The 
Front Page, that last livened by a yapping, scenery-gulping, deliciously 
baroque turn by Nathan Lane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-best-and-worst-of-broadway-2016-from-innovation-to-ineptitude%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf60c0753f07afeac920a2c008d580611f9831dc%2F0_128_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20and%20worst%20of%20Broadway%202016%3A%20from%20innovation%20to%20ineptitude&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-best-and-worst-of-broadway-2016-from-innovation-to-ineptitude%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20and%20worst%20of%20Broadway%202016%3A%20from%20innovation%20to%20ineptitude&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-best-and-worst-of-broadway-2016-from-innovation-to-ineptitude%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf60c0753f07afeac920a2c008d580611f9831dc%2F0_128_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
 The drone-happy Paramour. Photograph: Richard Termine 
At least the first Broadway revival of Falsettos showed the musical as both a 
period piece and continuously resonant, while a new version of The Cherry 
Orchard didn’t seem to know what period – or genre, or style, or wardrobe – it 
was in. And the outlier in an already disparate season was probablyHeisenberg, 
a serious and kooky riff on the romcom aided by two superb actors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/04/heisenberg-review-sweet-drama-mary-louise-parker>
, Mary-Louise Parker and Denis Arndt. Rather more conventional were two new 
musicals that felt like old ones, in a wilted rather than a wistful way: the 
Irving Berlin compilation Holiday Inn and the doo-wop and soul adaptation ofA 
Bronx Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/02/a-bronx-tale-the-musical-review-new-york-robert-de-niro>
.


Most of this probably sounds dispiriting. It was. But there were still 
pleasures to be found, although they little resemble each other.Dear Evan Hansen
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/02/dear-evan-hansen-review-musical-emotional-critique-internet>
, a new musical about a friendless teenager, displayed unusual psychological 
acuity and a relentlessly vulnerable and irrepressibly star-making performance 
from Ben Platt. If Evan Hansen remakes the teen musical, then Oh Hello, on 
Broadway,a riotous goof from the comedians Nick Kroll and John Mulaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/10/oh-hello-on-broadway-review-nick-kroll-john-mulaney>
, nearly turns old geezers cool again – and it renders tuna sandwiches 
genuinely frightening.

'Nothing is private any more': behind Dear Evan Hansen, the social media 
musical
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/05/dear-evan-hansen-social-media-musical-broadway>
Simon McBurney’s solo Amazon travelogue, The Encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/17/the-encounter-review-simon-mcburney-complicite>
, might have seemed merely clever and indulgent were it not for the use of 
binaural audio, a thrilling technology that sends voices and sounds beaming 
straight into the head of each attendee. Even more innovative was Dave Malloy’s
Natasha, Pierre and the Great Comet of 1812 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/14/natasha-pierre-great-comet-1812-review-josh-groban-broadway>
, a riotously pleasurable electro-indie-folk adaptation of War and Peace and a 
radical recalibration of Broadway stage space. Inventive set and lighting 
design allowed the actors to perform throughout the theater, racing even up to 
the outermost reaches of the mezzanine in the course of an exuberant and moving 
evening.

 As the year wanes, I know I’ll continue to think of Platt’s tenderly 
revealing work and of the vivacious, audacious use of space and song in The 
Great Comet. But when I really want to cheer myself up, I’ll probably think of 
Paramour and how those three color-coded acrobats swung helplessly while the 
singers beneath fretted: “Can’t let go as I dangle/ From the corner of this 
love triangle.” Unless trepanation really catches on, this is a show I can’t 
forget.
 