
1) Jean-François Domergue (France v Portugal, 1984)

Despite memorable efforts by Basile Boli and Zinedine Zidane, Manuel Amoros is 
the perpetrator of the greatest head-butt in the history ofLes Bleus. Because 
when Amoros reacted to being felled by Denmark’s Jesper Olsen in France’s 
opening group game at Euro 84 bytrying to hurl a ball at the winger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/jun/10/france-euro-1984-tv-bbc-itv-platini>
 and then sticking a loaf on him, he copped a suspension that led to 
Jean-François Domergue’s first international start. Domergue was respected 
domestically – his dynamism from left-back was one of the few highlights of 
Lyon’s season in 1983 and convinced Toulouse to sign him when Lyon were 
relegated – but the extent of his international action prior to Euro 84 
consisted of one half in a pre-tournament friendly against West Germany. But he 
came on as a substitute for Yvon Le Roux against Denmark and, following 
Amoros’s red card, kept his place for the remainder of the tournament. In the 
semi-final against Portugal he made an indelible impact on the European 
Championship, illuminating a classic match with the highlight of his career.

The Joy of Six: football chants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/06/the-joy-of-six-football-chants>
Michel Platini is remembered as the outstanding individual of Euro 84 – and 
rightly so, for he was magnificent. And Domergue played upon that fact to make 
his own mark. When France were awarded a free-kick at the edge of the area in 
the 24th minute of the semi-final, the Portuguese goalkeeper, Bento, along with 
the entire watching world, expected Platini to unleash a shot. France’s captain 
had already scored seven goals in the tournament and could do almost anything 
he wanted from free-kicks. “But I saw a little opening and asked Michel if I 
could hit it and he said: ‘OK, go on’,” explained Domergue afterwards, 
accounting for the fact that he stepped up and walloped the free-kick into the 
top corner with the outside of his left foot, barely bringing a movement from 
the stunned Bento. France created many chances to extend their lead after that, 
with Domergue hurtling down the left with thrilling regularity, butPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> drew level through Jordão in 
the 74th minute and then took the lead early in extra time, thanks to a volley 
by the same player. “It was as if our whole world was falling in but we sort of 
said to each other: ‘if we’re going to do anything, now is the time to do it – 
and I think everyone just went for it,” Domergue said.

Six minutes from full time, he mounted yet another raid down the left and 
pinged the ball into Le Roux near the Portuguese penalty spot. Le Roux’s shot 
was blocked and the ball rolled to Platini, who collapsed under a challenge by 
a defender. Before anyone could appeal for a penalty, Domergue strode forth and 
lashed the breaking ball past the outrushing Bento and into the roof of the 
net. Platini, inevitably, scored the winner in the 119th minute. Domergue never 
scored again for his country and, indeed, finished his career with only nine 
caps. But he’ll always have Portugal.PD

2) Ivo Viktor (Czechoslovakia v West Germany, 1976)

There were only four matches at Euro 76 but every one was a belter and we may, 
at various points over the next few weeks, find ourselves pining for a such a 
concentration of quality. West Germany’s Dieter Müller gave a particularly 
condensed demonstration of excellence, coming off the bench to make his 
international debut in the 74th minute of West Germany’s semi-final against 
Yugoslavia and then scoring with his first touch before adding two more goals 
to crown a 4-2 win. Jaroslav Pollak crammed so much brilliance into the other 
semi-final, Czechoslovakia’s 3-1 win over Holland, that he was named in the 
team of the tournament, despite only gracing it for 60 minutes. His exhibition 
reached an abrupt end when he was sent off a brutal foul on Johan Neeskens (who 
would later be sent off for an even more violent tackle as some Dutchmen 
apparently decided to go down with an almighty kicking spree, an attitude
Tottenham Hotspur would invoke many years later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 during a memorable outing to Stamford Bridge). But despite Pollak’s midfield 
splendour and a superb defence marshaled by Anton Ondrus, Czechoslovakia would 
never have been crowned European champions if not for two magnificent 
performances by their goalkeeper, Ivo Viktor. After excelling against Holland, 
the 34-year-old Dukla Prague keeper was outstanding in the final against West 
Germany, who, as against Yugoslavia, recovered from two goals down but this 
time could not go on and win, largely because Viktor showed exceptional agility 
to turn away shots by Erich Beer, Rainer Bonhof and Bernd Hölzenbein. Without 
those saves Antonin Panenka would never have got to take his now legendary 
spot-kick and Viktor might only be remembered as the guy who, in 1970, was made 
to scurry backwards in fearful panic as Pelé tried to lob him from beyond the 
halfway line.PD

3) Bernd Schuster (West Germany v Holland, 1980)

After gaining a measure of revenge for their defeat in the 1976 final by 
beating Czechoslovakia 1-0 in their opening group game four years later, West 
Germany made an inspiring change for their next match. Their manager, Jupp 
Derwall, plumped for a more adventurous approach, switching from a 4-4-2 to 
4-3-3 and giving a start to Bernd Schuster against the Germans’ fiercest rivals,
Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>. Klaus Allofs scored an 
excellent hat-trick in a 3-2 victory but most of the acclaim was reserved for 
Schuster, who was instrumental in each of his team’s goals and in almost 
everything else they did well.

The Joy of Six: bad ideas in football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/the-joy-of-six-bad-ideas-in-football>
Schuster conducted his team’s play with a thrilling range of passing and 
powerful bursts from midfield. The Dutch hardly got a touch in the first 20 
minutes and it was no surprise when the Germans opened the scoring, Allofs 
converting the rebound after a ferocious Schuster shot crashed back off a post. 
The Dutch could not cope with West Germany’s superior technique, speed and 
strength, particularly that of Schuster, who bestrode midfield with almost 
nonchalant imperiousness. Schuster created his side’s second goal by winning 
possession in midfield and passing to Hansi Müller, who cut the ball back for 
Allofs. And he teed up the third by seizing the ball in the Dutch box, dashing 
past a defender and playing a reverse pass that seemed practically unfeasible 
at the speed he was running, and the angle he was at, presenting Allofs with a 
chance to make it 3-0. Holland fought back to 3-2 but West Germany won.

A yellow card was the only blemish on Schuster’s performance and Derwall 
decided to omit him from the last group game lest he be suspended for the 
final. Reintroduced to the starting lineup for that final, he pulled West 
Germany’s strings again and led them to victory over Belgium. He was only 20 
years old and seemingly destined to be one of the stars of international 
football for the next decade or more. But Schuster wasn’t a man to bow to 
expectations, nor to authority or social conventions. He never played in 
another international tournament owing to a variety of fallings out, notably 
with Derwall. At 24, he retired from international football, saving his best 
for Barcelona and Real Madrid instead.PD

4) Henrik Larsen and Kim Vilfort (Denmark v Holland, 1992) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fthe-joy-of-six-great-european-championship-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9168f0fdad14c67c900c9b25d647cca677fececa%2F0_173_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20great%20European%20Championship%20performances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fthe-joy-of-six-great-european-championship-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20great%20European%20Championship%20performances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fthe-joy-of-six-great-european-championship-performances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9168f0fdad14c67c900c9b25d647cca677fececa%2F0_173_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Henrik Larsen celebrates Denmark’s stunning triumph in 1992. Photograph: 
Shaun, Botterill/ALLSPORT 
Denmark’s remarkable triumph in 1992 is well thumbed: given just over a week 
to prepare for a tournament they had not qualified for, Denmark entered the 
group stage owing to the last-minute withdrawal of war-devastated Yugoslavia. A 
month later, without their best player, Michael Laudrup – who quit the team 
before the tournament because he disagreed with the manager Richard Moller 
Nielsen’s style of play –Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark> 
became champions of Europe, beating the holders Holland in the semi-finals and 
the World Cup winners Germany in the final.

The midfielder Henrik Larsen had began the tournament on the bench, failing to 
feature against England in their opening 0-0 draw and only getting less than 
half an hour in Denmark’s defeat by Sweden. However, after Kim Vilfort was 
called away to visit his young daughter Line, who was fighting leukaemia, 
Larsen got his chance to start againstFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>, and scored within eight minutes 
to set up a 2-1 win, squeezing Denmark through to the knockout stage.

Having been told before the tournament that her condition was improving, Line 
Vilfort continued to deteriorate as the tournament progressed and Kim was faced 
with an agonising decision over whether to rejoin the squad, which could also 
possibly disrupt a team who had beaten France without him. But Vilfort’s family 
insisted that he did return and Moller Nielsen included both Vilfort and Larsen 
in midfield to face Holland in the semi-finals.

It was a huge gamble but both were inspired. Larsen stole the headlines, and 
rightly so, with his two ruthlessly taken goals – the first a stooping header 
at the back post after a tricky run from Brian Laudrup down the right, the 
second a first-time drive from the edge of the penalty box. But Vilfort’s 
contribution alongside Larsen was equally as impressive and no less important.

The most advanced of a three-man midfield, Vilfort – traditionally an 
attacking-minded player – was outnumbered against their Dutch counterparts, 
which included Frank Rijkaard and the captain, Ruud Gullit. The physical battle 
was huge: running, tackling and heading for 120 minutes against some of the 
giants of European football. Yet it was the mental battle that won the day and 
how Vilfort kept his emotions in check, while carrying out Nielson’s tactical 
instructions to the letter, is beyond belief. Often Dennis Bergkamp would drop 
deep to receive the ball but Vilfort and Larsen (and John Jensen) formed a 
resolute barrier in front of their five-man defence and it was only a scrappy 
goal conceded from a set piece four minutes from time that prevented the Danish 
from winning in normal time.

Instead, with the scores at 2-2, the match went to penalties, and with Laudrup 
substituted, it was Larsen who stepped up first. His transformation from 
bench-warmer to talisman of Denmark was complete, squeezing his spot-kick past 
Hans van Breukelen in the Dutch goal. Vilfort, mentally and physically 
exhausted, would not shy away from his responsibility either, coolly tucking 
his penalty away, with Martin Tyler noting on the commentary that it was a 
penalty that got “the biggest cheer of all. Knowing that his family are 
watching back in Denmark, that is a brilliant moment for Vilfort, whatever 
happens”.

What did happen, of course, is that Denmark won the shootout – Marco van 
Basten (who after his 1988 heroics had not scored all tournament) seeing his 
penalty saved by Peter Schmeichel. After, Vilfort would again leave the squad 
to see his daughter, again he was sent back by his family to play in the final 
and he would score the second goal in a 2-0 shock win over Germany, his socks 
around his ankles, a smile plastered across a well-moustached face.

But rather than that individual moment, and Larsen’s goals in the semi-final, 
it was their efforts as part of a collective team against Holland that paved 
the way for Denmark’s triumph. “Ten of the players we had in the squad either 
played for or had previously played for Brondby,” Vilfort later said. “A year 
before the Euros, Brondby had got to the semi-finals of the Uefa Cup – that was 
a big thing for a Danish club. We didn’t have the best players but we had the 
best team.”

Larsen finished joint top scorer at Euro 1992. Tragically, Line would die 
after the tournament. Yet, Vilfort played on and he and Larsen would retire 
from international football at Euro 1996, together.MB

5) Francesco Toldo (Holland v Italy, 2000)

Such was the embarrassment of riches for Italy between the sticks during the 
1990s, despite being one of the best goalkeepers of his generation, Francesco 
Toldo had earned only eight caps forItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> by the time Euro 2000 rolled 
around. The dominance of Gianluca Pagliuca and Angelo Peruzzi in the early 
years of the decade, and the emergence of a young Gianluigi Buffon later on, 
meant that Toldo was never seen as first choice on the international stage.


Yet when Peruzzi withdrew himself from selection after refusing to be back-up 
to Buffon, and Buffon broke his hand in Italy’s final warm-up game before Euro 
2000, the 28-year-old Toldo was thrust into the starting lineup for his 
country’s opening group game against Turkey. However, after Antonio Conte had 
given Italy the lead with a magnificent overhead kick, Toldo made a serious 
misjudgment and came flapping for a cross but got nowhere near it, leaving Okan 
Buruk to head the ball into an empty net. A late Filippo Inzaghi penalty saved 
Toldo’s blushes to give Italy the win but the keeper was heartbroken over his 
performance and fully expected his manager (and idol growing up) Dino Zoff to 
replace him with Christian Abbiati for the second game against Belgium.

The Joy of Six: Short-lived football rule changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/joy-of-six-short-lived-football-rule-changes>
Zoff stuck by Toldo and it proved an inspired decision as Italy won their 
remaining two matches to top the group and beat Romania in the quarter-finals 
to set up a scorching semi-final with the hosts, Holland, at the Amsterdam 
Arena. After beating the World Cup winners France to top Group D, and thrashing 
Yugoslavia 6-1 in their quarter-final, Holland were widely seen as favourites 
to beat Italy and win the tournament on home turf, with Dennis Bergkamp and 
Patrick Kluivert forming a formidable attack.

What happened next was one of the great defensive displays in international 
football. When Gianluca Zambrotta was sent off for a second bookable offence in 
the 34th minute, Italian hearts sunk. Holland were awarded the softest of 
penalties for a foul on Kluivert moments later and the inevitable looked 
certain. But, as Frank de Boer smashed an excellent spot-kick low just inside 
the left post, Toldo extended his 6ft 5in frame and somehow tipped his effort 
wide, before leaping in the air in celebration as though he himself had scored. 
It was a beautiful save. Shortly after the break, Holland were awarded another 
penalty. Again, they missed: Kluivert crashing his effort against the post.

Frustration in the Holland camp grew during the second half, as each time they 
crossed the ball, Toldo collected it cleanly. It was his voice that could be 
heard above those of Paolo Maldini, Alessandro Nesta and Fabio Cannavaro in 
front of him as the game moved into extra time. Pinned back, Italy withstood 
wave after wave of attacks, with Toldo making another excellent stop from 
Clarence Seedorf. “I don’t know how I stopped those shots,” Toldo would later 
admit upon picking up his man-of-the-match award. But it would be the penalty 
shootout where the former waiter would make himself a hero, again saving from 
De Boer and then from Paul Bosvelt – the latter a particularly spectacular stop 
low to his right – while Jaap Stam blazed another well over the bar. Exhausted 
but jubilant, Italy were somehow through to the final.

Of the five penalties Holland took against Toldo that day, they scored only 
one, but whether they were saved or missed, Toldo had played his part, shouting 
and goading De Boer and Stam prior to their misses. “Penalties are 
psychological things, wars between you and the attacker,” Toldo explained 
afterwards. “You have to try to unsettle your opponent. That’s why Stam missed. 
The script for this match was written before kick-off. They could have played 
for an entire day taking shots at our goal and they would never have scored.”

Italy would come within a minute of beating France in the final before an 
injury-time equaliser from Sylvain Wiltord and an extra-time golden goal from 
David Trezeguet would spoil the party. But even after Italy returned home as 
runners up, their third-choice goalkeeper was held up as a national hero. 
“Toldo is a giant,” proclaimed the Corriere newspaper, declaring him “Il nuovo 
Yashin”. “Toldo: super-goalkeeper!” roared Gazzetta dello Sport. Yet, it would 
have been a more understated tribute that meant the most. “I want to say a big 
thank you to Toldo,” said Zoff. “He did a great job.”MB

6) Theodoros Zagorakis (Greece v Portugal, 2004 final)

Golden Goal: Angelos Charisteas for Greece v Portugal (Euro 2004 final) | 
Niall McVeigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/13/golden-goal-angelos-charisteas-greece-portugal-euro-2004-final>
Euro 2004 ended how it had started. Greece, the perennial underdogs, beat 
Portugal by a single goal in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/jul/05/euro2004.sport1> – the same 
opponents they haddefeated 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/jun/12/euro2004.sport> in the 
tournament opener in Group A. Theodoros Zagorakis didn’t provide any assists or 
score any goals in either game but was man of the match in both and was duly 
named as the Uefa player of the tournament afterwards. Save for a beautiful 
assist against France, in which he skipped around Bixente Lizarazu and put it 
on a plate for Angelo Charisteas, the former Leicester City man contributed 
little goal threat but was a colossus in midfield. Greece did not win the 
European Championship because of Zagorakis – they won it because of their 
tactics – but their captain was their best proponent of this, barking 
instructions at every juncture and keeping the defensive shape designed by Otto 
Rehhagel. Greece’s run was no fluke, they had topped their qualifying group, 
ahead of Spain, and had a simple, effective way of playing: a strong, physical 
defence, a hard-working three-man midfield and a tall strike partnership, 
capable of making the most from set pieces.

The final was a dreadful game. Greece took the lead shortly after half-time, 
Charisteas nodding in a corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/13/golden-goal-angelos-charisteas-greece-portugal-euro-2004-final>
. From there on in, Zagorakis tore around the pitch like a man possessed, 
snapping at the heels of Deco, Cristiano Ronaldo and Luís Figo. The Portuguese 
would have only two golden chances, squandered by Figo and Ronaldo, but Greece 
would not be denied. Team spirit is not something that can be defined easily 
but in every underdog story it is there in spades. “We proved once again that 
the Greek soul is, and always will be, our strength. It is the greatest gift 
that God ever gave us,” Zagorakis said, fighting back tears.MB
 