
At Al-Bahar fish farm in Gaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza>, a 
Palestinian family holding long-handled nets attempt to catch sea bream from a 
tank.

There are squeals as a boy pulls out a fish, one of half a dozen that will 
shortly be gutted and grilled in the farm’s adjoining restaurant.

The farm sits on a small rise above a beach, and looks out over the breaking 
surf of the Mediterranean. Alongside its restaurant and aquarium, Al-Bahar 
boasts a playground, and visitors flock there for a novel day out.

For its owners, however, Al-Bahar represents the possibility of something much 
more substantial: providing Palestinians with a new source of fish supplies – 
and reducing their dependence on imports from Israel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f874ee38d53f73825db0cd4aac7de5ad0e5b15%2F0_12_5142_3083%2F5142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza's%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza%27s%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f874ee38d53f73825db0cd4aac7de5ad0e5b15%2F0_12_5142_3083%2F5142.jpg>
 A Palestinian family net sea bream from a tank for lunch at the Al-Bahar fish 
farm and restaurant in Gaza. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
The Palestinian fishing industry operates under strictly enforced restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/24/gaza-fishermen-gunboats-israel-navy>
. An exclusion zone policed by Israel limits the industry’s range to within six 
miles off Gaza’s coast.Fishermen risk being shot at 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/dec/08/fishing-under-fire-in-gaza>
, arrested and having their catch confiscated.

Fish <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> stocks in the zone are 
low, and Gaza’s fleet struggles to catch enough fish to supply the domestic 
market. As a result, markets currently sell sea bream – the area’s most popular 
restaurant fish – which they import twice a week from Israeli fish farms.

Al-Bahar, whose 12 massive fish tanks were built at a cost of $1.2m 
(£900,000), is the most successful of four fish farms that have sprung up in 
Gaza since the 2014 war with Israel, and it is preparing to build an adjoining 
plot for a second commercial fish farm, . to be ready within a year.

For now, its fish are raised from fish fry and eggs bought from Israel, which 
also supplies the farm’s protein-rich fish food, but the owner, Yassir al-Haj, 
is contemplating opening a hatchery so that he no longer needs to import fry 
and eggs.


Haj said the farm produces 120,000kg of bream a year – enough to supply the 
private customers who come to his farm and restaurant but well short of the 
amount needed to supply commercial dealers. “Dealers come to us, but we can’t 
provide them with fish yet, which is why we are building a second farm which 
will be able to produce 200,000 kg,” Haj said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71387696d075c6dd72dd6e86e78b6dd23bdb4e92%2F0_105_5139_3085%2F5139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza's%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza%27s%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71387696d075c6dd72dd6e86e78b6dd23bdb4e92%2F0_105_5139_3085%2F5139.jpg>
 Sea bream farmed at Al-Bahar fishery in Gaza is collected from tanks to be 
cooked in the restaurant. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
Moreover, he added, the price of sea bream puts it out of the range of all but 
Gaza’s elite. “Only a few people who have high salaries can afford to come 
here,” he said.

Fishing under fire off the Gaza coast | Alex Renton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/dec/08/fishing-under-fire-in-gaza>
All the farms in Gaza are vulnerable to the instabilities resulting from Hamas 
rule. But Haj said the biggest barrier to expansion is the unreliable supply of 
electricity to a business that needs power 24 hours a day to oxygenate the 
tanks and keep the fish alive. “I need to have two back-up generators. They 
cost me $100,000. If I lived anywhere else except for Gaza, I wouldn’t need 
that cost.”

It is a problem well known to another Gaza fish farmer. Behind a fence in a 
seaside plot not far from the southern city of Khan Younis, Mohammed Salmi, 21, 
is minding his father’s tanks.

“My father worked for 30 years in Israel at a fish farm,” Salmi said. “It was 
his dream to open a fish farm in Gaza.”


Far smaller than Al-Bahar, the farm run by the Salmi family lost its first 
shrimp harvest after a power cut on the main tank. Now the family are trying 
their hand atfaredi – a small orange fish that is more robust than shrimp and 
can survive on only 12 hours of electricity a day. Nevertheless, the family 
have ordered solar panels as a back-up to keep their fish alive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a216233a89b95a631a9477f485100bca10b3ce%2F0_218_5174_3106%2F5174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza's%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fish%20farmers%20hoping%20to%20end%20Gaza%27s%20reliance%20on%20Israeli%20imports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgaza-fish-farms-are-a-chance-to-end-reliance-on-israeli-imports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a216233a89b95a631a9477f485100bca10b3ce%2F0_218_5174_3106%2F5174.jpg>
 Sea bream being grilled for Al-Bahar’s diners. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for 
the Guardian 
Gaza fishermen take to the waters – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/apr/18/gaza-fishermen-take-to-waters-in-pictures>
“We lost 1 million shrimp last year,” Salmi said. “So now we are afraid all 
the time of power shortages. But when the solar comes – hopefully within a 
month – we should be fine.”

As at Al-Bahar, the family plan to build a restaurant and a petrol station for 
their customers, who come from across the Gaza Strip. In another parallel, Sami 
said the farm’s popularity with private customers means there is not enough 
fish to supply Gaza’s dealers.

Back at Al-Bahar, Basil Abu Sahal is buying 2kg of fish to be cooked for his 
family. “It’s the first time I’ve been here,” he said. “I’m testing it out, but 
it’s almost the same price you pay in the market.” Part of the appeal, he said, 
was that the fish was better than that caught in Gaza’s polluted sea waters.

The bream is cooked, and Sahal sits down to eat his farmed fish with his 
family, at a table looking out over the sea.
 