
In the 1980s I worked on Michael Aspel’s ITV talk show Aspel & Company, 
helping to book the celebrity guests. At the height of the 1984 miners’ strike 
I somehow managed to book Margaret Thatcher andBarry Manilow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/barry-manilow> on to the same show. It’s 
hard to imagine a more Marmite line-up, but it was certainly eye-catching, 
although I doubt many miners were watching.

On the Sunday before the recording I called Manilow in Los Angeles. He had an 
idea. He wanted to perform a duet with Thatcher. The song was to be “We’ll Meet 
Again” and the studio audience would hold candles in the air. Would I promise 
to put the suggestion to the prime minister?

My job was to make sure he flew in for the Thursday-night recording, so I said 
yes. The following morning I calledBernard Ingham, the press secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/10/margaret-thatcher-bernard-ingham-private-papers>
 at Number 10, a man not known for suffering fools gladly. I deserved short 
shrift. He made sure I got it. But I had kept my promise. And Manilow kept his. 
He got on the plane.

I doubt Thatcher had any idea who Manilow was but she bustled up to him and 
turned his collar down

On the day of the recording he arrived early to rehearse his (solo) song, then 
spent a long time in hair and make-up. The prime minister arrived with minutes 
to spare, just as Manilow emerged from his dressing room, immaculately coiffed, 
jacket collar turned up at an artful angle. I doubt she had any idea who he was 
but she bustled up to him and turned his collar down. It stayed that way.

They appeared separately, Thatcher going first. Aspel asked: “You live ‘over 
the job’ at Number 10. Is it possible to feel at home there?” She replied: “I 
sometimes feel as if I started life living over the shop and I live over the 
shop now. Is it possible to feel at home? Well, I’m always on the job…”

The rest of her answer was drowned out by laughter from the studio audience. 
She was nonplussed. Humour was not her forte, double entendres not her style.

Later, over a large glass of whisky in the green room, she asked why everyone 
had laughed when she said she was “always on the job”. I left it to someone 
else to explain. I can’t recall who stepped up to the challenge, but I’m pretty 
sure it wasn’tBarry Manilow <https://www.theguardian.com/music/barry-manilow>. •

Simon Booker is the author of Without Trace (Twenty7, £7.99, or £6.39 from 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409161/>)
 