
Returning for its seventh season this week, Portlandia has given us hours of 
absurd sketches from Carrie Brownstein and Fred Armisen over the years. It’s 
hard to determine the best ones, although there are have been a few notable 
standouts, but we’ve narrowed down the 10 greatest Portlandia skits of the 
previous six seasons.

Portlandia is ruining Portland: feminist bookstore publicly cuts ties with show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/portlandia-portland-feminist-bookstore-in-other-words>
Put A Bird On It!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiHmLljk2t8M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiHmLljk2t8M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiHmLljk2t8M&media=>
This might be a controversial claim, but Season One’s Put A Bird On It! is 
undeniably the best – and most iconic – Portlandia skit. The clip, which clocks 
in at under two minutes, reveals how everyone in Portland believes that the 
best thing to do with any object or food is to put a bird on it. It’s so true, 
even in its absurdity, that you can’t help but laugh every time you see 
something for sale with a bird on it in the real world. The skit follows two 
people as they visit a Portland boutique and “spruce things up” by plastering 
bird stickers all over the products. When Brownstein’s character insists on 
painting a bird onto an existing bird it seems like the pinnacle – until an 
actual bird flies into the store.

Spoiler Alert
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwrvDwIw5is&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwrvDwIw5is>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwrvDwIw5is&media=>
In its third season, Portlandia tapped into pop culture by parodying the way 
we rapidly consume TV shows and can’t handle if anyone ruins them for us. The 
sketch mentions every big TV series, from Mad Men to Breaking Bad to Game of 
Thrones, without actually spoiling any of the plots – until the characters 
start giving away the ends of famous movies. “They just kill off Dumbledore,” 
one says while Armisen gasps in shock. It’s all about how impossible it is to 
actually stay spoiler-free and the skit ends with a hilarious twist (which we 
won’t spoil here).

Battlestar Galactica
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnjr3aFpTMyQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnjr3aFpTMyQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnjr3aFpTMyQ&media=>
In the same vein as “Spoiler Alert”, this sketch skewers binge-watching as 
Brownstein and Armisen can’t look away from the series Battlestar Galactica. 
Their obsession with the show gets worse and worse, and eventually there are 
some major real-life repercussions. We may not have lost our jobs over TV 
shows, but we have all watched way too many episodes of something in a row and 
not really understood where the time went.

Did You Read It?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6JLWQEuz2gA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6JLWQEuz2gA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6JLWQEuz2gA&media=>
Have you ever hung out with someone who insisted they’ve read everything? This 
sketch reflects on just how absolutely obnoxious it is when people try to one 
up each other by constantly claiming to have read everything. The terse skit 
amps up quickly as the characters affirm that they’ve not only read The New 
Yorker, but also skywriting, a fortune cookie, writing in the sand on the beach 
and closing movie credits. In the end it concludes that, basically, you 
shouldn’t act like one of the assholes in the sketch. It’s OK if you didn’t 
read something.

The Knot Store
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNfLu7GRMR7g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNfLu7GRMR7g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNfLu7GRMR7g&media=>
Thank goodness for Jeff Goldblum. Here he dons a pink sweater and stands in as 
the owner of a specialty artisan knot store, who helps Armisen and Brownstein 
select a knot. The actors treat the subject with complete seriousness, which 
lends to the absurdity of the sketch. It’s short, but tells a complete story 
and finds a sincere level of interest in knots. It’s funny because it feels 
like this could be an actual store where actual hipsters buy rope tied into 
tiny knots.

Brunch Village
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlYhPwcBeieo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlYhPwcBeieo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlYhPwcBeieo&media=>
Technically Brunch Village is an episode, not an individual sketch, but it’s 
worth an inclusion here. In the episode, which concludes season two, Brownstein 
and Armisen play on the agonizingly long wait for brunch (something we’ve all 
endured). The line for brunch at the new hip spot stretches across the entire 
city and suddenly Brownstein’s character finds herself being forced to eat 
Pop-Tarts by a long-haired eccentric played by Tim Robbins. It’s also a great 
example of how Portlandia manages to include all their random characters into 
one storyline and allow it to feel cohesive.

Catnap
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtefgnX5GRig&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtefgnX5GRig>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtefgnX5GRig&media=>
This skit features a fictional band called Catnap, which is comprised of 
Brownstein and Armisen’s punk rock characters, as well as an actual cat named 
Kevin. Kristen Wiig guest stars as a super-fan who corners the trio backstage 
and who desperately wants the band to stay in Portland. The best joke arrives 
when Wiig reveals her name to be Gathy (not Cathy). Whoever was responsible for 
training Kevin deserves an award, too, since the cat really seems to be a 
member of the band who feels threatened by an insane fan. Wiig is amazing, but 
Kevin is the real standout.

911 Beets Emergency
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKw2WsXIgO6A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKw2WsXIgO6A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKw2WsXIgO6A&media=>
Do you ever get confused about the state of your bowel movements after eating 
beets? That’s the heart of this Portlandia skit, which sees Brownstein and 
Armisen as 911 operators who help concerned people deal with their red stool. 
“It’s not blood,” Brownstein confirms to one, “it’s beets.” The pair gets 
annoyed with all the beets-related issues, until Jeff Goldblum pops up as a man 
who has gotten into a serious car accident. Except, as it turns out, he was hit 
by a beet truck.

Deuce Hotel
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdNszcI0Y5Zo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdNszcI0Y5Zo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdNszcI0Y5Zo&media=>
If you’ve ever stayed at an Ace Hotel, then you know it’s basically already a 
parody of its own hipness. But leave it to Portland to take things one step 
further. The Deuce Hotel has a lobby DJ, sinks with magically appearing faucets 
and free typewriters with every room. The Shins’ James Mercer, Sleater-Kinney’s 
Corin Tucker and Colin Meloy of the Decemberists guest star as an indie rock 
band way too hip for the hotel, much to the dismay of the staff. And, actually, 
we kind of want to stay here.

Is It Local?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWAlWrT5P2VI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWAlWrT5P2VI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWAlWrT5P2VI&media=>
One of Portlandia’s funniest and most relevant sketches appeared in the show’s 
first-ever episode, showcasing two restaurant guests who just want to make sure 
the chicken they’re eating is local. It turns out that the chicken is not only 
local, but he is named Colin who comes from a nearby farm. The pair decide they 
need to check out the farm for themselves, just to be sure Colin is really 
worth eating. It’s funny because some people are actually this picky about 
their food – and it’s ridiculous. The sketch immediately proved that Portlandia 
was onto something real and funny, and the tone has carried through the show 
since.
 