
They say that those who laugh last, laugh loudest. But what about those who 
laugh first and then forget to stop? In bulldozing their way to a second 
consecutive Serie A title,Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> held top spot (or at least a 
share of it) from the opening day of the 2012-13 season right through to the 
last. Despite losing five games, theBianconeri somehow appeared even more 
dominant than they had while going unbeaten a year previously.

Juventus started as they meant to go on, beating Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> at the pre-season SuperCoppa in 
Beijing. Unfortunately, that match also set the tone for a year of bitter 
controversy. Enraged by a string of perceived refereeing injustices, Napoli's 
players refused to attend the post-game medal ceremony. The club's owner, 
Aurelio De Laurentiis, rewarded them with a bonus and threatened to boycott the 
competition in future.

Nine months later, an Italian referee would take charge of the Champions 
League final at Wembley, yet the consensus on the peninsula was that this had 
been one of the worst officiated seasons in Serie A's recent history. In April 
two officials, Paolo Tagliavento and Andrea Gervasoni, had to be suspended for 
mishandling high-profile fixtures.Mauro Bergonzi's performance in Milan's 
crucial final game against Siena was equally calamitous 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/may/20/italy-siena-penalty-milan-champions-league>
 .

The Catania president Antonino Pulvirenti had already lamented the "death of 
football 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2012/oct/29/juventus-catania-bemoan-death-of-football>
" after his team had a perfectly good goal disallowed in their 1-0 defeat to 
Juventus in October. Adding insult to injury, their opponents' winner was set 
up by a player in an offside position. Even theBianconeri, though, would get 
their turn to feel aggrieved. In January, their manager Antonio Conte claimed 
to have heard the referee Marco Guida saying that he "didn't feel up to" 
awarding Juve a penalty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/jan/28/juventus-cry-shame-genoa-draw>
 during their draw with Bologna.

This season also reminded us, however, that Italian football has bigger 
problems than poor officiating. Four teams were docked points as a result of 
last summer's match-fixing investigations, and further high-profile cases will 
play out over the next few months. Conte himself received a four-month 
touchline ban after being found guilty ofomessa denuncia – the failure to 
report an attempted fix – a charge dating back to his time atSiena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/siena>.

The issue of violent fan behaviour was also to the fore. Shortly before the 
Coppa Italia final,police in Rome seized a cache of weapons 
<https://twitter.com/capuanogio/status/338677519345672194/photo/1> that might 
not have looked out of place on a medieval battlefield. The Milan 
vice-president Adriano Galliani was forced to flee thetribuna d'onore at 
Fiorentina's Stadio Artemio Franchi in the middle of a game in April after 
being targeted by fans throwing coins and other missiles.

And then there were the racist chants that blighted so many games. This will 
be remembered as the season in whichMilan abandoned a friendly in protest at 
monkey noises launched from the stands 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/jan/03/kevin-prince-boateng-stand-racism>
, before havinga league fixture suspended for much the same reason 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/may/13/racism-mario-balotelli-kevin-prince-boateng-italy>
 . Neither gesture seemed to have any lasting impact. Mario Balotelli was 
routinely abused at games where he was not even present.

Despite it all, there were still some bright notes to be found. Vincenzo 
Montella'sFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> provided 
a great number of them. At a time when crowds have been dwindling across the 
country, theViola increased their average attendance figure by almost 20%, 
drawing fans in with their entertaining and optimistic approach. They fell just 
two points short of a Champions League berth, and scored more goals (72) than 
every other team except Napoli.

Roma's directors might regret passing up the opportunity to name Montella as 
their full-time manager following his caretaker stint in 2011, but the
Giallorossi themselves enjoyed a brief spike in attendances after re-appointing 
Zdenek Zeman last summer. The manager was fired in February with his team 
struggling in eighth, yet he did get some things right. At their best, Zeman's
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> were scintillating. Francesco 
Totti credited the manager with helping him to find his best form in years.

Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> did not play with quite 
such attacking verve, yet the emergence of such players as Stephan El Shaarawy, 
Mattia De Sciglio and M'Baye Niang was nevertheless thrilling. To finish third 
despite the departures of Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Thiago Silva, Alessandro Nesta 
and the rest was remarkable. The addition of Balotelli in January lent fresh 
star appeal to both their team and the league.

And then there were the top two. Napoli never quite looked like title 
contenders, but they did reassert their quality in moving back ahead of the 
rest of the pack. It will be fascinating to watchhow the newly-appointed Rafael 
Benítez fares next season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/may/27/rafael-benitez-napoli>, with or 
without Edinson Cavani.

Juventus, meanwhile, unleashed Paul Pogba on the world, adding yet another 
string to an already potent bow. Their comprehensive Champions League defeat by 
Bayern Munich was deflating, but the Germans were operating on a different 
plane this year. It should not be forgotten that Juventus also eliminated 
Chelsea while going unbeaten through their first eight games of that 
competition.

The champions are certain to strengthen once again this summer – indeed, they 
already have with the capture of Fernando Llorente on a free transfer. The rest 
of the division will have to work hard simply to keep up.

Player of the season

It has to be Edinson Cavani. The Napoli striker led Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> with 29 goals in 34 
league appearances this season, yet the most telling statistic of all relates 
to the brief period in which he stopped scoring.

Perhaps distracted by events off the field (he had just begun the process of 
getting a divorce from his wife Maria Soledad), Cavani went eight games without 
a goal in all competitions between early February and the middle of March. 
Napoli won just once during that spell, and were eliminated from the Europa 
League by Viktoria Plzen. The extent to which this team had been carried by 
their striker was brutally laid bare.

Cavani has scored a remarkable 78 league goals in three years with Napoli. He 
is also the first player in the history of Serie A to score hat-tricks against 
Juventus, Milan and Inter. This was his greatest season yet.No wonder the fans 
in Naples built a cage to stop him from leaving 
<https://twitter.com/matthew_barker/status/333607906203295744>.

Goal of the season

5) Antonio Cassano's swerving 30-yard strike 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Yrhvhv5wSk> against Fiorentina was as glorious 
as it was futile. His team were 4-0 down at the time, in the 86th minute.

4) Josip Ilicic ultimately came up short in his one-man crusade to save 
Palermo from relegation 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2013/05/01/bandini-the-incredible-and-enigmatic-josip-ilicic-hits-double-digits-for-palermo/>
, but he scored some very pretty goals along the way. Against Sampdoria he ran 
half the length of the pitch, outfoxing opponents as he went,before clipping 
the ball past Sergio Romero <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i-0vEViqRLo>.

3) Overhead kicks department: Amauri against Pescara 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mvJnW8cemXM>, Fabio Quagliarella against Chievo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oo72XfSTrf0&t=1m49s>, and my favourite: Enzo 
Maresca against Atalanta <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ELKfmfmd3dk> .

2) Panagiotis Kone's scissor kick against Napoli 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x26fkquBM0g> was so good that Gazzetta dello 
Sport suggested its image could one day replace that of Carlo Parola on packets 
of Panini stickers.

1) A late entry, but a brilliant one, from Massimo Gobbi, who met Jaime 
Valdés's cross with one of the mostperfect outside-of-the-boot volleys you are 
ever likely to see <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6UusjkZlvn4>.

Honourable mentions: Paul Pogba <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hFCDnufsyPI>, 
Fabrizio Miccoli <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EU088IUR2g> and Facundo 
Roncaglia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q396kshvHTI>.

Own goal of the season

The Roma goalkeeper Mauro Goicoechea helped to seal Zeman's fate with his 
spectacular mishandling of a Danilo Avelar cross 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_euzOoL1l6s>.

Honourable mention: It would be harsh to blame Zeljko Brkic for this slapstick 
moment against Fiorentina <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TRzosK3aFgY>, but you 
would have been hard-pressed not to chuckle.

Penalty of the season

Arturo Vidal's spot-kick against Milan was so perfect 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oe0iIVTiryo&t=0m36s> that the newspaper La 
Repubblica devoted an entire article to its majesty. "There are lots of ways to 
hit a penalty: with power, off the post, with a chip," wrote Alessandro 
Vocalelli. "But one like this has probably never been seen before."

Game of the season

It is easy to forget that Inter were at one point considered serious title 
challengers this season. "Now we know who the anti-Juve are," wrote Luigi 
Garlando in the Gazzetta Sportiva on 4 November last year. "It is this 
possessed Inter team who [just] desecrated their front room."

Garlando was writing in the heady aftermath of Inter's 3-1 victory over 
Juventus in Turin, at a time when theNerazzurri had just closed to within a 
single point of the league leaders. Six months and one catastrophic collapse 
later, Inter would finish the season down in ninth, 33 points off the pace.

But subsequent events should not diminish Inter's performance at Juventus 
Stadium <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoShv3n2NY0> . Within 20 seconds of the 
kick-off they found themselves a goal down to opponents who had not lost a 
league game in 538 days. Worse yet, Juve's goal ought not to have stood – 
Kwadwo Asamoah having provided the assist from an offside position. And yet, 
rather than losing their heads, Inter stuck resolutely to their attacking 
game-plan, claiming their reward in the form of three second-half goals.

It was a game high on tempo, tension and chances at both ends. Most of all, 
though, it was the game that proved Conte's Juventus could indeed be beaten – 
even if wresting the title from their grasp would turn out to be another matter 
altogether.

Honourable mention: Napoli's 5-3 win away to Torino 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-0Cy5nKtvQ> had it all: goals, penalties, 
comebacks and even a Blerim Dzemaili hat-trick.

Vital statistics

1: Number of Udinese fans who showed up for their game away to Sampdoria in 
December 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2012/12/12/horncastle-udineses-dedicated-lone-away-supporter-against-sampdoria-reveals-turnout-issues-in-serie-a/>
 .

2: Points collected by Pescara since 7 January.

44: Managerial changes at Palermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> during Sir Alex Ferguson's 
27-year tenure at Manchester United.

12: Age at which Francesco Totti claims to have lost his virginity. "It was in 
Tropea with a 17-year-old Roman girl called Simona," he told an interviewer 
from Rai's Radio2 earlier this year. "But I didn't understand a thing [about 
what was happening]."

Team of the season (3-4-2-1)

Federico Marchetti (Lazio); Hugo Campagnaro (Napoli), Andrea Barzagli 
(Juventus), Giorgio Chiellini (Juventus); Alessio Cerci (Torino), Borja Valero 
(Fiorentina), Arturo Vidal (Juventus), Erik Lamela (Roma); Marek Hamsik 
(Napoli), Francesco Totti (Roma); Edinson Cavani (Napoli).

Substitutes: Samir Handanovic (Inter), Mattia De Sciglio (Milan), Riccardo 
Montolivo (Milan), Andrea Pirlo (Juventus), Stephan El Shaarawy (Milan), Stevan 
Jovetic (Fiorentina), Antonio Di Natale (Udinese)

Manager of the season

Vincenzo Montella did not begin the season fretting about Champions League 
qualification. Asked towards the end of 2012 whether his team was capable of 
qualifying for Europe, the Fiorentina manager simply replied: "I have a team 
full of quality footballers. The only route we can take is to try to put on a 
show."

That they most certainly did, playing some of the most entertaining football 
in the division. Montella's preferred starting midfield of Borja Valero, David 
Pizarro and Alberto Aquilani was unique for its lack of a tough-tackling 
enforcer. He challenged his teams to outwit and outmanoeuvre their opponents; 
more often than not they succeeded.

In the end, Fiorentina finished fourth – above such rich and illustrious teams 
as Inter,Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> and Roma. The show 
that Montella had promised turned out to be a glorious one.

Assist of the season

Alberto Aquilani's spinning backheeled through-ball for Stevan Jovetic 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/amazing-gif-alberto-aquilani-back-heel-assist-for-stevan-joevtics-2nd-goal-v-inter/>
 against Inter was so good that Francesco Totti staged a re-enactment a month 
later <http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=k6pzoBAjtbQ>.

The Handball Maradona 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Shilton%27s_Handball_Maradona> award for 
services to videogaming

Andrea Pirlo sent corks flying at Sony's marketing HQ back in April, writing 
in his autobiography that: "After the wheel, the best invention is the 
PlayStation." He followed up by estimating that he had played at least four 
times as many games of football on consoles as he had in real life –and most of 
them against Alessandro Nesta 
<http://espnfc.com/blog/_/name/espnfcunited/id/5381?cc=5901>.

His comments stood in stark contrast to those made by Montella earlier this 
season. "The other day my son said: 'Dad, if you knew how to play PlayStation 
you'd be a perfect father,'" the Fiorentina manager told La Repubblica back in 
September. "I took that as a very great compliment."

Worst substitution

When the Lazio manager Vladimir Petkovic pulled Miroslav Klose out of his 
team's rout ofBologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> with 24 
minutes left to play, he thought he was doing his striker a favour. Klose had 
already scored five times, and this way he could enjoy a standing ovation from 
the fans before putting his feet up and reflecting on a job well done. What 
Petkovic didn't realise is that Klose was just one strike away from breaking 
Serie A's all-time record for most goals in a single game.

The Ned Stark award for taking the moral high ground

Klose talked his way out of a goal on 26 September, informing the referee Luca 
Banti thathe had used his hand to score for Lazio in the third minute of their 
game away to Napoli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2012/sep/27/napoli-lazio-klose-cavani>
. He was rewarded with a firm handshake from the official, who had previously 
awarded the goal but now disallowed it. Klose walked away with his head held 
high. His team walked away with a 3-0 defeat.

The Petyr Baelish trophy for getting the job done

Klose's Lazio team-mate Sergio Floccari showed no such qualms four months 
later, claiming, somewhat implausibly, to be unawarethat he had handballed 
before scoring his team's opening goal against Atalanta 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pK4202k0j_k> . The goal stood, and Lazio won 
2-0.

Miss of the season

Andrea Ranocchia was four yards from goal as he ran on to a cross in the dying 
seconds of Inter's game against Atalanta in April.He placed his shot so far off 
target that it didn't even go out for a goal-kick 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/gb/relevance/search/ranocchia/1#video=xytg8o>.

Honourable mention: Ranocchia's then team-mate Marko Livaja hit the post from 
a yard out in the 90th minute of Inter's 1-1 draw with Genoa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCQW52RpWrw&t=1m56s>.

The Ann Timson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lp28Jgn-8e8> award for 
have-a-go heroics

Footballers are a consistent target for criminals in Italy. In the last three 
years, Edinson Cavani, Samuel Eto'o, Wesley Sneijder and Mario Balotelli have 
all had their homes broken into, while Marek Hamsik has been robbed at 
gunpoint. But when a crook waved a pistol in Leonardo Bonucci's face last 
October, the Juventus defender punched his assailant twice before chasing him 
up the street. "I am no superhero," insisted the Juventus defender afterwards,
but Gazzetta dello Sport's cartoon sure made him look like one 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/259933485689606144/photo/1>.

Worst dive

Bonucci did not seem quite so tough when executing one of the most 
preposterous tumbles you will ever see 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/blog/the-worst-dive-ever-leonardo-bonucci-juventus-v-palermo/>
 during his team's game at Palermo.

The Lemmon-Matthau certificate for best Odd Couple

In October Inter's Japanese full-back Yuto Nagatomo revealed that Antonio 
Cassano had become his best friend at Inter. The forward concurred. "We are 
great friends, because we don't understand a thing that we say to one another," 
said Cassano. "From dawn to dusk we tell each other how much we like each 
other, because I don't have any other alternatives."

Most shameless volte-face

7 January: The Milan owner Silvio Berlusconi describes Mario Balotelli as a 
"bad apple" during a televised interview, adding, "I would never accept him 
being a part of our changing room."

31 January: Signs him.

Worst transfer strategists

Only Inter could sell Wesley Sneijder for substantially less than his market 
value, then bring a retired and out-of-shape John Carew in for a trial just a 
few weeks later.

Best clearance

Only Philippe Mexès could have dreamed up the airborne backheel he pulled off 
against Atalanta 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/the-crazy-flying-backheel-clearance-philippe-mexes-ac-milan-v-atalanta/>
.

Best Halloween gimmick

For the second year running, Juventus's marketing team did a fine job of 
reimagining their players as ghosts, ghouls and cinematic bad guys. Personal 
favourites:Gigi Buffon as Freddy Krueger 
<https://twitter.com/juventusfc/status/263582518039703552/photo/1/large> and 
Andrea Pirlo as The Joker 
<https://twitter.com/juventusfc/status/263650374521606144/photo/1/large>.

Best half-time snack

Why settle for soggy pies when you could just bring an entire panettone with 
you from home 
<https://twitter.com/jacopomannini/status/282504353472974848/photo/1>?

Best promise

"If I win the World Cup [with Italy in 2014] I will give myself two mohawks" – 
Cesare Prandelli makes a vow that must not be forgotten.

Best exploitation of a contract loophole

Among the many clauses written into Mario Balotelli's Milan contract is one 
that forbids him from go-karting, a safeguard presumably inserted to prevent 
the player from doing himself a mischief on his days off. And so, instead of 
breaking the rules in May, Balotellisimply drove his own Ferrari down to the 
go-karting circuit, and persuaded the staff there to let him take that for a 
spin round their track instead 
<http://milano.repubblica.it/cronaca/2013/05/08/foto/balotelli_a_cinisello_l_ultima_follia_il_giro_in_ferrari_nella_pista_dei_kart-58342429/1/>
 .

 Best explanation for Antonio Conte's hair

It's actually a cat 
<http://www.video.mediaset.it/video/iene/puntata/371348/matano-il-gatto-di-conte.html>
.

Greatest moment

Nenad Krsticic was not the only one with a tear in his eye after he scored his 
first Serie A goal for Sampdoria in December. In 2008, the player was informed 
that he had just 48 hours left to live after being diagnosed with an aggressive 
form of Burkitt's Lymphoma. Four years later, he has not only beaten cancer, 
but also fulfilled his dream ofmaking it as a professional footballer at the 
highest level 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2012/12/05/bandini-nenad-krsticic-born-again-at-sampdoria-after-long-battle-with-cancer/>
.

Most Optimistic

"Wherever he goes, Mauro [Zarate] will be loved and appreciated by the Lazio 
fans" – the forward's agent, Luis Ruzzi, in January.

"The true champion is humble. He goes and collects the balls when training 
with the reserves. He doesn't cry on Twitter, and he reduces his wages. He does 
not cling on to an overly generous contract. Zarate: leave" – message displayed 
by Lazio supporters on enormous banners at the club's next home game.

Worst bookie

During a local radio interview in January, the Palermo president Maurizio 
Zamparini denied claims that he was about to fire manager Gian Piero Gasperini 
– going so far as to offer odds of 100-1 on that possibility. His interviewer 
duly bet him €50 at that price. One week later, Gasperini was gone.

Most subversive news ticker

On 5 May, Sky Sports 24 HD became the first, and only, Italian media outlet to 
run with the breaking news story:"Scandal, Milan [are] shit!" 
<http://www.milanotoday.it/~media/base/14374673690446/sky-sport-24-papera-titoli-scrive-milan-merda-2.jpg>

Chant of the year

"The ball's that yellow thing, the ball's that yellow thing …" – Fiorentina 
supporters offer some assistance to hapless Inter during their 4-1 rout of the
Nerazzurri in February.

Worst invitation

The Cagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> owner Massimo 
Cellino told his team's fans to come on down to the Stadio Is Arenas for their 
game against Roma in September, even though the stadium had not been signed off 
as safe to hold supporters by the various local authorities. The game, 
inevitably, was abandoned with Roma awarded a nominal 3-0 victory.

Lifetime achievement award for most relentless trolling

Marco Materazzi might have retired from playing football, but his career as 
professional antagonist is still going strong. In Novemberhe tweeted a photo of 
himself smiling before a statue 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/265576460633395200> of the butt he 
received from Zinedine Zidane at the 2006 World Cup final.

Most likely to wind up playing the victim on an MTV reality show 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catfish:_The_TV_Show>

"You reach Serie A and immediately the sexual attention you get multiplies," 
noted Stephan El Shaarawy in September. "I like it. But I find my women on 
Facebook. You can find a lot of stuff online …"

Best fan choreography

Parma celebrated the 20th anniversary of their first-ever European trophy 
earlier this month, inviting their 1993 Cup Winners' Cup-winning squad back to 
the Stadio Tardini. As those players walked out on to the pitch before 
kick-off, the club's supporters raised a series of banners showing the names of 
each player that had started the final …in the correct starting formation 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/parmafc/8732685844/in/set-72157633463706659/>.

Most innovative solution to match-fixing

"What happens in the changing room ought to stay in the changing room," said 
Roma's Pablo Osvaldo when asked how he might react to a team-mate approaching 
him about a possible fix. "I will never be a grass, but I would not turn away 
either. In silence, I would beat him silly."

Worst parents

"If it ends badly, it will mean that our father and mother didn't bring us up 
right," said the Cesena president Igor Campedelli last summer after appointing 
his younger brother Nicola as the club's new manager in the wake of their 
relegation to Serie B.Igor sacked his sibling three games later 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2012/09/11/bandini-the-team-the-president-his-coach-his-brother/>
.

Alphaville amulet for the Forever Young 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1TcDHrkQYg>

The papers were full of pessimistic predictions regarding Javier Zanetti's 
future in professional football after the 39-year-old tore his Achilles tendon
during Inter's defeat to Palermo last month 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/apr/29/javier-zanetti-inter-serie-a>
 . The player himself, however, seemed utterly convinced that he would return 
from this latest setback soon enough, saying: "My career is not over. After 
travelling so many kilometres, I simply needed a tyre change."

Guarisci presto, Pupi. We look forward to seeing you back on the field next 
year.
 