
“Infinite Juve,” boomed one front-page headline on Sunday. Given that it 
belonged to the Turin-based newspaper Tuttosport, you can assume that it was 
intended in a celebratory tone.Juventus had just done the double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/23/alvaro-morata-juventus-coppa-italia-paolo-bandini>
, again, reaffirming their hegemony over Italian football. Their fifth 
consecutive Serie A titlehad already been sealed weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/26/juventus-enjoy-improbable-march-to-success-and-lift-fifth-successive-serie-a-title>
.

For fans of every other team, such repetition might feel rather tedious. But 
it is not forJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> to worry 
about anybody else’s needs. Besides, you could say that they did their bit to 
make things interesting this season – affording their rivals a two-month head 
start. After 10 games, they had accrued a total of 12 points. By the end of the 
campaign they had scaled all the way to 92.

Juventus made history along the way, becoming the first team ever to win a 
domestic double ofSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
and the Coppa Italia in consecutive years. And yet they had begun by suffering 
their first-ever defeat in a home opener. They followed up that 1-0 loss to 
Udinese by drawing with Chievo and Frosinone in their next two matches at 
J-Stadium.

Juventus crowned Serie A champions after Roma score late against Napoli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/roma-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
At the time, the signs looked ominous for Juventus. This was a club in 
transition, one that had lost Carlos Tevez, Andrea Pirlo, Arturo Vidal and 
Fernando Llorente over the summer. Questions were asked about whether they had 
tried to change too much, too quickly.

Today, though, Juventus look as strong as they have at any point in this 
five-year cycle. Paulo Dybala has bloomed in one season from raw prospect into 
a world-class talent. Paul Pogba has matured from callow youth struggling with 
the weight of the No10 shirt into a more consistent performer. The likes of 
Alex Sandro, Mario Mandzukic and Juan Cuadrado have all added more strings to 
the team’s bow.

Ally that with an established and brilliant back-line, and it is not hard to 
see why this team keeps on winning. The only question now is whether Juventus 
can keep this squad together and push on towards the European success to which 
they aspire. Here, too, there are grounds for optimism – the close friendship 
between Dybala and Pogba has raised hopes that the Frenchman might hang around 
longer than had previously been assumed.

Meanwhile, Juve’s rivals continue to play catch-up. This was, in abstract, a 
brilliant season forNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> – for 
whom expectations were low at the outset. Season ticket sales fell at the 
Stadio San Paolo last summer, to the point that only Carpi had sold fewer by 
mid-August. Even Diego Maradona publicly questioned whether Maurizio Sarri, a 
bank manager as recently as 2002, was the right man to get this team back into 
the Champions League.

In the end, he made it look too easy. At their best, Sarri’s Napoli were 
phenomenal – winning by four or more goals on eight separate occasions across 
all competitions. Such blistering brilliance made it tempting to believe that 
they could lift theScudetto, but a cool-headed analysis shows that this team 
exceeded expectations simply to come second. They finished 19 points better off 
than last season.

Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> were more disappointing, 
failing to build on an early win over Juventus and eventually succumbing to 
what Rudi Garcia described as “draw-itis”. Things got so bad in the winter that 
fans dumped 50kg of carrots outside the training ground, branding their players 
“conigli” – “rabbits” (an Italian slang expression for cowards).

The return of Luciano Spalletti sparked dramatic improvement, and provided a 
basis for optimism. Eventhe manager’s sparing use of Francesco Totti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/21/francesco-totti-italian-football-roy-of-rovers-roma>
 – a point of contention at the outset – became a strength, Spalletti 
demonstrating that the forward might be most effective as an impact substitute 
at this stage of his career.

It now appears likely that Totti will sign a new contract, a prospect that 
seemed very distant back when he was getting so bored during matches thathe had 
to invite ballboys to join him for a kickabout 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0EozOru2tJ0>. Miralem Pjanic might be tougher 
for Roma to keep hold of. So, too, the large number of loan players who 
featured for the team this season.

One way or another, the Giallorossi will at least have a Champions League 
qualifier to look forward to. The same cannot be said for Internazionale, who 
faded dramatically after occupying first place at Christmas, or Fiorentina, who 
were second at the time. Milan, despite significant transfer investment last 
summer, could not even make it into the Europa League.

But we should not dwell exclusively on the top of the table. Many of this 
season’s most fascinating stories unfolded elsewhere. Sassuolo’s astonishing 
rise above Milan to claim a spot in Europe might be the best of all. It is only 
eight years since theNeroverdi were promoted for the first time in club history 
to Serie B.

To have achieved such growth with a squad populated overwhelmingly by domestic 
talent is all the more impressive. Especially in a season when Inter and 
Udinese became the first teams ever to line up against one another in Serie A 
without a single Italian player in either starting XI.

At the bottom of the table, Bologna became the first side to avoid relegation 
after losing seven of their first eight games. The credit goes to Roberto 
Donadoni, who showed up quotingAl Pacino’s “Inches” speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_b7bgtu2O4E> from Any Given Sunday and 
commanding his players to claw with their fingernails for each point, but wound 
up making the fight for survival look more like a stroll in the park.

Sadly, though, we must bid farewell to both Carpi and Frosinone, the minnows 
whose presence at this levelhad caused Claudio Lotito such furious anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/18/capri-frosinone-promotion-serie-a>
. Between them, they too contributed some of this season’s most memorable 
moments.

Carpi’s Lorenzo Pasciuti became the first player to score for the same club in 
all of Italy’s top four divisions. Frosinone’s Leonardo Blanchard – a lifelong 
Juventus supporter, who travelled to Berlin to watch them play in last season’s 
Champions League final –scored the goal that earned his team a point away to 
the champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/24/frosinone-leonardo-blanchard-juventus-serie-a>
.

Those memories will not soothe the pain of relegation, but at least they ought 
to raise a smile. With any luck, the same might be said for my end-of-season 
Bandini awards.

Player of the season

There were two stand-out contenders in this category, and choosing between 
them was not easy. Gigi Buffon deserves to be recognised, after a season in 
which he set a new Serie A record for the longest-ever sequence without 
conceding by a goalkeeper – a whopping 973 minutes – and generally continued to 
defy the ageing process.

Across Europe’s top-five leagues, Buffon’s save percentage was second only to 
that of Paris Saint-Germain’s Kevin Trapp. His leadership was arguably even 
more important after Juve’s dismal start to the campaign. Following a 1-0 
defeat to Sassuolo in late October, it was he who addressed the changing room, 
saying: “Lads, at 38 years old, I’m not interested in going around just to make 
myself look shit.”

Despite all this, my feeling is that the award must go to Gonzalo Higuaín. To 
break Gunnar Nordahl’s 66-year-old Serie A scoring record would have been an 
incredible feat under any circumstances. To do it despite missing three matches 
is ridiculous.

Those absences were Higuaín’s own fault – the result of a suspension that he 
earned himself with an on-pitch meltdown at Udinese – butin the context of the 
season 
<http://www.gazzettaworld.com/features/higuain-hysterics-sensational-season> I 
can find even that understandable. The Argentinian had hardly put a foot wrong 
since last summer, when he shed 4kg to enhance his explosiveness. To see the 
title slipping away from him despite such efforts might simply have been too 
much to bear.

His 36 goals arrived at a preposterous rate of one for every 82.3 minutes 
spent on the pitch. They also represented 46% of Napoli’s total. He was often 
utterly unplayable, and that is why he gets the award.

Goal of the season

5) Mohamed Salah suggested afterwards that he had not really intended to 
shoot, but even sothis goal from an absurd angle against Palermo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GkZVDVLsBjI> had to squeeze in here somewhere.

4) For determination alone, I include Blanchard – who fluffed his initial 
overhead kick attempt against Genoa but thennonchalantly swatted home a second 
attempt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2SHa6rEzTU> while lying prone on the 
ground.

3) Just call him Marco van Benassi. Erm, Marco Benass-ten. Oh, whatever, you 
can see where I’m going with this 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qcguz5QqFqI&t=0m14s>.

2) Stephan El Shaarawy’s backheel volley against Frosinone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iIFvOoq44Rg> was pretty special. But, for me, 
Sergio Pellissier’s equivalent against Genoa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pTWaS8IFi9k&t=0m37s> was even better.

1) Likewise, we had stiff competition in the overhead kick category this 
season. Mauricio Pinilla, as usual, had several entries,the best of which is 
well worth revisiting <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cAxdAyiGlY>. My 
favourite, though, was the one with which Higuaín broke Nordahl’s record.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYwZl8C6WcH4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYwZl8C6WcH4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYwZl8C6WcH4&media=>
Own goal of the season

Andrea Consigli. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QmXUbVJqll4>

Save of the season

As a counterpoint to that ludicrousness, Consigli also claims this award. The 
reach, control and wrist strength required to push Adem Ljajic’s effort on to a 
post are extraordinary.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxxlkckl-FU0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxxlkckl-FU0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dxxlkckl-FU0&media=>
Honourable mention: Buffon’s jaw-dropping double save from Carlos Bacca and 
Mario Balotelli <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/718892926802075648> 
in April.

Best hat-trick

Every one of Suso’s three goals against Frosinone in April was a gem.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnZDRy5P-R1o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnZDRy5P-R1o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnZDRy5P-R1o&media=>
Miss of the season

Honestly, I can’t pick between Edin Dzeko and Joaquín Correa.
BT Sport Football (@btsportfootball) 
Former @MCFC <https://twitter.com/MCFC> forward @EdDzeko 
<https://twitter.com/EdDzeko> misses an open goal from three yards for 
@OfficialASRoma <https://twitter.com/OfficialASRoma> against @palermocalcioit 
<https://twitter.com/palermocalcioit>. https://t.co/5Gk9t55K5t 
<https://t.co/5Gk9t55K5t>
 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/701501477391433728> February 21, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/701501477391433728> BT Sport 
Football (@btsportfootball) 
"That has to be the miss of the season!" @tucu_correa 
<https://twitter.com/tucu_correa> has an open goal shocker for @sampdoria 
<https://twitter.com/sampdoria> against @Inter <https://twitter.com/Inter>. 
http://t.co/FweGF9YHyX <http://t.co/FweGF9YHyX>
 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/650675870877650944> October 4, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/650675870877650944> 
Assist of the season

Oh, nothing, only a sliding backheel half-volley from Chievo’s Riccardo 
Meggiorini <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-8xC85Afbo>.

Worst clearance

Federico Peluso forgets the “over” in “overhead kick”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6q3QydkgiGQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6q3QydkgiGQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6q3QydkgiGQ&media=>
Worst dive

Paolo Cannavaro for Sassuolo against Lazio 
<https://twitter.com/IlCafaro/status/655733009581252608>. The worst part is, he 
did get a penalty for it, too.

Most vital defensive contribution

How differently would the climax to this season have gone, if Leonardo Bonucci 
had failed to get a toe on Elseid Hysaj’s cross as it arrowed towards Gonzalo’s 
head during Juventus’s second league meeting with Napoli?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgQWTPrSHp4g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgQWTPrSHp4g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgQWTPrSHp4g&media=>
Game of the season

Perhaps it would be more accurate to say “best 30 minutes”. With an hour gone, 
January’s Derby della Lanterna looked like a rout. Sampdoria were 3-0 up and 
all over Genoa, with Antonio Cassano – who proudly informed reporters 
afterwards that he had shed a kilo over Christmas – running the show. Playing 
as a false nine, he’d had a hand in all three goals and looked capable of 
creating more whenever the mood should take him.

Then, Leonardo Pavoletti pulled one back and very quickly everything changed. 
Cassano was subbed off and Samp fell apart. Darko Lazovic shot wide of the near 
post when clean through for Genoa. Pavoletti chipped Emiliano Viviano before 
heading home to make it 3-2.

After that, the final 10 minutes were basically bonkers – the Marassi rocking 
as the match descended into mayhem. Viviano made one save after another, 
thwarting Serge Gakpé and at one stage desperately plunging to his right to 
keep out a Suso shot that had been flying well wide until it hit Ervin 
Zukanovic and ricocheted back sharply towards the bottom corner. At the far 
end, Édgar Barreto hit the crossbar on a Sampdoria counterattack.

The game finished 3-2, but frankly it could have been five apiece. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tfC4k5o9CpE>

Team of the season (4-3-3)

Buffon; Alessandro Florenzi, Leonardo Bonucci, Francesco Acerbi, Faouzi 
Ghoulam; Paul Pogba, Miralem Pjanic, Marek Hamsik; Paulo Dybala, Gonzalo 
Higuaín, Lorenzo Insigne.

Subs: Samir Handanovic, Sime Vrsaljko, Andrea Barzagli, Borja Valero, Mohamed 
Salah, Giacomo Bonaventura, Franco Vázquez.

Manager of the season

In manner, Maurizio Sarri is decidedly old-school. The image of him enjoying a 
cigarette and an espresso 
<http://www.napoligol.it/foto/2015/07/sarri_sigaretta_caffe.jpg> straight from 
the pot on the training pitch was one of the great images of pre-season. He can 
be refreshingly blunt at times, and his first words to Gonzalo Higuaín were to 
tell the striker that he needed to stop being so lazy.

But what makes him so impressive is that he allies this demeanour with a way 
of thinking about football that is innovative and open to new ideas. For all 
the raised eyebrows that greeted his use of drones to film training sessions in 
the summer, many other clubs have since followed suit. He is constantly working 
on new schemes to deploy in open play and from set pieces. The results are 
clear for everyone to see.

Best celebration

Massimo Maccarone toasted a goal against Bologna at Christmas by running over 
to a friend on the sideline andtaking a swig of his beer 
<http://video.repubblica.it/edizione/bologna/maccarone-segna-e-si-fa-una-birra/222744/221982>
.

Honourable mention: In this age of players refusing to celebrate against their 
former clubs, hats off to Mattia Destrofor going in a different direction 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/668360785677037568)>.

Best nominative determinism

After scoring his first Serie A goal in January, Kevin Lasagna took his Carpi 
team-mates out for dinner.You’ll never guess what they ordered 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BBDm9OxoicJ/>.

Most stylish

Walter Zenga did not last long as manager of Sampdoria, but at least he made 
his brief stint look good withthese team-branded braces 
<https://twitter.com/inFranchezza/status/638086064536715265>.

Everything Is Awesome award for most Lego-like beard

Again, Zenga. (The beard is partially painted on with Henna, if you were 
wondering.)
Words (@Wordsfit) 
Zenga sta invecchiando male…
Farsi cresce la propria barba per un paio di settimane era troppa fatica, vero?
pic.twitter.com/1cuIq1zamB <https://t.co/1cuIq1zamB>
 <https://twitter.com/Wordsfit/status/665119807780597760> November 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Wordsfit/status/665119807780597760> 
Best use of household appliances

As Kevin Strootman struggled on through his rehabilitation at the start of 
this season, fans, team-mates and even his manager joined inposting pictures of 
themselves next to their washing machines 
<http://www.corrieredellosport.it/foto/dettaglio/calcio/serie-a/roma/2015/09/01-3674973/roma_tutti_i_selfie_per_strootman_dajekevin>
 in a show of solidarity. The player had been nicknamed “Er Lavatrice” in Rome, 
on account of the work he did cleaning up his team’s mistakes.

Most political pizza

Created in response to Gonzalo Higuaín’s suspension 
<https://twitter.com/zazzatweet/status/717718642855690240>.

The Wojciech Szczesny award for being Wojciech Szczesny

This year, as every year: Wojciech Szczesny.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dok4ToNJqGqg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dok4ToNJqGqg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dok4ToNJqGqg&media=>
Best cake

The one featuring a massive cigarette – created in honour of Maurizio Sarri 
<https://twitter.com/pelle1966/status/679396198537666560> by Napoli supporters 
at a fan club in Figline Valdarno, where he grew up.

The Still Got It Award for Managers Who Should Still Be Playing

Roberto Mancin … ah, wait, no, maybe not 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TmwmKRoQ0KE>.
F.C. Internazionale (@Inter) 
#ForzaInter <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ForzaInter?src=hash> e forza 
@robymancio <https://twitter.com/robymancio>, con il tuo carattere e la nostra 
passione ripartiremo! 💪🏼⚫️🔵#FCIM <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FCIM?src=hash>
https://t.co/vmknfGsuPy <https://t.co/vmknfGsuPy>
 <https://twitter.com/Inter/status/694476681608736768> February 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Inter/status/694476681608736768> 
Best banner

There have been some big and beautiful choreographies in Serie A this year, 
just like every year. But how can we look past Rolando, the Roma fan who 
printed off a sheet of A4 at hometo tell the world that: “I’m annoyed” 
<https://twitter.com/mattiafontana83/status/685944111761866752>.

Best choreography

Oh, OK, let’s have a separate award for choreography as well. A hollow mockery 
it might be, given their own team’s recent struggles, butInter Ultras’ send-up 
of Juventus as the Beagle Boys 
<http://www.tuttosport.com/foto/calcio/serie-a/2015/10/18-5077759/inter-juventus_la_coreografia-sfott_della_curva_nerazzurra/#5>
, reaching out for the Champions League and coming away with domestic trophies 
instead, was brilliantly done.

Grimmest warm-up routine

Alvaro Morata and Simone Zaza juggle a piece of chewing gum back and forth, 
before the Spaniard allows it to be volleyed back into his mouth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg-EdiXCd0J0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg-EdiXCd0J0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg-EdiXCd0J0&media=>
Best paint job

I’m not exactly sure how Pepe Reina’s kids manage to sleep at night beneath 
the image of their father bellowing between the Stadio San Paolo and Mount 
Vesuvius 
<http://sport.ilmattino.it/photos/PANORAMA/35/61/1403561_20151213_12342486_927500230665178_2955968755695338930_n.jpg.pagespeed.ce.L-5JdGrIDf.jpg>
 in their bedroom.

Best (?) ink job

Lorenzo Insigne’s father, Carmine, who had a picture of his son celebrating 
under Vesuvius 
<http://sport.ilmattino.it/sscnapoli/news/insigne_tatuaggio_napoli/1624645.shtml)>
 tattooed on to his right arm.

Best Christmas video

I defy you to watch Chievo’s players and staff sing Jingle Bells – after an 
earnest team-talk from manager Roland Maran – without smiling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gbr-rCie0w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gbr-rCie0w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gbr-rCie0w&media=>
Most Italian analogy

“To play the derby without the Curve is like having a vegetarian amatriciana 
sauce with no tomato. It simply does not exist” – radio personality Johnny 
Palomba contemplates the absence of Ultras at Roma’s latest meeting with Lazio.

Lifetime achievement awards

I could not sign out this column without a fond farewell to Luca Toni, Antonio 
Di Natale and Miroslav Klose. The trio have scored a whopping 420 Serie A goals 
between them, and their presence will be greatly missed. I shall remember them 
each in the way that feels most fitting, with one of my favourite (not to say 
“best”) goals from each.

For Luca Toni, a strike against Messina back in 2005 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QHo6hcVkVcI&t=0m15s> – because how many other 
players would keep moving through a violent kick to the shin as though nothing 
had happened? For Di Natalea ludicrous volley back across his body in 2010 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o4B2irJzAT4>, because he was never afraid to 
have a go. And for Klose, the goal earlier this seasonwhen he sat Samir 
Handanovic down before chipping into an unguarded net 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=StbzD5ByVMg>. I don’t know that I’ve ever seen 
a finisher quite so cool.

Grazie di tutto, ragazzi. Here’s hoping that the next chapter turns out to be 
every bit as rewarding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQmXUbVJqll4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQmXUbVJqll4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQmXUbVJqll4&media=> 