
Europe’s response to the migrant question is the subject of this complex, 
mysterious, sophisticated and superbly photographed documentary portrait by the 
Italian film-makerGianfranco Rosi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/not-even-death-can-stop-200000-migrants-wanting-to-escape-fire-at-seas-gianfranco-rosi>
.

Why migrants will risk death to escape - Fire at Sea director Gianfranco Rosi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/not-even-death-can-stop-200000-migrants-wanting-to-escape-fire-at-seas-gianfranco-rosi>
It shows scenes from the day-to-day life of Lampedusa, the Sicilian island 
which is on the front line of this crisis. Desperate souls from Africa and the 
Middle East arrive there in horrifyingly unsafe inflatables every week; 
thousands die around its coast.

Rosi focuses on one mischievous boy, Samuele, who is being treated for a lazy 
eye by a doctor who must also tend to the migrants and carry out autopsies on 
their corpses. The doctor, who is the point of contact between the indigenous 
islanders and the traumatised incomers, is himself becoming ill and depressed 
by this terrible burden.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg&media=>
Watch the trailer for Fire at Sea on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f8Kc5wy0Rxg> 
Geography has made Lampedusa the point of landfall for the agonised refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/16/lampedusa-island-of-hope>, just 
as history made it part of a European Union that is as prosperous and 
attractive as the US once was for European migrants. Rosi records what this 
means to people on the ground, how the fabric of life is being placed under 
violent stress.

For Lampedusa, the crisis is not a crisis – nothing so temporary, so dramatic. 
It has been happening for 20 years; it is the new normal. There is an enigmatic 
pageant of scenes: people preparing placidly for supper; migrants playing 
football, impassive figures in hazmat suits silently bringing migrants’ bodies 
ashore.

What we are seeing is a kind of life during wartime that everyone is almost 
inured to – but a terrible sadness and anger rises in waves from this film.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 