
See a full list of management in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/oct/22/the-guardian-us-team>

Guardian US has offices in New York, San Francisco and Washington DC. Search 
for editorial staff by their last name.

Search by the letter of the last name

A - C


Jill Abramson, political columnist

Jill Abramson is a visiting lecturer in the English department at Harvard 
University and a journalist who spent the last 17 years in the most senior 
editorial positions at the New York Times.

Spencer Ackerman, national security editor, New York

Spencer is national security editor for Guardian US. A former senior writer 
for Wired, he won the 2012 National Magazine Award for Digital Reporting.

spencer.ackerman@theguardian.com <mailto:spencer.ackerman@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter: @attackerman <https://twitter.com/attackerman>

Aliza Aufrichtig, interactive journalist, New York

Aliza Aufrichtig is an interactive journalist for the Guardian US. She 
previously was a programmer at Recurse Center and product director at 
Flocabulary.

aliza.aufrichtig@theguardian.com <mailto:aliza.aufrichtig@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter: @alizauf <https://twitter.com/alizauf>

Lanre Bakare, arts editor, West Coast

Lanre is the arts editor for Guardian US, based in Los Angeles. Where he 
previously acted as the commissioning editor.

Lanre.Bakare@theguardian.com <mailto:Lanre.Bakare@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@Lanre_Bakare <https://twitter.com/Lanre_Bakare>

Mike Barry, head of audience, New York

Mike leads the effort to build relationships with the Guardian US audience, 
cultivate communities around the Guardian’s journalism, and advocate for our 
readers in the newsroom. Previously, Mike led audience initiatives for The Week 
magazine’s digital arm and was a politics editor at The Huffington Post. Mike’s 
team includes Harry Slater, Sarah Eberspacher and Ross Maghielse.

mike.barry@theguardian.com <mailto:mike.barry@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter:@MikeElliotBarry <http://twitter.com/mikeelliotbarry>

Lois Beckett, senior reporter, gun control, New York

Lois previously reported on gun violence and gun policy at ProPublica. Before 
joining ProPublica in 2011, Lois reported for the Nieman Journalism Lab and SF 
Weekly.

lois.beckett@theguardian.com <mailto:lois.beckett@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/loisbeckett> @loisbeckett <https://twitter.com/loisbeckett>

Les Carpenter, writer, Washington DC

Les is a writer for Guardian US. He covers sports and wrote previously for 
Yahoo Sports.

les.carpenter@theguardian.com <mailto:Les.Carpenter@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @Lescarpenter <https://twitter.com/Lescarpenter>

Rory Carroll, west coast correspondent, Los Angeles

Rory Carroll is the Guardian’s west coast correspondent. He previously 
reported from South America.

rory.carroll@theguardian.com <mailto:rory.carroll@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@rorycarroll72 <https://twitter.com/rorycarroll72>

Mona Chalabi, data editor, New York

Mona is data editor at the Guardian US. She previously worked at 
FiveThirtyEight, the Bank of England, the Economist Intelligence Unit, 
Transparency International and the International Organisation for Migration.

mona.chalabi@theguardian.com <mailto:mona.chalabi@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@MonaChalabi <https://twitter.com/MonaChalabi>

D - F

Kenan Davis, head of interactive, New York

Before joining the Guardian in 2013 as an interactive journalist, Kenan was 
digital media coordinator at the Columbia Journalism school and has worked on 
the Emmy-winning NSA Decoded and Beyond the Border projects, as well as the 
Counted and the World Cup interactives.


kenan.davis@theguardian.com  <mailto:kenan.davis@theguardian.com>| Twitter: 
@kenandavis <https://twitter.com/kenandavis>

Jan Diehm, graphics producer, New York

Jan is the graphics producer for the Guardian US. She has previously worked 
for ABC News and the Huffington Post.

jan.diehm@theguardian.com <mailto:Jan.Diehm@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@jadiehm <https://twitter.com/jadiehm>

Caty Enders, series editor, New York

Caty Enders is series editor at Guardian US. She is also the supervising 
producer for Guardian US podcasts and writes for the features and sports desks. 
Previously, she was assistant editor, sustainable business.

caty.enders@theguardian.com <mailto:caty.enders@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@catyenders <https://twitter.com/catyenders>

Sarah Eberspacher, engagement editor, New York

Sarah joined the audience team in 2015. Previously, she held several positions 
at TheWeek.com such as associate editor, Saturday news editor and assistant 
photo editor.

sarah.eberspacher@theguardian.com <mailto:sarah.eberspacher@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter: @eberspacher <https://twitter.com/eberspacher>

Kerry Eustice, editorial partnerships editor, New York

Kerry is editorial partnerships editor. She previously oversaw the 10 
education and society professional networks at the Guardian in London, working 
with the teams to grow audiences, build loyalty and liaise with commercial 
colleagues. She was part of the team that launched the first professional 
networks.

kerry.eustice@theguardian.com <mailto:kerry.eustice@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @kerryeustice <https://twitter.com/kerryeustice>

Nicole Flatow, enterprise editor, New York

Before joining the Guardian in 2015, Nicole was senior editor at Think 
Progress in Washington DC.

nicole.flatow@theguardian.com <mailto:nicole.flatow@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @NicFlatow <http://twitter.com/nicflatow>

Amana Fontanella-Khan, assistant opinion editor, New York

Amana Fontanella-Khan is assistant US opinion editor. She is also the author of
Pink Sari Revolution.

amana.fontanella-khan@theguardian.com 
<mailto:amana.fontanella-khan@theguardian.com> | Twitter: @AmanaFK 
<https://twitter.com/AmanaFK>

G - I

Adam Gabbatt, writer and presenter, New York

Adam Gabbatt is a writer and presenter for Guardian US, based in New York. He 
won a journalism bursary from the Scott Trust, the company that owns the 
Guardian, in 2008.

adam.gabbatt@theguardian.com <mailto:Adam.Gabbatt@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@adamgabbatt <https://twitter.com/adamgabbatt>

Lauren Gambino, national reporter, New York

Lauren is a graduate of ASU’s Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass 
Communication and a 2011-12 Fullbright scholar.

lauren.gambino@theguardian.com <mailto:lauren.gambino@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @LGamGam <https://twitter.com/lgamgam>

Sarah Gilbert, picture editor, New York

Sarah Gilbert is the photo editor for Guardian US, a position she previously 
held in the London office. She joined the Guardian in 2004. She previously 
worked as a picture editor for Tatler published by Condé Nast and freelanced 
for numerous newspaper, magazines and book publishers.

sarah.gilbert@theguardian.com <mailto:sarah.gilbert@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @sarahgilbert01 <https://twitter.com/sarahgilbert01>

Lee Glendinning, editor, Guardian US

Lee Glendinning is editor of Guardian US where she was previously deputy 
editor and head of news. Prior to that she was deputy editor of Guardian 
Australia. Lee joined the Guardian in 2006 and has worked as both a news editor 
and reporter in London.

lee.glendinning@theguardian.com | Twitter: @lee_glend 
<https://twitter.com/lee_glend>

Jessica Glenza, reporter, New York

Jessica is a reporter for Guardian US. Previously she was at Digital First 
Media’s Project Thunderdome.

jessica.glenza@theguardian.com <mailto:jessica.glenza@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @JessicaGlenza <https://twitter.com/JessicaGlenza>

Kira Goldenberg, deputy opinion editor, New York

Kira is deputy opinion editor for the Guardian US. She previously worked for 
the Columbia Journalism Review.

kira.goldenberg@theguardian.com <mailto:kira.goldenberg@theguardian.com>| 
Twitter: @kiragoldenberg <https://twitter.com/kiragoldenberg>

Suzanne Goldenberg, environment correspondent, Washington DC

Suzanne has been our US-based environment correspondent since 2009. She has 
won several awards for her work in the Middle East, and in 2003 covered the US 
invasion of Iraq from Baghdad. She is author ofMadam President 
<http://www.suzannegoldenberg.com/>, about Hillary Clinton’s historic run for 
the White House.

suzanne.goldenberg@theguardian.com <mailto:suzanne.goldenberg@theguardian.com> 
|Twitter: @suzyji <http://twitter.com/#!/suzyji>

Bryan Graham, deputy sports editor, New York

Bryan Armen Graham is the deputy editor of Guardian US Sports, based in New 
York. He has previously written for Sports Illustrated, the Atlantic and the 
Village Voice

bryan.graham@theguardian.com <mailto:bryan.graham@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@BryanAGraham <https://twitter.com/BryanAGraham>

Rich Harris, interactive editor, New York

Rich Harris is an interactive editor at Guardian US. He previously worked as a 
financial reporter, video journalist and web producer at Citywire, before 
joining the Guardian’s UK interactive team as a front-end developer.

rich.harris@theguardian.com <mailto:rich.harris@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@Rich_Harris <https://twitter.com/rich_harris>

Tim Hill, sports writer and editor, New York

Tim is a sports writer and editor for the Guardian US.

tim.hill@theguardian.com <mailto:tim.hill@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@timmyhilleh <https://twitter.com/timmyhilleh>

Martin Hodgson, international editor, New York

Martin is responsible for international coverage on Guardian US. He joined the 
Guardian as an assistant news editor in 2009, and before that worked as a 
freelance reporter and foreign correspondent.

martin.hodgson@theguardian.com <mailto:martin.hodgson@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @martinxhodgson <https://twitter.com/martinxhodgson>

Amanda Holpuch, reporter, New York

Amanda is a reporter at the Guardian. She joined the US office in 2012 and has 
previously written for the New York Daily News and Rodale.

amanda.holpuch@theguardian.com <mailto:amanda.holpuch@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @holpuch <https://twitter.com/holpuch>

J - L

Ben Jacobs, political reporter, Washington DC

Ben is a political reporter for Guardian US based in Washington DC. He was 
previously a reporter for the Daily Beast.

ben.jacobs@theguardian.com <mailto:ben.jacobs@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@bencjacobs <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs>

Raya Jalabi, news editor, New York

Raya joined Guardian US in 2013 as a news editor and reporter.

raya.jalabi@theguardian.com <mailto:raya.jalabi@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@rayajalabi <https://twitter.com/rayajalabi>

Amber Jamieson, reporter, New York

Prior to joining the Guardian, Amber reported for the New York Post. She also 
spent four years in Melbourne writing for Crikey, one of Australia’s leading 
political news sites.

amber.jamieson@theguardian.com <mailto:amber.jamieson@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @ambiej <https://twitter.com/ambiej>

Jennifer Kho, managing editor, New York


Jennifer is the managing editor and previously oversaw all editorial 
partnerships. She has edited and reported on a broad range of topics, but 
especially business and tech. Her stories have appeared in publications 
including the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times’ Green blog, Forbes.com, 
Fast Company, the Christian Science Monitor, GigaOM and Red Herring.

jennifer.kho@theguardian.com <mailto:jennifer.kho@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@jennkho <http://twitter.com/#!/jennkho>

Jamiles Lartey, reporter, New York


Jamiles is a reporter for Guardian US. He joined the Guardian in 2015 as a 
researcher for The Counted and previously interned for the Melissa Harris-Perry 
Show on MSNBC.

jamiles.lartey@theguardian.com <mailto:jamiles.lartey@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @jamileslartey <https://twitter.com/JamilesLartey>

Oliver Laughland, senior reporter, New York

Oliver is a senior reporter for Guardian US. He was previously a reporter for 
the Guardian in Australia where his investigations into immigration detention 
and Australia’s treatment of asylum seekers won multiple awards.

oliver.laughland@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.laughland@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter:@oliverlaughland <https://twitter.com/oliverlaughland>

Sam Levin, reporter, San Francisco


Sam was a senior staff writer at the East Bay Express in Oakland, California, 
and has previously written for the Riverfront Times, the Village Voice and New 
York Daily News.

sam.levin@theguardian.com <mailto:sam.levin@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@SamTLevin <https://twitter.com/SamTLevin>

Paul Lewis, west coast bureau chief

Paul is the head of the Guardian’s west coast office. He previously served as 
Washington correspondent and special projects editor in London.

paul.lewis@theguardian.com <mailto:paul.lewis@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@PaulLewis <https://twitter.com/PaulLewis>

Tom Lutz, sport editor, New York

Tom is sport editor for Guardian US, a position he previously held for 
Guardian Australia. He has worked for the Guardian since 2003. Tom’s Deputy is 
Bryan Graham.

tom.lutz@theguardian.com <mailto:tom.lutz@theguardian.com> | Twitter: @tom_lutz
 <https://twitter.com/tom_lutz>

M - O

Ross Maghielse, engagement editor, New York

Ross joined the Guardian US in 2016 as an engagement editor. He previously 
worked at CBS, Facebook and Digital First Media.

ross.maghielse@theguardian.com <mailto:ross.maghielse@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @Maghielse <https://twitter.com/maghielse>

Laurence Mathieu-Léger, senior video producer, New York

Laurence Mathieu-Léger is a cross-platform producer and reporter. She strives 
in thinking differently about reporting and storytelling by creating content 
that is compelling, informative and beautiful.

laurence.mathieu@theguardian.com <mailto:Laurence.Mathieu@theguardian.com>

Tom McCarthy, national affairs correspondent, New York

Tom McCarthy is a live blogger and reporter at the Guardian US. Previously he 
was the newswriter at ABC News’s Nightline. He has worked at the Daily Star 
(Beirut) and the Omaha World-Herald and blogged for the Huffington Post.

tom.mccarthy@theguardian.com <mailto:tom.mccarthy@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@TeeMcSee <http://twitter.com/#!/TeeMcSee>

Merope Mills, west coast editor

Merope is west coast editor for Guardian US. She joined the Guardian 2003, 
where she previously served as weekend editor and film & music editor in London.

merope.mills@theguardian.com <mailto:merope.mills@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@meropemills <https://twitter.com/meropemills>

Oliver Milman, environment reporter, New York

Oliver is an environment reporter at the Guardian US. Prior to joining the NY 
office, he was a reporter and freelance contributor for Guardian Australia. He 
was also editor of the website StartupSmart.com.au.

oliver.milman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.milman@theguardian.com>| Twitter: 
@olliemilman <https://twitter.com/olliemilman>

Paul Owen, deputy head of news, New York


Paul Owen is deputy of news for Guardian US and previously was live editor. He 
has also written for the Times Literary Supplement, the Times, and the 
Independent, among others. He is co-editor of the bookThe Wire Re-up: The 
Guardian Guide to the Greatest TV Show Ever Made 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852652213>
. In 2011 he was nominated at the Amnesty International and the Foreign Press 
Association awards for his work on theMiddle East live blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live>.

paul.owen@theguardian.com <mailto:paul.owen@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@paultowen <https://twitter.com/paultowen>

P - R

Deepal Patadia, communications manager, New York

Deepal.Patadia@theguardian.com <mailto:Deepal.Patadia@theguardian.com> | 
@deeeply <https://twitter.com/deeeply>

Martin Pengelly, weekend editor, New York

Martin is responsible for news coverage on Saturdays and Sundays. He has 
worked for the Guardian since 2004. Previously, he worked for the Independent 
and the Independent on Sunday.

martin.pengelly@theguardian.com <mailto:martin.pengelly@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @MartinPengelly <http://twitter.com/#!/MartinPengelly>

Ed Pilkington, chief reporter, New York

Ed has been the Guardian’s New York correspondent since 2006. He has been both 
national and foreign editor of the Guardian. He is author ofBeyond the Mother 
Country 
<http://www.amazon.com/Beyond-Mother-Country-Indians-Notting/dp/1850431132>.


ed.pilkington@theguardian.com <mailto:ed.pilkington@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @Edpilkington <http://twitter.com/#!/edpilkington>

Nadja Popovich, interactive editor, New York

Nadja is an interactive editor and journalist for Guardian US.

nadja.popovich@theguardian.com <mailto:nadja.popavich@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter:@PopovichN <https://twitter.com/popovichN>

Molly Redden, senior reporter, gender equality, New York

Molly is a reporter for Guardian US. She previously worked for Mother Jones, 
where she has widely reported on the erosion of women’s rights across the US.

molly.redden@theguardian.com <mailto:molly.redden@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
<https://twitter.com/mtredden>@mtredden <https://twitter.com/mtredden>

Jessica Reed, features editor, New York

Jessica is features editor for Guardian US. She’s French. She likes to receive 
emails with excellent ideas (here’show to pitch to her 
<https://medium.com/@jessicaelisabethreed/how-to-pitch-to-me-plus-what-i-would-give-my-right-arm-to-read-more-of-f63cb82c4470>
). She previously worked as opinion editor for Guardian Australia and also 
worked for five years in the Guardian’s London office.

jessica.reed@theguardian.com <mailto:jessica.reed@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@guardianjessica <https://twitter.com/guardianjessica>

Dan Roberts, bureau chief, Washington DC

Dan became head of the Guardian’s DC office in 2013. Previously, he worked as 
the national editor in London and was head of business.

dan.roberts@theguardian.com <mailto:dan.roberts@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@robertsdan <http://twitter.com/#!/robertsdan>

Dominic Rushe, business editor, New York

Dominic has been based in New York since 2001. He has worked for a number of 
newspapers, including the Daily Mail and the Sunday Times of London. He was 
part of the team awarded the 2014 Pulitzer prize for public service for 
groundbreaking articles on NSA surveillance.

dominic.rushe@theguardian.com <mailto:dominic.rushe@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @dominicru <https://twitter.com/dominicru>

S - U

Adithya Sambamurthy, video producer, San Francisco

Adithya is a video producer for the Guardian US, based in Oakland. He 
previously produced video for the Center for Investigative Reporting.

adithya.sambamurthy@theguardian.com 
<mailto:adithya.sambamurthy@theguardian.com> | Twitter: @AdiSamba 
<https://twitter.com/AdiSamba>

David Shariatmadari, head of opinion, New York

David oversees the Guardian’s US opinion section, which is part of Comment is 
free. Previously, he worked as deputy opinion editor for five years in London.

Please read the Guardian US opinion pitch guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/24/guardian-us-opinion-pitch-guidelines>
.

david.shariatmadari@theguardian.com 
<mailto:david.shariatmadari@theguardian.com> | Twitter:  
<https://twitter.com/D_Shariatmadari>@D_Shariatmadari 
<https://twitter.com/D_Shariatmadari>

Sabrina Siddiqui, political reporter, Washington DC

Sabrina is a political reporter based in Washington DC. She previously covered 
US politics for the Huffington Post and worked with the White House team at 
Bloomberg News.

sabrina.siddiqui@theguardian.com <mailto:sabrina.siddiqui@guardian.co.uk> | 
Twitter: @ <https://twitter.com/SabrinaSiddiqui>SabrinaSiddiqui 
<https://twitter.com/SabrinaSiddiqui>

Harry Slater, deputy head of audience, New York

Harry is the deputy head of audience, responsible for ensuring the Guardian’s 
journalism reaches the widest audience by optimizing it for search engines, 
social media andtheguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>. Previously, he held 
similar roles in the Guardian’s London office, first as a producer and then a 
deputy editor.

harry.slater@theguardian.com <mailto:harry.slater@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@harry_slater <https://twitter.com/harry_slater>


David Smith, senior reporter, Washington DC

David is the Guardian’s senior Washington correspondent. He was previously 
Africa correspondent for the Guardian.

david.smith@theguardian.com <mailto:david.smith@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@smithinamerica <https://twitter.com/smithinamerica>

Nigel Smith, entertainment writer, Los Angeles

Nigel is the Guardian’s entertainment writer, based in Los Angeles. Formerly 
managing editor of Indiewire, he has also written about film and culture for 
USA Today, Bullet Magazine and MTV.

nigel.smith@guardian.co.uk <mailto:nigel.smith@guardian.co.uk> | Twitter: 
@nigelmfs <https://twitter.com/nigelmfs>

Jane Spencer, deputy editor, strategy, New York

Before joining Guardian US in 2016, Jane worked at Fusion, where she held the 
roles of editor-in-chief, digital and senior vice president, emerging 
platforms. She is a former Nieman Fellow, and served as both executive editor 
and managing editor of the Daily Beast, as well as oversaw digital content for 
Newsweek.

jane.spencer@theguardian.com <mailto:jane.spencer@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter:@janebspencer <https://twitter.com/janebspencer>

Zach Stafford, US contributor

Zach Stafford is a contributing writer for Guardian US based in Chicago. He is 
the co-editor ofBoys, An Anthology 
<http://www.amazon.com/Boys-Anthology-Zach-Stafford/dp/1629213713/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1408655340&sr=8-1&keywords=boys+an+anthology>
.

zach.stafford@theguardian.com <mailto:zach.stafford@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @zachstafford <https://twitter.com/zachstafford>

Jon Swaine, senior reporter, New York

Jon joined the Guardian in February 2014. He was previously New York 
correspondent, Washington correspondent and a London-based news reporter for 
the Daily Telegraph, which he joined as a trainee in 2007.

jon.swaine@theguardian.com <mailto:jon.swaine@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@jonswaine <https://twitter.com/jonswaine>

David Taylor, deputy editor, news, New York

David rejoined the Guardian in 2015 as the head of news after six years at the 
Times of London, where he was head of news and then Washington DC-based US 
editor. He joined the Guardian first time around as deputy home editor in 2006 
and before that worked as a home affairs specialist and news reporter at titles 
including the London Evening Standard.

david.taylor@theguardian.com <mailto:David.taylor@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@geordiedav <https://twitter.com/geordiedav>

Matthew Teague, southern correspondent, Alabama

Matthew Teague is southern correspondent based in Fairhope, Alabama. 
Previously, he reported from the Los Angeles Times, where he was global 
correspondent. He has also reported from Afghanistan, China, Ireland and Sri 
Lanka for National Geographic, Vanity Fair, Esquire and the Atlantic.

matthew.teague@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.teague@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @MatthewTeague <https://twitter.com/MatthewTeague>

Sam Thielman, technology reporter, New York

Sam Thielman covers the business of technology for Guardian US. He previously 
reported for Adweek and Variety.

sam.thielman@theguardian.com <mailto:sam.thielman@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@samthielman <https://twitter.com/samthielman>

Steven Thrasher, writer-at-large


Steven Thrasher is writer-at-large for Guardian US. He was named Journalist of 
the Year 2012 by the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association. His work 
has appeared in the New York Times, the Village Voice, Rolling Stone, BuzzFeed, 
the Advocate and more.

steven.thrasher@theguardian.com <mailto:steven.thrasher@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @thrasherxy <https://twitter.com/thrasherxy>

Judy Tong, news editor, west coast

Judy is the west coast news editor for the Guardian US. She previously worked 
as metro editor for the New York Times

judy.tong@theguardian.com <mailto:judy.tong@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@judystong <https://twitter.com/judystong>

V - X

Jessica Valenti, columnist and writer, New York

Jessica is a columnist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/jessica-valenti> and staff 
writer for Guardian US. She is the author offour books 
<http://jessicavalenti.com/books> on feminism, politics and culture, and 
founder ofFeministing.com <http://feministing.com/>.

jessica.valenti@theguardian.com <mailto:jessica.valenti@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @JessicaValenti <https://twitter.com/JessicaValenti>

Ucilia Wang, assistant editor, editorial partnerships, New York

Ucilia Wang is an assistant editor of Editorial Partnerships at Guardian US. 
She’s been a technology and business writer and editor since 2003.

ucilia.wang@theguardian.com <mailto:ucilia.wang@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@UciliaWang <https://twitter.com/UciliaWang>

Chris Whitworth, news video producer, New York

Chris is a news video producer for the Guardian US.

chris.whitworth@theguardian.com <mailto:chris.whitworth@theguardian.com>

Richard Wolffe, columnist

Richard Wolffe is a Guardian US columnist, as well as chief digital and 
marketing officer at Global Citizen, a non-profit dedicated to ending extreme 
poverty. An MSNBC political analyst for a decade, Wolffe was most recently 
vice-president and executive editor of MSNBC.com, and is the author ofRenegade: 
The Making of a President 
<http://www.amazon.com/Renegade-Making-President-Richard-Wolffe/dp/0307463133>, 
Revival: The Struggle for Survival Inside the Obama White House 
<http://www.amazon.com/Revival-Struggle-Survival-Inside-Obama/dp/0307717429> and
The Message: The Re-Selling of President Obama 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Message-Reselling-President-Obama/dp/1455581569>. He 
previously spent several years in senior roles at Newsweek magazine and the 
Financial Times.

richard.wolffe@theguardian.com <mailto:richard.wolffe@theguardian.com> | 
Twitter: @richardwolffedc <https://twitter.com/richardwolffedc>

Julia Carrie Wong, technology reporter, San Francisco

Before joining the Guardian, Julia was a news and politics staff writer at SF 
Weekly. She previously worked as a freelance reporter, contributing articles on 
San Francisco Bay Area politics and the tech industry for Salon, In These 
Times, the New Yorker, USA Today and Vice.

julia.wong@theguardian.com <mailto:julia.wong@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@juliacarriew <https://twitter.com/juliacarriew>

Nicky Woolf, reporter, San Francisco


Nicky joined the Guardian US as a news and feature writer in 2014. He was 
previously US correspondent for the New Statesman, and a contributing editor at 
British GQ.


nicky.woolf@theguardian.com <mailto:nicky.woolf@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@nickywoolf <https://twitter.com/NickyWoolf>

Y -Z

Alan Yuhas, reporter and deputy weekend editor, San Francisco

Alan is the deputy weekend editor and a reporter for the Guardian US.

alan.yuhas@theguardian.com <mailto:alan.yuhas@theguardian.com> | Twitter: 
@AlanYuhas <https://twitter.com/AlanYuhas>
 