
When I wrote two years ago about the boom in standup comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/10/standup-comics-boom-time>, a 
veteran promoter told me: "We're in the glam rock era – and there's a punk 
revolution brewing." The revolution is now having its Red Square moment, with 
the launch of a new venue called the Invisible Dot, opened by the agency of the 
same name. The Dot has cornered the market in, it says, "creative, clever, 
interesting, adventurous, brave" standup comedy. Their signature act is the 
gnomic comic poet (and occasional Alan Partridge sidekick)Tim Key 
<http://timkeyappreciation.tumblr.com/>. "I'm quite into the idea of a new 
wave," says Dot boss Simon Pearce. "If the analogy is with bloated 70s rock, 
wouldn't you rather be inTalking Heads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/13/david-byrne-bicycle-diaries> 
than Hawkwind?"

I'm meeting Pearce in his new office in King's Cross, London, once the home of 
a private security firm. "It was in a disgusting, dilapidated state," he says, 
indicating a now-sleek space two floors above the Dot's bijou performance space 
(capacity 75). "But it's ideal for our purposes. Rather than a bit of branding, 
the Dot has become a place you can go." This new performance hub will have 
themed evenings and standup nights, starring the Dot's flagship acts: Key and 
fellow Foster's comedy award-winnerJonny Sweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/12/jonny-sweet-review>, fast-rising 
Aussie eccentric Claudia O'Doherty, the sketch troupeSheeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/16/new-edinburgh-act-sheeps>, and 
more. So far, says Pearce, "we've sold out every show".

It's a step up from the company's origins in a converted stable in 
Camden Market, where they could host performances only by moving chairs to the 
side of their office. It was there that Key andTom Basden 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Basden> (the comic and playwright behind the 
recent ITV sitcom Plebs) performed as the double actFreeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/22/kafka-comics-standup-key-basden>
, and where Inbetweeners starsSimon Bird and Joe Thomas presented spoof 
boardroom event, The Meeting 
<http://www.theinvisibledot.com/events/3-the-meeting>. That was in 2009. Then, 
staffed by Pearce alone, the Dot took Key, Sweet and The Meeting to Edinburgh 
andswept up the awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/29/edinburgh-comedy-awards-tim-key1>
. "It felt like a moment," he says.

Pearce created the company, he says, because "there were a few people floating 
around and no real home for them. They were going from producer to producer 
having mediocre experiences. They were being handled as if they were standup 
comedians, which they're not."Mark Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/15/comedy.edinburgh20062>, famed 
for once doing a 36-hour show, was one of the company's first clients.

The Dot refuses to force its talent into standup-shaped pigeonholes. If they 
have ambitious production requirements, if they want to work theatrically or 
filmically – or to publish, like Key, books of verse – the Dot will try to make 
it happen. "My last show had big, fat production elements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/14/tim-key-review>," says Key. 
"I had a large custom-built bath and flashy lighting. It's very valuable to 
have a playground where you can bash that stuff into shape."

Nor will the Dot limit itself to comedy. "I enjoy theatre and film," says 
Pearce, "and that's as much of an influence on what goes on stage here as 
comedy." The future for the Dot, he says, lies in producing plays, and hosting 
film and literary events, as well as straight standup. The unifying vision is 
that "all that activity shares characteristics of adventurousness, playfulness 
and intelligence. We want to grow an audience that trusts us."

What the Dot isn't about is "niche weirdos", he says. "When we started, there 
was a received wisdom that these guys were the fringe of the fringe, just odd 
people." As far as Claudia O'Doherty is concerned, the launch of the venue 
proves the commercial viability of unusual comedy. "Now young comics can see it 
working," she says, "and think, 'Maybe making comedy in a creative way is not 
such a terrible thing after all.'"

• The Invisible Dot is at 2 Northdown Street, London N1. Box office: 020-7424 
8918. Details:theinvisibledot.com <http://theinvisibledot.com>.
 