
Traditionally, textile designers have been tucked away in studios like busy 
worker bees, producing library-loads of mostly anonymous designs, for which 
recognition is rare.

But that’s not the case at the moment. There’s a new crop of textile artists 
creating vibrant and distinctive prints for homes. Their work is not going 
unnoticed – every retailer from Ikea to Fortnum & Mason is currently piling 
interiors sections high with print.

The new breed of designers are tech and marketing savvy as well and, as a 
result, their work – and their names – are becoming known to a much wider 
audience.

Most of them run their own businesses, heavily driven by social media. And the 
process of digital printing has enabled them to produce small batches of 
experimental work so that they can collaborate with young furniture designers 
on reputation-making projects.

Textile and furniture production has come on a long way – and these designers 
are doing it for themselves.

Emma Neuberg

Anglo-French artist and textile designer Emma Neuberg has found herself a new 
niche. After her degree in plastics at Brighton, a PhD at the RCA and years of 
teaching, she noticed that “so many graduates seemed to drop off after a few 
years. The struggle was too much.”

Tapping into an existing community of designers ranging in age from 23-80, she 
set up the Slow Textiles Group “as a platform of solidarity to carry on a 
conversation, to show work, to help. I see the potential in what they’re 
doing,” she adds, “and make it commercially viable with the use of digital 
technology… It’s me at my computer.”

That might mean altering colours or picking out motifs. New products made with 
painter Lisa Todd’s work are now stocked at Liberty and recently won an Elle 
Decoration design award, while a top-secret collaboration with the widow of an 
Op-artist is about to happen.

Neuberg, who also marks her own paintings and textiles, runs a design studio 
in London. “We are eight people from all over the world working in different 
disciplines,” she says, adding mournfully, “Some of the most exciting work 
comes from the cross-cultural mix you get here. It fuels the powerful textile 
movement. I can’t imagine an industry here without it.”emmaneubergdesigns.com 
<http://emmaneubergdesigns.com/>

Vicki Murdoch
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c8a23a6fa852d9b6e264e43e69ded2e0b73fa79%2F0_0_3678_4904%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20joy%20of%20textiles%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20new%20fabric%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20joy%20of%20textiles%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20new%20fabric%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c8a23a6fa852d9b6e264e43e69ded2e0b73fa79%2F0_0_3678_4904%2F3678.jpg>
 ‘I’m not trying to be too serious. I want my brand to be luxurious and 
humorous’: Vicki Murdoch. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
“I had John Lennon in my bed for a bit,” says Vicki Murdoch, founder of Silken 
Favours. Sorry, what? “Sort of. I drew a nice pencil sketch of Lennon’s head 
above my bed and every morning when I was leaving for school I would stuff my 
bed so it looked like he was in it. I was 11.”

Murdoch’s love of drawing endures, but her ambitions have changed. Raised in 
Aberdeen, she did some modelling, a degree at Chelsea College of Arts then 
pretty much went straight into the scarf hall at Liberty following a successful 
open day for graduate designers in 2011, when she also launched her company.

Now her scarves, cushions, wallpapers and clothes are stocked at Clerkenwell 
London, The Conran Shop and Fortnum & Mason, among others.

Her look is unashamedly cute and kitsch, featuring animals, fruit, people and 
poems, much of it influenced by her love of the outdoors. Her products range 
from hand-drawn scarves to shaped cushions, shirts and ponchos, and a new 
wallpaper collection as well as bespoke private commissions.

“I’m not trying to be too serious,” she says. “I want my brand to be luxurious 
and humorous. There’s enough shit happening in the world so if I can create 
something that brings joy to people’s houses or wardrobes then that’s great.”
silkenfavours.com <http://silkenfavours.com>

Claire de Quénetain
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc3377ffacb0dbc428a5ad0698e645a1cb3eece%2F0_907_3580_3852%2F3580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20joy%20of%20textiles%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20new%20fabric%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20joy%20of%20textiles%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20new%20fabric%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbritains-new-fabric-designers-vicki-murdoch-emma-neuberg-claire-de-quenetain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc3377ffacb0dbc428a5ad0698e645a1cb3eece%2F0_907_3580_3852%2F3580.jpg>
 ‘People often tell me that my work is quite French’: Claire de Quénetain 
Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
Claire de Quénetain’s designs are reminiscent of a childhood spent on a 
Normandy farm where her father reared deer. “I was always outside, but then we 
moved to Paris when I was 11 and I missed that life, so I began to paint.”

After a fine art degree in Switzerland – where she met her Danish husband – 
she studied textiles at the Royal College of Art, but her roots still show. 
“People often tell me that my work is quite French. I do love impressionism, 
and Dufy.”

Like a fashion designer, she works in collections. “I try to produce one or 
two each year. Each one is a new chapter of my story.”

Following a collaboration with Swoon Editions for a limited-edition fabric, 
wallpapers for Finnish company Feathr and a three-year deal with Heal’s, de 
Quénetain is working with French company Thevenon to launch new work in 2017.
clairedequenetain.com <http://clairedequenetain.com>
 