
Two weeks ago, he was a chicken fan with a tiny YouTube following. Now, he has 
a manager, millions of fans and a secret plan for world domination. But the
Chicken Connoisseur <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCZFmxd9L1btyXig-2Dp9XnA> 
has zero appetite for discussing his age. Is he a teenager, as many assumed 
when his video reviews of London chicken shops went viral last week? With 
boyish features and dressed in his Sunday best, the then-unnamed critic 
attracted millions of hits. But then, in a tweeted – and now deleted – reply to 
the question of age, he said he was 23.

“I don’t really see that there’s much of a need to confirm it,” says Elijah 
Quashie, in a phone interview arranged by his manager and old friend Marwan 
Elgamal. Quashie is promoting episode seven of Pengest Munch, which you can 
watch below, in which theChicken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chicken> Connoisseur goes to North 
Finchley. “To be honest, I can’t remember what I tweeted or didn’t tweet – a 
lot’s been going on,” he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lXumCFCVBk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lXumCFCVBk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lXumCFCVBk&media=>
Quashie, from Tottenham, north London, realised things were exploding when his 
phone started buzzing while he sat on a train. Until a little over a week ago, 
his videos had about 700 views each. His YouTube channel, which he started in 
August 2015, had 150 subscribers. At the time of writing, the videos now have 
about a million views each and the channel almost a quarter of a million 
subscribers.

“My head is still spinning,” Quashie says. “Before, I might have had a lie-in, 
take my time and go and make some jam and peanut butter sandwiches. Now it’s 
this interview, or this thing. It’s been hectic. But it’s kind of what I 
wanted, just not necessarily at this scale.”

Quashie attributes his unexpected fame to “the bald one on MasterChef”. Last 
year, he was idly watching Gregg Wallace judging a plate of food. “I wondered 
to myself, what makes his opinion more valued than anyone else’s? Is it because 
he’s been eating more food, so he has an experienced palate? I’m not sure. I 
thought, no one is doing this for the type of people who eat at chicken shops.”

Chicken shops have become integral to communities across our cities. “This 
isn’t me being cliched, but I genuinely don’t know what life would be like 
without them,” Quashie says. “When I link up with my friends, we go to the 
chicken shop and eat and chill. If not there, we might end up going to 
someone’s house but then someone has to cook and it’s a bit long.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-chicken-connoisseur-on-his-new-pengest-munch-i-owe-it-to-the-bald-one-on-masterchef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c925763e3dfd80964793a898ac55b1c9ed00d06%2F73_0_2178_1307%2F2178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Chicken%20Connoisseur%20on%20his%20new%20Pengest%20Munch%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20owe%20it%20to%20the%20bald%20one%20on%20MasterChef%E2%80%99%20%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-chicken-connoisseur-on-his-new-pengest-munch-i-owe-it-to-the-bald-one-on-masterchef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Chicken%20Connoisseur%20on%20his%20new%20Pengest%20Munch%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20owe%20it%20to%20the%20bald%20one%20on%20MasterChef%E2%80%99%20%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-chicken-connoisseur-on-his-new-pengest-munch-i-owe-it-to-the-bald-one-on-masterchef%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c925763e3dfd80964793a898ac55b1c9ed00d06%2F73_0_2178_1307%2F2178.jpg>
 For Quashie, chicken shops live and die by price. Photograph: Youtube 
Quashie, who has always been the class joker, is unimpressed by the more 
recent rise of high-end pretenders, including Chicken Shop, the Soho House 
chain. “If I want to spend £10 on chicken, I’ll go to my local bossman and feed 
five people,” he says. For Quashie, shops live or die by price, but he says 
that lighting and seating arrangements are also vital. “These things affect the 
mood of the place,” he adds.

The suits he wears while reviewing (typical line: “The burger caught me 
off-guard, ’cos it was hench … man definitely chewed on a bone”) are his church 
clothes. “I thought it was funny, because people might demean chicken shops,” 
Quashie says, “but it’s just as much a restaurant.”

The videos, made by Elishama Udorok, a filmmaker friend of Quashie’s, went 
viral when the sixth episode took off on Reddit and Twitter. Now Quashie, a 
former shoe-shop worker with a collection of 40 pairs of rare trainers, is 
getting recognised on the street. Recently, he says, a paramedic shouted at him 
from an ambulance, insisting that his local Chick-King could not be matched.

Quashie tries to limit chicken shop meals to one or two a week. “Before this 
thing blew up, I was thinking I might need to cut down to get my diet on point, 
but now …” he says. “But most of the time I’m eating jollof rice or a bit of 
plantain.” He also has plans to leverage his burgeoning fame into a new 
project. As to what that might be, though, he wants to keep fans guessing. 
“We’re talking about expensive intellectual property, so I will keep it under 
wraps,” he says.
 