
Laura Mercier Candleglow Soft Luminous Foundation, £35 
<http://www.spacenk.com/uk/en_GB/brands/l/laura-mercier/candleglow-soft-luminous-foundation-MUK200016713.html>

This foundation does “glow” in a way that no other foundations have before. 
Using pearlised pigments, it creates a satiny sheen to the skin that looks 
healthy, without being shiny or oily. It is genuinely one of the best 
foundations I have tried, and comes in 24 shades. Crucially, they have 
concealers and powders to match – and nobodyever thinks of that. You won’t be 
disappointed.

Illamasqua Beyond Powder in Epic, £32 
<http://www.illamasqua.com/shop/face/highlighters/>

Highlighters come in many weird and wonderful shades – yet finding a nice 
golden-bronze one that’s finely milled enough to not look glittery on darker 
skins isstill a struggle. Luckily, Illamasqua have nailed it with this shade, 
because not only is it so smooth that it looks like silk on the skin, but it is 
the perfect natural colour for most darker skins.

The Estée Edit by Estée Lauder: The Blackest Liner, £17 
<http://www.selfridges.com/GB/en/cat/the-estee-edit-by-estee-lauder-the-blackest-liner_327-81004877-RFLM/?previewAttribute=Black&cm_mmc=PLA-_-Google-_-Beauty-_-THEESTEEEDITBYESTEELAUDER&ci_src=18615224&ci_sku=68912222&$$&_$ja=tsid:35948%7ccid:198779374%7cagid:10881871534%7ctid:pla-100185191614%7ccrid:40370635054%7cnw:g%7crnd:9400416424632309693%7cdvc:c%7cadp:1o1&gclid=CN_Z4InY0tACFdMV0wodlhQCsQ>

Eyeliners might all seem the same, but on darker skins, however, ones that are 
a dark browny black don’t show up enough (unless subtle is what you’re looking 
for) and those insipid “nearly” blacks are an exercise in pointless. This one 
is true pitch black, as it’s moniker suggests, and if wielded carefully will do 
thebest eyeliner flick you’ve ever seen.

Morphe Brushes Plum Palette, £21 
<http://www.beautybay.com/cosmetics/morphebrushes/35p35colorplumpalette/>

If you’ve not heard of this brand, prepare to fall in love. This palette has 
35 full-sized shadows in this season’s gothic-inspired purples and burgundy 
shades that are incredible quality (better, arguably, than many higher-end 
brands) and genuinely wearable. In this entire palette, there are only about 
three shades I wouldn’t use – and eventhat is my preference. If you have spent 
your lifetime, like me, failing to find a palette that caters to darker skins, 
then rejoice – you have just found it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc95fd26526a32a091ed0bb0116d50c755625e538%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20makeup%20and%20skincare%20products%20for%20darker%20skins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%20makeup%20and%20skincare%20products%20for%20darker%20skins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc95fd26526a32a091ed0bb0116d50c755625e538%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Left to right:Too Faced Born this Way Concealer; Guerlain Terracotta Bronzer 
Powder; Laura Mercier Candleglow Soft Luminous Foundation. 
Dr Barbara Sturm Sun Drops SPF 50, £105 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/gb/en/product/822758/dr_barbara_sturm/sun-drops-spf50--30ml>

Granted – this is pricey, really pricey. But I am not sure I have ever seen a 
high SPF that literally disappears into dark skins like this one does. There 
are some pretty decent ones about now (such as La Roche-Posay Anthelios XL 
Ultra-Light Fluid SPF 50+, £16.50) but this one was specifically designed to 
suit all skin tones and it is totally transparent. It has added skincare 
benefits too – the drops contain vitamin E to fight the free-radical damage of 
sun exposure and pollution and beta-glucan to support cell regeneration. It is 
a lot to spend on one product (even if it is totally non-greasy – a rare feat 
for an SPF) – but there is a lot to love here, unlike so many other skincare 
products of this price.


Too Faced Born This Way Concealer, £20 
<https://www.toofaced.com/p/concealers/born-this-way-concealer/>

Need a concealer that conceals dark circles without caking into fine lines, 
that blends like a serum, and that blurs when it hits the skin looking entirely 
natural? This is the one, and it comes in 10 beautiful shades that cater to 
darker skin tones. It’s insanely good.

Time Bomb Instawow Sparkling Facial Mask, £39  
<http://www.timebombco.com/uk/beauty/time-bomb/instawow-sparkling-facial-mask.html>

On darker skins, when the older, dead skin cells collect on the surface of the 
skin, it can show up as greyness or ashy skin. The solution? Use this 
citrus-infused mask once or twice a week as an exfoliator – it’s super 
effective at zapping those cells and leaves your skin moisturised too. An 
all-round winner!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75c6b192170872a629ce367a2eccd0a9ccc497ed%2F0_0_4902_3680%2F4902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20makeup%20and%20skincare%20products%20for%20darker%20skins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%20makeup%20and%20skincare%20products%20for%20darker%20skins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-10-best-makeup-and-skincare-products-for-darker-skins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75c6b192170872a629ce367a2eccd0a9ccc497ed%2F0_0_4902_3680%2F4902.jpg>
 Perfect foundations, bronzers, concealers and makeup for darker skins. 
Photograph: Bambu Productions/Getty Images 
The Ordinary Hyaluronic Acid 2% + B5, £5.90 <http:// 
https://www.victoriahealth.com/product/Hyaluronic-Acid-2-B5/12196>

Despite the scary name, hyaluronic acid is a molecule we produce naturally in 
our bodies, which holds water in the skin (one gram of the stuff can hold up to 
six litres of water), keeping it looking plump and hydrated. It also supports 
our skin-cell function, priming it for the natural repair process. But astudy 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4086530/> in the Journal of 
Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology in 2014 showed that women of African descent 
have a higher rate of transepidermal water loss, which can show up as dry or 
oily skin that overproduces serum to lubricate itself. Hyaluronic acid is the 
perfect antidote to this – and this one not only looks cool, but it’s a snip! 
Use this serum after you’ve washed your face, twice a day, and follow with your 
regular serum and moisturiser.

Akoma Black Foaming Soap, £9.47 
<https://www.melariche.com/collections/face-cleansers>

Although it’s trendy to use face oils and balms (they are great to take makeup 
off) I prefer the feeling of a foam cleanser for a deeper clean. This is one of 
the few I’ve used that doesn’t strip the skin of moisture (leading to sebum 
overproduction) and leaves it feeling both clean and soft. As a bonus, it’s 
vegan, produced in Ghana and Fairtrade.

Guerlain Terracotta Bronzing Powder, £30.60 
<http://www.guerlain.com/uk/en-uk/makeup/face/powders/terracotta-bronzing-powder>

A confession: until recently, I had always thought bronzer was just for white 
people after a bit of a tan. But after a few tries with this one, I can see 
that it’s a brilliant “warmer” on all skin tones. Using it around the hairline 
and under the cheekbones, it acts as a gentle contour. And if you’re big on the 
current extreme contour/highlighter/blush trend, using a daub of bronzer to 
soften the stripeyness helps the look appear more blended. Guerlain genuinely 
do the best bronzers on the market – and this one comes in eight shades that 
have enough warmth in the undertone without looking too “red”, as so many 
darker ones do.
 