
The evisceration of the Independent Commission Against Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
 and its commissioner, Megan Latham, has been a long time coming.

New South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
politicians of all stripes have traditionally put their hands on their hearts 
and declared their support for a squeaky clean public administration ... three 
cheers for Icac.

 Yet in their heart of hearts they have feared and detested the country’s most 
formidable corruption-busting body. Two Liberal premiers fell foul of Icac and, 
during the recent Operation Spicer investigations into electoral funding, at 
least 10 Liberal MPs were banished to the crossbench or into oblivion as a 
result of their involvement with tainted donors.

Other senior Liberal party figures, such as Paul Nicolaou and Nick Di 
Girolamo, were also unhappilycaught up in Operation Spicer 
<http://icac.nsw.gov.au/docman/investigations/reports/4865-investigation-into-nsw-liberal-party-electoral-funding-for-the-2011-state-election-campaign-and-other-matters-operation-spicer/file>
, but werenot found to have acted corruptly 
<https://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/component/investigations/article/5024?Itemid=4196>.

Icac commissioner Megan Latham resigns after pressure from Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/icac-commissioner-megan-latham-resigns>
 The wounds run deep, especially after Barry O’Farrell shot his premiership to 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/barry-ofarrell-resigns-as-nsw-premier-after-thankyou-card-for-wine-emerges>
 by providing an incorrect answer to the commission in a separate but related 
matter.

 Icac’s parliamentary oversight committee, dominated by politicians from the 
right of the spectrum, soon got to work. Its job was ably assisted by two other 
factors: Icac’s inspector, the former judge David Levine; and the commission’s 
attempted investigation into allegations against senior crown prosecutor 
Margaret Cunneen, which ended up being stuck down by the high court.

 While she waged a personal war against Icac commissioner Latham, Cunneen was 
in thick with conservatives in the upper house, such as the Reverend Fred Nile, 
who also sat on the oversight committee. Levine, also batting from Cunneen’s 
end of the pitch, came up witha whole pile of recommendations 
<http://www.oiicac.nsw.gov.au/assets/oiicac/reports/other-reports/Report-to-Premier-Inspectors-Review-of-the-ICAC.pdf>
 that would have effectively defenestrated Icac’s functions as a public 
investigator.

 Cunneen, Levine and the parliamentary committee gave rise to an imperfect 
storm, with the rightwing media bellowing like banshees.

 Levine recommended an end to corruption investigations conducted in public, 
whilethe former Icac commissioner David Ipp 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/david-ipp-life-beyond-the-icac-bench-20140728-zxlso.html>
 remarked: “The whole raison d’etre of Icac is the exposure of corruption. The 
idea of exposing corruption behind closed doors is oxymoronic.”

 The inspector also wanted an exoneration protocol so that those who had been 
found corrupt by Icac and who had not been convicted of a criminal offence 
after a trial could apply to the supreme court to expunge Icac’s findings.

 It was left to Bruce McClintock SC, who, along with former chief justice 
Murray Gleeson,had conducted a review of Icac in 2015 
<http://www.dpc.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/173235/Independent_Panel__Review_of_the_Jurisdiction_of_the_Independent_Commission_Against_Corruption__Report.pdf>
, to carefully explain that Icac makes corruption findings on the balance of 
probabilities, while the DPP has the job of prosecuting and if possible 
securing convictions beyond reasonable doubt.

 Much of what Icac discovers through its coercive powers cannot be admitted in 
criminal proceedings, so it can be no surprise that findings of corruption can 
be made while criminal convictions either don’t proceed or don’t succeed.

McClintock submitted to the parliamentary committee 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/DBAssets/InquirySubmission/Body/55589/Submission%2018%20-%20Bruce%20McClintock%20SC.pdf>
: “Thus, it is inevitable that a proportion of cases where Icac finds corrupt 
conduct will not result in any prosecution, even [though] its findings were 
appropriate on the information available to Icac … That does not mean that the 
person in question did not engage in corrupt conduct, still less that the 
person is ‘innocent’.”

In the end the government and Labor members of the parliamentary committee 
agreed 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/DBAssets/InquiryReport/ReportAcrobat/6087/Report-InspectorsReviewOfICAC.pdf>
 to airbrush Levine’s two major recommendations – secret hearings and 
exonerations – to arrive at a three-commissioner Icac where all investigations 
would be conducted in secret, unless the chief commissioner and one other 
agreed otherwise.


Additional “safeguards” have been included in the new act that amount to a 
backdoor version of an exoneration protocol. New guidelines for the conduct of 
public inquiries have to be formulated, along with prior disclosure to anyone 
under investigation of all the available evidence and time for responses to be 
formulated.


Icac overhaul passes New South Wales parliament despite scathing criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/icac-overhaul-passes-new-south-wales-parliament-despite-scathing-criticism>
 No adverse findings can be made without first giving the affected party a 
right of response and for that response to be included in the final report. 
People whose conduct attracts critical observations but no formal adverse 
findings cannot be identified in the responses.

 These measures are a shift towards greater protections for those in the frame 
and remove much of the rough and tumble in the hunt for the truth. It should 
suit the politicians and the business interests that pull the strings no end.

Premier Mike Baird’s claim that his new legislation is just a reflection of 
the bipartisan recommendations of the parliamentary committee is disingenuous 
to a fault. Importantly the Labor members of the committee did not support the 
requirement that commissioner Megan Latham lose her job – and if she wanted it 
again she would have to make an application.

 To require the commissioner to put her hand up for her job while she has been 
investigating members of the governing political party and while findings 
involving senior Liberals are still pending shows the extent to which the fix 
is in.

 If she had chosen to do so, her appointment would have to be approved by the 
Coalition-controlled parliamentary committee. How do you think that would work?

 The intemperate cross-examination of Latham by members of the committee on 
things like the commission issuing a press release announcing the Cunneen 
matter had been referred to the DPP, and her right to refuse to answer 
questions on operational matters, gives us a clue.

 In fact the committee can veto the appointment of any commissioner 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/bills/Pages/bill-details.aspx?pk=3360> – ie 
politicians can blackball anyone who looks like having the constitutional 
fortitude to be able to put a broom through the Augean Stables of the state.

 The old Icac has been abolished, replaced by a new body with legislative 
mechanisms that make it much more politically responsive.

We also got a look at the vengeance that accompanied these changes. Cunneen 
was in the president’s upper-house gallery on the afternoon the legislation was 
passed.It was reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/the-new-question-for-mike-bairds-colleagues-20161117-gsrci0.html>
 that she watched as Mike Gallacher spoke in favour of the bill, while frothing 
about Icac and its commissioner.


Gallacher resigned as police minister and went to the crossbench as a result 
of evidence that emerged during the investigations into political donations. 
The final Spicer report found he had given unreliable evidence and “acted with 
the intention of evading laws” relating to the disclosure of political 
donations and the ban on donations from property developers, but did not make 
any findings of corruption.

 Grinning broadly as the legislation sailed through, the former minister said: 
“Despite occasional challenges, some days just could not get any better … Let 
me say, that is exactly how I feel today.”

 It should be noted that the parliamentary committee on Icac has not released 
Cunneen’s phone conversations and text messages intercepted by the Australian 
Crime Commission. With the snippets that have emerged we find Cunneen messaging 
her son’s then girlfriend, Sophia Tilley, “to start having chest pains” in 
order to delay a breath test at the scene of a car accident.

Eddie Obeid loses multimillion dollar lawsuit against NSW corruption commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/27/eddie-obeid-loses-multimillion-dollar-lawsuit-icac>
 The prosecutor also hoped that by the time an ambulance arrived a zero blood 
alcohol reading would be recorded. In a conversation with a smash repairer
Cunneen was intercepted telling him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/icac-the-car-crash-a-drama-in-four-acts-starring-margaret-cunneen>
: “That naughty girl had alcohol … that’s all right, I can cover that … But she 
had drunk, she’s on her P-plates. But it had been some time ago, which is why I 
sent her a message to start having chest pains and get the ambulance because it 
has bought her a few more hours. Just hoping it goes down to zero ‘cause 
otherwise there might be complicated insurance issues.”

 Nile said that Cunneen was “joking” when she made those remarks. 

 Icac commissioner Latham put forward those tapes in an attempt present a full 
picture, to counter Levine’s critical findings and the over-egged response from 
members of the committee.

 If it had been made public in its entirety, maybe we would not now be at the 
point where the independence and effectiveness of the corruption fighter is so 
miserably compromised.
 