
My favourite sideswipe at those who question the ethical provenance of all 
they consume is provided by the TV seriesPortlandia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/08/portlandia-hipster-satire-alternative-universe>
. Super-earnest couple Nance and Peter demand the life story of the chicken on 
a restaurant menu. Eventually they head for the farm to find out for themselves.

I’m more laidback about fish, because I trust seafood eco-labels. Policing 
some 3m vessels across the globe is not easy but we have some accountability, 
includingGlobalGAP <http://www.globalgap.org/uk_en/>, the label for certified 
aquaculture, and the blue tick (awarded by theMarine Stewardship Council 
<https://www.msc.org/> to 281 sustainable fisheries across the world).

The MSC system means that those who flout scientific advice on sustainable 
catch levels will be penalised. After four years in special measures, the 
North-East Atlantic fishery has won back its blue tick status. You’ll now find 
mackerel from this fishery in Waitrose (canned) and Sainsbury’s (chilled).

But Anya Hart Dyke, founder of asktheq.org <http://www.asktheq.org/>, wanted 
to find out if shoppers navigating seafood cabinets using the MCS’s Good Fish 
Guide are likely to end up with the real (sustainable, responsible) deal.

Apparently not – retail labelling can be misleading. She tested farmed sea 
bass, prawns and salmon labelled as “responsibly farmed” or “responsibly 
sourced” and found that the majority only reached a number 3 rating in the 
MCS’s guide. This advises that far from being sustainable, they should be eaten 
“only occasionally”.

We can’t tolerate assurances that don’t add up (Join Anya’s petition 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/responsibly-farmed-seafood-must-be-labelled-eat-occasionally>
 at 38 degrees to get these products relabelled). It’s simply too important. 
Either the retailers get their facts straight, or I’m going to follow the
Portlandia model.

The big picture: Fordlandia exhibition
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc804112dd174e5518b28e7be908d495314470ca2%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20buying%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20buying%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc804112dd174e5518b28e7be908d495314470ca2%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Waste land: Fordlandia in the Amazon. Photograph: Studio Swine 
For a twist on the story of capitalism destroying nature, try the Fordlandia 
exhibition, inspired by Henry Ford’s failed utopian city in the Amazon. In the 
late 1920s, he tried to create the ideal plantation but hadn’t counted on leaf 
blight and worker revolts. This show imagines a very different scenario where 
Fordlandia flourished – on at London College of Fashion until 10 December 
(fashionspacegallery.com).

Well dressed: Community Clothing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9835612db1fb7f22b46521dd59e2b053fc86fbb1%2F77_14_669_836%2F669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20buying%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20buying%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-buying-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9835612db1fb7f22b46521dd59e2b053fc86fbb1%2F77_14_669_836%2F669.jpg>
 Care in the community: Community Clothing. 
How do you ensure that British-made clothing is affordable when our remaining 
mills are caught up in the race to meet spring/summer and autumn/winter 
collection deadlines? We need to spread the love around. Patrick Grant 
(otherwise known as presenter of The Great British Sewing Bee) bought a 
Blackburn mill last year and, with a little help from crowd funding, Community 
Clothing was born. As well as supplying other brands from the factory, 
Community Clothing releases its own range of ‘made in Blackburn’ jeans, 
jackets, waterproof coats and tote bags, in a reasonable price range between 
£15 and £119. It’s hard to think of anything cooler to wear and if you can’t 
get to the newly opened Blackburn shop in person, visit it on eBay.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 