
The year 2016 was a terrific one for the Premier League and a terrible 12 
months for English football.Leicester City’s title success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
 was every bit the fairytale, the perfect antidote to long-held and justifiable 
fears that ordinary clubs could no longer dream of glory as the bigger 
institutions and the Champions League elite had effectively ringfenced all the 
prizes worth winning.

A 2016 football moment to remember: Dejan Lovren sets the Kop on fire | Paul 
Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/2016-football-moment-dejan-lovren-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league>
Leicester’s achievement was all the more remarkable for being totally 
unexpected, not only for the above reasons but also because of the struggle 
against relegation the previous season; yet even as Jamie Vardy and his 
team-matesenjoyed their party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/may/02/leicester-city-players-party-at-jamie-vardys-house-as-the-foxes-win-the-premier-league-in-pictures>
 at domestic level something much more predictable was clouding the 
international scene.

England doing badly in tournaments is now almost a given. The faithful expect 
little else and are grateful for even the smallest signs of progress. Even so, 
beingejected from the European Championship by Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/iceland-england-euro-2016-triumph>
 while simultaneously watchingWales turn into one of the teams of the tournament
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/07/wales-euro-2016-gareth-bale-portugal-cristiano-ronaldo>
 surely represented a new low. The last time England looked as though they 
might enjoy themselves at a tournament was in 2002 or 2004; the story since has 
become a little more depressing every couple of years, although no sooner does 
it seem impossible to sink any lower than the national side find a way to 
manage it.

England actually performed that trick twice in 2016. Their abject 2-1 
capitulation to the smallest nation ever to qualify for a major 
tournament represented a startling variation on the dire baseline establishedin 
Brazil two years earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/20/world-cup-2014-england-crash-out>
, when they were eliminated before the end of the group stage. Then whenRoy 
Hodgson did the decent thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/28/england-begin-search-for-new-manager-after-euro-2016-capitulation-live>
 and the FA bowed to pressure to appoint a more streetwise manager, it found 
that decision blowing up in its face as well.

So England have had three permanent managers in the calendar year, including 
one reign so short thatSam Allardyce never got the chance  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-history-suspicion-dream-job-ended-67-days>
to sit in the dugout at Wembley, and perhaps more damagingly haveended up with 
Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/gareth-southgate-england-manager-permanent>
 in charge because the job is no longer viewed as sufficiently attractive, 
prestigious or desirable.

Southgate will probably not lead England back to the forefront of world 
football, the journey is simply too long and no one now expects it. Just about 
the only positive to be drawn from a sorry situation is that he finds himself 
in a position somewhat similar toChris Coleman when he took over Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/27/chris-coleman-wales-interview>
. Unlike England, Wales have never had any sense of entitlement in 
international football – they know they have to start low and work hard for any 
success. Recognition finally arrived in 2016 and well-deserved it was, too. 
England could do worse than attempting to copy the Coleman plan, although with 
Wembley to fill and 50 years of hurt to factor in, the parallel is not an exact 
one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3d4877664a7de20970b0bab30d272cf07fb0bd8%2F0_187_5003_3002%2F5003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3d4877664a7de20970b0bab30d272cf07fb0bd8%2F0_187_5003_3002%2F5003.jpg>
 Gareth Southgate was appointed as England manager in late November following 
Sam Allardyce’s one-match spell in the role. Photograph: Julian Finney/Getty 
Images 
With the abuse scandal this newspaper helped uncover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/crewe-alexandra-andy-woodward>
 reaching unimagined proportions by the end of the year, 2016 could hardly be 
described as a high point for English football. Yet, if the Premier League is 
what this country does best, this was one of its vintage years. The Leicester 
story delighted football followers around the world and the achievement is not 
diminished by the team’s struggles in the league this season. Now that Chelsea, 
Liverpool and the Manchester clubs are back to something approaching their 
best, it does begin to appear that Leicester took advantage of an ideal set of 
circumstances last season.

Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur are particularly guilty of dithering instead of 
cashing in on the managerial changes and overblown transitions going on 
elsewhere, but Leicester still deserve immense credit for being decisive and 
making their distinctive team ethic work. They were worthywinners of Team of 
the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
 at the BBC’s Sports Personality awards for, if ever a title was won by 
collective effort rather than the contributions of individuals, this was it. 
Leicester took on the big teams and won when it mattered, most notably in 
gaining astunning victory over Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/manchester-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 at the Etihad and providingJosé Mourinho’s final defeat as Chelsea manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/15/jose-mourinho-chelsea-players-betrayed-leicester>
.

Arsenal and Tottenham are particularly guilty of dithering instead of cashing 
in on managerial changes elsewhere

Mourinho had remarked that Leicester were in a false position, a statement he 
then had to retract, although his mistake was not quite as expensive as similar 
assumptionsmade by bookmakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/bookmakers-record-payout-leicester-city-win-premier-league>
.

Mourinho is back in employment now at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/27/jose-mourinho-appointed-manchester-united-manager>
, where he gradually seems to be shaping the side into one capable of living up 
to club traditions, even if talk alreadyof a contract extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-contract-extension>
 has unsettled some fans. Under Mourinho, United still made their worst start 
for 27 years, however well they are currently playing, and although Paul Pogba 
is now startingto exert a positive influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/paul-pogba-manchester-united-medical-juventus>
 in midfield andHenrikh Mkhitaryan has begun to perform well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/jose-mourinho-mkhitaryan-secret-location-manchester-united-west-ham>
, it is fair to say fans were expecting a little more bang for their buck after 
breaking the world transfer record in the summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22299ef024952b1ab531992bca846674fcf70382%2F11_29_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22299ef024952b1ab531992bca846674fcf70382%2F11_29_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
 José Mourinho oversaw Manchester United’s worst start to a league season in 27 
years but the resurgent Zlatan Ibrahimovic has raised spirits. Photograph: 
Hannah McKay/Reuters 
Manchester City are in a slightly better, albeit similar, position. Pep 
Guardiola has not found it easy to adjust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/pep-guardiola-admits-he-has-to-adapt-to-make-manchester-city-stronger>
 to the Premier League after all. The City manager has been freely admitting as 
much in recent weeks but his side have played some thrilling football at times 
during a campaign that has already yielded impressive victoriesover Arsenal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
andBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
. Last season City would have been out in front without too much of a problem. 
This season they are being put in the shade by Chelsea and Liverpool, 
especially the former, although a moment of truth will arrive at Anfield when 
City are the visitors on New Year’s Eve.

It is fair to point out, as Guardiola and Mourinho frequently do, that Chelsea 
and Liverpool have the advantage of being unencumbered by European commitments 
this season, althoughAntonio Conte in particular deserves credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/chelsea-> for completely 
changing his club’s outlook in well under six months in a new country.Chelsea 
have been playing so well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 of late that even neutrals have been appreciating their ability.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8ac2ac6fa8484ac7b9c6d44ede5b71675859325%2F47_151_4749_2850%2F4749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20in%20football%3A%20highs%20and%20lows%20of%202016%20%E2%80%93%20from%20Allardyce%20to%20Zlatan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2F2016-year-football-sam-allardyce-zlatan-ibrahimovic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8ac2ac6fa8484ac7b9c6d44ede5b71675859325%2F47_151_4749_2850%2F4749.jpg>
 Antonio Conte looking animated yet cool in one of his suits. Photograph: Glyn 
Kirk/AFP/Getty Images 
That used to happen in a grudging way when Mourinho was in charge, mostly 
because the efficiency was remarkable, but now Chelsea are the genuine 
crowd-pleasing article, showcasing some exceptional talents and looking a good 
bet for the title. If it is true thatRoman Abramovich has always hankered after 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/30/mourinho-chelsea-maradona-boring-immoral-football>
 an entertaining, free-scoring side, a force not only recognised but admired 
around Europe, he seems closer than ever to achieving his wish. If they 
continue to improve, European progress will surely follow under Conte, although 
that is for next year.

As 2016 winds down, with the official prizes to be handed out towards the end 
of the season, here are a few unofficial suggestions for the year as a whole …

I've just Cruyffed them and stuck it in the net
Hal Robson-Kanu 
Team of the year Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>

Coach of the year Claudio Ranieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/15/claudio-ranieri-an-apology-leicester-city>

Player of the year Riyad Mahrez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2015/dec/08/riyad-mahrez-jamie-vardy-player-season-premier-league>
.

Most improved team Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>

Most improved player Diego Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/13/chelsea-diego-costa-interview-football-my-life>

Most memorable goal Jamie Vardy v Liverpool 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7b82BGKcAuI>.

Most jaw-dropping moment Hal Robson-Kanu puts Wales ahead 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SMudVqJOyz0> against Belgium

Quote of the year Robson-Kanu again: “I’ve just Cruyffed them and stuck it in 
the net”

Most remarkable atmosphere Liverpool v Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/2016-football-moment-dejan-lovren-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league>
.

Most embarrassing own goal Sam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce>

Most embarrassing choice of drink Sam Allardyce

Best positional switch Chelsea to back three and wing-backs

Best celebration (premature) Alan Pardew dancing  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lUCtvuPzgU0>on the sideline at the FA Cup final

Worst news management Manchester United spoiling Louis van Gaal’s moment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/louis-van-gaal-fa-cup-win-not-enough-manchester-united>
of glory at Wembley

Worst slide to the bottom of the table Swansea and Sunderland to share

Most promising newcomer Marcus Rashford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/07/marcus-rashford-jose-mourinho-sam-allardyce-manchester-united-england>
.

Best old-timer Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/zlatan-ibrahimovic-last-hurrah-football-manchester-united>
.

Most biblically apt arrival due this Christmas Gabriel Jesus joins Manchester 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/manchester-city-sign-gabriel-jesus-palmeiras>
.

Piece of commentary for posterity Steve McClaren talking up England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/england-iceland-internet-reacts-humiliating-euro-2016-brexit>
 as Iceland score

Best dresser Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte>
. Even his outfits look more animated than those of his rivals
 