
I awake to a loud clap of thunder shaking my little wooden cabin at Ramsvik 
holiday village, perched on the edge of the coast near Smögen inwest Sweden 
<http://www.westsweden.com>. As I peek out of the window, dark clouds sweep 
across the sea bringing torrential rain. I am just about to run a 24km trail 
race along the rugged coastline of the Bohuslän archipelago and I am already 
fearful of the granite rocks and, more specifically, my ability to run across 
them. And that’s before they are wet.

The race is the second stage of a three-day event from outdoor-footwear makers 
Icebug called theIcebug Xperience 
<http://icebug.com/se/en/event-2/icebug-xperience/>. It comprises a 74km race 
along the stunning coastline across smooth seaside rocks, through untouched 
forests and across winding paths between old fishing villages. Competitors can 
run or hike the stages, and accommodation and locally sourced, sustainable food 
is all part of the package.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fthe-icebug-race-along-stunning-coastline-and-through-untouched-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7934997caa1ee49acb68ce8744fad856109f8d95%2F0_0_2558_3840%2F2558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Icebug%20race%20%E2%80%93%20along%20stunning%20coastline%20and%20through%20untouched%20forests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fthe-icebug-race-along-stunning-coastline-and-through-untouched-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Icebug%20race%20%E2%80%93%20along%20stunning%20coastline%20and%20through%20untouched%20forests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fthe-icebug-race-along-stunning-coastline-and-through-untouched-forests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7934997caa1ee49acb68ce8744fad856109f8d95%2F0_0_2558_3840%2F2558.jpg>
 Icebug Xperience trail race in west Sweden. Photograph: Jonas Jörnberg/Icebug 
Because I am on a fleeting visit, I am just doing the second stage. The day 
before, I had the chance to see the coastline from the sea as we kayaked 
through a few of the thousands of remote granite islands that form the 
archipelago, past the terracotta boat houses through a sea full of 
multicoloured jellyfish. Our guides Marcus and Ingela looked like the classic 
Swedish couple: tall, blond and athletic.Kayaking 
<http://www.vastsverige.com/en/products/172923/Skargardsidyllen-Kayaking-Ocean-Adventures-Grebbestad-Koster-West-Sweden/>
, or as the locals more aptly call it here, paddling, is wonderfully laid back; 
there are no currents or wind and once I’ve worked out how to steer myself, I’m 
off and away. We kayak to Pinnö island and Ingela has packed a lunch of local 
delicacies. The food in west Sweden is outstanding. We are just a bit too early 
for the much-talked-about start of lobster season, but I feel as if I managed 
to consume my body weight in prawns. Post-kayaking, we were rewarded with 
oysters fresh from the sea atEverts Boathouse <http://www.evertssjobod.se/>.


We arrive at the Ramsvik campsite that night, and over dinner, I have a chance 
to chat with some of the competitors who have just finished the first stage. 
They all tell me how hard it is.


The next morning, the thunderstorm passes just in time for the start of the 
race, though the granite rocks that make up the majority of this stage are 
going to be wet no matter what. We head off from Ramsvik and, after a very 
short time, we hit the wide flat rocks covered in water. I am cautious, not 
knowing what my grip will be like, or indeed my balance. I lift my feet well, 
try not stay too long in any one place to slip but also run at a snail’s pace. 
I pick my way over rocks and kilometres pass by almost unnoticed because I am 
so focused. The scenery is stunning, the rocks have pink and orange hues 
against the sea.


There’s a brief respite once we get on to the tracks and pathways, which 
offers a chance to run properly and stretch my legs as we head into the forest 
briefly before our next meeting with the rocks. I am gaining in confidence and 
am now running across the rocks feeling that I can trust my feet and my shoes, 
and then I slip. No harm is done, so I carry on running more cautiously only to 
fall again almost immediately. I gather myself. I am bruised and have a cut on 
my hand, but otherwise unscathed and it’s not long before we leave the granite 
again. The rest of the run was a mixture of the slabs and beautiful forest 
trails, mud and water – which I am much more comfortable with, being from 
England.


While in Sweden, I thought, do as the Swedes do, so I fartleked the rest of 
the course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2015/jun/09/fartlek-swedens-gift-to-running>
. I went slower over the rocks and ran harder in the forest and on the paths. I 
ran up the hills, because I knew I wouldn’t slip, and was more cautious going 
downhill on slippery stones. By running like this I had time to recover from 
the harder efforts, so by the time I hit the final part of the race – which 
took me over the boardwalks and past the brightly painted boats houses of 
Smögen harbour – I still had something left in my legs.My Garmin was telling me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/may/14/running-gps-watches-reviewed>
 I still had 2kms to go and I was almost disappointed when I rounded a corner 
to hear someone shouting, “100m to go.”


I crossed the finish line very wet, covered in mud, bruised and blistered, but 
already wishing I wasn’t leaving Sweden the next day and could do the next 
stage. There’s always next year – if I can just find somewhere to practise 
running on granite.


The Icebug will run again next year <http://icebug.com/se/event/>

More info on walking/hiking (or indeed running) in Sweden 
<http://icebug.com/icebugx/ More info on walking/hiking (or indeed running) in 
Sweden>

 