
Campaigners claim millions of shoppers are being led to believe the expensive 
shoes they buy in high-street stores are made in Germany and Italy – when many 
are actually made by workers on poverty wages in eastern European sweatshops.

The scandal is exposed in a damning investigation into the European shoe 
industry, which details illegal wages and shocking working conditions in 
factories turning out footwear for the UK market.

The investigation claims some big brands appear to be using a legal loophole, 
stamping their products with “Made in Italy” or “Made in Germany” to suggest 
they are high quality, when they have actually been made by poverty-stricken 
eastern European workers. The investigation found that footwear workers in
Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> were earning as little as 
49p an hour including overtime – which is an illegal rate even in such a poor 
country.

Workers in Macedonia, where the hourly wage was as low as 64p, described being 
taken to hospital in wheelbarrows after fainting in freezing factories where 
they had to work with strong chemicals. “If the employer needs to complete, 
let’s say, an order of 9,000 pairs of shoes, he will put 90 pairs on the belt 
and even if you want to die, you have to finish it,” a worker told researchers 
compiling the report, entitledLabour on a Shoestring 
<http://labourbehindthelabel.org/report-labour-on-a-shoe-string/>.

How can Lidl sell jeans for £5.99? Easy … pay people 23p an hour to make them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/13/lidl-jeans-bangladesh-worker-pay-23p-an-hour>
It alleges that one Macedonian factory, which produced Geox shoes, was paying 
illegally low wages of €131 (£113) a month, with overtime. The legal minimum is 
€145 before overtime.

Geox shoes are available in the UK through John Lewis and House of Fraser, 
among other retailers. Geox did not respond to requests for comment.

Manufacturers are able to take advantage of an obscure European loophole known 
as the outward processing trade (OPT) scheme. Under the rules, companies cut 
parts for the shoes in one country before exporting them to a low-wage economy 
where they are assembled and sewn. They are then imported back to the original 
country, duty free. The finished shoes can then be labelled as being made in 
the original country.

The report, compiled by researchers from several European rights groups, is 
based on interviews with 179 workers in 12 factories. It condemns OPT as “a 
dead-end scheme for workers, national economies and businesses” and describes 
it as “an economic and social road to ruin”.

Researchers found that the factories produced shoes for brands including Zara, 
Lowa, Deichmann, Ara, Geox, Bata and Leder & Schuh AG and subsidiaries of CCC 
Shoes & Bags inPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> and Rieker and 
Gabor in Slovakia.

Bata did not address the allegations directly but welcomed the report, which 
it said had provided “interesting insights in the generally under-reported 
working conditions in eastern Europe”. The company said it expected its 
suppliers to comply with local laws.

The report looked at production in six low-wage European countries: Albania, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bosnia-and-herzegovina>, 
Macedonia, Poland, Romania and Slovakia. One in three of the Albanian workers 
questioned were paid less than the legal minimum wage of £121 a month, even 
with overtime and bonuses. The report indicated that women were generally worse 
off. Albanian workers reported having to work on up to 60 pairs of shoes a day.

Female workers in Romania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/romania> said 
their husbands had to find low-paid seasonal work in the west to be able to 
afford wood to burn for heating during the winter. One man said: “Both my wife 
and I work in this factory. We are glad we could find work, but cannot imagine 
raising children on two factory wages. Our parents and relatives cannot support 
us, so we depend on this miserable wage. We wanted to move from the village to 
the city for a better life, but cannot afford to pay city rent from our 
salaries.”

Another worker, Krisztina, said her family had to keep livestock to feed 
themselves. “We have a garden and some animals. If I had to buy meat, like 
chicken breast from the shop, I would not be able to afford it. So, we must 
also take care of our animals every day because they are some of the only food 
we can afford.”

About 24 billion pairs of shoes are produced worldwide every year, including 
about 729 million made inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
. But prices for European shoes are higher: an average Italian pair exports for 
£39, while an average Chinese pair exports for £3.

In a Macedonian factory supplying the Geox, Deichmann and Bata brands, workers 
said they were expected to use strong chemicals and complained of rheumatism, 
back pain, allergies and respiratory problems. They said their skin was often 
exposed to harmful chemicals because wearing gloves meant lower productivity 
and even lower wages.

Deichmann said it was not aware of issues with the factory, but was conducting 
its own investigation and would take any action necessary.

According to the report many workers complained of sweltering conditions in 
summer and freezing factories in winter. “My hands are freezing, I’m shivering 
all over and the door to the hall is open all the time,” one worker said. “If I 
get sick at work and if I have a car, somebody will take me to the hospital. 
But if I don’t have a car, then I will be taken in a wheelbarrow,” said another.

“In the summer, the heat is unbearable so we have had the ambulance here six 
times this year because co-workers had heat stroke,” said one Slovak worker.

If I get sick at work and I don't have a car, somebody will take me to 
hospital in a wheelbarrow
East European worker 
Dorel Mituletum, deputy mayor of Calafat in Romania, was also interviewed for 
the report and said of the factory workers: “The poor things drop like flies.”

One Romanian worker said that when three women were overcome by the heat at 
their factory her Italian supervisor joked that “he would have to improvise a 
cemetery in the back yard if the women continued to faint”.

Anna McMullen, from Labour Behind the Label <http://labourbehindthelabel.org/>
, a UK-based workers’ rights group involved in the report, said consumers 
needed to be told the truth about where their shoes come from. “The clever ruse 
of shipping shoe parts out to low-wage countries to the east of Europe for 
assembly and glueing, before returning shoes for labelling as ‘made in Europe’, 
is duping consumers into thinking their products are made with dignity,” she 
said.

“In fact, we now know that workers in Albania and Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> are being paid wages so low that 
they cannot feed their families – so much so that the gap between the minimum 
and living wage is greater than in China. These out-sourcing methods used by 
some brands are turning mass profits on the back of worker poverty.”

McMullen said consumers tended to associate sweatshops with Asia, but the 
reality was that they existed much closer to home. “The need for fast fashion 
is bringing shoe production closer to home, and with it comes wage competition 
with Asia that mirrors, if not tops, the exploitation that we see elsewhere in 
global supply chains.

“Workers are earning less than a quarter of the wage that they need to live 
with dignity, despite toiling massively long hours to deliver stressful 
piece-rate targets. ‘Made in Europe’ no longer means ‘made with dignity’.”

The groups behind the report want manufacturers to be more transparent about 
where they make shoes that are on sale on UK high streets – and about wages and 
working conditions.

McMullen added: “Today, we are calling out brands that hide exploitation 
behind labels that con consumers. Brands have a duty to make sure human rights 
are delivered for people who make their shoes. Being honest about where that 
is, is one of the first steps.”

Separately, one company not named in the report, Adidas, was invited by the 
researchers to comment on its findings and backed the campaigners’ calls for 
improved working conditions. “We do agree … that working conditions in eastern 
Europe are generally under-reported and increased worker rights protection is 
called for. More should be done to improve wages and we know, first-hand, that 
engagement between local suppliers, unions, governments, and buyers can pay 
dividends and improve the overall lives of workers,” it said.

Zara’s parent company, Inditex, confirmed that it produced a small number of 
shoes in Romania and Albania. It said it operated a strict code of conduct to 
comply with the most stringent labour and human rights standards. It added: “In 
line with a key recommendation of the report, Inditex is working hard, 
worldwide, to drive living wages throughout its supply chain.”

Lowa stressed that it too set the highest ethical standards. In a statement, 
it said: “Lowa strongly condemns the deplorable conditions shown in these 
reports. The decision to manufacture 100% ‘made in Europe’ incorporates our 
assurance of fair and humane manufacturing conditions. We will be intensifying 
our oversights in this area in order to be absolutely certain that facilities 
producing for Lowa abide by such conditions.”

The other brands did not respond to the allegations in the report or to the 
Observer’s request for comment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fshoes-uk-high-street-made-for-a-pittance-eastern-europe-sweatshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ef358a948d736ba69e306d8bdb6c54454f2066b%2F0_125_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20expensive%20%E2%80%98Italian%E2%80%99%20shoes%20made%20for%20a%20pittance%20in%20east%20European%20sweatshops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fshoes-uk-high-street-made-for-a-pittance-eastern-europe-sweatshop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20expensive%20%E2%80%98Italian%E2%80%99%20shoes%20made%20for%20a%20pittance%20in%20east%20European%20sweatshops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fshoes-uk-high-street-made-for-a-pittance-eastern-europe-sweatshop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ef358a948d736ba69e306d8bdb6c54454f2066b%2F0_125_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Some workers said they were expected to make up to 60 pairs of shoes aper day 
Photograph: Alessia Pierdomenico/Bloomberg via Getty Images  