
1

Planet Earth II (BBC)


Planet Earth II is a stunning ensemble of talent, beyond David Attenborough’s 
sober poetry, which he deploys judiciously, modestly and obliquely to remind 
the audience not just that macaques are cheeky, but that the cameramen are shit 
hot as well. And there is more going on than the majesty of nature. The editing 
is seamless, the scripts are arresting, the perfectionism is there in every 
particular. But I find myself transfixed by its first principle: that we all 
have a visceral connection to nature, root for it, mourn with it, rejoice with 
it. Theiguana hatchlings chased by snakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/11/planet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough>
 were the jewel in its crown, closely followed by the famished lions making an 
Ocean’s Eleven, last-ditch punt at a giraffe. The dynamics of such scenarios, 
triumph and disaster, the symphony of co-operation, the elation of escape, 
underdogs battling desperate odds – these are the cornerstones of narrative, 
the stuff that drove us to invent language in the first place. Planet Earth II 
made me reach into an emotional vault I haven’t accessed for decades. That’s 
its umbrella distinction, its overarching achievement: it is a teenage kick, a 
transport of wonderment that adult life mostly only reminds you of. Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb79d99a28e0ff98662b56968ff9ea30019ac6%2F0_0_3940_2627%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb79d99a28e0ff98662b56968ff9ea30019ac6%2F0_0_3940_2627%2F3940.jpg>
2


Fleabag (BBC3)


Bold and filthy and utterly self-assured, Fleabag was unlike anything else on 
television this year. The series opened with a monologue about anal sex, sped 
through a terrorist-incited bathroom panic attack and rows and rows of 
plaster-cast penises – to that finale which threw you totally off-kilter. It 
was a stupendous ending, and it launched an already brilliant series into the 
stratosphere. It’s why Amazon picked up the series and made it so buzzworthy 
Stateside. And it’s why, a decade from now, Phoebe Waller-Bridge is going to be 
a national treasure.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/18/fleabag-the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-2-fleabag>


3

Stranger Things (Netflix) 

The key ingredients barely need repeating. The Duffer brothers took the best 
of 80s pop culture – elements of John Carpenter, Steph(v)ens King and 
Spielberg, shoved them in with Dungeons and Dragons,New Order 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3LY3ftiLqmE> and Winona Ryder – and ended up 
with an algorithm-busting, genre-melding, word-of-mouth smash. Set in the
fictional Indiana town of Hawkins 
<http://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/stranger-things-filming-locations-are-just-as-spooky-in-real-life>
, it’s the story of the mysterious disappearance of Will Byers, one-quarter of 
a gang of nerds. It quickly spread its narrative into a string theory-twisting, 
sci-fi horror via CIA conspiracy thriller with a side of high-school romance. 
And from the deep-dive discussion of the plot to thesoundtrack 
<http://www.what-song.com/Tvshow/173/Stranger-Things/s/666>, the endless memes 
and a new star in the shape of Millie Bobby Brown, Stranger Things provided a 
genuine 2016 TV moment.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-3-stranger-things>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d6262ecab1632704657ee834eadd233c301a65%2F486_0_2457_1475%2F2457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d6262ecab1632704657ee834eadd233c301a65%2F486_0_2457_1475%2F2457.jpg>
4

Happy Valley (BBC)

The second series of Sally Wainwright’s masterpiece was arguably even better 
than the astonishing first. The violence was less bloody, but Wainwright’s 
pitiless examination of the human condition as it plays out in the Calder 
Valley was bleaker, more brutal and braver than before. As always in her work, 
women were – simply, unapologetically, vitally – at the heart of it. Sarah 
Lancashire was the linchpin again, of course, as Sgt Catherine Cawood, 
shouldering burden upon burden in the absence of any alternative. In a world 
full of shiny dramas whose characters don’t feel rounded, watching Wainwright’s 
people endure their tragedies then keep on is a glorious, restorative sight. As 
richly satisfying and devastating as you could have hoped.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/16/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-4-happy-valley>

5

The Night Of (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

When Naz Khan, the 23-year-old student son of a Pakistani American cab driver, 
is found leaving a crime scene containing the corpse of a young woman with whom 
he spent a wild night, the case seems clear-cut. A cop summarises the evidence 
excitedly: “Sex, drugs, rock’n’roll – and he’s a Muslim!” Yet this apparently 
simple “solve” remains, across the whole of this HBO eight-parter, ambiguous to 
the end – and possibly even beyond it. It had a harrowing central performance 
by Riz Ahmed, and a documentary realism about the horrors of imprisonment on 
Rikers Island. It was perceptive in its representation of race in the US, and 
its structure was thrilling, with the accused alternately positioned as victim 
and unreliable narrator. A shocking reflection of a society and a system in 
which facts have become relative.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/15/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-5-the-night-of>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e892e6afb639a00f9189d64512ae69a2b93a097%2F0_0_1920_953%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e892e6afb639a00f9189d64512ae69a2b93a097%2F0_0_1920_953%2F1920.jpg>
6

Black Mirror (Netflix)

Charlie Brooker is showing us the abyss into which we are amorally plummeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/reflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality>
. His series of six near-future nightmares asked questions that possess us in 
2016. Are we nice enough? Are we interesting enough? Why don’t trolls like me? 
And if we aren’t nice or interesting, can we use technology to make ourselves 
seem that way to improve our social capital? What made it such compelling 
viewing was that its answers were unremittingly, almost unbearably, dark.Read 
more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/14/black-mirror-the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-6>

7

The Night Manager (BBC)

The BBC’s glossy Sunday-night Le Carré spectacular pivoted on the relationship 
between Hugh Laurie’s laconic monster Richard “Worst Man in the World” Roper 
and Tom Hiddleston’s Jonathan Pine, his alleged protege in infamy and actual 
undercover agent. It had sex, glamour, superb performances all round – and that 
delicious denouement, which tied up all the loose ends in one highly explosive 
bow.Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/13/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-7-the-night-manager>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/13/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-7-the-night-manager>

8


Line of Duty (BBC)

The third series of Jed Mercurio’s terrifyingly plausible police corruption 
drama started with an execution and a coverup, and ended with two 
extraordinarily intense interrogations and an “urgent exit required” break-out. 
And in between? Revenge, torture, decapitation, abuse, more coverups – and so 
many false leads and dead ends that it kept you awake at night. There’s another 
series next year; it’s hard to see how Mercurio will top this one.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/12/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-8-line-of-duty>

9

Transparent (Amazon Prime)

In the best series of Transparent so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
, Jill Soloway and her transaffirmative team took the concept of life as a 
state of permanent, anxiety-inducing transition to the very edge. Then they 
pushed it over and watched it smash into a million heartbreaking pieces. In a 
year when it has been hard to conceive that president-elect Trump and 
Transparent are products of the same country, this was a most defiant, poignant 
act.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/11/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-9-transparent>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee235518dd3f4b45f833fe2e612894eb1714afd1%2F0_181_3900_2339%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee235518dd3f4b45f833fe2e612894eb1714afd1%2F0_181_3900_2339%2F3900.jpg>
10

HyperNormalisation (BBC iPlayer)

Adam Curtis jumps from Manhattan to Libya to cyberspace and back again in a 
three-hour tour through a post-truth world that is less a documentary than an 
experience. HyperNormalisation is not just provocation; it’s an eye-opening 
collection of insights into history and the human condition.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/10/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-10-hypernormalisation>

11

Atlanta (FX/Fox)

Donald Glover’s smart, woozy sitcom about a wannabe hip-hop manager tackled 
racial prejudice and poverty – topics that tend to be excluded from the comedy 
conversation. If that makes Atlanta sound a bit heavy, it really isn’t: there’s 
a surreal playfulness that brings to mind everything from Monty Python to 30 
Rock. Worth watching alone for the black Justin Bieber.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/19/atlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv>

12

Westworld (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

Michael Crichton’s robot-cowboy-on-the-rampage movie has become a genuinely 
tremendous television series. Vast in scope, gorgeous to look at and brimming 
with big ideas, you could waste entire weeks Googling fan theories on what 
Westworld is actually about.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/04/westworld-review-seamless-marriage-cowboys-dystopians>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6a31f245990be9d295096b520671951bdd4a12%2F0_271_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6a31f245990be9d295096b520671951bdd4a12%2F0_271_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
13

Trapped (BBC4)

The sleeper hit of spring. Fans fell in love with police chief Andri – the 
hottest, beardiest man in Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/24/trapped-bbc-olafur-darri-olafsson-interview>
 – and his sidekick Hinrika as they tried to solve the murders taking over 
their tiny town after a blizzard left it in lockdown.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/12/trapped-the-finale-review-gruelling-bleak-and-breathlessly-brilliant>


14

War and Peace (BBC)

The latest adaptation of Tolstoy’s revered doorstopper was a sexy, handsome 
piece of storytelling fromAndrew Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/30/andrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace>
, retaining much of the book’s detail – if, somewhat inevitably, losing a 
smidge of battlefield chaos. Superbly acted, War and Peace set a new high-water 
mark in literature-to-TV adaptations. It also made lying about having read it 
much, much easier.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/04/war-and-peace-deutschland-83-review>

15

The Crown (Netflix)

Peter Morgan’s lavish look at the private lives of the royal family. Claire 
Foy plays a perfectly stoic Queen Elizabeth II, Matt Smith gives gaffes galore 
as Phil the Greek, and there’s a very moving turn byJohn Lithgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/02/john-lithgow-the-crown-netflix-when-the-brexit-movie-lands-i-call-dibs-on-boris-johnson>
 as Winston Churchill. But above all, this is TV that refuses to bow down to 
royalty. The BBC could never have touched it.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>

16

American Crime Story: The People Vs OJ Simpson (FX/BBC)

The glove! The verdict! The ridiculous wigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/08/the-people-vs-oj-simpson-a-wig-by-wig-analysis>
! This campy high-soap-opera – starring John Travolta’s eyebrows, Sarah 
Paulson’s power perm, David Schwimmer’s Sad Ross and a too-short-by-halfCuba 
Gooding Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/26/cuba-gooding-jr-on-oj-simpson-it-could-have-been-me-in-that-bronco>
 – allowed us to relive the entire trial of the century, yet somehow gripped us 
to the last.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/19/the-people-v-oj-simpson-finale-review-racism-sexism-and-celebrity-dazzle>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6adfb43c050c6a67a367f02d533875ffa086f882%2F0_0_4366_2624%2F4366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6adfb43c050c6a67a367f02d533875ffa086f882%2F0_0_4366_2624%2F4366.jpg>
17

Grayson Perry: All Man (Channel 4)

Whether he’s talking to aimless teenagers on park benches or slick city boys 
in ivory towers,Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/04/grayson-perry-all-man-boys-breaking-man-contract-if-they-cry>
 always listens and never patronises. That’s how he wins people’s trust and 
persuades even the wariest subjects to open up. The results are funny, moving 
and sometimes revelatory for all involved.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/05/grayson-perry-all-man-martial-arts-durham-miners-suicide-masculinity>

18

Flowers (Channel 4)

Will Sharpe’s comedy centred on an oddball family living in the English 
countryside, but rather than resting on their quirks for laughs, it wrung its 
jokes from relationships, mental health issues and plain old unhappiness.Julian 
Barratt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/24/julian-barratt-trouble-keeping-lid-on-self-hatred-mighty-boosh-flowers>
’s patriarch was a children’s author suffering from depression; the story of 
his subsequent breakdown was harrowing, uplifting and, amazingly, incredibly 
funny.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/26/flowers-review-gloriously-dark-sitcom-depression-rage>


19

National Treasure (Channel 4)

Until the devastating climax, the brilliance of National Treasure lay in its 
sustained ambiguity. Should we sympathise with Paul Finchley,a man accused of 
multiple historic rapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/06/for-the-people-abused-robbie-coltrane-yewtree-inspired-national-treasure-channel-4>
, or remember he was an actor and suspect his carefully nurtured outrage? This 
was a drama about power and powerlessness – and, as real life has horribly 
shown us, if you’re a “national treasure” you can get away with almost anything.
Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/national-treasure-review-robbie-coltrane>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72487a1382935e4e65e34418010b089fa4ff20ff%2F0_80_2500_1543%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72487a1382935e4e65e34418010b089fa4ff20ff%2F0_80_2500_1543%2F2500.jpg>
20

Louis Theroux: Drinking to Oblivion (BBC)

In the year he contended with both the Church of Scientology and Jimmy Savile, 
a one-off documentary about the lives of alcoholics might seem small-fry. Yet 
Drinking to Oblivion was one of the filmmaker’s most affecting works, shining a 
light on debilitating cycles of dependency. A tough watch, but with moments of 
hope and humour, as well as the unlikely sight of Louis singing Guys and Dolls.
Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/25/louis-theroux-drinking-to-oblivion-review-worry-alcohol-consumption>

21

Game of Thrones (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

The sixth season was essentially more of the same – that is to say, the single 
greatest televised fantasy-drama in history. But many of the sedentary subplots 
burst into life here, and the Battle of the Bastards bloodbath becamea 
record-breaking hour of TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/sep/19/battle-of-the-bastards-game-of-thrones-episode-record-seven-emmys>
. Still unmissable.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>

22

OJ: Made in America (ESPN/BT Sport 1)

A new watershed for TV documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/11/oj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations>
, this eight-hour epic managed to draw dizzying new insight from a well-worn 
subject. Though its nominal concern was Simpson’s life – from sporting success 
to the infamous murder trial, right up to his farcical autumn years – its real 
focus was on something far broader: the many complex ways in which race and 
celebrity intersect in American life. A staggering achievement.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/oj-made-in-america-espn-review>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ecdfecead3e48a7f7a4fcfb81d1278b6b5e5377%2F0_159_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ecdfecead3e48a7f7a4fcfb81d1278b6b5e5377%2F0_159_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
23


NW (BBC)

In reducing Zadie Smith’s 2012 novel about crises of identity affecting two 
former schoolmates in London to 90 minutes of television, writer Rachel 
Bennette and director Saul Dibb inevitably lost Smith’s stylistic tricks but 
commendably kept her complex representation of black lives.Nikki Amuka-Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/nw-star-nikki-amuka-bird-zadie-smith-is-purposefully-challenging-the-viewer-london>
 as Keisha/Natalie, whose unhappiness in her skin triggers sexual 
transgression, should surely be a 2017 Bafta contender.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/nw-bbc-zadie-smith-london-tale-has-never-felt-so-relevant>


24

The Young Pope (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

Jude Law, in a career-best performance, is an orphan from New York who 
unexpectedly becomes pope and appals the Vatican with his strange ways and 
views. In thissharp, visually spectacular 10-parter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/the-young-pope-jude-law-paolo-sorrentino>
, writer-director Paolo Sorrentino’s depiction of a crude and peculiar American 
taking over a famous historical address now looks spookily prophetic of the 
ascent of President-elect Trump.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/the-young-pope-review-jude-laws-sleek-pontiff-shines-in-sorrentinos-twin-peaks>

25

Veep (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

Veep’s fifth season kicked into a higher gear, underpinned as always by Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus’s note-perfect performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/julia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld>
. In a year when American politics was going “full-metal Nixon”, President 
Myers’s all-too-short term proved that politics could still be a laughing 
matter.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/27/veep-season-five-supernaturally-selfish-selina-tops-trump>

26

People Just Do Nothing (BBC Three)

Bang – lyrical blow to the jaw! The third series of the brilliant BBC3 
mockumentary about Brentford’s pirate radio buffoons Kurupt FM wasmore meta and 
more melancholic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/22/how-people-just-do-nothing-made-sitcoms-funny-again>
, with MC Grindah and long-suffering Miche’s relationship on the rocks and 
Steves’ Nan leaving him. But it only added to the hapless jokes of this gem.
Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/20/people-just-do-nothing-kurupt-fm-ibiza>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb974e8ddf8299988f61a2f0b022f34d6ec2a557%2F0_0_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb974e8ddf8299988f61a2f0b022f34d6ec2a557%2F0_0_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
27

Camping (Sky Atlantic)

Julia Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/06/julia-davis-i-like-that-really-repressed-stuff-you-can-kick-against>
’s unhappy campers gave us the miserable comic masterpiece of the year. You 
will have needed a holiday to recover from this one. As far from a campsite as 
humanly possible.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/13/camping-review-julia-davis-a-comedy-masterpiece-that-is-gloriously-boldly-bleak>

28

The Missing (BBC)

From writers-of-the-moment Jack and Harry Williams, this gripping, grisly 
crime drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/30/the-missing-bbc-so-stressful-it-became-almost-impossible-to-watch>
 spanned continents and played out in three timeframes to get to the truth 
about the abduction of young Alice Webster. You’ll never look at a drill the 
same way again.Read a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/01/the-missing-review-fabulous-unbearably-tense]>

29

Insecure (HBO/Sky Atlantic)

Issa Rae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/11/issa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy>
 made her name with the whip-smart web show The Misadventures of Awkward Black 
Girl, so it was thrilling to see her get picked up by HBO for a full series. 
And she didn’t disappoint: Insecure was a refreshing, candid and hilarious 
depiction of black female friendship – with a soundtrack overseen by Solange.
Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/18/insecure-lets-black-women-watch-ourselves-on-tv-at-last-issa-rae>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2eab84c24b086ba2addef14027b3ef6ccf05a1%2F0_212_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2eab84c24b086ba2addef14027b3ef6ccf05a1%2F0_212_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
30


Louis Theroux: Savile (BBC)

For more than a decade, Louis Theroux has agonised about not grilling Jimmy 
Savile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/26/jimmy-savile-sexual-abuse-timeline>
 more when they first met. In this extraordinarily self-flagellatory 
documentary, he meets the victims of the man who emerged as a monster, the man 
he once referred to as a friend.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/29/when-louis-theroux-met-jimmy-savile-again-gullible-bbc>

31

Stag (BBC2)

This was a rare beast: the three-part Saturday night comedy-horror. The Wrong 
Mans’ Jim Field Smith’s stag do from hell in the Scottish Highlands was an 
under-the-radar thrill, with a glorious double twist.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/26/gritty-bbc-comedy-series-stag>


32

Exodus (BBC2)

Exodus followed refugees such as Hassan, a kind-hearted English teacher 
fleeing Syria, and resigned-to-death 11-year-old Isra’a as theysecretly filmed 
their journeys across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/07/people-smuggling-turkey-greece-exodus-bbc-tv-documentary>
. From nightmarish negotiations with people smugglers to footage of bailing out 
sinking dinghies, this was the most essential, devastating documentary of the 
year.Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/12/exodus-our-journey-europe-review-bbc-documentary-bbc>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa320b4390e98a6ab589f8008a4f6fe9a4f75f316%2F0_0_4210_2907%2F4210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa320b4390e98a6ab589f8008a4f6fe9a4f75f316%2F0_0_4210_2907%2F4210.jpg>
33

Silicon Valley (Sky Atlantic)

Still the funniest show out there by several hundred miles. In its third 
series, the team behind the revolutionary data-compression platform Pied Piper 
finally get everything they’ve ever wanted, and realise how awful it is. Plus: 
horse sex!Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/29/silicon-valley-satire-mark-zuckerberg-san-francisco-tech-bay-startup>

34

Motherland (BBC2)

Sharon Horgan and Graham Linehan’s slapstick sendup of the agonies and 
rivalries of motherhood. A group of scrummy mummy bullies gang up on Julia (the 
phenomenally frazzled Anna Maxwell Martin) and only Liz (Diane Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/10/diane-morgan-comedy-genius-on-playing-philomena-cunk>
) will come to her rescue, taking in her kids when Julia’s day goes to pot. We 
only got to watch the pilot this year – look out for a full series run in 2017.
Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/motherland-review-a-terrifying-no-holds-barred-glimpse-into-parenthood>

35

Louis Theroux: A Different Brain (BBC2)

In recent years, Louis Theroux has moved away from sensationalist subject 
matter and made more thoughtful films that continue to unravel in the mind long 
after viewing. This documentary exemplified his new style: following four 
people with life-changing brain injuries, it doubled as an affecting, subtle 
and profound meditation on identity and mental health.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/15/the-best-tv-of-2016-so-far-game-of-thrones-happy-valley-line-of-duty-the-night-manager-trapped>

36

The Girlfriend Experience (Amazon Prime)

The TV adaptation of Steven Soderbergh’s 2009 film is an improvement in almost 
every way. Part coming-of-age story, part corporate potboiler, part erotic 
thriller, it’s as sleek and bold as anything you’ve ever seen. Stick around for 
the jaw-dropping finale. There’s nothing like it.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jun/30/the-girlfriend-experience-amazon-prime>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d6dbe239c0f05a178776abcd681865cd58cdd%2F0_60_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d6dbe239c0f05a178776abcd681865cd58cdd%2F0_60_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
37

The Great British Bake Off (BBC1)

This year, Britain’s most popular show brought us Candice, who gave Mel and 
Sue a run for their innuendo money, Andrew the engineer’s Leonardo da 
Vinci-inspired rotating cog pie (plus his knights jousting with caramel 
phalluses), and the charmer from Ghana, the undisputed king of cooking cool –
Selasi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/selasi-great-british-bake-off-christmas-recipes>
.Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-gbbo-final-flour-butter-sugar-eggs-tears>

38

Hillsborough (BBC2/ESPN)

In the year when the unlawful killing of 96 football fans at Hillsborough 
stadium wasfinally recognised in a court of law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
, this documentary provided the definitive account of what happened on 15 April 
1989. Comprising archive footage and interviews with those caught up in the 
tragedy – from survivors to police officers – it underlined the catastrophic 
mistakes made on the day and the shameful cover-up that followed.

39

Deutschland 83 (Channel 4)

It’s the 1980s, the cold war is raging and nuclear war is a distinct 
possibility. Thankfully, this German-American espionage thriller made the 
threat of irreversible global meltdown seem fun.Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/24/deutschland-83-box-set-review-a-serious-thriller-driven-by-jeopardy-and-wry-humour>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e214d9add026660ba09e21d6429a123203acb5e%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e214d9add026660ba09e21d6429a123203acb5e%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
40

Mum (BBC)

Lesley Manville shone as Cathy in this sweet sitcom from Him & Her creator 
Stefan Golaszewski. Starting with the funeral of her husband, Dave, it quickly 
became a wistful will-they-won’t-they between Cathy and Dave’s best mate, 
Michael. Props also to Lisa McGrillis for her portrayal of Cathy’s son’s 
girlfriend, Kelly – the most naively amusing sitcom character of the year.Read 
a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/14/mum-review-lesley-manville-stefan-golaszewski>

41


Orange Is the New Black (Netflix)


Between Piper’s branding with a swastika, Lolly’s sectioning and Poussey’s 
tragic end, this series was horrific – andway more critical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/17/orange-is-the-new-black-this-show-will-change-the-fabric-of-our-culture>
 of the US penal system than ever before. With overcrowding at Litchfield 
prison, the rage between inmates and guards simmered throughout – until that 
heart-stopping final scene.Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/24/orange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness>

42

BrainDead (Amazon Prime)


It’s 2016. Political discourse has become violently polarised. Why are we all 
so angry and partisan? According to BrainDead, it’s because space bugs have 
come to Earth, crawled into our ears and eaten our brains. This was the 
timeliest, most inventive and sharpest satire of the year.Read a full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/26/braindead-the-absurd-new-thriller-that-will-make-your-head-explode>

43

Crazy Ex-Girlfriend (Netflix)


A wacky musical romcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/21/crazy-ex-girlfriend-rachel-bloom-im-not-saying-love-is-bull-but>
 about obsessive self-deceit, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’s skill is its ability to 
package complex ideas in primary-coloured wrapping. It’s a silly and funny 
show, and you’ll recognise someone you know in every single character.Read a 
full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/29/crazy-ex-girlfriend-rachel-bloom-comedy>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd326ae14576bf861360dcc19b3060f2cdb914993%2F0_133_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd326ae14576bf861360dcc19b3060f2cdb914993%2F0_133_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
44

Fresh Meat (Channel 4)


JP, Vod and co finally graduated this year, though not before one last series 
ofJesse Armstrong and Sam Bain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/22/fresh-meat-series-four-writers-university-student-days>
’s smart, funny comedy drama. Throughout its run, Fresh Meat has been that 
rarest thing: a TV re-creation of uni that refuses to resort to student cliches.
Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/28/fresh-meat-farewell-good-luck-in-the-real-world-its-terrible-out-there>

45


2016: Year Friends (Vimeo)


After the BBC neglected to pick up their sketch-show pilot People Time for a 
series, young British comics Liam Williams, Ellie White, Natasia Demetriou, 
Jamie Demetriou, Al Roberts and Daran Johnson created their ownweb sitcom 
<https://vimeo.com/2016webseries>. The result was absurdly creative and 
gratifyingly weird: in a world of staid banter, it proved that comedy could 
still be taken to bizarre new extremes.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/08/2016-year-friends-surreal-monthly-web-only-series>

46

Ash vs Evil Dead (Virgin Media)


A dollop of silliness to counteract the po-facedness of most modern drama. 
Picking up where the Evil Dead films left off, a middle-aged, chainsaw-handed 
Bruce Campbell leads a foul-mouthed crusade against the forces of darkness.Read 
more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/the-walking-dead-ash-vs-evil-tv-peak-gore-horror-blood>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb467e8a3557c523b5107ff35ee74879355108c1%2F116_303_3388_2033%2F3388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb467e8a3557c523b5107ff35ee74879355108c1%2F116_303_3388_2033%2F3388.jpg>
47

Lovesick (Netflix)

Remember Scrotal Recall? Tom Edge’s timeline-jumping, gonorrhea-themed 
love-com on Channel 4 has been renamed and reborn on Netflix, resuming its run 
as the best will-they-won’t-they show since the US Office.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/16/c4-comedy-scotal-recall-returns-as-netflix-series-lovesick>

48


Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt (Netflix)


The second series of Tina Fey and Robert Carlock’s cult-survivor fun show. 
This time it centred around the festive antics of Kimmy, her roommateTitus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/12/all-hail-tituss-breakout-star-of-unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt>
 and their daffy landlady Lillian. Kimmy got a new job as an elf, Lillian went 
on a one-woman mission to bring down gentrification – and Titus put on a show 
called Kimono You Didn’t, inspired by his past life as a geisha.Read a full 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/15/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-season-two-funnier-smarter-than-ever-review>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d6170b562a61a705c70faa2895adc07522c0d9%2F0_190_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20the%20full%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbest-tv-shows-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d6170b562a61a705c70faa2895adc07522c0d9%2F0_190_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>

49


Halt and Catch Fire (Amazon Prime)


AMC’s 1980s tech drama is still the most sorely underrated US show on TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/22/halt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe>
. The spectacular third outing saw our crew of computer programmer pioneers 
move to the nascent Silicon Valley. It had secret weddings and Super Mario 
Bros, plus multiple masterful cliffhanger endings. Catch up before the fourth 
and final series starts next summer.Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/12/half-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men>

50


The Walking Dead (Fox)


The post-apocalypse horror show marches on – and Rick Grimes and the gang may 
finally have met their match in Negan and the sadistic Saviors. How will they 
stop themselves dying, one by one, at the hands of Lucille the barbed-wire 
baseball bat?Read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/24/the-walking-dead-season-seven-premiere-the-day-will-come-when-you-wont-be>
 