
The Wretched of the Earth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wretched-of-the-earth.html> by Frantz Fanon


I teach it to my first years and return to the book through their degree. It 
is the perfect introduction to complex ideas: oppressive socio-economic 
political structures, forms of resistance and defiance, and the point at which 
violence becomes justifiable.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> always find the book 
challenging, disturbing and thought provoking. And that is exactly what 
university syllabi ought to be!

'They tell me not to speak Polish': students on life after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/27/international-students-life-after-brexit-universities>
Sunny Singh, lecturer at London Metropolitan University and author of Hotel 
Arcadia

Malgudi Omnibus <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/malgudi-omnibus.html> by R K 
Narayan


Every literature student should have space on her shelf for the complete works 
of R K Narayan. Or at least for a Malgudi omnibus, the fictional town in which 
he set many of his novels, including Swami and Friends, The Bachelor of Arts 
and The English Teacher. Although Narayan has had Western champions, including 
Graham Greene and John Updike, his work is perhaps failing to find a younger 
readership. I teach on the creative writing MA and MFA courses at the 
University of Surrey, and will be playing my own small part in trying to keep 
his legacy alive on campus. What we can learn from Narayan ranges from his 
mastery of setting (Malgudi teems with life), his gently devastating comic 
technique, to his ability to tackle large issues (such as India’s sterilisation 
programme) with a light but keenly incisive touch.

Monica Ali, author of Brick Lane, which was shortlisted for the 2003 Man 
Booker Prize
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f7328a63fedc54452509c80e91fe954cc6155ab%2F0_221_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f7328a63fedc54452509c80e91fe954cc6155ab%2F0_221_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
 Monica Ali recommends the works of R K Narayan. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
Flowers in the Mirror <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flowers_in_the_Mirror> by 
Li Ruzhen


This Chinese novel from 1827 is a fantasy classic of the Qing Dynasty period, 
full of sophisticated philosophy, tense quest plot-lines and one of the most 
wonderful explorations of feminism I have ever read. Li Ruzhen picks up gender 
roles, caresses them, dresses them and then fully subverts them, creating a 
realistic, resilient, revolutionary yet humorous setting for the action of much 
of the novel in the “Country of Women”.

Sabrina Mahfouz, playwright, poet and screenwriter

Samskara <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/samskara.html> by U R Ananthamurthy


Samskara by U R Ananthamurthy is one of the finest novels written by an 
Indian. In the early part of the 20th century, the idyllic life of a small 
south Indian village is disturbed by an unexpected dilemma, which the community 
asks their priest to resolve. Although he is famous for his learning, the 
priest discovers that the ancient scriptures are of no use to him; he must 
leave the village and seek out new knowledge. On the way, he encounters a 
prostitute. More adventures, comic and disturbing, follow, and by the time he 
returns to the village, the priest has changed in ways no one could have 
anticipated at the start of the novel. Samskara is a brilliant and moving 
portrait of a nation poised on the brink of modernity.

Aravind Adiga, author of The White Tiger, which won the 2008 Man Booker Prize
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d30c8272baaab56b87c1b007aa482482ea176a%2F0_601_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d30c8272baaab56b87c1b007aa482482ea176a%2F0_601_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
 Aravind Adiga recommends U R Ananthamurthy’s Samskara. Photograph: David 
Levenson/Getty Images 
Absent 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/rhpg//rc/library/display.pperl?isbn=9780812977424> 
by Betool Khedairi

Set in 1990s Baghdad, it is the story of a young woman, Dalal, for whom many 
losses must be reconciled. Despite the backdrop of sanctions and bombings, and 
despite the daily hardships of Dalal and the others who live in her apartment 
complex, the story is so delicately told that it never crumbles under its own 
weight. This must be the reason I keep coming back to it. And this: the 
resilience of the characters is unlike any I have encountered in other novels. 
It is not pat, not easily won. The men and women survive through reinventing 
themselves, over and over again, because they have no other choice. So they do 
it with innovation, even humour.

Uzma Aslam Khan, author of Trespassing and other novels

Palace Walk <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/palace-walk.html> by Naguib 
Mahfouz


The first part of Naguib Mahfouz’s epic Cairo Trilogy, which traces the story 
of the al-Jawad family over three decades to the end of World War II. Mahfouz, 
who in 1988 became the first Arab to win the Nobel Prize, lived his entire life 
in modest circumstances in the Egyptian capital, but was influenced both by 
nineteenth-century realists such as Balzac and Zola and twentieth-century 
modernism.

Palace Walk is set in 1917–19. The al-Jawad family is ruled over by the strict 
patriarch and merchant Ahmad, who keeps his wife and daughters in seclusion, 
while taking full advantage of the pleasures offered by the sleazier 
backstreets of Cairo. His five children are, in one way or another, engaged in 
a struggle to find their own identities, while labouring under the twin regimes 
of their father and the British colonial authorities. But the novel is very far 
from schematic. It’s at once a tremendously readable family saga and a novel of 
adolescent and political awakening. The characters are fully realised and the 
book teems with the sights, sounds, aromas and bustle of the city. The 
climactic chapters, which unfold against the backdrop of a demonstration 
against the British authorities, successfully interweave the personal and 
social themes of the book. It’s a novel that achieves the rare feat of being 
deeply satisfying on both a political and an emotional level.

Graeme Macrae Burnet, author of His Bloody Project, which was shortlisted for 
the 2016 Man Booker Prize
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6058ee6a3cb99f16729992d06f5a655b7c405664%2F0_27_5061_3037%2F5061.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6058ee6a3cb99f16729992d06f5a655b7c405664%2F0_27_5061_3037%2F5061.jpg>
 Graeme Macrae Burnet recommends Palace Walk by Naguib Mahfouz. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
On Black Sisters’ Street 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-black-sisters-street.html> by Chika Unigwe


In this novel, Unigwe imagines the lives of four very ordinary women in 
Nigeria and shows how they end up as prostitutes in Belgium. While 
circumstances conspire against them, they are not presented as passive victims. 
They are all fully-realised, flawed individuals who have agency, making 
unexpected choices. We follow their paths as as they forge new lives in their 
adopted city, hoping it will better than the problems they’ve left behind. The 
novel, set in Nigeria and Belgium, writes about experiences that are otherwise 
marginalised, demonised or objectified. Unigwe’s admirable achievement is to 
create exciting fiction that is powerful, humorous, shocking and puts invisible 
black womens’ lives in the centre of the page.

Bernardine Evaristo, author and professor of creative writing

So Long a Letter <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/so-long-a-letter.html> by 
Mariama Ba


A few years back I saw a documentary clip in which a girl in Sierra Leone, 
about nine years old, reaches for the words to describe her favourite book to 
an aid worker. The aid worker can’t figure out what the book is and says in a 
patronising voice: “Does it have a princess?” “No,” says the girl, “This lady 
writes a letter to her best friend.” The aid worker shrugs, shakes her head, 
moves on.

So Long a Letter, by the Senegalese writer Mariama Ba, was published in 1980. 
I teach it to my students in the US and they love it just as much as the little 
girl in Sierra Leone. Written in the form of a letter from a woman in Dakar to 
her best friend in America it covers a West African woman’ s life: girlhood, 
coming of age, the promises and pitfalls of modernity, love and its 
disappointments, the mixed blessings of her new widowhood, her own faults, 
failings and conflicts, Ba’s protagonist Ramatoulaye Fall lays her life on the 
page. It is a staple of African literature courses but should be read far more 
widely. Even personal diaries are written with a reader in mind, but So Long a 
Letter’s delight lies in its unalloyed honesty, it really does feel like a long 
look into a private world. Like a novel written by a woman who thought nobody 
would ever read it, perhaps.

Aminatta Forna, author and fellow of the Royal Society of Literature
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea12bf834e0524c5627868f4285b4ce40f3a6c96%2F0_1006_2672_1603%2F2672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20non-western%20books%20that%20every%20student%20should%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthe-non-western-books-that-every-student-should-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea12bf834e0524c5627868f4285b4ce40f3a6c96%2F0_1006_2672_1603%2F2672.jpg>
 Aminatta Forna recommends So Long a Letter by Mariama Ba. Photograph: Linda 
Nylind for the Guardian 
Dhammapada <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dhammapada-2.html>, Buddhist text


For a non-Western work that anyone would benefit from reading, I choose the 
Dhammapada, one of the foundational texts of Buddhism. Composed in the 3rd 
century BC in the Pali language, the slim compilation of Gautama Buddha’s 
sayings and teachings may as well have been written last year, so powerfully 
does it penetrate the core of human experience. Its insights carry the 
timelessness of all great literature: in 423 pithy aphorisms it lays bare the 
universal afflictions of suffering, envy, fear, greed and despair, and 
illumines the psychological frailties behind them. It also offers the keys of 
liberation from the prison of our self-perpetuating torments: the Buddhist path 
of skilful and mindful action. Granted, even after reading the Dhammapada we 
will screw up again and again, but it does provide a framework of wise, serene, 
beneficent living - a goal to move towards, however slowly.

Robert Doyle, author of Here Are the Young Men

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 