
It was the spring of 1977 and I had just started writing for the NME 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nme>. I’d been hired to write about punk, 
but there wasn’t much around at the time. Mainly you saw bands play live; there 
wasn’t much vinyl. The culture moved more slowly than it does now. I went to 
meetthe Clash  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/clash>just before their first 
album came out.

We met on the Circle line. I remember standing on the platform with Chalkie 
Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/09/chalkie-davies-best-photograph-jerry-dammers-the-specials>
, the photographer, when we sawJoe Strummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joestrummer> stick his head out of the 
carriage and invite us on board. We met in the morning and spent the whole 
afternoon going round and round the line, drinking Foster’s and taking
amphetamine sulphate <http://www.release.org.uk/drugs/amphetamines>. It’s hard 
to imagine that happening today with a journalist, but there was an 
understanding back then. We felt like we were all part of a scene, all at the 
start of our careers, and the band trusted me not to stitch them up. Nobody had 
any money and we were all living in odd places – I was in a bedsit in Crouch 
End that I’d got off Rat Scabies, Mick was living with his nan, Paul was in 
west London with his girlfriend, and Joe was in a squat.

At Liverpool Street we all piled into a photo booth to take some more speed

They had just gotten rid of their drummer, so it was the three of them. From 
the outside it looked like Paul was the pin-up, Joe was the leader and Mick the 
music, but really they were three leaders. They argued a lot, but they were 
like brothers, or mountaineers, joined together by this absolute belief in 
their project. A proper band. They were convinced that they were going to 
become bigger than the Rolling Stones in about 10 minutes. It didn’t happen 
quite like that, but it wasn’t far off. It was that early period, when 
everything was still ahead of us, before the drugs became a problem.

I remember at Liverpool Street we all piled into a photo booth to take some 
more speed. A policeman must have seen four pairs of Dr Martens sticking out 
and tried to pull the curtain open while we laughed and laughed until we wept, 
like you do when you’re a child.

When night fell we decided we wanted to go to a rock ’n’ roll club. We tried 
to go to the Speakeasy, but they wouldn’t let us in because we weren’t cool 
enough. In the end it was the perfect punchline to a perfect day. I remember 
seeing all these people going in with Rod Stewart feather cuts and velvet 
flares, and just thinking: “You have no idea what’s about to hit you.”

The Hanging Club  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385210/>by Tony 
Parsons is published by Penguin Random House at £12.99. To order a copy for 
£11.04, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385210/>
 