
If you could only bottle what goes on in Once and For All We're Gonna Tell You 
Who We Are So Shut Up and Listen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/oct/23/theatre-edinburghfestival> you'd 
make a mint. This 60 minutes of teenage kicks performed by 13 Flemish teenagers 
ranging in age from 14 to 18 is pure animal magnetism, a sweaty adrenaline rush 
that captures the restless energy of being a teenager and all the absurd, 
reckless abandon of being poised permanently on the brink of the high diving 
board. It makes you look back and try to pinpoint the divide, that moment when 
you ceased being a child and became an adult and life became much more 
manageable but also much more dull. It makes you feel joyful and sad in equal 
measure. It is an extraordinary piece of theatre, cunningly choreographed to 
feel completely unchoreographed and madly manipulative. But in all the right 
ways. It is a show that doesn't hold back. Everything these kids do they do 
with total commitment, even though you know that they are acting being 
themselves. They just do it better than most actors could.

What's fascinating about it in a British context is that, as Shami Chakrabati 
recently commented at theAction on Children's Arts 
<http://www.danceuk.org/metadot/index.pl?id=25375&isa=DBRow&op=show_printer_friendly>
 conference, we really seem to hate kids in this country. Many adults stumbling 
upon a group of 13 teenagers in the street would cross the road. Yet here they 
take centre stage. For the most part children are neither seen nor heard in the 
theatre unless they are cute little moppets appearing in Annie or The Sound of 
Music. But just at a time when parenting anxiety and fear of teenagers has 
reached epidemic proportions along come a slew of shows in which watching 
teenagers being teenagers has adults queuing up to watch.

Quarantine, one of the most ground-breaking and exciting UK companies has 
often included young people in its work including three teenage girls in its 
most recent showOld People, Children and Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/jun/16/theatre.reviews>. In That Night 
Follows Day 
<http://www.timetchells.com/projects/performances/that-night-follows-day/>, a 
group of children arrange themselves as if on best behaviour in a school gym, 
gaze at the audience and tell us some home truths. It's an hour-long litany of 
accusation whose effect is to create a sense of how much of childhood is about 
being coerced and bullied into doing things that you don't want to do by 
adults. "You make us promises and sometimes hope you will not remember them. 
You tell us to sit still, to stay quiet. You tell us no."

What's interesting about all these shows, of course, is that they are shaped 
and mediated by an adult director. Richard Gregory directed Old People, 
Children and Animals. It is Tim Etchells (from Forced Entertainment) who is 
credited with writing and directing That Night Follows Day, and his distinctive 
voice is apparent behind that of the children. For Once and For All it is 
31-year-oldAlexander Devriendt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/oct/23/theatre-edinburghfestival> who 
takes the credit. Is this a problem? Only if the pretence was otherwise, and in 
any case these shows are not made by teenagers for teenagers, but very much for 
adult audiences. The two 13-year-olds I took to Once and For All liked it, but 
much in the way they enjoy the illicit thrill of seeing an episode of Skins. In 
That Night Follows Day the children gaze out at us accusingly as they speak of 
love, betrayal, selfless sacrifice and emotional manipulation. They may be 
standing on stage in the spotlight, but it is us - the adult audience - who are 
being interrogated. The show causes an extraordinary welter of emotions because 
you know that as a parent you are guilty of the behaviour you also recall from 
your own childhood. The cunning of this artful yet beautifully simple piece is 
that the adult audience has a foot in both camps.

There's a similar fascination in Once and For All which tumbles across the BAC 
stage and trashes it. After one scene in which the kids snog, touch each other 
up and hang out, they turn and look at us. Their gaze is so merciless you want 
to look away. "What are you looking at?" asks one and you can hear the scorn in 
her voice. We have been caught looking at the animals in the zoo. I'd be 
interested to know whether these shows work differently in other contexts and 
when performed in societies not as scared of their young as we are, and whether 
their fascination is in part based on a kind of nostalgia because they allow us 
to reconnect with our lost teenage selves. The kids, I think, will be alright; 
it's us adults watching who I worry about.
 