
The “yellowface” dispute 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/londons-print-room-criticised-for-racist-casting-in-chinese-roles/>
 that blew up just before Christmas over the Print Room’s all-white casting of
Howard Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/01/howard-barker-scenes-execution>
’s In the Depths of Dead Love, a play set in ancient China, is a reminder of 
how far theatre has come in terms of diversity – and the significant distance 
it still has to go.


As the Print Room’s clumsy, tying-itself-in-knots response 
<http://www.the-print-room.org/blog/> points out, Barker’s play was broadcast on
Radio 3 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01m5c5j/p01m5ccp> in 2013 with an 
all-white cast featuring Richard E Grant and Francesca Annis. As far as I can 
see, it passed without protest even though that was just a year after the 
furore that met the under-representation of east Asian actors in the RSC’s 
production ofThe Orphan of Zhao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/22/royal-shakespeare-company-east-asians>
.


That dispute was significant in raising awareness about the lack of roles 
available to east Asian actors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/mar/07/developing-britains-east-asian-actors-playwrights>
, but clearly the message still hasn’t reached all British theatres. In 2017 
every production on our stages should draw from the widest possible pool of 
talent and reflect the rich diversity of that talent. Four white actors is no 
reflection of that at all.

Diversity in theatre: why is disability being left out?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/16/disability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton>
Undoubtedly, attitudes to diversity have shifted since I wrote, almost exactly 
two years ago, thatdiversity is key to creativity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
. Organisations such asAct for Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/09/do-we-need-diversity-quotas-for-theatre>
 andTonic Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/sep/23/theatres-must-act-now-about-gender-inequality>
 have played a major role in forcing the arts to start to think about how they 
operate and how they might bring about real diversity within their workforces 
and on stage, rather than paying lip service to the idea or doing nothing at 
all. Nevertheless, you can still see what looks like thoughtlessness and 
unconscious racism behind casting decisions, sometimes defended through talk of 
artistic freedom.

If you want signs of progress, then I suppose a few years ago the Print Room’s 
casting would probably have passed without comment, just as Trevor Nunn’s
all-white casting of The War of the Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/trevor-nunn-war-roses-all-white-history>
 in 2015 would likely have gone unnoticed. It’s good that is increasingly less 
likely to happen. Diverse casting can challenge some audiences – I heard 
recently of a regional theatre whose casting of a black Cinderella one year led 
to emails and letters of protest. In that instance, it made the artistic 
director even more aware of the need to cast diversely.

Perhaps it’s not surprising that audiences react in such a way when so much 
TV, film and theatre is still stuck in the past and casting directors still 
choose from the same small pool of actors, denying others opportunities and 
access. The arts are waking up to the need for greater diversity in terms of 
race,disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/16/disability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton>
, gender andsocio-economic background 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/dave-obrien-and-mark-taylor-do-the-arts-promote-diversity-or-are-they-a-bastion-of-privilege/>
. But as long as the top-down structures at management and board level continue 
to favour those who are white, male and from social elites, these organisations 
will find themselves ill-equipped to bring about radical change.
 