
If you’d have asked Peter Rowe, the artistic director of the New Wolsey in 
Ipswich <https://www.wolseytheatre.co.uk/>, how many female designers he works 
with, he would have said it was about a 50/50 gender split. But that was until 
he took part in the latest six-monthAdvance programme 
<http://www.tonictheatre-advance.co.uk/>, offered to arts organisations by 
Tonic Theatre to address gender imbalances in the industry. The figures don’t 
lie: the number is actually far smaller.

Young women play leading roles in life – so why not on stage?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/15/young-women-play-leading-roles-in-life-so-why-not-on-stage>
Focusing on the gap between perception and reality has been one of the 
challenges ofTonic’s 2016 Advance programme 
<http://www.tonictheatre-advance.co.uk/advance-2016/>, a follow-up to the 2014 
inaugural programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/22/theatre-female-figures-gender-gap>
 which found 11 theatres around the country – from Sheffield to the Young Vic 
to the RSC to Pentabus – pledging to change their artistic programmes to reflect
the shockingly low numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/sep/22/theatre-gender-inequality-tonic-advance>
 of female directors, writers and performers whose work is seen on British 
stages. Sheffield pledged to implement a 50/50 casting policy, whileHeadlong 
<https://headlong.co.uk/> promised to commission equal numbers of male and 
female playwrights.


Despite those pledges, there is still a long way to go. A woman’s work is 
never done, but the great thing about the Tonic Advance programme, led by the 
indefatigableLucy Kerbel 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2015/lucy-kerbel-gender-equality-everyones-duty/>
, is that it makes arts organisations face up to how they decide about who 
writes, directs, designs and performs the work they produce, and offers ways of 
translating talk into action. In the long term it is hoped the concept of 
gender equality will embed itself and change the way organisations think and 
operate on a daily basis.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftheatres-must-act-now-about-gender-inequality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab9a54cae1a3f4f99ab2fb63ab7b48b5e5efebf%2F0_28_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theatres%20must%20act%20now%20about%20gender%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftheatres-must-act-now-about-gender-inequality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theatres%20must%20act%20now%20about%20gender%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ftheatres-must-act-now-about-gender-inequality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab9a54cae1a3f4f99ab2fb63ab7b48b5e5efebf%2F0_28_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
 Rosie Armstrong and Harry Long in Pentabus’s production This Land, written by 
Siân Owen and directed by Jo Newman. Photograph: Richard Stanton 
This year’s programme encompassed a broader range of arts organisations beyond 
theatre, including Sadler’s Wells,Northern Ballet <https://northernballet.com/> 
and the Royal Opera House, alongside theNational Theatre 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>, Northern Stage and others. If the 2014 
programme focused on how to get more women centre stage through commissioning 
and casting policies, this year’s programme has dug even deeper to look at 
women in creative freelance roles. The Royal Opera House specifically looked at 
how it might encourage more female conductors; Sadler’s Wells considered why is 
it that emerging female choreographers are less likely than their male 
counterparts to become mid-career choreographers; the National investigated 
whether their mode of business, with its emphasis on meetings, had a built-in 
unconscious bias that favoured male voices over women’s, and Northern Stage 
started to rethink itsartist development 
<https://www.northernstage.co.uk/take-part/creative-residencies/creative-residencies>
 policy, looking at how it serves women.


How can we give female choreographers a lift?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/oct/12/dance-female-choreographers-rambert-debate>
What’s clear is that there is no shortage of women working in the arts. But as 
organisations such as the New Wolsey discovered when they looked harder at 
their set-up, the volume of women masked inequalities in the roles they had 
within the organisation. Kerbel and others from Tonic are clear that it is not 
just about numbers, but about rethinking how organisations are structured in 
order to generate ways of working that allow everyone to reach their full 
potential.

That means paying special attention to the world of freelancing. Being a 
freelance creative in the arts is precarious, and arts organisations that have 
benefited from increased arts funding over the past 20 years have often not 
improved the fees they offer to directors, designers and others. That’s hard 
for all freelancers, but especially so for women who often encounter the 
unconscious bias and organisational working practices that ensure they earn 
less, progress more slowly and have lower profiles than their male counterparts.


Tonic is making arts organisations scrutinise themselves for how they work and 
who holds the privilege. They are helping to create the circumstances for a 
continuum of change and improvement, which as Kerbel says, makes them look on a 
“granular level at how they operate, as well as encouraging them to see the big 
picture of the change they – as leaders in their fields – have the capacity to 
initiate”.


This makes sense because arts organisations are invigorated when they 
diversify their talent pool. Any arts organisation so institutionalised that it 
remains reluctant to initiate change will be left behind and ensure its own 
eventual demise. That’s because diversifying talent pools isn’t just about 
equality, but about the quality of that organisation and the quality and
creativity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
 of the work it produces in every aspect of its operations, from participation 
to what happens onstage.

 