
So now we have confirmation that the government is working on a long-term 
solution to the social care crisis. Or at least “starting internally to look” 
at the issue, which must be considered progress of some kind.

Those were the words of Theresa May under questioning by senior MPs at the 
Commons liaison committee, where her answers on social care were extracted as 
painfully asthose on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/theresa-may-indicates-mps-parliament-not-vote-final-brexit-deal>
 – the main business of the session – and on which the atmosphere felt almost 
as strained.


Beyond that we know very little. Asked for assurances that the review would be 
inclusive of opposition parties, the prime minister made a caustic aside about 
past experience and offered only an undertaking of full involvement “when there 
is a decision taken”.


Prompted to say that the review would consider social care in the context of 
the health and care system as a whole, May seemed to sense a trap and replied 
that it would not be considering the NHS budget as part of the exercise. It 
would, she said carefully, be important to “look at health alongside” social 
care.


And that’s it. Who is carrying out the review, where it is being done and on 
what timescale must be matters of speculation. Presumably as on Brexit, May 
does not propose to give us a running commentary.


A council tax rise alone will not solve the social care funding crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/20/a-council-tax-rise-alone-will-not-solve-the-social-care-funding-crisis>
Questions hang heavy in the air about the now-slimline Whitehall’s capacity to 
carry out such a complex exercise and to succeed where a series of 
well-resourced inquiries over the past two decades, up to and including aroyal 
commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/feb/25/interview-stewart-sutherland>, 
has failed to deliver a solution.


The prime minister does not even have a dedicated special adviser on health 
and care. And it was significant that the liaison committee’s chair, Andrew 
Tyrie, ended the session with a delightfully polite but razor-sharp complaint 
about the government’s failure to keep up with correspondence from Commons 
select committees.


One thing that is clear, however, is that government is embracing the idea of 
a three-stage solution to the care crisis as set out by NHSEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/england> chief executive, 
Simon Stevens, in earlier evidence to the communities and local government 
select committee.


Stage one, Stevens said, was dealing with immediate pressures in the system. 
Stage two, over the next three or four years, was pushing ahead more 
purposefully with health and care integration to realise benefits for the whole 
system. Stage three was “a big set of changes” to deliver “a new deal for 
retirement security” encompassing income, accommodation and care.


That third stage was what May suggested the government was starting to look 
at, but she similarly mapped out a three-step process and dwelt heavily – as 
other ministers and their spinners have done in recent days – on the potential 
to extract more from existing resources under stage two.


The social care crisis is pulling NHS trusts further underwater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/16/social-care-crisis-nhs-trusts>
Under real pressure over the social care crisis after chancellor Philip 
Hammond’sfailure even to reference it in his autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/shameful-autumn-statement-social-care>
, the government has been pointing fingers at variation in the performance of 
English councils.


On BBC Radio 4’s Any Questions, Treasury chief secretary David Gauke asked why 
it was that Peterborough, Rutland and Newcastle upon Tyne could achieve zero 
delayed discharges from their local hospitals in September while others left 
thousands of older people languishing in hospital beds when they were ready to 
leave.


At the liaison committee, May cited with approval the performances of 
Coventry, Darlington, Derby, Doncaster and Dudley in increasing numbers of 
older people receiving long-term care. Others could be matching them, she 
implied, adding: “It’s wrong to decide that the only failing in social care is 
a failing about funding.”


Stevens told MPs that “the majority” of cases of delayed discharge were linked 
to problems with availability social care – even though only about 40% are 
formally ascribed to them – at an annual cost to the NHS of between £500m and 
£1bn.


But he stressed that even if all councils were to get their performance up to 
that of the best, the social care system would still need extra funding. And 
there would still be a need for long-term reform.


It’s unlikely that the extra funding Stevens had in mind was merely what was 
announced 24 hours after his select committee appearance in the local 
government finance settlement. Stung by reaction to the autumn statement, 
ministers found what they said amounted toan additional £900m “available to” 
social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 in England over the next two years.


None of this is new money. It is arrived at by allowing councils to levy a 3% 
precept on council tax for social care in each of the next two years, instead 
of 2% in each of the next three years as previously envisaged, and diverting 
£240m from the new homes bonus fund already allocated to local government.


The value of the package has been challenged by the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8811>, which puts it at just £700m 
extra. But even £900m must be compared to the £1.9bn whichthree leading health 
thinktanks have together calculated 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/autumn-statement-2016> is 
the funding gap facing social care in 2017-18.


Moreover, the precept is worth considerably more to councils in affluent parts 
of the country, where property prices and therefore council tax rates are 
higher, than in poorer areas where need is greatest. And some councils have 
already suggested that the added value of a 3% precept is so marginal thatthey 
will not bother changing their plans to levy 2% 
<https://www.lgcplus.com/politics-and-policy/finance/leaders-express-doubts-over-taking-up-3-care-precept-offer/7014317.article>
 [paywall].


A belated recognition of the crisis, then, but nowhere near enough to end it. 
Do not unfasten your seatbelts: we are still in for a rough ride.


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 