
Lacie Richardson, a poet and Colorado native, first fell in love with Alaska’s 
waterways as a junior in college. Richardson spent a year studying at the 
University of Alaska Southeast in Juneau as part of an exchange program. When 
she wasn’t in class, she was fly fishing. “I kind of became known in the 
community as this crazy, wild fly-fishing girl who was out on the river every 
day the second my class was out,” Richardson says. “People would see me hiking 
up some river with my rod, or trying to fly from the side of the beach.”

Richardson returned to Colorado for her final semester of college and 
graduated with a degree in English. The day after graduation, she got a call 
from the captain of a commercial fishing boat in Alaska. He was looking for 
crew for his boat, he said, and a mutual friend had told him all about the 
fly-fishing girl in Juneau – had Richardson ever considered working in the 
commercial fishing industry?

Reeling it in: global sustainable seafood market hits $11.5bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/11/seafood-industry-sustainable-fishing-salmon-overfishing>
“I told him the thought had never occurred to me,” Richardson says. “But it 
sounded like a blast, and it got me back to Alaska.” Richardson bought a 
one-way ticket and headed north.

Over the next three years, Richardson worked in virtually every sector of the 
Alaskan commercial fishing industry – she gill-netted sockeye salmon, 
long-lined for halibut, seine fished and tendered. Then, she discovered salmon 
trolling, a fishing technique in which fish are caught one at a time, with one 
hook and one line. To Richardson, the art and strategy of trolling, as well as 
the way of life it represented, were irresistible. Salmon trollers like 
Richardson view themselves as stewards of the region’s waterways, environment, 
and culture.

Today, Richardson is betting that the rest of America, or at least the portion 
of America that shops at the local farmer’s market and insists on grass-fed 
beef and organic produce, will find salmon trolling equally irresistible. As 
the owner of Wild WomanFish <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> Co, 
Richardson sells troll-caught Alaskan salmon, as well as other hook-and-line 
caught fish, directly to customers in the continental US at local farmer’s 
markets and via mail order. She also sells to specialty grocery stores.

Richardson currently ships 3,000 lbs of fish per month, and she expects to 
ship 5,000 lbs per month in the fourth quarter of 2016. She says her mission is 
not only to increase the public’s awareness of different fishing methods, but 
to introduce more people to the hook-and-line fishermen of Alaska and the lives 
they lead.

Richardson is one of only a handful of individual Alaskan fishermen attempting 
to sell directly to consumers, although she works with a hook-and-line 
cooperative called theSeafood Producers Cooperative <http://www.spcsales.com/> 
(SPC) that has a larger operation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F856cffa293972024b6592217aa5d6d7961b7aac0%2F0_93_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20Colorado%20poet%20is%20disrupting%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20commercial%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20Colorado%20poet%20is%20disrupting%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20commercial%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F856cffa293972024b6592217aa5d6d7961b7aac0%2F0_93_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Lacie Richardson on her boat in Alaska. Richardson uses salmon trolling, a 
fishing technique in which fish are caught one at a time, with one hook and one 
line. Photograph: Lacie Richardson 
“We’re kind of like the last of the real fishermen,” Richardson says. “I don’t 
want to say that net fishermen aren’t real fishermen, but we are going out off 
the coast with hooks and lines, and we’re judging depth, we’re changing our 
bait out. We’re really fishing.”

Trolling, also referred to as hook-and-line fishing, produces an unusually 
high-quality catch and is considered one of the most sustainable methods of 
fishing. Unlike dredging or trawling methods in which a net or basket is 
dragged along the seafloor, it doesn’t damage or disturb the habitat of the 
seafloor, and it’sone of the few commercial fishing methods 
<http://www.seafoodwatch.org/ocean-issues/fishing-and-farming-methods> that 
results in virtually no bycatch and carries no risk of entangling other 
species. “If you’re out there with a net, you’re catching everything in your 
path,” explains Ryan Bigelow of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood watch 
program. “But as soon as a troller gets a catch, they pull it in, and then 
throw it back if it’s not what they’re fishing for. If you’re catching 
something in a net, say a turtle for example, it will drown before you have a 
chance to throw it back.”

Entrepreneurs turn billion dollar seafood waste into profitable products
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/14/us-fishermen-turn-billion-dollar-seafood-waste-into-profitable-products>
In recent years, the market for ethically and sustainably produced food has 
grown substantially – in 2015,sustainably sourced seafood constituted 14% of 
worldwide seafood production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/11/seafood-industry-sustainable-fishing-salmon-overfishing>
, up from only 0.5% in 2005. But while savvy consumers may know to look for 
wild-caught salmon, as opposed to farm-raised, very few know the difference 
between, for example, salmon trolling and salmon trawling. “We’re seeing a 
marked increase in the number of people who want to buy sustainable products,” 
Bigelow says. “But we’re not seeing more people that know more about catch 
types.”

Barton Seaver <http://www.chgeharvard.org/about/people/barton-seaver>, a chef, 
author and the director of the Sustainable Seafood and Health Initiative at the 
Harvard School of Public Health, thinks that education efforts around fishing 
methods are an uphill battle. Seafood still represents a relatively small 
proportion of people’s diets, and the conversations around seafood and 
sustainability are extremely complicated.

“People understand sustainable farming because it’s part of the ecosystem we 
inhabit,” Seaver says. “But when it comes to sustainable fishing, people are 
not talking about it nearly as much.”

Both Bigelow and Seaver suggest that Richardson’s success will hinge on her 
ability to connect the average consumer in the continental US to Alaska’s 
hook-and-line fishermen, and the communities they inhabit and protect. “The 
story is high-quality product delivered by a passionate, small American 
business trying to help their community,” Seaver says. “These are values that 
we can understand.”

Kendall Whitney handles direct-to-consumer marketing for SPC. He believes it’s 
essential that consumers see the faces, and learn the stories, of the fishermen 
of the SPC, many of whom are deeply involved in the region’s fisheries 
management and local environmental causes. In every direct-to-consumer 
shipment, Whitney includes a booklet with recipes, cooking tips and the stories 
of one of SPC’s fishermen and deck hands.



“I want our customers to understand what it’s like to be a fisherman, the 
connection they have to the water and, if you’re a salmon troller, the forests 
of Alaska,” Whitney says.

Salmon trolling represents only a small percentage of Alaska’s wild-caught 
salmon market. The lion’s share of the catch (which is dominated by chum and 
pink salmon) iscaught with purse seine nets or gillnets 
<http://www.adfg.alaska.gov/index.cfm?adfg=commercialbyareasoutheast.salmon#harvest>
. Bigelow isn’t sure that operations like Richardson’s or the SPC will ever be 
able to capture a significantly larger market share. “We eat so much salmon, 
and there’s such a demand for it, it’ll be difficult to go back,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d12fb45397e4dfa9dcd1751d42022e933b5a10%2F0_414_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20Colorado%20poet%20is%20disrupting%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20commercial%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20Colorado%20poet%20is%20disrupting%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20commercial%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fwild-caught-salmon-seafood-sustainable-alaska-fishing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d12fb45397e4dfa9dcd1751d42022e933b5a10%2F0_414_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Lacie Richardson on her boat. “She is building a story on the fish,” says Ryan 
Bigelow of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood watch program. Photograph: Lacie 
Richardson 
But Seaver believes that there is room for growth in the demand for 
hook-and-line caught fish, both among consumers who are deeply committed to 
sustainable food and among retailers who are focused on quality. “I think that 
the real growth in this is going to come from chefs and restaurants and 
retailers who are selling troll, or hook-and-line, as the sex appeal of quality 
rather than as the marker of sustainability,” he says.

Richardson, who has also started leading fishing retreats in Alaska as part of 
her mission to connect more people to the region’s fishing communities and 
traditions, is banking on the fact that American consumers are ready to start 
asking more questions about the fish they’re eating.

“It’s [the] troller’s time to have a voice in the industry,” she says.
 