
THEATRE

1 Alice In Wonderland

Mike Kenny’s clever production makes sense of Lewis Carroll’s slice of 
absurdity for modern kids by reframing the tale as Alice’s anxiety nightmare 
the night before an exam. Familiar characters appear in different guises: 
Tweedles Dee and Dum are bullies, while the school head doubles as the despotic 
Red Queen. It’s not the most Christmassy show, but is high-quality 
family-friendly theatre that strips the story of Victoriana.

Derby Theatre, to 7 Jan <https://www.derbytheatre.co.uk/alice-wonderland>

2 Beauty And The Beast

The simple but inventive style adopted by the New International Encounter 
company is well suited to fairytales. It produced a delicious Hansel And Gretel 
in 2012 and now reimagines a classic, transposing it to 1920s France and 
providing songs with a hint of Gallic folk. It’s a show that sparks the 
imagination with its magical stagecraft and treats include a terrific double 
act of truly beastly ugly sisters. It’s lots of fun but thoughtful, too, in its 
exploration of the deceptiveness of appearances and how beauty is only skin 
deep.

The Junction, Cambridge, to New Year’s Eve 
<http://www.junction.co.uk/beauty-and-the-beast?spektrix_bounce=true>

3 The Snow Queen

Too scary for the small members of the family, but a shivery pleasure for 
everyone else. Vivienne Franzmann’s Snow Queen is a terrifying child snatcher 
who guzzles on the naughtiness in children’s hearts, the whole show being a 
celebration of difference and learning that happiness comes when you be 
yourself. Lee Lyford’s staging makes great use of puppets and is brilliantly 
designed by Tom Rogers.

Bristol Old Vic, to 15 Jan <http://www.bristololdvic.org.uk/snowqueen.html>

4 In The Heights

You’re going to have get your dancing shoes on quickly if you want to see 
Lin-Manuel Miranda’s pre-Hamilton hit; it finishes its long run early in the 
new year. Set amid an impoverished Puerto Rican community in Washington 
Heights, this fairytale with Latino rhythms and rap is not merely an essential 
intro to the work of the Hamilton creator, but a joyous night out in its own 
right.

King’s Cross Theatre, N1, to 8 Jan <https://www.intheheightslondon.com/>

5 Aladdin

The pick of this year’s London pantos: Aladdin writer Joel Horwood and 
director Ellen McDougall take onlookers to the land of Hammerboosh, where poor 
people aren’t allowed to gaze upon the Emperor One Per Cent and his daughter, 
or indeed come anywhere near their palace. It’s not the Dame, but the baddie 
(Vikki Stone’s show-stealing Abanazer) who gets all the best lines in what 
promises some neat twists on an old formula. Stone is a ball of energy, proving 
that vice is twice as nice as virtue.

Lyric Hammersmith, W6, to 7 Jan  
<http://www.lyric.co.uk/whats-on/production/aladdin/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbest-theatre-and-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff638395eb2919dc39a5eab50556a1b7d91dd5a30%2F0_152_3696_2218%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20theatre%20and%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbest-theatre-and-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20theatre%20and%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbest-theatre-and-dance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff638395eb2919dc39a5eab50556a1b7d91dd5a30%2F0_152_3696_2218%2F3696.jpg>
 The Nutcracker On Ice. Photograph: Robert Workman 
DANCE

1 The Royal Ballet <http://www.roh.org.uk/about/the-royal-ballet>

Grown-up balletomanes can get their Christmas fix at the Royal Opera House, 
WC2, with a revival of Petipa’s The Sleeping Beauty (to 14 Mar), which is 
paired this season with Peter Wright’s pitch-perfect, captivatingly styled 
staging of The Nutcracker (until 12 Jan). 

2 The Nutcracker On Ice

Amid the traditional pointe shoes and tutus, the Imperial Ice Stars’ dance 
spectacle at Winter Wonderland offers a very different Nutcracker, with aerial 
routines, acrobatics and internationally recognised Russian skaters.

Hyde Park, W2, to 2 Jan 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/events/2015/the-nutcracker-on-ice/>

3 Strictly Ballroom

Ambitious young choreographer Drew McOnie turns first–time director in 
adapting the Baz Luhrmann movie musical for the stage.

West Yorkshire Playhouse, to 21 Jan 
<https://www.wyp.org.uk/events/strictly-ballroom-musical/> 
 