
The future of the nuclear industry may happen somewhere on scenic but 
relatively isolated land that’s about 100 miles southwest of Yellowstone 
National Park. Amid the 890-square-mile Idaho National Laboratory campus, a 
plan is in motion to build a type of nuclear reactor unlike any that’s 
currently in use to produce electricity.

The plan belongs to Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems 
<http://www.uamps.com/index.php/about-uamps>, a consortium of 45 municipal 
agencies looking to replace their aging coal-fired plants. It won approval from 
the US Department of Energy earlier this year to scope out a site at the lab to 
analyze the environmental and safety impacts of what’s called the small nuclear 
reactor. If all goes well, the consortium plans to build a power plant there 
with 12 reactors totalling 600 megawatts in capacity.

The analysis is crucial for determining whether there’s a strong business case 
for building small nuclear reactors. The emerging technology is meant to create 
cheaper and safer nuclear power plants.Nuclear power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/nuclearpower> plants emit no 
emissions, but existing designs have become too costly to be a popular solution 
for climate change. The new technology has gotten significant funding from 
investors such as Bill Gates.

The Utah group isn’t alone in investing in the new technology. In May, the 
Tennessee Valley Authority, which supplies power to nine million people in 
seven southeastern states, became the first utility to apply for a permit 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601426/small-modular-nuclear-plants-get-their-first-chance-in-the-us/>
 from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to build a small nuclear reactor.

The name of the technology gives a good clue to its distinguishing 
characteristics. Unlike other nuclear reactors that usually produce about 1,000 
megawatts of carbon-free electricity, thesmall modular reactors 
<https://www.iaea.org/NuclearPower/SMR/>, like the ones Utah is planning, are 
designed to be a fraction of the size at 50 to 300 megawatts. Rather than using 
electrically operated pumps and motors to circulate coolant and keep the core 
of the nuclear reactor at a low temperature, as happens in traditional plants, 
small reactors use no pumps and motors and instead rely on passive means such 
as gravity and conduction ­­to cool the reactors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsafer-small-nuclear-reactors-power-plant-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F939338f56b983fbef4d31863258f09fd67e45462%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20new%20technology%20could%20save%20the%20troubled%20nuclear%20power%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsafer-small-nuclear-reactors-power-plant-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20new%20technology%20could%20save%20the%20troubled%20nuclear%20power%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsafer-small-nuclear-reactors-power-plant-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F939338f56b983fbef4d31863258f09fd67e45462%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
 A comparison of small nuclear reactors (left) with a traditional reactor at a 
nuclear power plant today. Illustration: NuScale Power 
The compact size and other new improvements, including the ability to assemble 
all the components in a factory rather than on a project site, in theory make 
the small modular reactors much cheaper to build than traditional nuclear power 
plants that cost about $10bn and take a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/carbon-free-plants-nuclear-energy-future-power-state-sources>
 to secure permits and build. At a time when many existing nuclear power plants 
are struggling financially from competition from low natural gas prices and 
subsidized wind and solar projects, the nuclear industry sees hope in this 
next-generation technology.

“From an investment standpoint, this makes it easier to do because you don’t 
have to put all the money up front; you can stagger when you build them,” said 
Gene Grecheck, a former president and the current co-chair of a policy advisory 
committee at the American Nuclear Society, which represents engineers and 
scientists. Grecheck said scientists are studying other ways to improve nuclear 
technology.

Can our need for a carbon-free future override our fears of nuclear energy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/carbon-free-plants-nuclear-energy-future-power-state-sources>
“There is also a lot of research going on for advanced reactor concepts to 
take used fuel and reprocess it to reduce [the spent fuel] even more 
dramatically,” he said.

Startup companies working on using spent uranium fuel include the Bill 
Gates-backed TerraPoweras well as Transatomic and TerrestrialEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>. Another start up, Oklo, seeks 
to create 2-megawatt reactors that fit inside shipping containers to provide 
electricity for remote off-grid locations.

Many small nuclear reactor companies have yet to line up customers. One 
exception is Oregon-based NuScale Power, whose technology has been tapped for 
the project by the Utah consortium in Idaho.

NuScale plans to apply for certification from the US Nuclear Regulatory Agency 
later this year, a step that all nuclear engineering firms must take before 
their designs can be used to build power plants. The company expects the agency 
to approve the design by 2020 if the permit process goes smoothly, said Mike 
McGough, NuScale’s chief commercial officer.

McGough said NuScale has currently spent “a little over” $30m on testing ahead 
of its NRC submission, and if the design is approved, the company expects 
construction costs to be less than $3bn for the first 12 modules.

Comparatively, the Southern Company’s 2,200-megawatt Vogtle Power Plant 
<https://www.georgiapower.com/about-energy/energy-sources/nuclear/vogtle.cshtml>
, being built in Georgia, is expected to cost $8bn just for its roughly 46% 
share in the project.

Even if the small reactor remains within estimated costs, it will be pricey, 
at least initially, next to subsidized wind and solar. The USEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Information Administration 
estimates the cost of constructing and operating power plants averages $50.90 
per megawatt hour for wind and $58.20 per megawatt hour for solar. NuScale 
estimates the same type of cost for the first batch of small modules will be 
about $101 per megawatt hour. Like solar and wind, McGough said he expected the 
prices would decrease over time as more utilities build small nuclear reactors. 
The Utah consortium is pegging the cost at $85 per megawatt hour, a lower 
estimate because city governments can borrow money at cheaper rates, Webb said.

Can America's first floating wind farm shake off environmental concerns?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/31/california-wind-farm-energy-trident>
The Utah consortium, like power companies across the country, is under 
increasing pressure from state and federal regulations such as the Clean Power 
Plan to cut its emissions. Nuclear fits that need, but the size of traditional 
plants is too big, said LaVarr Webb, spokesman for the Utah consortium. 
NuScale’s design is much more appealing. “That way we buy based on what our 
needs were, which makes a lot of sense,” he said.


Plus, Webb said, the small reactor design eases the challenge of using nuclear 
power to complement the group’s intermittent renewable energy sources, such as 
wind and solar. Current nuclear plants are designed to produce electricity 
without interruption; adjusting the levels of energy output quickly in response 
to any sudden increase or drop of renewable energy generation is difficult to 
do. Small reactors can operate independently, allowing a plant to vary its 
output more dynamically, McGough said.

The Utah consortium will hire Washington state-based Energy Northwest to 
operate and maintain its 12 reactors in Idaho if they are built. The Utah group 
expects the project to come online by 2024.

The initial high prices mean these tiny nuclear reactors will likely be built 
in the near future in states that allow utility monopolies, such as California, 
Utah and Washington.Utilities <https://www.theguardian.com/business/utilities> 
in those states need to win state approval for charging customers higher rates 
to pay for the new power plants, but they don’t have to worry about competition.

Mike Pasqualetti, senior sustainability scientist at Arizona State 
University’s School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, isn’t 
convinced the world needs this technology. These new plants may be cheaper to 
build in theory than conventional nuclear projects, but it delays the 
transition to a more sustainable future in which 100% of the US’ electricity 
needs come from renewable sources and energy storage, he said.

“Small scale nuclear has advantages to it, but there’s still waste. Are they 
safer? Probably. Are they cheaper to build? Probably. Do we have any experience 
doing it? Not really,” Pasqualetti said.

While active research is in place to reduce the complexity of building and 
operating nuclear power plants, there’s a long way to go in making this source 
of energy an important solution for fighting climate change, said Dan Bakal, 
head of the electricity power research organization Ceres, a nonprofit 
sustainability advocacy group.

“If we get to a breakthrough there, that could lead to [new plant 
construction]. Right now I wouldn’t be betting a lot on that,” Bakal said.
 