
Looking back over the past year, my email correspondence has been quite 
heavily dominated by solvers living outside the UK. They are roughly divided 
between expats who value the Guardian and its crosswords as a link with home, 
and non-expats who value them as a window into the events and culture of this 
country and its evolving language. More than one correspondent seems to have 
subscribed to the Guardian crosswords after stumbling on them while surfing the 
net for a non-American take on the news in the immediate aftermath of September 
11.

The most touching message was one from Jamaica thanking Bunthorne for his 
September Genius puzzle. The writer said that this had helped her keep sane 
during the night of September 10. She had downloaded the puzzle before the full 
force of hurricane Ivan hit the island, bringing down all telephone lines and 
cutting the electricity supply. So, by the light of a candle, she was able to 
pass the night wrestling with the puzzle. She did not, though, say how far she 
got with it before daybreak.

Much of the correspondence was concerned with the discussion as to whether it 
is fair to use computers in general, and Google in particular, to help solve 
clues. Most, but not all, of my UK-based correspondents took the view that 
abstinence from electronic aids was in some sense a purer way of solving and, 
incidentally, that using crossword solving software does not have the side 
effect of helping to keep Alzheimer's disease at bay.

Not surprisingly, non-Brits and expats were almost unanimous in thinking that 
moderate surfing was legitimate, particularly in helping with clues based on 
very culture specific references, transient British popular culture, or recent 
happenings. Cricket, Fi Glover and Sir Norman Foster's London Gherkin were 
cited as cases in point. But, even here, there was a cautionary tale from a 
solver who fed a few key words into Google in the hope of a lifeline to the 
solution to a clue involving sea dogs and pirates, and was shunted to a 
hardcore porn site.

Also unsurprisingly, younger solvers seem to make more use of the internet as 
an aid to solving than do their grandparents. This seems to me fair enough, in 
view of the fact that so much of the grammar of broadsheet cryptic crosswords 
is based on culture, educational fashion and events that were current before 
they were born. The names of the kings of Israel, for example, do not feature 
in today's national schools curriculum.

So one younger solver, having worked out that the solution to an anagram [to 
Zechariah, missed English] in Shed's June Genius must be CHOTA HAZRI but never 
having seen the words before, used Google to discover that it is the 
Anglo-Indian term for early morning tea (small breakfast originally in 
Bengali). The words are in fact in Chambers (as are chota peg, the Anglo-Indian 
for a wee dram).

Fifty years ago, the meaning of chota hazri would have been known in many 
families, as, before India's independence, an astonishingly high proportion of 
British families had members with years of experience of living in the 
subcontinent, mainly because of serving in the British army there. Ironically, 
given the much higher proportion of people of Asian origin living in the UK 
today, Indian words and phrases - apart from those that have passed fully into 
English, like bungalow, chintz, choky, curry, dungarees, juggernaut, shampoo 
and tank - are now hardly used at all in modern English speech. (Incidentally, 
cha/char meaning tea is of Chinese, not Indian, origin.)

If you are interested in exploring the huge impact of Indian languages on 
modern English, I can highly recommend a glossary of Anglo-Indian words and 
phrases first published in 1886, Hobson-Jobson, compiled by Colonel Sir Henry 
Yule of the Bengal Engineers, who had retired from India to live at Palermo, 
and Dr Arthur Burnell of the Madras Civil Service. It was last republished in 
1995 and new or used copies can be found viabookfinder.com 
<http://www.bookfinder.com> and other search engines.

Happy solving in 2005!

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 