
The remarkable photos taken by Ricardo Stuckert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/brazil-budget-uncontacted-amazon-tribe-risk-indigenous>
 of an uncontacted Amazon tribe reminded me of my own experience with the 
indigenous people of nearby Peru. “The Nomole are here, they’ve come. The 
Nomole,” were the hushed whispers I heard outside my tent as I was roused from 
my dawn slumber. Nomole was a term meaning brothers which I had heard many 
times in the last few days, at once embracing and familial yet also uttered 
with apprehensive concern.

With a jolt of adrenaline I pulled on some trousers and stumbled out into the 
open and jogged to the edge of a riverside bluff and gazed out. As the morning 
mist rose like steam off the Manu national park forest, 11 matchstick figures 
had emerged from the foliage and were walking out over a rock-strewn strand 
some 200m away across the turbulent Upper Madre de Dios river.

Photographer captures images of uncontacted Amazon tribe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/photographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe>
To me it could have been a scene from the dawn of mankind. I felt I was 
looking at humanity, stripped down in all its primitive magnificence, and it 
was humbling. Men, women, one pregnant, one with an infant, and children, naked 
and unarmed strode over the rocks and began to call out, beckoning to special 
protection agents employed byPeru’s culture ministry on our side of the river 
bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/peru-indigenous-tribe-mascho-piro-reaching-out>
.

It was Romel Ponciano, whom they called Yotlotle (which means giant river 
otter in their language), they were calling for. Having seen one of these 
exuberant Amazonians I had to admit the anthropomorphic resemblance was uncanny 
and even funny. Portly and affable, Ponciano, an indigenous Yine leader, had a 
gentle air and exuded calm. He had had more than 20 encounters with the 
Mashco-Piro tribe and understands about 80% of their language. Such meetings 
can be dangerous, even deadly, but as children rode piggy-back on Ponciano’s 
back and he gave his T-shirt to one of the men to wear it was clear I was 
beholding a friendly exchange as timeless and quintessentially human as any.

Peru’s official policy of “no contact”, adopted in 2006, remains unchanged 
with respect to the 14 or 15 tribes living in isolation within its boundaries. 
Luís Felipe Torres, an anthropologist with the Madre de Dios region’s isolated 
tribes team, explained that an exception was made in the case of this 
particular group of Mashco-Piro because they were actively seeking contact with 
the outside world, exposing themselves to grave danger.

Why has this Amazonian tribe suddenly started to make contact with outsiders?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/peru-indigenous-tribe-mascho-piro-reaching-out>
While the Mashco-Piro are at a turning point in what increasingly seems an 
inexorable route towards contact, Peru’s culture minister is trying to cushion 
them from the illnesses that could lay waste to their population, the 
unscrupulous people who might enslave or exploit them and the missionaries who 
want to save their souls.

The tribe portrayed in Stuckert’s pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/dec/22/sighting-of-uncontacted-amazonian-tribe-in-pictures>
, not far across the Peruvian border in the Brazilian state of Acre, are not 
yet at that stage. They continue to appear to want to shun the outside world, 
just as they thrive, hunt game and farm. Yet asillegal gold mining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/may/03/illegal-gold-mining-peru-in-pictures>
 continues to decimate swaths of rainforest in south-eastern Peru andlocal 
authorities illegally build roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2013/may/24/peru-amazon-rainforest>
 which deliberately cut through national parks and isolated indigenous 
reserves, the living space for these isolated people who know no national 
boundaries is ever diminishing.

Those people who still name themselves after the flora and fauna of the 
forest, who I came to know from the other side of a river bank, may be the last 
of their generation.
 