
Bayern Munich drew 2-2 at Benfica on Wednesday to reach the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> semi-finals for the 
fifth consecutive season with a 3-2 aggregate victory and remain on track for a 
treble of titles.

Arturo Vidal’s 38th-minute goal cancelled out the hosts’ early lead through 
Raúl Jiménez’s header.

Bayern added another goal through Thomas Müller’s volley from a Javi Martínez 
header in the 53rd minute to knock out the Portuguese side who managed a late 
equaliser through Talisca.

Atlético Madrid’s Antoine Griezmann sends Barcelona crashing out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>, former European 
champions, were vying for their first semi-final appearance in more than a 
quarter of a century but suffered their fourth elimination in their fourth 
European tie against Bayern.

“It was a sensational atmosphere but it was hard work,” said the Bayern 
captain, Philipp Lahm, who played his 103rd Champions League game to become 
joint leader in Germany along with the former Bayern goalkeeper Oliver Kahn.

“We had to be more precise than in the first game, close the spaces between 
midfield and defence and we did it better tonight. We remained calm after the 
goal and worked hard,” Lahm said.

Benfica, missing their top strikers Jonas, Gaitan and Kostas Mitroglou through 
suspension or injury, were on the back foot as expected with the German club 
controlling 70% of possession.

Müller had Bayern’s first good chance but fired wide after 15 minutes with 
Benfica’s double backline working extremely hard.

The hosts struck following a quick break when Eliseu found space to cross from 
the left and Jiménez charged past two defenders to score with a flying header.

The Mexican went close to adding another but the Bayern keeper Manuel Neuer 
did well to parry his shot.

Bayern looked briefly rattled by the setback but quickly recovered when Vidal, 
who scored the winner in the first leg, drilled in the equaliser after 
perfectly timing his shot from the keeper Ederson’s clearance.

Manuel Pellegrini may enjoy last laugh before Manchester City handover to 
Guardiola | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/13/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-pep-guardiola>
Pep Guardiola had surprisingly kept Robert Lewandowski on the bench and Müller 
took over his role, slipping in like a natural centre-forward and volleying in 
a Martínez assist.

Bayern, also chasing a record fourth successive Bundesliga crown as well as 
the German Cup, did not let up and Douglas Costa’s powerful shot hit the post 
on the hour.

Martínez was lucky not to be sent off for a last-man foul and the Benfica 
coach Rui Vitoria was sent to the stands over the referee’s decision to book 
the Spaniard.

Talisca gave him something to smile about, though, curling the resulting 
free-kick superbly past Neuer to cap a battling performance against the German 
giants.
 