
Kevin-Prince Boateng scored a hat-trick after coming on as a substitute as a 
stunning second-half comeback forMilan saw the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> champions recover from 
three goals down to beatLecce 4-3.

Giullermo Giacomazzi headed Lecce in front in the fourth minute, Massimo Oddo 
converted a penalty kick and Carlos Grossmüller added a third before half-time. 
But Boateng began to change the game after coming off the bench for Robinho, 
scoring Milan's first goal four minutes into the second half. The Ghana 
international completed his treble within 14 minutes and Mario Yepes scored the 
winner with seven minutes left. The victory lifts Milan into the top half while
Lecce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lecce> remain second from bottom.

Players wore black armbands and observed a minute's silence at the start of 
every game as a tributeto the Italian rider Marco Simoncelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/23/motogp-marco-simoncelli-malaysia>
, who died on Sunday after a crash at the Malaysian MotoGP.

Udinese took sole leadership of the standings after cruising to a 3-0 win over 
Novara, thanks to two goals and an assist from Antonio Di Natale. He broke the 
deadlock in the 33rd minute and Maurizio Domizzi doubled Udinese's lead six 
minutes later when he headed in a corner at the near post. Di Natale grabbed 
his sixth of the season four minutes into the second half with a free-kick that 
theNovara <https://www.theguardian.com/football/novara> goalkeeper Alberto 
Maria Fontana could do nothing about.

Udinese move two points clear at the top of the table after Juventus drew 2-2 
at home withGenoa on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/oct/23/juventus-genoa-serie-a>. 
Cagliari remain a point adrift of Juventus following their goalless draw with 
Napoli. Either team could have won the game in a lively first half, which saw 
both sides hit the woodwork twice.

Internazionale ground out a 1-0 victory at Chievo. Thiago Motta tapped in 
Wesley Sneijder's corner to give Inter only their second win in seven league 
games.

Roma secured a narrow 1-0 win over Palermo to move into the top half of the 
table. Erik Manuel Lamala scored the only goal of the game in the seventh 
minute andRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> clung on, with their 
goalkeeper Maarten Stekelenburg pulling off several outstanding saves, notably 
from Fabrizio Miccoli in stoppage time, to secure the victory.

Cesena remain bottom after losing 2-0 at Siena. Pablo González scored in the 
10th minute and, after theCesena <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena> 
midfielder Antonio Candreva had hit the post, Emanuele Calaio doubled Siena's 
advantage eight minutes into the second half.

Two goals from Maxi Moralez secured Atalanta a 2-1 win at Parma. All the goals 
came in the second half, with the substitute Jaime Valdes's strike 10 minutes 
from time proving no more than a consolation forParma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parma>.
 