
Centrelink’s software problems, like those of Queensland Health, the Census 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/census> and Victoria Police before 
them, arise from pathologies created by the powerful labour hire and 
outsourcing industries.

Centrelink’s software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/centrelink-crisis-cataclysmic-turnbull-former-head-digital-transformation>
 invents second employers and additional income.Queensland Health bungled the 
pay of nurses and doctors 
<http://www.afr.com/technology/it-disasters-now-part-of-modern-life-20160628-gptyw6>
 and also sent them nasty legal letters. Queensland lost a staggering $1bn 
through that disaster.The census website system fell over. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/23/australian-bureau-of-statistics-lays-blame-for-census-bungle-on-ibm>

This is what happened when Centrelink called to review my false debt 
accusation | Michael Griffin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/this-is-what-happened-when-centrelink-called-to-review-my-false-debt-accusation>
These would be extraordinary mistakes even for a small business, and yet 
they’re being made by government departments with hundreds of millions of 
dollars to spend. How does this happen? 

The answer is to be found in the arrangements the labour hire and outsourcing 
industries have created for themselves. Almost all software development by 
government is now performed by programmers hired through labour hire firms or 
outsourcers.

Labour hire firms hide the payments from the other party in the relationship. 
This allows them to charge high rates to government departments and attribute 
the rates to skill shortages. Meanwhile they pay the programmer only a 
relatively small amount, pocketing a small fortune for nothing.

For example, a 2012 investigation by the NSW Independent Commission Against 
Corruption (Icac) 
<https://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/docman/investigations/reports/3854-investigation-into-alleged-fraud-on-the-former-nsw-department-of-education-and-communities-operation-barcoo-january-2012-pdf/file>
 (pdf) found that the New South Wales education department was paying $90 to 
$95 to a labour hire firm for programmers, but some of the programmers were 
receiving only $25 per hour. That is equivalent to a salary less than $50,000 
per year.

Another Icac investigation found that Sydney University 
<http://www.cio.com.au/article/588780/witnesses-reveal-contractors-were-ripped-off-university-sydney-ict-corruption-inquiry/>
 paid a labour hire firm $750 per day for one IT contractor, yet the contractor 
received only $290 per day. Similarly, the university paid $1.6m to a labour 
hire firm, but the contracted workers only received $800,000. These problems 
only came to light when a new manager started asking questions and reported his 
findings. There are many government departments where no one asks questions.

Even worse, the system of approved suppliers, while fine in theory, can be a 
barrier to hiring. Even if a manager knows a brilliant programmer and wants to 
hire him or her, they must hire through a registered supplier, who then takes a 
cut of the pay or creates some reason to provide a less capable alternative.

Outsourcers are a problem too. Like labour hire firms, their goal is to 
maximise revenue from the government while reducing their own costs. They are 
led by salesmen, not software experts. When unusual problems arise, no one has 
the confidence to challenge existing procedures. Government managers become 
unhappy accomplices because their own standing is tied up with the project.

When things start going wrong, government managers typically try to rotate 
away from the project, leaving it with a bad reputation and a succession of 
temporary managers. Outsourcers find themselves trapped by inflexible plans and 
sometimes hostility from the department.

These problems could be fixed with some simple changes.

First, the Independent Contractors Act 2006 should be amended to force labour 
hire firms to disclose both parties’ pay rates to all parties. This simple 
change would stop labour hire firms gouging the government and also, by 
providing more pay for programmers, attract more talent.

Sussan Ley stands aside as health minister while travel claims investigated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
Second, government should tip more money into its own development groups. Each 
organisation knows its own requirements best, and it is possible to build 
talented development groups, if management commits to it. There is no reason 
well-funded government departments can’t build their own teams equivalent to 
those at Google, Facebook and Microsoft. The Washington Post’s digital team 
under Jeff Bezos is a striking example of what leadership can achieve.

Third, as an immediate measure, departments should hire top programmers to 
manage their interaction with outsourcers, in the same way they have in-house 
legal experts to manage interaction with external law firms. Current practice 
is to hire general purpose executives, who can face difficult pressures from 
outsourcers.

Software is a growing, important field without clear administrative checks. 
Government needs to take drastic steps to keep up, and especially to ensure 
taxpayers’ money is not wasted.
 