
The development of tidal lagoon schemes has received a boost with a commitment 
of millions of pounds to the technology in the UK andIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

The investment by the Gupta family, thought to be around £10m, will give it a 
substantial stake in Tidal Lagoon Plc, a holding company set up to finance the 
development of full-scale tidal lagoons to generate clean power in the UK and 
abroad.

It comes as Tidal Lagoon Power Ltd, which set up Tidal Lagoon Plc, awaits a 
government decision on subsidies forthe world’s first lagoon project in Swansea 
Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/02/should-the-uk-be-subsidising-the-worlds-first-tidal-lagoons>
, a proof-of-concept scheme to harness renewable energy from the power of the 
tides.

Last month, the prime minister, David Cameron, said his enthusiasm for tidal 
lagoon technology was “reduced” by the costs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-politics-35306084>. 

But Tidal Lagoon Power argues the first project in Swansea Bay would open the 
way for five other schemes around the coast, with lower costs due to economies 
of scale, that could meet 8% of the UK’s electricity demand for 120 years.

Proposed schemes at Cardiff and Newport would provide around 4GW of power 
capacity and generate £10bn of capital investment, the company said.

The move by the Gupta family is part of a wider strategy by its global energy 
and commodities company SIMEC to develop renewable energy worldwide, and use 
innovative technologies to provide low-cost power to energy-intensive 
industries including steel.

Gupta family representative Sanjeev Gupta said: “We are very pleased to invest 
in this ambitious and innovative enterprise that promises to provide 
low-carbon, baseload energy and drive economic renewal through the development 
of a high-value supply chain that will create thousands of new jobs.”

The move will also lead to the creation of a joint venture between SIMEC and 
Tidal Lagoon Power to develop large-scale tidal lagoons in India, with the 
first feasibility studies carried out in the Gulf of Khambhat, Gujurat, in 
western India.
 