
Steve Emsley is wrong when he compares tidal lagoons with Hinkley and asks why 
tidal energy is not even being discussed (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/greener-alternatives-to-hinkley-point-c>
, 17 August). The latest estimated cost of the lagoon proposed for Swansea Bay 
is £1.3bn. Hinkley would produce 65 times as much electricity, all day, every 
day – true “baseload”. Tidal lagoons would produce variable amounts (four times 
as much on a spring tide as on a neap tide in Swansea and a bigger difference 
further up the Severn estuary) and the generation would be intermittent (four 
three-hour blocks a day) – that’s not “baseload”.

Lagoons could only produce 8% (about 25TWh a year) of the UK’s electricity 
requirements (a figure challenged by tidal energy experts), if five others 
followed Swansea, each many times larger and much more costly than Swansea 
(many times more than £5bn in total). But consent for the next two (huge 
lagoons further up the Severn estuary off Cardiff and Newport) is most unlikely 
because of various EU environmental designations (special area of conservation, 
special protection area etc). As to why no one is discussing them: in fact, 
Charles Hendry is conducting a review of tidal lagoons to assess, among other 
things, whether they could play a cost-effective role in the UK energy mix (see
www.hendryreview.com <http://www.hendryreview.com>). Some think the review was 
prompted by belated government realisation that the figures bandied around for 
lagoons just don’t add up.
Phil Jones
Ynystawe, Swansea

• The crown estate’s support for wind power and tidal energy (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/14/crown-estate-hinkley-point-nuclear-debate>
, 15 August) must receive full backing from government and public, in spite of 
any commitments to Hinkley Point. Zero-carbon economies must be top priority 
worldwide. Wind is already making a substantial contribution to renewable 
electricity supplies, in this country and elsewhere, but tidal energy seems to 
have been overlooked. Yet it is safe, sustainable, dependable, available at 
many places round our shores and in the wider world. It is also much cheaper 
and less obtrusive than Hinkley Point and similar projects.
Elsa Woodward 
High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 