
The funny thing about Richard II is that it’s completely different from every 
other Shakespeare history play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/25/richard-ii-play-for-today>. It’s 
richly poetic, almost baroque, not a single line of prose in the entire thing. 
There’s a huge amount of politics, plenty of manoeuvring and jockeying for 
position, but the form is so polished and stylised. It’s a beautiful play, and 
somehow also a little bit strange. It’s a kind of experiment.

When we staged it with the touring company Prospect from 1968 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/r2/prospect.htm>, I played Bolingbroke to Ian 
McKellen’s Richard. The play is divided between them, quite symmetrically: at 
the beginningRichard is in power, but Bolingbroke has all the movement 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/richard-ii/the-plot>. He’s Richard’s cousin, the son of 
John of Gaunt, and clearly Richard sees him as a threat, so he banishes him 
from England. When Bolingbroke returns to claim his rights, Richard ends up 
resigning the crown. Bolingbroke is suddenly in charge. But by that stage the 
play is all Richard’s – you can’t take your eyes off him. Shakespeare must have 
felt something very strongly for him, I think:his final scene 
<http://shakespeare.mit.edu/richardii/richardii.5.5.html>, when he’s in prison 
and hears music (“So it is in the music of men’s lives”), is such an 
extraordinary piece of writing. Perhaps it’s just that he’s the consummate 
actor – always aware of how others see him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Ftimothy-west-ian-mckellen-richard-ii-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c18fed692f21fc57b9acb923f2defa866887d48%2F0_0_2362_2957%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Timothy%20West%20on%20Richard%20II%3A%20'You%20can't%20take%20your%20eyes%20off%20him'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Ftimothy-west-ian-mckellen-richard-ii-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Timothy%20West%20on%20Richard%20II%3A%20%27You%20can%27t%20take%20your%20eyes%20off%20him%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Ftimothy-west-ian-mckellen-richard-ii-shakespeare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c18fed692f21fc57b9acb923f2defa866887d48%2F0_0_2362_2957%2F2362.jpg>
 Timothy West as King Lear at Bristol Old Vic. Photograph: Simon Annand 
Ian played Richard as a sacramental figure 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/r2/reviews.htm>, almost godlike: he glided 
around on stage, clearly believing that he was on the throne through divine 
right alone – quite an extreme interpretation in a way, but completely 
justifiable. I decided my job was to be the opposite: everything Richard was, I 
wasn’t. If Richard was listening too much to his flatterers, Bolingbroke would 
be involved with the commoners; if he was swanning about in white, I’d stand 
perfectly still in black. Bolingbroke is a fascinating character, clearly 
ambitious, a bit machiavellian, but also rather mysterious. History opens 
spaces for him, and he moves smoothly in. He’s efficient. Having got through 
the door, he makes sure it’s closed behind him. His ambition comes on quite 
gradually, but when he gets close, you can see him thinking: actually, yes, 
I’ll have that.

Prospect was a touring company so the production 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/r2/photos.htm>, directed by Richard Cottrell, 
was very pared-back and minimal; we didn’t want to lug around huge 
pantechnicons of sets. We had an unvarnished text, 14th-century costume, with a 
lot of emphasis on the verse-speaking. It was pretty fast and vigorous, I 
remember. Nowadays we would probably think about it as deeply old-fashioned. 
But in one way of course it was authentic: Shakespeare didn’t use elaborate 
sets either. The language paints the scenery for you.

I decided my job as Bolingbroke was to be the godlike Richard's opposite: 
everything he was, I wasn't

The production was a huge success so we took it out on a second tour, pairing 
it withMarlowe’s Edward II <http://www.mckellen.com/stage/edward/index.htm>, 
which was written a few years before and is a companion play, in a way – you 
can see Shakespeare responding to Marlowe, who was his exact contemporary, and 
was killed perhaps just before Richard II was written. Edward is full of mighty 
lines and high-flown speeches, but it’s less deep, I think. There’s not quite 
as much there. Ian’s Edward was very different, much more masculine than his 
Richard. Even so, he played him as unapologetically gay, which caused something 
of a stir, particularly when we came to theEdinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival>. Our venue was the 
Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland, anda councillor was so appalled by the 
scene of Edward kissing Gaveston on stage that he went to the press 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5JPWrTvgVfM>. We were very grateful to him, 
actually. He sold a huge amount of tickets.

I’ve done a lot of Shakespeare during my career, many plays more than once: 
Macbeth, Falstaff, Iago, Prospero. TheLear I’m currently doing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/29/king-lear-review-timothy-west-bristol-old-vic-brexit-shakespeare>
 is my third. But I’ve never played Richard. A friend of mine, the director 
John Dove, says there are two kinds of actors, white-wine actors and red-wine 
actors – no difference in quality, but very different tastes. Ian McKellen is a 
wonderful white-wine actor, I’m definitely red. White wine is great, but it’s 
not really me.

 * King Lear is at Bristol Old Vic until 10 July 
<http://www.bristololdvic.org.uk/kinglear.html> 
 