
On the night of the US presidential election, Tina Brown was at a party hosted 
bySnapchat <https://www.snapchat.com/> deep in liberal elite Manhattan. There 
she was, gossiping away, when her husband Harry – aka the celebrated 
journalist, Sir Harold Evans – appeared. “I was holding a plate of sushi,” she 
says, in a voice that is eight parts brisk Home Counties to two parts twangy 
Upper East Side. “He said: ‘Things are going very badly for Hillary.’ Well, 
that was the end of the chatting for me. After that, I was glued to a screen in 
a corner.” Was she expecting what happened next? “No, none of us were. Though 
it’s fair to say that every time I saw Trump walk across the stage with the 
family, I thought: my God, they look like the Kardashian Camelot. Beautiful 
girls married to good-looking guys; the big patriarch with the private plane. I 
mean, it’sDyyy-nasty. That is a show people want to watch. Do they want to 
watch a show with the Clintons earnestly discussing healthcare? No, they don’t. 
They want a show about making it.”

Rudolph Giuliani is off his trolley. He’s turned into this teeth-gnashing ghoul

Brown, of course, knows all about making it, having once taken New York by 
storm. When she became the editor ofVanity Fair <http://www.vanityfair.com/> in 
1984, moreover, it was her salaried duty to chronicle the lives of the Trumps 
of this world – an interest she kept up even when, eight years later, she took 
over at theNew Yorker <http://www.newyorker.com/>, something of a hushed 
library beside the glitzy shopping mall that wasVF (she sent the New Yorker 
writerMark Singer <http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/mark-singer>, to his 
horror, straight out to follow the Donald, an experience he recently revisited 
in a funny book).

So while she is horrified by Trump’s victory, and in particular by those he is 
gathering round him – “I’m utterly aghast at the prospect of Stephen Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon> [founder of the right-wing 
news site,Breitbart <http://www.breitbart.com/>] in the White House; any way 
you slice that, it’s intolerable, he’s a thug” – it’s also possible to detect a 
certain fascination in her voice when she talks of him. “There are some things 
he can achieve because of who he is,” she says. “Obama tried for eight years to 
get infrastructure built, and was denied. But Trump understands building. It’s 
the only thing he does understand. He’ll be committed to that, and he won’t be 
denied.” Perhaps, too, the journalist in her is hooked on the story. “The stage 
is set for internal strife, conflict and chaos,” she goes on, the relish in her 
voice fighting the disgust almost to the ground. “We wait with bated breath to 
hear who is secretary of state.Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rudygiuliani> [Rudolph, formerly mayor of 
New York], is off his trolley. He’s turned into this teeth-gnashing ghoul. It’s 
absolutely bizarre.”

Brown is in London only briefly. The night before I meet her, she hosted a 
salon-style event forWomen in the World 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/>, the feminist roadshow she set up 
in 2010 following her departure fromThe Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/>, the ailing website she co-founded and of which 
she was editor-in-chief. Later, she will fly home to New York. She looks 
immaculate – trousers, blazer, Givenchy handbag the size of the Welsh 
parliament – but a little tired, too. There is something distracted about her, 
as if she is only going through the motions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c56cd819b1151ef9e66f4db92788d4d0d8c6343%2F111_0_2772_1663%2F2772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c56cd819b1151ef9e66f4db92788d4d0d8c6343%2F111_0_2772_1663%2F2772.jpg>
 On song: Tina Brown with Hillary Clinton at a Women In The World summit held 
In New York. Photograph: Andrew Burton/Getty Images 
I was in the audience at the event, which was held somewhat bizarrely in the 
offices of a Westminster PR company, attended only by invited guests, and 
sponsored by Mastercard. It was an interesting, inspiriting evening, but the 
venue and the size of the crowd seemed not to match the starry profile of the 
guests, who had been flown in specially (the exception being the leader of the 
Scottish Conservatives,Ruth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>). First up, to postmortem 
Hillary’s defeat, was a panel comprisingJane Harman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2009/apr/23/jane-harman-wiretapping-aipac>
, formerly a representative for California and now the president of theWoodrow 
Wilson International Center <https://www.wilsoncenter.org/>; Joy-Ann Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joy-ann-reid->, a presenter for MSNBC; and 
Zainab Salbi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/zeinab-salbi>, an Iraqi 
immigrant to the US and the founder of Women for Women International. This was 
followed by a conversation about reconciliation and forgiveness between two 
mothers,Bushra Awad 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2015/04/22/israeli-robi-damelin-and-palestinian-bushra-awad-talk-about-finding-humanity-in-the-enemy/>
, a Palestinian, andRobi Damelin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/10/palestine-israel-peace-campaigners>
, an Israeli, both of whom lost a son in the ongoing conflict between their 
nations. Finally, there was Davidson, delivering her usual blend of politics 
and sass.

My advice to Hillary Clinton would be never to ask for another dime from 
anybody ever again

To the casual observer, it may appear as though with this venture, Brown has 
simply jumped on the current wave of feminism as if it were just another trend 
(all the more so if you consider that she has never particularly identified as 
a feminist herself). But she doesn’t see it like this. “I didn’t begin Women in 
the World because I’m a feminist,” she says. “I began it because I’m a 
journalist and a storyteller. I see these events as live journalism, a pop-up 
magazine. I’d been on the board ofVital Voices <https://www.vitalvoices.org/> 
[an NGO that trains emerging women leaders and social entrepreneurs] and I kept 
meeting incredible women from Africa, India and the Middle East. I thought 
their stories were amazing and deserved a platform. So I put on a little 
conference, and it took off. People loved it, and wanted more. After two years, 
we moved into the Lincoln Center, hosting crowds of 2,500 every day.”

It now hosts similar events everywhere from India to Dubai, as well as smaller 
gatherings like the one last night. “The more people are on their screens, the 
more they want to get away from them,” she says. “There is this hunger for deep 
diving. You just don’t get to see bright women going at it like that. That’s 
what people like about it. You don’t get to see [female] brain power over that 
length of time. You turn on the TV, and there are just two slightly snippy 
women arguing with each other about Brexit or something.”

At the London event, two words kept coming up: “misogyny” and “authenticity”. 
The increasing use of the first of these she attributes mostly to social media: 
if people deploy it a lot these days, it’s because they have no choice but to 
call a spade a spade, given the nature and extent of the abuse of women online. 
Nevertheless, I sense it’s not a word she often uses herself. Authenticity, 
however, is another matter. This is her new watchword, post election. “Women 
are continually pushing themselves into one stereotype or another to please 
someone else,” she says. “It is difficult to keep sight of who you are. But 
Ruth Davidson, for one, has lived her own truth, and that is the future.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f9e80d2673b3acd19603b4ac9208c07c694be95%2F0_344_4920_2952%2F4920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f9e80d2673b3acd19603b4ac9208c07c694be95%2F0_344_4920_2952%2F4920.jpg>
 Hat trick: Tina Brown, editor of Tatler magazine, with the rest of the 
publication’s staff at their Mayfair office, in 1979. Brown became editor when 
she was only 25 years old. Photograph: Graham Morris/Getty Images 
To what degree, thinking back, did Brown stereotype herself? “Quite a bit. 
When I went to America, I had to get much more groomed and glossy looking. I 
did feel pressure, particularly at Condé Nast [owner ofVF and the New Yorker], 
a company that expects its editors to look a certain way. At times, I felt 
imprisoned by that.” It was partly to escape this that she left Condé Nast, 
though given that she went off to set up the ill-fatedTalk magazine for 
Miramax, a journal launched with the most Hollywood of parties, it’s hard to 
take this entirely seriously (also, I saw her heels last night, and they were 
higher than the lateRaine Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/21/raine-countess-spencer-obituary>
’s hair).

But I digress. It is, she thinks, still too easy to get “drowned out” as a 
woman. One of the reasons she believes Hillary won so much respect during the 
campaign was because she was publicly bullied by a man for week after week, yet 
never lost her cool: “It was awesome.” As a result, there is, she says, a sense 
of mourning among the women of America. “It’s not that they’re Hillary 
groupies. It’s that the outcome replays for them the trauma of all the times 
they’ve had their work minimised while a guy who was unprepared walked in and 
took the job and did it badly.” Brown knows Clinton a little; she wasTalk’s 
first cover star. How will she be feeling? “It’s unimaginable. She will feel: I 
failed twice, and because I failed, we have Trump. She’s got a hard four years 
ahead. But she’s been an incredible advocate for women, and that’s perhaps what 
she should spend her time doing. Herfoundation 
<https://www.clintonfoundation.org/> should probably cease to exist, though. My 
advice to her would be never to ask for another dime from anybody ever again.”

If Brown was beginning her own career now, would it be easier or harder? She 
only half answers. “Younger women are less encumbered than older ones. That’s 
the difference between Ruth, say, and Hillary. Older women are far more 
guarded. They’ve had to wear masks to get where they are, and those can’t just 
be ripped off. You become a certain way, like Theresa May. I’ve got a few 
battle scars, but I wouldn’t have done anything differently.” She was only 25 
when she became the editor ofTatler, rescuing the debby dinosaur from certain 
death. “When you’re young, you just rush in, right? Only as I got older did I 
realise how differently women are treated. They just are. There’s hardly even 
any point in talking about it.”

What percentage of her, at the time, was anxious? “Anxious? Actually, not at 
all. I knew what I wanted to do. I was very clear. It was a question of 
barrelling in, and getting a team in place. I love building institutions. I 
know how to do that.” So she wasn’t secretly throwing up in the ladies? “I was 
sometimes atVanity Fair. I found it very, very stressful. I had two children 
[Isabella and George, now grown up], and my son has Asperger’s, and I had to 
get out of the office to see them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23acff72961d1cf82a0b18279132c0bef48dcfe4%2F0_65_1166_1483%2F1166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23acff72961d1cf82a0b18279132c0bef48dcfe4%2F0_65_1166_1483%2F1166.jpg>
 What an honour: Tina Brown with her husband Harold Evans after she received 
her CBE in 2000. Photograph: PA 
Her burden, however, was lightened immeasurably by Evans, the man, 25 years 
her senior, with whom she fell in love more or less the moment she clapped eyes 
on him (they met at theSunday Times, of which he was then editor, and married, 
following his divorce from Enid, with whom he had three children, in 1981). “I 
could not have done anything in my career if I hadn’t been married to Harry,” 
she says. “He has encouraged me, supported me, loved me, picked me up. Some men 
are very competitive. I know women who are very successful whose husbands 
clearly resent it; they try not to show it, but they do. But Harry has always 
been a huge feminist. He likes strong women. His mother was strong, his first 
wife was strong. You can only like and love strong women if you are very secure 
yourself, but his mum loved him and made him feel great and he has always been 
very confident. I was very lucky with that – and frankly, without it, I would 
just have been so lonely.”

Not that working was something she thought of as a choice, exactly: “It’s an 
absolute psychic necessity. Oh, my God, you jump in, and it’s a great 
distraction.” When she left Oxford, where her suitors famously included Martin 
Amis, she wanted to be a novelist and a playwright. “But I got sidetracked. It 
[journalism] is addictive. I love to respond. I need to do that. I’m a news 
junkie, and I’m married to a news junkie.”

Brown is 63 now and, as she notes miserably, journalism is in a parlous state. 
Does she plan to keep going? What else does she have up her tailored sleeve? “I 
don’t know! Maybe I’ll keel over. What do you want me to do?” Oh, that’s easy: 
I want her to finish the memoir she is supposed to be writing. “Well, thank you 
for nagging me. Actually, it is turning into something slightly different. It 
will mainly be aboutVanity Fair now because I have come to feel that the 1980s 
was an especially interesting time. I kept a diary all the way through, so I’m 
using that. But it’s also a portrait of someone I no longer am, so that’s 
interesting, too.” How would she describe the difference between Tina Brown 
circa 1986, and the Tina Brown of 2016? “Well, it was a surface time.” Is she 
kinder these days? “Yeah.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68534565b4c88cd6f458560bd58c531cc7ad051%2F0_0_6168_4112%2F6168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tina%20Brown%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Trumps%20look%20like%20a%20Kardashian%20Camelot%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68534565b4c88cd6f458560bd58c531cc7ad051%2F0_0_6168_4112%2F6168.jpg>
 Tina Brown photographed in her East Side apartment in New York Photograph: 
Christopher Lane for the Observer 
What about Britain? She and Evans are US citizens now. Does she miss it? “Very 
much,” she says, slightly to my amazement. “We talk about coming back a lot. 
I’m more drawn to London lately than I am to New York. So, we’ll see.” When she 
leaves the hotel bar, her stride, so businesslike on arrival, is hesitant, 
almost dawdling.
 