
Manchester United v Arsenal, Saturday 12:30 GMT

The Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> 
returns with a bang on Saturday as the Manchester United-Arsenal rivalry, which 
has been dampened a little since the retirement of Sir Alex Ferguson, is 
reignited by the arrival of José Mourinho, who will renew hostilities with 
Arsène Wenger in one of the few managerial feuds that shows few signs of 
abating.

Saturday’s early kick-off is probably more important for the hosts, not just 
because their home advantage puts them under pressure to secure a result, but 
also because a defeat would open up a massive gap to the league leaders. A 
victory for Arsenal would put them nine points clear ofManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> – and give Liverpool a 
chance to stretch their lead over their great rivals to 11 points when they 
meet Southampton later in the afternoon.

The last six meetings between the teams have produced two win for Arsenal, two 
wins for United and two draws, but the recent history at Old Trafford has been 
more one-sided.Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> managed 
to win in Manchester in the FA Cup last year, courtesy of a goal from former 
United forward Danny Welbeck, but their last victory in the league came a 
decade ago when Emmanuel Adebayor scored a late winner.

Mourinho is also looking to protect a remarkable record of his own against his 
opposite number. He has never lost a league or cup game to a side managed by 
Wenger. Indeed, the last Arsenal player to score a league goal against Mourinho 
during his two spells at Chelsea was Gilberto Silva, from the penalty spot back 
in 2007. The recent form of the two clubs suggests that record could be broken, 
but there’s no doubt Mourinho would love to derail Arsenal’s early title bid, 
even if United’s already appears to have gone off-track.

Borussia Dortmund v Bayern Munich, 17:30 GMT

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa9e88561bed209b6e2985f9e14226bca010719%2F0_358_4623_2775%2F4623.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You're%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You%27re%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa9e88561bed209b6e2985f9e14226bca010719%2F0_358_4623_2775%2F4623.jpg>
 Borussia Dortmund fans and players celebrate together after their win over 
Sporting Lisbon earlier this month. Photograph: Alex Grimm/Bongarts/Getty Images
The biggest game in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> may have lost a 
little of its appeal in light of Borussia Dortmund’s struggles in recent years, 
butDer Klassiker could still have a significant bearing on the top of the table 
come the end of the weekend. The champions are top of the league, as expected, 
but they are by no means the dominant force as things stand.

Bayern, now under the tutelage of Carlo Ancelotti, are only on top of the 
league by virtue of goal difference. While Dortmund are down in fifth, already 
six points adrift, top-flight debutants RB Leipzig are level on points with 
Bayern, with Hoffenheim and Hertha Berlin also sandwiched between this 
weekend’s opponents.

This fixtures has underwhelmed in recent years, with their last league meeting 
and the DFB Pokal final in May both ending 0-0. However, with Bayern in danger 
of surrendering top spot for the first time since August 2014 and Borussia in 
danger of losing touch in the title race, there is a lot stake for this point 
in the season. Already five points worse off than in Thomas Tuchel’s first 
season in charge, Dortmund would surely wave their chances of a title challenge 
goodbye with a defeat.

Atlético Madrid v Real Madrid, Saturday 19:45 GMT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68be212f034c0c995292dbc6b590485749de18eb%2F0_285_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You're%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You%27re%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68be212f034c0c995292dbc6b590485749de18eb%2F0_285_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
 Atlético Madrid will be out for revenge after their defeat in the Champions 
League final in May. Photograph: Peter Powell/EPA 
Like in Der Klassiker earlier in the day, the hosts in the Madrid derby on 
Saturday night will be desperate not to lose ground on their league-leading 
rivals. Like Bayern, though,Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> top the table without having 
truly convinced thus far this season, which may sound an odd statement for a 
side that is unbeaten after 11 games and has won four in a row.

Zinedine Zidane’s men are without defeat in 28 matches in all competitions but 
they have put in some unconvincing displays this season. Cristiano Ronaldo has 
faced his fair share of flack, having failed to score in seven of his last 10 
appearances. Ronaldo has struggled in Madrid derbies in recent seasons, scoring 
in just two of last 11 meetings between the teams.

Real Madrid have come out on top when it has mattered most in recent seasons, 
but Diego Simeone has a strong record in derbies.Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> are unbeaten in their 
last nine domestic outings against Real Madrid, winning five. Simeone’s side 
have underwhelmed on the road this season – including defeats at Real Sociedad 
at Sevilla – but they have won six on the bounce at home. Alavés, who secured a 
1-1 at the Vicente Calderón on the opening day of the season, remain the only 
team to have taken points off Atléti in Madrid in 17 matches in all 
competitions this season.

Milan v Internazionale, Sunday 19:45 GMT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ec93b504d26b2d2cddaecd449ab92264c244a92%2F0_215_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You're%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tired%20of%20internationals%3F%20You%27re%20in%20luck%3A%20the%20big%20leagues%20return%20in%20style%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdortmund-bayern-atletico-madrid-real-madrid-manchester-united-arsenal-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ec93b504d26b2d2cddaecd449ab92264c244a92%2F0_215_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Mauro Icardi is the top scorer in Serie A this season with 10 goals. 
Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
Milan have “home advantage” at San Siro in the season’s first Derby della 
Madonnina and Vincenzo Montella’s men enter the game as favourites. The 
Rossoneri have cause for cheer for the first time in a while under the former 
Italy forward. Sitting third after a run of 22 points from the last 27 
available,Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> are eight points 
clear of Inter.

Having been appointed less than two weeks before the start of the Serie A 
season, Frank de Boer was relieved of his duties less than three months into 
the campaign. A run of four defeats in five league games was eventually the 
Dutchman’s undoing, and while theNerazzurri returned to winning ways against 
bottom club Crotone last time out, new managerStefano Piolo has quite the task 
on his hands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/internazionale-appoint-stefano-pioli-coach>
, especially this weekend.

Is the Premier League less predictable than other leagues? Not exactly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/nov/09/premier-league-predictable-la-liga-ligue-1-bundesliga-serie-a>
Were it not for the exploits of controversial striker Mauro Icardi, who is by 
far and awayInter’s most prized and vilified asset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
, things could have been even worse. The Argentinian has raced to 10 goals 
already in the league, accounting for almost two thirds of the side’s modest 
16-goal tally. Milan have shared the goals around more evenly; five of their 
players have scored at least twice in the league, including teenage sensation 
Manuel Locatelli, who has made a habit of scoring crucial home goals lately, 
including the winner against Juventus last month. While Inter are nowhere near 
that level, a victory over their city rivals may just trump that win in the 
eyes of the fans.

• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 