
I have from time to time made less than positive remarks about the "check" and 
"cheat" buttons on the interactive version of theonline puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>, usually to the effect that using them 
is like aiming to go for a healthy walk but then catching a bus or taking a 
taxi for half the distance. Earlier this year I was quite rightly taken to task 
for my attitude by H.C. of East Sussex, who admitted what he called his "guilty 
secret" of cheating. He is well into his 80s and still working hard at various 
writing and editing projects. He has done the Guardian crosswords for more that 
50 years. To get going in the morning he requires two things: a mug of strong 
coffee while he reads the newspaper and then some time completing the crossword 
on his laptop. He says that, to be honest, this would never take him less than 
30 minutes and used to take more when Bunthorne was still alive. As he cannot 
afford to lose so much work time, he uses the "check" button to fill in all the 
E's in the grid and after that finds that he can usually finish a puzzle in 
about 12 minutes. This routine fits comfortably the time needed to drink his 
coffee and gets his grey cells working efficiently. Why is that cheating? The 
answer, of course, is that it isn't, because crosswords are not there as some 
kind of objective test to be taken under examination conditions. Their purpose 
is purely recreational and setters and solvers (and crossword editors) are 
making a serious mistake if they think otherwise. There should be no such 
concept as cheating at crosswords. They are there to be used in whatever way 
the solver finds satisfactory. If you want to do them the hard way, without 
looking anything up or talking to another soul, fine. If you want to use the 
buttons, the choice is yours. If you want to do them as part of a team, 
perfect. And the same applies to using dictionaries, thesauruses and electronic 
aids like Google. You should feel no guilt in doing puzzles any which way you 
choose and I apologise for and withdraw unreservedly any past implication to 
the contrary.
_____

With sadness I have to report the death on 31 May at the age of 78 of our 
setterRover <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rover> (Ian Morgan). He was 
certainly of the firm view that the sole purpose of crossword puzzles was 
recreation and entertainment. Ian was born in Monmouthshire and educated at 
Bassaleg County Secondary School and St. John's College, Cambridge, where he 
read English and theology. After Cambridge he became a teacher at Preston 
Grammar School in Lancashire, where he remained until his retirement. He was 
President of the National Union of Teachers in 1987/88 and used to tell of how, 
when clearing out his things to go on secondment for that year at the NUT, he 
came across a story he had written for the school magazine some 30 years 
earlier, titled "The Man Who Found Himself". He had written of this imaginary 
character: "He was a maker of crossword clues. That is to say, of course, that 
he was a poet. He enjoyed all the types of ambiguity that poets enjoy; he was 
thrilled at the sight of similarity in things dissimilar; he loved, as though 
they were sleek cats, the poise of words and letters." Ian, who had never even 
thought of setting a crossword himself before this serendipitous find in the 
old magazine, went on to have puzzles published under the nom de plume of 
Serendip in The Teacher and Education and in the Times Listener series. He was 
then encouraged byAraucaria <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria> to 
send puzzles to my predecessor at the Guardian, John Perkin, where he selected 
the name Rover, chosen because he drove one and supported Blackburn Rovers. Ian 
has left a stock of unused puzzles, which with the permission of his family 
will in due course appear in the paper.

_____

Last month we had a new solver as the person in with the first correct 
solution to the Genius puzzle (May, No 83 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-25891,00.html> by 
Araucaria). The puzzle was not posted until late on that May Day bank holiday, 
so the entry from Bernard of London W3 was not in until the evening (20:42) and 
there were only four correct entries on the first day. The total submitted by 
the deadline was 162.

_____

Congratulations to Fiona Kergoat from Woking, Surrey who is May's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with the 
crossword service, please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any comments or queries about 
the crosswords, please emailcrossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk <>
 