
Nissan

The chief executive, Carlos Ghosn, said in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
: “If I need to make an investment in the next few months and I can’t wait 
until the end of Brexit, then I have to make a deal with the UK government. If 
there are tax barriers being established on cars, you have to have a commitment 
for carmakers who export to Europe that there is some kind of compensation.”

Ford

In July, Ford’s chief financial officer, Bob Shanks, said the Brexit vote and 
currency swings were causing problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/ford-considers-closing-factories-raising-prices-europe-brexit>
 for the carmaker and that it would take a hard look at costs. Asked if that 
meant the engine plants could close, he said: “Everything is on the table, 
across Europe.”
Most popular export destinations from UK 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-27T13:57:03/embed.html>
General Motors

This week GM said thousands of jobs were at risk at its UK Vauxhall factories 
because the firm had taken a $400m (£329m) hit as a result of the Brexit vote. 
GM said it was “prepared to take whatever action is necessary” and described 
the UK as “a speed bump on our path”.

Toyota

The executive vice-president, Didier Leroy, said in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
: “The challenge for all of us in the UK is to stay competitive because 85% of 
our production from the UK plant is exported to contintental Europe. If 85% has 
to pay trade duties it will be very, very tough.”
Proportion of UK-made cars exported 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-27T15:19:26/embed.html>
Jaguar Land Rover

The chief executive, Ralf Speth, hinted in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/european-customers-boycotting-british-cars-eu-brexit-vote-jaguar-land-rover>
 that future investment for the company might be outside the UK: “We have to 
realign all of our thinking and work on how to handle this Brexit best,” he 
said. Asked whether that could include axing UK investment, he said: 
“Everything.”

Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders

The chief executive, Mike Hawes, said in September: “The current uncertainty 
is not conducive to attracting manufacturing investment to the UK.”
 