
It is the sort of strange gladiatorial encounter that, were tickets sold, 
would draw the curious to the Big Top.Tom Waits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tom-waits>, the revered American singer and 
actor, is locked in an angry dispute with one of France’s favourite performers, 
the avant-garde circus star Bartabas the Furious.

The standoff between the two maverick entertainers centres on Bartabas’s right 
to use a series of Waits songs in his highly praised “equestrian operatic 
ballet”,On Achève Bien les Anges (They Shoot Angels, Don’t They?) and it now 
looks likely to delay plans to bring the production to Britain.

The deliberately haunting mood of the show performed by Bartabas’s Circus 
Zingaro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/10/flamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses>
 has made it popular with emotionally bruised audiences in Paris after the 
attacks at the Bataclan theatre, but Waits does not approve. In a personal 
statement, he argues: “None of the customary courtesies between artists were 
observed.”

Waits claims that 16 songs written with his wife Kathleen Brennan are used in 
the show to the extent that they serve as “the narrative heart and soul” of the 
musical drama, and that Bartabas (real name Clément Marty) impersonates him 
onstage. He and Brennan have asked for €500,000 compensation.

“What I say yes to and what I say no to creates the shape of how I am 
perceived,” Waits’s idiosyncratic document of complaint continues. “What I mean 
to my audience cannot be made separate from the music. It is absorbed into the 
songs and together they go into the ear of the listener.

“Honestly, France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is the last 
country I ever expected to encounter this situation: they have a minister of 
culture for Chrissakes!; moral rights and a strong commitment to honour, 
support and defend artists.”

The issue came to court in France for the first time last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/16/tom-waits-loses-court-bid-to-stop-french-show-using-his-songs>
 when Waits called for the show to be stopped. But a judge found in favour of 
the French performer, who claims he has made approaches to Waits’s agent for 
permission to use the songs, which feature alongside the music of Bach and 
Messiaen.

“It is clear that I would not have created this show in the same way if he had 
said he did not agree with the use of his songs,” Bartabas said, insisting a 
fee of €400,000 had already been paid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftom-waits-angry-bartabas-furious-intellectual-property-france-circus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149b17b0d495fd20b6610910fdab8ca5d7db1385%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Waits%20vents%20fury%20in%20row%20with%20avant-garde%20French%20circus%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftom-waits-angry-bartabas-furious-intellectual-property-france-circus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Waits%20vents%20fury%20in%20row%20with%20avant-garde%20French%20circus%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftom-waits-angry-bartabas-furious-intellectual-property-france-circus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149b17b0d495fd20b6610910fdab8ca5d7db1385%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tom Waits: ‘These songs were not found like driftwood on the beach; they came 
from good families.’ Photograph: Steve Jennings/WireImage 
Parisian media welcomed news that the show could continue and at the end of 
last month it reopened again at the wooden theatre in Aubervilliers, to the 
north-east ofParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, where Zingaro is 
based. But further legal arguments lie ahead. A second claim is now to go in 
front of a civil court, to consider the violation of rights that Waits alleges. 
A final decision is due next year.

Interviewed early this year, Bartabas spoke of plans to bring the show, 
complete with 30 horses and 19 truckloads of set, to the 2017 Edinburgh 
festival. Unless the legal dispute is resolved, this now looks unlikely.

Waits and his lawyers appear determined. “These songs were not found like 
driftwood on the beach: they came from good families,” he said, adding: “The 
songs have value; my name and image have value; my voice has value. This value 
is cultural, artistic, and personal as well as economic. Often, things that are 
rare (or even medium rare) are more valuable.

“I turn down all commercial product endorsement offers and rarely collaborate 
or lend my name or work to other endeavours. It is my choice to get paid or not 
to get paid. And that value has been taken and exploited for the profit and 
promotion of Bartabas’s career and for his religious and political ideology, 
which neither the songs nor I chose to express. In short, it violates the 
integrity of my work.”

Waits concludes his statement with a fine flourish and seems set on his 
righteous course: “Bartabas hitches a free ride to the marketplace on this 
misperception … and the whole thing just really burns me up.”
 