
I feel I’ve measured out my working life in Stoppard plays. As a young 
freelance, newly arrived in London, I was asked by Philip French in 1966 to do 
a review for the BBC Third Programme of two radio plays by a then unknownTom 
Stoppard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>. They were called If 
You’re Glad I’ll Be Frank and The Dissolution of Dominic Boot, and they 
revealed a whimsical absurdity and formal brilliance that were instantly 
striking.

Now, nearly 50 years later, I find myself in pre-match training for a 
new Stoppard play at theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>. All I know about The Hard 
Problem is that it will be directed by Nicholas Hytner and concerns a young 
psychology researcher wrestling with the conflict between matter and 
consciousness. But although I’ve reported on every Stoppard first night over 
the last half-century, I still haven’t come to any definite conclusion about 
his status as a dramatist. Perhaps that’s the point. Stoppard is a writer 
capable of inciting admiration, awe and astonishment as well as a baffled 
bewilderment, sometimes all in the same evening.

His virtues as a dramatist are by now well known. Although he has changed and 
developed as a writer, some qualities are constant fromRosencrantz and 
Guildenstern Are Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/interactive/2013/may/18/tom-stoppard-rosencrantz-guildenstern-annotations>
 (1966) toRock’n’Roll (2006). In Stoppard’s work there is always 
an intellectual exhilaration that led Jeremy Treglown to describe him as 
a “one-man Adult Education Centre”. Stoppard also has the capacity to bring 
unlikely opposites into flamboyant juxtaposition. Above all, there is a delight 
in the punning possibilities of language that makes him one of theatre’s most 
accomplished wordsmiths. On the downside, his research sometimes sits on top of 
a play rather than being integrated into its fabric, and there is often a 
tension between intellect and emotion. In his best work that tension is 
beautifully resolved; at other times you feel the head winning out over the 
heart.

Looking back over Stoppard’s life, many commentators have seized on the 
significance of his peripatetic childhood: the fact that he was, in his own 
words, “a bounced Czech” forced as a child to flee both Czechoslovakia and 
wartime Singapore before moving to India and, eventually, Britain. Others have 
seen the key to Stoppard in his return to his native land in the 1990s and his 
recognition that he was “completely Jewish” and not simply the grandson of a 
single Jewish relative. But what always fascinates me about his early life is 
the dog that didn’t bark: the fact that, at 17, he didn’t go from school to 
university, as you might expect, but instead became a Bristol journalist. That, 
for me, helps to explain why he acquired the intellectual voracity of the 
auto-didact, and why his plays sometimes suggest showbiz razzle-dazzle 
underscored by hours in a library.

What immediately impressed everyone about Stoppard’s early work was its mental 
agility, ability to make words dance and capacity to achieve fruitful 
collisions. In the mid 1960s British theatre was marked by its social 
observation and political commitment. Then along came Stoppard withRosencrantz 
and Guildenstern Are Dead: a kind of Vladimir and Estragon go to Elsinore in 
which two identity-seeking attendant lords find themselves existing on the 
margins of Shakespearean tragedy. I now admire even more a later, seemingly 
slighter play,The Real Inspector Hound (1968), which shows two theatre critics 
drawn into the creaky complexities of a country house whodunnit.

But Stoppard fully established himself as major player in the early 70s with 
two works for, respectively, the National Theatre and the RSC. The first was
Jumpers (1972), in which moral philosophy was combined with a marital crisis, a 
murder mystery and a team of academic acrobats. The second wasTravesties 
(1974), in which the coexistence of Joyce, Lenin and the Dadaist Tristan Tzara 
in Zürich in 1917 was seen through the faulty prismatic memory of a minor 
consular official, Henry Carr. In the latter,John Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/10/john-wood-obituary?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 gave one of the great Stoppard performances: in a second he switched from the 
aged, reminiscent Carr, chewing on endless cigarettes as if about to swallow 
them, to his younger, debonair self speeding through Zürich like a Beerbohm 
cartoon in perpetual motion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421324177089%2F6bcaee64-99c7-4e8d-8976-2990da4be4cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Stoppard%3A%20playwright%20of%20ideas%20delivers%20a%20new%20Problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Stoppard%3A%20playwright%20of%20ideas%20delivers%20a%20new%20Problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421324177089%2F6bcaee64-99c7-4e8d-8976-2990da4be4cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jamie Parker as Guildenstern and Samuel Barnett as Rosencrantz in Rosencrantz 
and Guildenstern directed by Trevor Nunn at London’s Theatre Royal Haymarket in 
2011. Photograph: Robbie Jack/Robbie Jack/Corbis 
The irony about those early Stoppard plays is that, while we all initially 
applauded their cerebral content, it’s their emotional substance that stands 
the test of time. Seeing Trevor Nunn’s 2011 Chichester revival ofRosencrantz 
and Guildenstern, I was struck less by the ingenious wordplay than by the 
preoccupation with death and the idea that “we must be born with an intuition 
of mortality”. It’s the same withJumpers: the notion that the moon-landings 
would lead to moral mayhem on Earth now looks absurdly dated, whereas George 
Moore’s gut-wrenching agony over his wife’s suspected adultery remains 
timelessly real. And even ifTravesties lacks that same degree of pathos, it is 
Henry Carr’s gin-soaked memory that resonates better than Stoppard’s attempt to 
rope Oscar Wilde –author of The Soul of Man Under Socialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/27/george-orwell-assesses-oscar-wilde-socialism>
 – into the ranks of the politically uncommitted. Stoppard’s work is at its 
best when its emotional core is as fully realised as its intellectual audacity.

That is one reason why I admire two crucial mid-period Stoppard plays, both 
dating from 1977:Every Good Boy Deserves Favour and Professional Foul. They 
belong to a time when Stoppard was becoming actively involved in human-rights 
campaigning, publicly attacking the treatment of dissidents in the Soviet bloc 
and forging a friendship with Václav Havel, and what the plays reveal is 
Stoppard’s ingenuity being put to the service of a moral cause. InEvery Good Boy
, a schizophrenic who hears an orchestra in his head is incarcerated in the 
same mental-hospital cell as a political dissident: a classic Stoppard 
juxtaposition, but one that shows the absurdity of a system in which the 
barrier between desperation and defiance is deliberately smashed. And
Professional Foul, written for BBC TV, is even more impressive in its portrait 
of an ethics professor who, having visited Prague to give a lecture and see a 
football match, returns home “educated by experience”. It’s not hard to see in 
that an image of the playwright himself, abandoning his own stylish political 
detachment when confronted with the realities of Soviet persecution.

Stoppard’s relationship with politics has always been a complicated subject. 
I questioned his assumption – aired in a Guardian interview in 1973 – that 
“when Auden said his poetry didn’t save one Jew from the gas chamber, he’d said 
it all”. What Auden’s dictum leaves out is the capacity of art, from 
Aristophanes’sLysistrata to Swift’s Modest Proposal and Picasso’s Guernica 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guernica_%28painting%29>, to heighten awareness 
and rearrange consciousness. The first version of Stoppard’s play about press 
freedom,Night and Day (1978), also rigged the debate by arguing that Britain 
was littered with newspapers pushing every line from Mao to Mosley: what that 
ignored was the power of profitability and the fact that the national press is 
overwhelmingly rightwing. And there are those who cannot forgiveThe Real Thing 
(1982) for creating a straw-man in the figure of Brodie: a politically mutinous 
soldier who, in attempting to write a play based on his own experience, is 
shown to be a clunky propagandist.

For me, however, The Real Thing is Stoppard’s most durable and accessible 
play: the one in which emotional depth is perfectly combined with structural 
intricacy and which affords constant delight. As I remarked when reviewing Anna 
Mackmin’s excellent Old Vic revival in 2010, it’s a play about the acquisition 
of self-knowledge through pain: about a successful dramatist who adopts a mask 
of ironic detachment but who, in abandoning his wife for another woman, 
undergoes a sentimental education. What he learns is that “the real thing” in 
love is not an exclusive, colonising passion but a frank acknowledgment by each 
partner of the other’s flawed individuality. This is Stoppard writing with his 
defences down; yet the play also wittily explores subjects including the power 
of language, the provenance of protest and the capacity of pop music to rival 
the classics in generating pleasure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421324397490%2Fe255569e-63d7-4e86-bfa4-7d26620201c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Stoppard%3A%20playwright%20of%20ideas%20delivers%20a%20new%20Problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Stoppard%3A%20playwright%20of%20ideas%20delivers%20a%20new%20Problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421324397490%2Fe255569e-63d7-4e86-bfa4-7d26620201c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Members of the National Theatre rehearse Stoppard’s new play A Hard Problem. 
Photograph: Johan Persson 
It is Arcadia (1993), however, that is now widely regarded as his masterpiece 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/features/is-tom-stoppards-arcadia-the-greatest-play-of-our-age-1688852.html>
, a play in which he achieves the perfect fusion of ideas and emotion, 
balancing maths and metaphysics with poetry and passion. It gets richer 
with each viewing and is now regularly revived (the latest production, by 
Blanche McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/05/blanche-mcintyre-stage-director-accolade>
 for English Touring Theatre, opens at the Theatre Royal Brighton, on 30 
January). Stoppard makes ingenious use of a dual time-scheme in which a group 
of 19th-century characters try to plot the future while those in the present 
seek to recapture the past. And there is no denying his skill in dramatising 
chaos theory, entropy and the second law of thermodynamics. But even in a play 
as fine as this, there are moments when the assiduous homework shows through: 
at one point the action stops while the mathematically dept Valentine explains 
to the Eng Lit academic Hannah the principle of theiterated algorithm 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterated_logarithm>. It makes fascinating reading 
but is hard to digest theatrically and feels like a disguised lecture.

As Stoppard’s own intellectual inquisitiveness has grown, this question of how 
to balance information with narrative dynamic has become ever more pressing. I 
enjoyedHapgood (1988) the first time around but it is now counted as one of his 
rare failures. The play exploresHeisenberg’s uncertainty principle 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty_principle> a decade before Michael 
Frayn’sCopenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/11/michael-frayn-crucible-sheffield-review>
, but Stoppard’s attempt to use wave-particle duality and quantum theory as a 
metaphor for human nature leads to a fiendish plot involving twins, double 
agents, switched briefcases and sleepers. He revised the play for New York, 
drastically condensing the scientific information, but as he admitted, “it’s 
not the physics that’s the problem … it’s the story, the plot, the narrative, 
the mechanism, the twins, all that”.

This is one of those instances when the massive research Stoppard undertakes 
for each play is not fully absorbed into the dramatic structure. Similarly,The 
Invention of Love (1997) is deeply moving when the older AE Housman confronts 
his younger self or wrestles with his thwarted affection for his undergraduate 
pal Moses Jackson (“I would have died for you,” says Housman, “but I never had 
the luck”). At other times, though, as in a game of dream-croquet between 
Pater, Ruskin and Jowett, the narrative grinds to a halt for a disquisition on 
Oxonian attitudes to art and education in the late 19th century. Stoppard’s 
epic trilogyThe Coast of Utopia (2002), while containing passages of 
breathtaking beauty and definitely worthy of revival, also suffered from his 
determination to include everything he’d discovered about Russia’s 
liberal-minded 19th-century emigres.

But it would be ungracious to carp at a dramatist who has given so much 
pleasure and, significantly for many other writers, shown that science can be a 
fit subject for drama. His most recent stage play,Rock’n’Roll, also achieved 
that perfect balance between ideas and emotion that is his constant goal and 
rested on another of his resonant juxtapositions: in this case, between Czech 
freedom-fighters and Cambridge Marxists. On the one hand, Stoppard showed Jan, 
an exiled Czech, returning to Prague at the time of the Soviet takeover and 
finding himself inexorably drawn into dissidence andCharter 77 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_77>; on the other, he drew a surprisingly 
sympathetic portrait of an unrepentant Marxist don, Max, as old as theOctober 
revolution <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_Revolution> and still drawn to 
“this beautiful idea”. Stoppard also poured into the play his own love of rock 
music, which seemed to embody the spirit of liberation and pagan ecstasy.

Summing up Tom Stoppard in a phrase or two, as I implied at the beginning, is 
impossible, not least because his virtues are inseparable from his vices. But, 
if I had to identify the bedrock of his achievement, it would be that he has 
extended the boundaries of what is theatrically viable. Beckett, he once said, 
“redefined the minima of theatrical validity”. Stoppard has done the opposite 
by exploring theatre’s maximum potential. He has also banished the puritanical 
belief that a drama addressing serious ideas cannot simultaneously be playful.

And in his best work for the theatre – which for me includes Jumpers, The Real 
Thing, Arcadia and Rock ’n’ Roll – he has glamorised thought and shown that the 
intellect and emotion are bedfellows rather than opposites. How that will apply 
toThe Hard Problem remains to be seen but, as always, a new Stoppard play is a 
keenly awaited event that leaves you hoping he can achieve the high-wire 
balancing act that has always been his forte.

• The Hard Problem opens at the National Theatre, London SE1, on 21 January. 
nationaltheatre.org.uk. 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/the-hard-problem>
 