
Tommy Elphick paid tribute to his team-mate Harry Arter after the midfielder 
spoke publicly for the first time since his fiancee gave birth to their 
stillborn daughter. In aninterview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
 last week, Arter revealed how, just two days later, he had given an emotional 
team talk before his man-of-the-match performance in the2-1 victory against 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/12/bournemouth-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in December.

Harry Arter: ‘Every single game now I go out to play for her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
The Republic of Ireland international was one of 10 players rested by Eddie 
Howe for this smash-and-grab victory over the 2008 FA Cup winnersPortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth>, who could count themselves 
unlucky after dominating large portions of the game. But having made a 
successful comeback of his own following four months out with an ankle injury, 
Elphick’s thoughts afterwards turned to Arter.

“To come out and play the day after that tragic event shows his character,” 
said the Bournemouth captain. “The thing with Harry is that he wears his heart 
on his sleeve but when he plays he’s as honest as the day is long. But we’re 
there for him. It shows the strength of the group and the squad. Harry has been 
a massive part of what we’ve done and he typifiesBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>.”

Goals from Josh King and the substitute Marc Pugh helped Bournemouth reach the 
fifth round for the first time since 1989, when they were eventually beaten by 
Sir Alex Ferguson’s Manchester United after a replay. “It shows not only the 
strength in depth we’ve got but the progression that the club is making,” said 
Elphick. “We’ve done some extraordinary things over the last three years and 
hopefully now we can make our mark on this competition. The gaffer reminds the 
players where we’ve come from and keeps us grounded. These are stepping stones 
in the right direction. You just have to take it game by game but obviously the 
Premier League is still our priority.”

In the 1988-89 season under Harry Redknapp, Bournemouth recorded what was then 
their highest-ever league finish of 12th in the old Division Two – a record 
that has since been obliterated by their astonishing ascent to the top flight. 
Sitting four points clear of the relegation zone, Howe spent almost £20m in 
January onBenik Afobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/bournemouth-confirm-signing-benik-afobe-wolves-record-deal>
,Juan Iturbe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/01/bournemouth-loan-juan-iturbe-roma>
 andLewis Grabban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/11/bournemouth-lewis-grabban-norwich>
, and Elphick believes that could give them the edge in the final few months of 
the season. “The signings that we’ve made have brought more out of the players 
who are in the team and hopefully that kicks us on again,” he said.

“But I think the main thing is getting the business done early. When you see 
players coming in within the first week of the transfer window you know they’re 
not being rushed into playing. The time is there for us to get to know them. We 
have another three or four weeks on top of what we might have had if they were 
racing to do the business.”

Man of the match Kyle Bennett (Portsmouth)
 