
Tony Pulis is confident his West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> side will rediscover their 
cutting edge as they look to avoid an upset at Northampton Town in the EFL Cup 
on Tuesday night.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-weekend-action>
West Brom lost 2-1 at home against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/west-bromwich-albion-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 in the Premier League on Saturday and go to Sixfields hoping to end the hosts’ 
unbeaten run, which stretches back to January.

Albion visit the club who earned promotion to League One in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/northampton-town-promoted-league-one-bristol-rovers>
 for the first time in 21 years and Pulis called on his side to find their 
shooting boots after two goals in two Premier League games so far.

Pulis, who could give a debut to Brendan Galloway after the left-back signed 
on loan from Everton, said: “We’re playing well and we’re creating chances but 
it’s not just the chances that we’re missing, we’re getting into the final 
third and picking the wrong pass – it’s just that bit of extra quality that we 
need.

“We’re just lacking a bit of a cutting edge at the moment and that final ball 
but I can’t really criticise my players because what they lack, and they do 
lack things sometimes, they make up for with their commitment and effort.

“We’ve got to dust ourselves down and go again because we’ve got a big game at 
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> on Tuesday 
night. I won’t be making a lot of changes because we haven’t got a lot of 
changes to make.”

Pulis is seeking to sign four players during the summer transfer window, with 
Aston Villa’s Jordan Ayew and the Sporting Lisbon forward Islam Slimani on the 
58-year-old’s wishlist, although Albion have been unable to agree a price with 
the Portuguese club.

“We’ve got 10 days to bring in some players, so we’ll see what happens,” the 
Albion head coach said. “We’ve got 10 days to do some work and hopefully we’ll 
be able to do it.”

Chris Brunt is out with a knee injury but the 16-year-old defender Kane Wilson 
is expected to be in the squad, while the midfielder James Morrison could make 
his first start since January after recovering from a hamstring injury.

The arrival of Everton’s Galloway on a season-long loan deal makes him West 
Brom’s second signing of the summer. Pulis had been seeking a left-back after 
Brunt was injured in March and he was then forced to play Jonny Evans out of 
position.

Galloway, 20, has made 21 appearances for Everton since joining from MK Dons 
in 2014 but he is yet to play this season and his last game came in an FA Cup 
win against Carlisle United in January.

Galloway failed to make the squad in Everton’s victory over West Brom at the 
weekend. However, he could make his West Brom debut when they travel to 
Northampton on Tuesday should Albion receive clearance in time.
 