
The new Genius will be available soon. We will send a special crossword update 
email to let you know when it is online. Congratulations to Jez MacBean who is 
August's winner.

I forgot to ask and for several weeks I have been cursing the oversight. It 
seems like such an obvious question, but in the muddle and hurry of taking on 
Hugh Stephenson's responsibilities as crossword editor it completely slipped my 
mind. We had too much else to do. Had the quiptics for week 42 been done? How 
do you spell 'shily'? Sorry, 'shyly'. (My thanks to Michael Bulley for that.) 
Had the corrections to puzzle 24,198 been entered on the computer or only on 
the printout of the pdf? And so on. But Hugh was setting off to sail to the 
Falklands and what I really wanted to know was what books he would be taking 
with him. And specifically what crossword books... if any?

The answer shall have to wait. Intrepid British travellers have for years 
taken their favourite works on their journeys. I am particularly fond of the 
story Peter Fleming told of his 1930s journey overland from Peking to India by 
way of Tibet and Sinkiang. "For the latter province, which had until recently 
been rent by civil war and which was virtually closed to all travellers, we had 
no passports." But Fleming was of intrepid stock - he was the brother of the 
more famous Ian - and thought something could probably be sorted out. And he 
liked to travel light. "Apart from a rifle, six bottles of brandy, and 
Macaulay's History of England, we had no equipment or supplies worth 
mentioning."

Well, Macaulay's History is probably not first in every crossword solver's 
list of essentials - but what is? A copy of Chambers, certainly - but do you 
need Collins as well? One of my first decisions as editor was to adjudicate on 
a certain word. I won't give you the word; it's coming up soon. Chambers said 
it was a two-word solution of four and six letters. Collins preferred one word 
of ten letters. Which is better? There are many examples. Often they involve 
hyphenation. Underage or under-age? Chambers prefers the hyphen, but in general 
I prefer solutions without them. In this case might not it be better to go with 
Collins?

And what else? Let's assume you have the selection of puzzles already in 
place, ranging from the easy to the nigh-on-impossible. What tools do you need 
to solve them? In the course of my various writings on crosswords I have peered 
at the desks of several of the Guardian setters. Some have a vast array of 
reference works to hand. Others prefer to use 'words they already know'. All of 
them use dictionaries to check their definitions and most of them eschew the 
internet as 'unreliable'. Should the toils - and tools - of the solver mirror 
those of the setter?

Let's assume then that on your travels you have no internet access, and space 
is tight. You are on a yacht in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. Books do not 
- whatever your heart tells you - take preference over drinking water or food. 
And so you have to choose. You have your Chambers (Collins if you must) and six 
months supply of puzzles. Hard-line (hardline? Chambers 2006 prefers the single 
word, but my Microsoft spellchecker insists on the hyphen) solvers will have 
halved the size of their crossword collections by removing the solutions and 
leaving them at home. Even so you have space for only one more book. What is it?

It's a tough choice, but by my reckoning a crossword solver needs something 
that is as eclectic, surprising, knowledgeable and fun as the puzzles. 
Something small and compact. Something that 'covers' art, science, literature, 
medicine, classical mythology, money... You get the idea. I was introduced to 
Pears' Cyclopï¿½dia by my father who swore by an edition he had been given after 
the war. Our evenings - this was 'before television' - could easily turn into a 
lazy, hazy wander through its densely printed pages. From time to time my 
father would grunt, 'I never knew that,' while I would lie on the carpet 
convinced that there was too much in the world and I would never know anything.

So perhaps Hugh has a copy of Pears with him - or perhaps he has nothing at 
all. What better opportunity to ignore for a while the fake world of crosswords 
and enjoy the real sights and smells and sounds of the open sea? Perhaps, like 
Peter Fleming, he has other concerns. Before leaving Peking Fleming was careful 
to visit three old beggars in a side street who - what's the word? - farmed 
lice. "The lice, thus nobly nourished, supplied an anti-typhus serum and on 
each of the three occasions we visited the old men we came away injected with 
the essence of no less than thirty of the little creatures." Fleming travelled 
at the tail end of the Great Game. With a little money, a bucket of charm, the 
occasional brandy and an enviable ability to shoot game at 350 yards he 
succeeded where many travellers before him had failed. Seven months after 'the 
eleventh hour passed ', he descended through the Vale of Kashmir to Srinagar, a 
little thinner, considerably more tanned, but otherwise none the worse for 
wear. Books you understand, were the least of his concerns and perhaps it was 
right that it should be so.
 