
Of all the beverages, champagne will reveal the ignoramus most brutally.

There’s the sparkling wine versus champagne debate, heated opinions about the 
best temperature to serve it, long discussions to be had about the most 
advantageous shape of the glass in which it is served, how the cork must be 
eased from the bottle not with a pop but with a ladylike sigh, and all manner 
of curious “did you know?” facts that bubble up at a table of wine aficionados. 
The fiddly riddling of the bottles, the legend of the accidental secondary 
fermentation that created the signature bubbles in the first place, the 
chalkiness of the terroir, the shape of Marie Antoinette’s breast, and yada 
yada yada, everyone’s an expert.

Except, that is, for the four Guardian Australian writers who submitted to a 
blind tasting of six sparkling wines of varying price and provenance. In an 
effort to find their inner champagne snobs just in time for Christmas (and to 
work out what to buy), they were guided through the tasting by the 
actual-expert hand ofsommelier Samantha Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-drink-wine-with-samantha>
 of Nomad Restaurant and Wine Store.


All grown up and alone at last: Christmas away from home is a mixed blessing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/19/all-grown-up-and-alone-at-last-christmas-away-from-home-is-a-mixed-blessing>
As Payne says, when buying wines we are very guided by labels and prices, and 
the same labels and prices influence what we taste. So six wines were chosen 
with fairly loose parameters: two from Australia, two French (one from the 
supermarket chain Aldi), and one each from Italy and Spain. Ranging in price 
from $17 to $129, they were covered in foil so none of the guinea pigs could 
see what they were tasting or know how it would impact their bank balance. They 
had to rely on the senses of taste and smell only.

Just like art, it was a matter of “I don’t know much, but I know what I like”. 
And that’s all that matters, right? Here are their tasting notes. Cheers.

Wines sampled:

1. Santa Margherita Prosecco di Valdo, $20 (Italy)

2. Jacobs Creek Trilogy Cuvee Brut, $18 (Australia)

3. Freixenet Vintage 2013 Reserve Cava $17 (Spain)

4. Veuve Clicquot Vintage Gold 2004 $129 (France)

5. Pirie Sparkling non vintage $37 (Australia)

6. Monsigny NV Premier Cru $29.99 (France)

Lenore Taylor’s pick: Pirie, ‘a lovely dry mouthful of bubbles’

I come to champagne tasting with some set views. I don’t love the most 
expensive French champagnes. I find their complex, slightly dusty flavours 
overwhelming. I like less fashionable dry, fruity sparkling wines that cost 
about half as much. Or at least that’s what I tell myself when I know what’s in 
my glass. But a blind tasting is the ultimate test.

The first bubbly to pour from the anonymous foil-covered bottles is too sweet 
and acidic. It’d be OK at a picnic, but it’s not great. I give it three out of 
five. It turns out to be prosecco at $20 a bottle. I’ve never been a huge 
prosecco fan.

I don’t like the second one at all. It’s sweet and bland, a little bit Passion 
Pop. One out of five. Turns out to be the $17 Jacob’s Creek Trilogy and for my 
not particularly sophisticated palate, you’d be getting what you paid for.

The third one has a bit of that dusty taste I associate with the champagnes 
I’m slightly embarrassed not to love, but the fourth has that full complex 
French champagne flavour. I give them both a four. I figure they’re both 
probably French. Actually, the third was Freixenet, at $18 a bottle, and the 
fourth is vintage Verve at $129 – so if, like me – you are obviously not a 
French champagne aficionado, the Freixenet is probably a bargain.

Number six made my tongue curl. It was revealed to be a cheaper French 
champagne.

My favourite was number five – a lovely dry mouthful of bubbles, simpler and 
more subtle than the Verve, fruity and citrusy and deliciously drinkable. Five 
out of five – my kind of sparkling. I’ll be buying the $37 Pirie Tasmanian 
sparkling wine for Christmas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91879297b763e799891a7248fc6b942361c418a4%2F0_0_2954_1969%2F2954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20of%20the%20pops%3A%20a%20novice's%20guide%20to%20the%20best%20sparkling%20wines%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20of%20the%20pops%3A%20a%20novice%27s%20guide%20to%20the%20best%20sparkling%20wines%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91879297b763e799891a7248fc6b942361c418a4%2F0_0_2954_1969%2F2954.jpg>
 Gabrielle Jackson: ‘I admired the very fine bubbles in the glass.’ Photograph: 
Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
Gabrielle Jackson’s pick: prosecco, ‘perfect with prawn cocktails’

My qualifications for tasting sparkling wine involve only having consumed 
quite a lot of it. When I moved to the UK in 2003 and discovered how much 
cheaper champagne was there than in Australia, I got quite carried away with 
the drinking of it.

Later, after a trip to Italy, prosecco became my bubbly of choice and I could 
afford to buy it by the caseload – to serve as an Aperol spritz with a side of 
olives and lightly salted crisps.

So I knew the prosecco when I tasted it, and at $20, the Santa Margherita 
Prosecco di Valdo is great value for money and a perfect accompaniment to our 
Christmas Day entree of prawn cocktails.

If I were rich (I’m not), I would have no hesitation in shelling out $129 for 
the vintage Veuve – as soon as I dipped my nose into the glass and inhaled the 
buttery aroma I knew I was on to a winner. I admired the very fine bubbles in 
the glass and the long aftertaste reminded me of the best chardonnays I’ve 
tasted. It was hands-down my favourite of the six wines and I was not partaking 
in any of that spitting out nonsense, let me tell you. In fact, I asked for a 
second taste just to make sure it was my favourite.

Low-grog eggnog: Christmas cocktails that won't knock you out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/02/low-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out>
I had more trouble identifying the other wines but the Tasmanian Pirie was 
also lovely to drink and I could quite happily quaff it at a cocktail party. 
The fine bubbles tingled on my lips, which was rather pleasant. For me, the 
real surprise was the cava. At $17, the vintage Freixenet seems a steal. As for 
the Jacob’s Creek, well, I might be happy to drink it at a pub at midnight, 
after I’d been drinking since lunchtime, but otherwise pass me the sparkling 
water please. And the less said about the acidic Monsigny champagne from Aldi, 
the better.

This Christmas, I’ll be serving the prosecco with the starters and the Pirie 
sparkling will be filling the stockings of some people I love.


Brigid Delaney’s pick: Veuve, ‘buttery and golden’

The prosecco felt immediately very minerally and acidic – with dense bubbles 
and dry finish. It had me craving seafood – oily fish like salmon would could 
go well with something like this, that truly cuts through.

The Jacob’s Creek Trilogy Cuvee Brut – yuck – was like a Fruit Tingle lolly 
with too much sugar and a greasy aftertaste. It is one to have at the end of 
Christmas Day perhaps – after your booze stocks are depleted and your palate is 
tired.

The Freixenet Vintage 2013 Reserve Cava was very drinkable and I could imagine 
being a good thirst quencher on a hot day. We stuck our noses to the glass as 
one of us said, “smell the oak”. It smelt like it was made from real fruit and 
in a barrel – as opposed to the Jacob’s Creek, which tasted vaguely chemical.

The Veuve was the best. It was buttery and golden, slightly acidic with an 
aftertaste that reminded me of chardonnay. Not only would this choice be great 
with Christmas lunch but it’s the sort of drink that would work well all by 
itself, or with a side of strawberries.

The Pirie sparkling from Tasmania was similar to the prosecco and tasted 
acidic enough to cut through the strongest Christmas flavours – brandy butter 
fruit pudding, slabs of seafood, creamy pavlova. By the sixth tasting I was 
beginning to feel as if I’d eaten an entire roast turkey. This was a slightly 
sweeter blend that had a tart, almost vinegary aftertaste.

My favourite – number four – was the most expensive, the Veuve Clicquot 
Vintage Gold 2004 (France) at $129 a pop. But if you want something more 
affordable, the Freixenet Vintage 2013 reserve Cava from Spain at $17 is good 
value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bb64a97a8a154f11e41619218b8b7fd8db25be1%2F0_0_2901_1934%2F2901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20of%20the%20pops%3A%20a%20novice's%20guide%20to%20the%20best%20sparkling%20wines%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20of%20the%20pops%3A%20a%20novice%27s%20guide%20to%20the%20best%20sparkling%20wines%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ftop-of-the-pops-a-novices-guide-to-the-best-sparkling-wines-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bb64a97a8a154f11e41619218b8b7fd8db25be1%2F0_0_2901_1934%2F2901.jpg>
 Steph Harmon, Lenore Taylor, Brigid Delaney and Gabrielle Jackson test their 
tastebuds at the blind tasting of six sparkling wines from Australia, France, 
Spain and Italy. Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
Steph Harmon’s pick: prosecco, ‘bubbles to refresh a mild hangover’

I came into this tasting at the distinct disadvantage of having indulged in 
too much cheap sparkling at an event the night before. On the flipside, when 
the worst stuff touched my tongue it was like muscle memory: Jacob’s Creek 
Trilogy Cuvee Brut is bad and should feel bad.

When I’m looking for a sparkling, I want something dry, citrusy, light and 
subtle – nothing challenging. I’m looking for something to drink outside on a 
summer evening, with a seafood barbeque and a long night ahead. Nothing too 
sophisticated, but taste is taste.

Food in books: Christmas pavlova from Ballet Shoes by Noel Streatfeild
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/dec/15/food-in-books-christmas-pavlova-from-ballet-shoes-by-noel-streatfeild>
I really enjoyed the prosecco; it was dry and would cut through seafood, and – 
importantly – it was bubbly enough to refresh a mild hangover. Perfect for 
Boxing Day lunch.

The Pirie sparkling was a favourite too – it was interesting without being 
overwhelming, but I found its aftertaste a little too sweet. (I picked its 
price point though, which brought me no small amount of smugness.) The cava was 
initially great, but got steadily worse the further down the glass I got, and 
when I went for a repour – in a tremendous show of collegial generosity, we 
brought the half-drunk bottles back to the office – it tasted kind of like 
garbage.

I loved the depth and complexity of the Veuve, and was strangely satisfied to 
have picked the most expensive wine as my favourite. But if I were to shop for 
the booze next weekend, on taste and price the prosecco would be my pick.

With thanks to the staff of Nomad Restaurant, Surry Hills.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchoosing-wine-christmas-day-wine-picks-xmas-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418703570729%2FHow-to-drink-wine-Samanth-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20the%20right%20wine%20for%20Christmas%20with%20one%20of%20Australia's%20top%20sommeliers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchoosing-wine-christmas-day-wine-picks-xmas-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20the%20right%20wine%20for%20Christmas%20with%20one%20of%20Australia%27s%20top%20sommeliers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchoosing-wine-christmas-day-wine-picks-xmas-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418703570729%2FHow-to-drink-wine-Samanth-001.jpg>
Choosing the right wine for Christmas with one of Australia’s top sommeliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2014/dec/17/choosing-wine-christmas-day-wine-picks-xmas-video> 