
Congratulations to Terence Saunders from Middlesbrough who is August's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with the 
crossword service, please email subshelp@theguardian.com <>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk <>

If you happened to have been braving the rain in Trafalgar Square on Wednesday 
26 August between 10pm and 11pm you would have seen an unusual sight. Kathy 
Ham, a Guardian crossword devotee, had drawn the right to be on top of the 
vacant plinth in the square for that hour and had elected to use it to sit 
there, attempting to complete a puzzle within the hour, in order to raise 
awareness of Alzheimer's. Some friends at ground level handed out leaflets to 
the onlookers about the cause. The link is appropriate as it is well attested 
that doing a crossword (it does not have to be the Guardian's) helps keep the 
dreadful disease at bay. So, too, I am told by doctors, does smoking, but they 
feel inhibited for some reason from saying so publicly.

There was a slight cheat involved as Kathy rightly took the view that, at that 
hour of night, people might be less than impressed if she appeared to solve in 
an hour a crossword that had been on the streets since dawn and available on 
the Guardian crossword website (complete with its 'cheat' facility) even 
longer. So I arranged that she should in fact be supplied with a PDF version of 
Paul's puzzle No 24,789 for the following day, which was given to her just 
before the 'cherry picker' truck lifted her up and deposited her on top of the 
plinth where she announced to the crowd below that she was there to do the 
Guardian crossword.

And do it she did, though having rapidly filled in several clues she was heard 
to take up her 'phone a friend' option in order to get the solution to 8 down 
(Payback time here? (7,6) DEBTOR'S PRISON). It emerged in Simon Hoggart's 
Guardian column on Saturday 29 August that she may have used the 'phone a 
friend' option more than once and that he was the friend in question. He 
described her as sitting "on a folding chair looking a little, from a distance, 
like Queen Victoria doing Sudoku".

Charity remains the theme this month because on 12 September Araucaria is 
seeking sponsorship for his part in the Cambridgeshire Historic Churches 
Trust's annual 'Ride and Stride' event. Half the money raised goes to the trust 
and half to the rider and strider's own church. In his case this is the parish 
church of St John the Baptist in Somersham, near Huntingdon in Cambridgeshire, 
which he describes as a beautiful 14th-century building that John Betjeman and 
Simon Jenkins both unaccountably left out of their books on churches.

This event was formerly known as the Historic Churches Cycle Ride and 
participants raise money by visiting as many churches in Cambridgeshire as 
possible between 10am and 6pm. (Luckily Cambridge is a flattish county.) 
Araucaria has reached the stage where he no longer has a bicycle (nor a car), 
but he has discovered that the rules allow him to participate by foot and 
public transport and his goal is to get to about 18 churches in the allotted 
time.

Details of the trust are to be had at http://cambshistoricchurchestrust.co.uk  
<http://cambshistoricchurchestrust.co.uk> and any monies you would like to 
contribute will be gratefully received by the trust's treasurer, Ron Dexter, at 
39 Bentham Way, Ely CB6 1BS. You should make it clear that Araucaria is the 
horse you are backing, in order that St John the Baptist, Somersham gets its 
due cut, and (if that is the case) that you are a UK resident and taxpayer so 
that money can also be clawed back from the government.

My email tray (and the letters column of the paper) have had more than a 
handful of contributions complaining about the number of clues in recent Quick 
crosswords relating to dogs. One correspondent, however, did point out that 
there was nothing particularly surprising in this as the compiler was a setter. 
I have always been conscious of the bias in these things, since those who 
dislike something are quick to say so, while those who like it or are neutral 
in their attitude don't bother spontaneously to say so. Last year, in this 
space, I asked you to let me know if you liked/disliked/couldn't care less 
about occasional running themes in the Quicks. Your answers surprised me in 
that more people said that they liked them than those who disliked them, with 
most saying that they were fine provided they did not happen too often. On this 
basis, unless I hear to the contrary, I think that we shall continue with 
occasional running themes.

Two items for the 'useless information' bag:

1. Following last month's note on Weatherbys 18-character limit on names for 
registered thoroughbreds, I am indebted to Rhona O'Connell for telling me that 
new technology, not old, is now the reason for it. It seems that the Weatherbys 
computer system uses sets of nine characters (or spaces) as an electronic 
building block and, therefore, has a limit of 2x9=18. She also tells me of a 
rumour that the Newmarket trainer Julie Cecil has managed to sneak some risquï¿½ 
anagrams past the censors in the names of her registered horses. Does anyone 
have further and better particulars?

2. Earlier this year Dorothy Taylor, a long-time setter of the Everyman 
crossword in the Observer, died at the age of 98. She was a friend and 
colleague of many notables in the crossword world, including Ximenes, the 
author Colin Dexter and Sir Jeremy Morse, the banker and crossword star from 
whom Colin Dexter took his inspector's name. Less well known is the fact that, 
when Dorothy Taylor entered prize crosswords herself, she did so as Mrs B 
Lewis, thus providing the author with a name for his inspector's sidekick.

PS: I am away for most of September on a sailing trip, so please forgive me if 
I am even slower than usual in answering emails.
 