
A Conservative MP elected to parliament last year faces a vote of no 
confidence from senior party members over his involvement in a loan to his 
local football club that saw a potential loss of £10m to the council, it has 
emerged.

A meeting of the executive council of the Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> South Conservative 
association on Friday is to consider a motion expressing grave worries about 
the conduct of David Mackintosh, the MP since the 2015 election.

The agenda for the meeting, a copy of which has been seen by the Guardian, 
says the executive council is worried by “the reputational damage” the affair 
is having on the party, saying this is being felt in local election results.

Northamptonshire police are investigating what happened to the loan to 
Northampton Town in 2013-14, which totalled £13.5m. The money was lent by
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northampton> borough, then led 
by Mackintosh.

The money was intended to pay for improvements at Northampton’s Sixfields 
stadium, including a new east stand. However, the project collapsed with 
£10.25m owed to the council.

The police investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/northampton-town-loan-conservative-mp-david-mackintosh>
 also covers inquiries into £36,000 in donations made to Mackintosh’s local 
Conservative association and people associated with him by Howard Grossman, 
whose company, 1st Land, was contracted to manage the Sixfields development.

Despite the bulk of the money being paid to Grossman’s company, the firm 
building the new stand, Buckingham Group, stopped work in early 2015 having not 
been paid £1.9m they were owed, with 1st Land put into administration.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ftory-mp-faces-vote-of-no-confidence-over-135m-loan-to-football-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F956151bc791e9a0e45ff7e5fb49884b47702ff3c%2F1431_711_3327_1996%2F3327.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tory%20MP%20faces%20vote%20of%20no%20confidence%20over%20%C2%A313.5m%20loan%20to%20football%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ftory-mp-faces-vote-of-no-confidence-over-135m-loan-to-football-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tory%20MP%20faces%20vote%20of%20no%20confidence%20over%20%C2%A313.5m%20loan%20to%20football%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ftory-mp-faces-vote-of-no-confidence-over-135m-loan-to-football-team%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F956151bc791e9a0e45ff7e5fb49884b47702ff3c%2F1431_711_3327_1996%2F3327.jpg>
 The uncompleted east stand at Northampton’s Sixfields ground. Photograph: 
TGSPhoto/Rex Shutterstock 
A report by the council’s auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/council-loan-northampton-town-auditors-inquiry>
 that Mackintosh, as the council leader, had stressed the importance of making 
the loan and that it be done “promptly”.

Friday’s motion is put forward by two senior local Tories, both members of 
local county council – Mary Markham, the council leader until October, and 
Michael Clarke, formerly a cabinet member.


It says the executive committee “expresses its disappointment and its concerns 
over the conduct” of Mackintosh and his “refusal to accept criticism of his 
conduct contained in the PwC report”.

It adds: “The executive further expresses its concerns over the reputational 
damage this matter is having on the standing of the Conservative party in 
Northampton borough,” citing recent election results.

On long-time local party activist, who asked to not be named, said Northampton 
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> were worried 
about what they were calling “the Mackintosh factor” meaning the parliamentary 
seat, held by the party with a majority of less than 4,000, could be vulnerable 
to Labour.

Given the slim Conservative majority in the Commons there was no immediate 
pressure for a byelection, unless Mackintosh becomes implicated in any police 
probe, the activist said.

He added: “He’s facing a huge amount of pressure in the local party. They want 
to put a shot over the bows and say, ‘this is a one-term MP’. They do not want 
him.”

In a statement, Mackintosh said his “door has always been open” to party 
members over the issue, and he had previously to the executive committee about 
it.

He said: “I apologise for any part I played in the granting of the loan to 
Northampton Town football club, and I am sorry that our efforts to support the 
club ended as they did.”

He added: “I do, however, refute the suggestion that undue pressure was put on 
officers to deliver the loan. As leader of the council I always expected 
projects to be delivered without unnecessary delay, but never asked or 
pressured officers to cut corners.

 “The report published by PricewaterhouseCoopers has shed some light on what 
went wrong at the council when the loan was being put together, and I hope this 
means the same mistakes will never be repeated.”
 