
My kitchen is … a temporary one. I’m living in Okinawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/19/japanese-diet-live-to-100>
 in my girlfriend’s apartment, and most of my things are in storage. I don’t 
need much to be able to cook, though. It’s a small space and everything in it 
is important. The two changes I made when I moved in were to remove the 
microwave – which she never used – and replace the rice cooker with a 
traditional cast-iron cooking pot. From my experience cast iron makes the best 
plain white rice – it’s the kind of pot you’ll find in the very best sushi 
restaurants. Also, the iron is like a natural additive. I don’t like 
electricity much.

Whenever I go to cook somewhere, I first go to the market – I need to meet the 
produce, say hello, see what looks happy.

My favourite kitchen tools are … traditional ones: an oroshigane (a fine 
grater), anuragoshiki (a sieve made of bamboo with horse-hair meshing) and a 
fine metal sieve – I normally use about 10 when I’m cooking. Also, cooking 
chopsticks, and asuribachi and surikogi  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suribachi_and_surikogi>(a Japanese mortar and 
pestle). The suribachi I use is 30cm wide – anything smaller feels like a 
child’s toy. I get them directly from an artisan really cheap, and I usually 
take at least a few tools with me when I go abroad to cook. The surikogi is 
made fromsansho (Japanese pepper) wood, which seasons whatever you grind with 
it. Sansho wood has all sorts of beneficial properties – people in the olden 
days really knew what they were doing when they came up with this kind of tool.

My storecupboard staples are … rice, white sesame seeds, konbu (seaweed), kuzu 
starch (a thickener made from kuzu root, a mountain plant) andkanten (agar). I 
always have a tin of sweet kanten jelly in the fridge for my girlfriend – not 
too much sugar, lots of fruit (there’s so much wonderful fruit in Okinawa).


When I’m starving I … have onigiri rice balls, most often with miso. For me, 
miso has medicinal purposes – if I have digestive problems, I’ll have a 
spoonful of miso; it is so cleansing. My favourite is barley miso, from 
Kumamoto.

Yasmin Khan: ‘My friends are my guinea pigs’ | Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/06/peanut-butter-exotic-fruit-iranian-food-recipe-yasmin-khan-kitchen-encounters>
My culinary inspiration is … vegetables. Whenever I go to cook somewhere, I 
first go to the market. I don’t have a menu in mind – I first need to meet the 
produce. Say hello, see what looks happy, or what speaks to me.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … to make sure the kitchen is completely clean 
and tidy by the time I’m ready to eat. Tidying up as you go and having nothing 
more to do makes the experience of eating so much better.

When I’m invited to dinner I always take … sesame tofu. It takes quite a long 
time to make and people really appreciate the effort – it’s not something most 
people are able to do, and it isn’t something you can buy either. In Okinawa, 
people use peanuts instead of sesame, so I’ve been making a lot of that. It 
makes everyone so happy.

Everything tastes better with … ponzu 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2016/06/ponzu-sauce-recipe.html> 
(citrus-flavoured soy sauce). A friend of mine in the Wakayama region produces 
his own – it’s a small-scale artisanal production, withdaidai 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daidai> and yuzu and kankitsu citrus juices … I 
was amazed to find bottles of his ponzu on the tables atAlain Ducasse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/24/alain-ducasse-this-much-i-know>
 in Paris a couple years ago.

 * Toshio Tanahashi is a master of Japanese shojin-ryori cooking, and the 
current chef in London’sCarousel restaurant <http://www.carousel-london.com/>’s 
residency roster
 