
It was not just a successful substitution, it was a sign of a broader 
transformation. On a rainy night at Lorient last Friday Monaco were struggling 
to break down Ligue 1’s bottom team, who were uncharacteristically defiant 
under their new manager, Bernard Casoni. So after 63 minutes Leonardo Jardim 
introduced Radamel Falcao from the bench. With his first touch the Colombia 
striker scored. The floodgates opened and Monaco went home with a 3-0 win that 
sent them top of the table. It was Falcao’s fifth goal in his past three 
matches, his seventh in the nine he has played so far in a season in which he 
is re-emerging, at last, as a forward to fear.Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> have been warned.

What a difference there is between Falcao now and the player who provoked 
little but pity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/radamel-falcao-left-out-chelsea-champions-league-squad>
 duringtwo years on loan in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/radamel-falcao-manchester-united-form-premier-league-colombia>
 before slinking back to Monaco in the summer with his confidence in a bin bag. 
He scoredfour goals in 29 forgettable appearances for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/radamel-falcao-manchester-united-told-he-can-leave-louis-van-gaal>
 andone in 12 for Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/monaco-radamel-falcao-stay-chelsea>
. He looked broken, a sad remnant of the striker who had been classed asone of 
the world’s most deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/06/radamel-falcao-manchester-united-monaco-atletico-madrid>
 until shredding knee ligaments in January 2014. Now, at the age of 30, there 
are traces of a renaissance.

Harry Winks gives Tottenham hope for Champions League survival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/harry-winks-tottenham-hotspur-hope-champions-league-survival>
All he needed, say Monaco, was time and a little less pressure. On reflection 
Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> reckon Falcao was cast 
into the Premier League too soon after a serious injury.

He is not yet the same player as before and may never be. The explosive 
acceleration has not returned but his sharpness is back, along with cunning 
movement and confidence. Scoring twice in Monaco’s last Champions League match, 
the 3-0 win against CSKA Moscow, was a significant boost to the morale of a 
player who had not scored in European competition since the 2012-13 season, a 
campaign he began witha devastating hat-trick for Atlético Madrid against 
Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/31/chelsea-atletico-madrid-super-cup>
 in the Super Cup. Being recalled by Colombia this month for the first time in 
more than a year was another milestone reached on his road back to the top.

The good thing for Falcao – and the bad thing for Spurs – is that Monaco are 
not dependant on him. He is one of their many goal-getters. Which brings us to 
the principal transformation at the club: this season Monaco have become a 
thrilling attacking team.

In the previous two campaigns under Jardim they were a strong, tight, 
sometimes cagey side but this season they have been far more cutting and 
destructive, often blowing teams away. They have scored six or more goals three 
times in Ligue 1, where their 39 goals from 13 matches makes them the highest 
scorers in any of Europe’s major leagues and even more prolific than Celtic in 
Scotland. A strike rate of three goals per game is remarkable in a league with 
a lot of defensive-minded teams and is double the rate Monaco managed in their 
first two seasons under Jardim. The goals have come from all over the pitch, 
with 13 players scoring this season. The Premier League’smeanest defence could 
not contain Monaco at Wembley in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-wembley-monaco-champions-league>
 evenwith a fully fit Toby Alderweireld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/toby-alderweireld-not-ready-for-tottenham-return-mauricio-pochettino>
 and when Falcao was making only his second appearance of the season. Spurs 
will have to excel to shut out Monaco at the Stade Louis II on Tuesday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmonaco-radamel-falcao-tottenham-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e19620e76effc791fc0615f7fa718800ddde34e%2F0_17_4518_2710%2F4518.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%20must%20halt%20Falcao%E2%80%99s%20revival%20to%20keep%20Champions%20League%20hopes%20alive%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmonaco-radamel-falcao-tottenham-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%20must%20halt%20Falcao%E2%80%99s%20revival%20to%20keep%20Champions%20League%20hopes%20alive%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmonaco-radamel-falcao-tottenham-champions-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e19620e76effc791fc0615f7fa718800ddde34e%2F0_17_4518_2710%2F4518.jpg>
 Under manager Leonardo Jardim, Monaco have score 39 goals in 13 Ligue 1 
matches this year, and have become a more cutting and destructive unit. 
Photograph: Claude Paris/AP 
Monaco, with eight points (and seven goals) from four Group E matches, need 
only to draw against Spurs to guarantee progress to the knockout round but will 
certainly seek opportunities to attack and stay on course to top the group. It 
is what their players do. Jardim says this season scoring sprees have not been 
the result of a radical change of approach but rather the fruit of his work in 
the previous seasons, the blossoming of the young players the club has been 
signing and nurturing since deciding to tone down its galáctico-style 
recruitment.

How Monaco became the top goalscorers in Europe – without a prolific striker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/nov/22/tottenham-monaco-champions-league-falcao-fabinho-lemar>
Amid a sprinkling of trusty older players such as the Poland centre-back Kamil 
Glik and the goalkeeper Danijel Subasic, exciting younger talents are 
flourishing. Fabinho, the 23-year-old Brazil right-back, has continued his 
progression whether in defence, or in midfield when João Moutinho is missing. 
The rest of the midfield is even younger. Tiemoué Bakayoko is 22, as is the 
superb Portugal winger Bernardo Silva, while the other wide player, Thomas 
Lemar, has been in such wonderful form he won his first senior France cap last 
week just days after turning 21.

Monaco’s full-backs, the 22-year-old Benjamin Mendy and the 24-year-old 
Djibril Sidibé, have thrived since being signed in the summer from Marseille 
and Lille respectively. And up front the 17-year-old Kylian Mbappé has made 
goal-scoring cameo appearances when filling in for Valère Germain, Guido 
Carrillo or Falcao.

When Monaco bought Falcao for £52m in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/26/falcao-transfer-monaco-medical>
 he was seen as the diamond-tipped spearhead of the club’s attempt to buy their 
way to superclub status. Now, after more than two years of personal woe, he is 
one of several examples of Jardim and Monaco’s ability to foster, or salvage, 
talent. Suppressing Falcao’s revival is one of the tasks Tottenham will have to 
accomplish to keep alive their Champions League hopes.
 