
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
says Harry Kane may be rested for Tottenham’s Europa League match at home to 
Monaco on Thursday while Mousa Dembélé is definitely out because he is ill.

Dembélé missed training on Wednesday after suffering a stomach bug and key 
players like Kane could also sit out the match, given Spurs are already through 
to the knockout stages.

West Brom and Tottenham charged by FA over flashpoint at the Hawthorns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/fa-charge-west-brom-tottenham-incident-hawthorns>
A draw against Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> would 
ensure Pochettino’s side finished first in the group, which would also 
guarantee them a seeding going into the last 32. Kane, however, has played in 
all of Tottenham’s 21 fixtures this season and endured a hectic summer, after 
going to Australia on the club’s post-season tour and then playing for England 
Under-21s.

“Is it a chance to rest him? Maybe yes,” Pochettino said. “He is in the squad 
but it is true we need to assess him and we still have to decide the starting 
11.”

Pochettino has resisted the temptation to make wholesale changes in the Europa 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> so far and 
suggested he will retain a number of core players again.

“There may be one or two more changes but not much,” Pochettino said. “I think 
the squad we have is strong enough to compete in different competitions but 
maybe if you compare (the team)to the game against Qarabag  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/sep/17/tottenham-v-fk-qarabag-europa-league-live>
there will be some changes, but not too much.”

Pochettino added: “Always it is tough, it was a tough decision when we played 
against Qarabag and now it’s tough again. Always we share the information with 
the sports science and medical department. We make the best decision for every 
game. Tomorrow is a good opportunity to finish first and win the group, this is 
our objective.”

Nabil Bentaleb and Nacer Chadli will both be in the squad after recovering 
from foot and ankle injuries respectively. Chadli has not played since the
goalless draw against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/tottenham-hotspur-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
on 17 October and he believes Tottenham can get even better with a fully-fit 
squad. Ryan Mason and Alex Pritchard (both ankle) remain sidelined.

“It was frustrating for me to be on the side and be injured so you’re not part 
of the team,” Chadli said. “But you’re always happy when your team do well. If 
everyone is fit we have more chances to do even better so it’s good some 
players are coming back from injuries. Hopefully if players don’t have so many 
injuries we can get even better results.”

There may also be an opportunity for some of Tottenham’s youngsters with Tom 
Carroll, Joshua Onomah and Harry Winks all hoping for a chance to shine in the 
first team.

“They may have the opportunity to play in the next few games or later this 
season,” Pochettino said. “They are very young but they show every day they 
have the quality to play for Tottenham. We have a lot of talent in behind, in 
the academy. Always the young players need time to develop and be mature enough 
in the head to play in the Premier League for a team like Tottenham.”
 