
Tottenham Hotspur were the only top-flight club to make a profit from their 
transfer dealings over the last two windows.Mauricio Pochettino managed to bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-hotspur-tough-stadium-project>
 £6.7m while taking his team to third place in the Premier League and automatic 
Champions League qualification.

A string of sales last summer was led by Paulinho’s £9.9m move to Guangzhou 
Evergrande. Lewis Holtby, Étienne Capoue, Roberto Soldado, Vlad Chiriches, 
Aaron Lennon and Benjamin Stambouli also left the club, while there was only a 
modest outlay on players such as Toby Alderweireld and Son Heung-min.
Club-by-club net transfer spending 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/premier_league_spend/giv-12515TO2qK4msD8Rp/>
Manchester City, whose signings included Raheem Sterling, Nicolás Otamendi and 
Kevin De Bruyne,were by some margin the biggest net spenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/02/financial-fair-play-manchester-city>
. Their outlay of £124.4m comfortably exceeded the combined total of the rest 
of the Premier League’s top nine but they finished the season in fourth, two 
places worse off than last year, with 13 fewer points.

Which Premier League club did the best business in the January transfer window?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2015/feb/03/january-transfer-window-cuadrado-bony-gabriel-defoe-gil>
City spent £1.88m per point, considerably less than the least efficient 
top-flight spendthrifts,Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited>, whose £80m outlay 
brought them 37 points – at £2.16m per point or £8.89m per win – 18th place and 
relegation to the Championship. Spurs, by contrast, made just under £96,000 for 
each point they won.

Transfer window review: how did the Premier League clubs do? | Guardian writers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/01/premier-league-transfer-window-review>
Leicester City’s £28.9m spend was less than six other top-flight teams, with 
those high spenders including three of the bottom four. Eight of the 10 
bottom-half sides spent more than second-placedArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> whose recruitment drive cost 
£15.6m and sparked supporter discontent.

The figures show there is no correlation between spending on transfers and 
sporting achievement. Newcastle proved it was possible to spend a lot of money 
and go down whileAston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> 
– net spend £9.3m – demonstrated the less surprising feat of getting relegated 
on the cheap.

They were the only one of the five lowest spenders to finish outside the 
division’s top 12, withSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> (£4.8m), Swansea (£5m) and 
Chelsea (£7.8m) also keeping a tight control on their purse strings.

The need for teams promoted from the Championship to invest heavily in their 
squad is demonstrated in the final positions of Watford, Bournemouth andNorwich 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity>, the three sides that 
joined the top flight at the start of the season.

Watford spent the most – £42.5m – and finished highest, in 13th; Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> spent £38.7m and finished 
three places further back; Norwich spent the least, £27.1m, and were relegated 
in 19th place.
 