
Clinton Njie is set to join Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> on a season-long loan as 
Tottenham prepare to announce the signing of the France under-21 winger 
Georges-Kévin Nkoudou for £11m.

Cameroon forward Njie, who signed a five-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/15/tottenham-sign-clinton-njie-spurs-lyon>
 at White Hart Lane last summer after joining from Lyon, was initially 
reluctant to return to France despite a disappointing first season at Spurs in 
which he made only eight Premier League appearances.

Manchester United edge closer to Paul Pogba deal with second offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/20/manchester-united-edge-closer-to-paul-pogba-deal-with-second-offer>
However, with Nkoudou having successfully completed his medical on Tuesday 
before his move from Marseille, Njie has now accepted that his opportunities 
would have been limited next season and is now expected to move to the south of 
France. It is understood that the deal includes a €7m option to make the 
transfer permanent should the 22-year-old play a certain number of games for 
the club next season.

Nkoudou, who moved to the Stade Vélodrome last summer from Nantes for £1m and 
had been scouted by several English clubs,was convinced to join Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/17/tottenham-agree-deal-sign-georges-kevin-nkoudou-marseille>
 after speaking on the phone to Mauricio Pochettino at the end of last week. He 
will be the club’s third summer signing, afterVictor Wanyama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/tottenham-complete-signing-victor-wanyama-southampton>
 andVincent Janssen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/12/tottenham-hotspur-sign-holland-striker-vincent-janssen>
.

Meanwhile, on Wednesday Marseille’s owner, the billionaire Margarita 
Louis-Dreyfus, named the Italian businessman Giovanni Ciccolunghi as chief 
executive of the club that she put up for sale earlier this year.

Louis-Dreyfus, who took control of the club after the death of her husband 
Robert in 2009, also appointed long-time family friend Jean-René Angeloglou as 
chairman of the club’s board.

Louis-Dreyfus said Ciccolunghi was a close associate of her husband Robert 
prior to his death in 2009 as a board member of the Louis-Dreyfus Commodities 
trading house.
 