
They came in their tens of thousands and the sense of occasion was palpable. 
Never before had so many watched a home club game in English football history 
but the over-riding emotion among the whopping 85,011 in attendance would be 
regret.

What if Tottenham had been more clinical? What if they had not switched off 
twice in the first half to concede? Tottenham did not look unnerved by the 
grandest of occasions at Wembley. They merely came up on the wrong side of the 
finest of margins against aMonaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> 
team that showed precisely why they are on top of Ligue 1 at present.

Mauricio Pochettino had said beforehand that the strength of the Premier 
League is such that a tie in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> ought to hold no fears. 
Tottenham had won handsomely at Stoke City on Saturday. “It’s just as tough to 
play Monaco as it is at Stoke,” the manager said.

Mauricio Pochettino furious at lack of Tottenham passion in Monaco defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-mauricio-pochettino-monaco-champions-league>
It rang hollow. Monaco were no Stoke and they showed their clinical side to 
condemn Tottenham to a disappointing start in Group E. Toby Alderweireld’s goal 
in first-half stoppage time to eat into Monaco’s 2-0 lead had hinted at a 
comeback but Monaco closed the game out with a degree of comfort in the latter 
stages.

Pochettino had told his players to play the match and not the occasion and 
theirs was a performance of drive and dabs of creativity. It was not a case of 
them falling flat on the big night. As a spectacle, it was enjoyable; the 
atmosphere was decent and there were moments when the decibel levels rose 
sharply.

But Tottenham were found wanting when it mattered most. Son Heung-min missed a 
golden chance after eight minutes whereas Harry Kane could not finish towards 
the end, when centrally placed. As for the concessions, they were disastrous.

Agüero hat-trick inspires Manchester City against Borussia Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report>
Monaco’s breakthrough goal was a choker, particularly for Erik Lamela, who 
lost the ball in a dangerous area and watched the quicksilver Bernardo Silva 
advance unchecked towards the edge of the area. It was too easy for the 
Portugal forward, with neither Ben Davies nor Jan Vertonghen challenging, 
although the rasping finish was of the highest class.

Silva played off the shoulder of the former Manchester United and Chelsea 
striker Radamel Falcao in what was a 4-4-2 formation from the Monaco manager, 
Leonardo Jardim. Within it Silva had the licence the drop off but it was a 
system that was marked by balance and boldness and one that was not upset by 
the early loss of the right winger, Nabil Dirar, to a muscle pull.

Dirar’s replacement, Thomas Lemar, scored his team’s second and it was another 
concession marked by slapdash defending. From Silva’s nonchalant back-heel, 
Djibril Sidibé was granted the space to cross from the left and, when the ball 
eluded Vertonghen, it crashed into Davies and broke for Lemar. He banged his 
shot high into the net.

Pochettino, too, had been adventurous with his selection, finding room for 
both Lamela and Son and using Dele Alli alongside Eric Dier in midfield, at the 
expense of the more defensive-minded Victor Wanyama. Alli flickered but he 
could find no end product.

Tottenham were the brighter team for the first 15 minutes but Son’s miss was 
disappointing. He had time to control Kane’s cross at the far post and place 
his shot towards the far corner. Andrea Raggi, though, had bolted back to cover 
and he cleared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4ca0714cb779af6333e471e971d80ef6c3eafc%2F0_190_5017_3010%2F5017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%20lure%20record%20crowd%20to%20Wembley%20but%20Monaco%20spoil%20the%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%20lure%20record%20crowd%20to%20Wembley%20but%20Monaco%20spoil%20the%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4ca0714cb779af6333e471e971d80ef6c3eafc%2F0_190_5017_3010%2F5017.jpg>
 Tottenham’s Moussa Dembélé in action at Wembley. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for 
the Guardian 
The record crowd grew restless as Tottenham trailed by two but Alderweireld’s 
goal represented a life-line. He got himself in front of Kamil Glik on Lamela’s 
corner to thud a header past Danijel Subasic and there was almost more to come 
moments later. Alli stretched to apply a touch to Lamela’s clipped pass only to 
find himself narrowly short.

Tottenham played Monaco twice last season in the Europa League, drawing away 
and hammering them at White Hart Lane but Jardim’s current crop looked more 
polished, more streetwise. Silva and João Moutinho provided the refinement and 
Falcao also emerged with credit.

Pochettino introduced Mousa Dembélé at the interval for his first action of 
the season – the midfielder was suspended for Tottenham’s opening four Premier 
League games – and the scene was set for a knife-edged drama. The home team 
pressed hard on to the front foot, with Kane linking up the play, but Monaco 
remained capable of springing on the counter.

Leicester City ease to victory over Club Brugge on Champions League debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/club-brugge-leicester-city-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
Alli worked Subasic with a dipping volley from distance, Kane saw a shot 
blocked by Jemerson and there was the bizarre moment when Alli threw himself to 
the ground, under a non-challenge from Fabinho, as Lamela prepared to take a 
corner and the referee, Gianluca Rocchi, rushed over to book the Monaco player. 
The visiting players panicked, clearly sensing that a penalty award was next, 
but Rocchi could not point to the spot as the ball had not been in play.

Tottenham wanted one more chance – a shot at salvation – and it came in the 
79th minute when the substitute Vincent Janssen crossed for Kane. The striker, 
however, blasted his shot at Subasic. It was a bad miss. Tottenham have work to 
do.
 