
The “Orwellian” schmoozing of young people in schools along the proposed HS2 
route (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/12/hs2-accused-of-brainwashing-schoolchildren-on-high-speed-rail-route>
, 12 December) pales into insignificance alongside the efforts of the nuclear 
industry to ingratiate itself with the community around the Magnox nuclear 
power station at Bradwell-on-Sea in Essex. Some 20 or more years ago Girl 
Guides staged an enrolment ceremony while standing on the pile cap of the then 
active nuclear reactor.
Val Mainwood
Wivenhoe, Essex

• The inhabitants of Mata Hari’s home city would not be pleased to read that 
they live in “Friesland, Holland” (Mother, dancer, wife, spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/05/the-real-mata-hari-executed-abused-woman>
, G2, 6 December). Friesland, one of the 12 provinces of the Netherlands, has 
its own language, literature and proud history. North and South Holland are 
merely two other provinces of the same country. My Frisian husband, having 
lived in London for over 40 years, recently acquired a second passport. He 
became a British citizen – not an English one. It’s pretty much the same 
difference.
Liz Barnes
London

• Challenging times for small-scale poultry keepers (Owners told to keep 
poultry inside amid bird flu alert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/bird-flu-warning-keepers-told-to-keep-poultry-inside>
, 8 December). Our solution, for normally free-range hens, is a trampoline 
draped in pegged-down fruit netting, attached to the small chicken house. At 
least they can still have dust baths and peck around. How are others resolving 
the situation?
Mary Stiff
Westwood, Devon

• I’m 62 and not sure if I count as an older woman, but my two daughters, now 
30 and 26, played with Barbies and had pink rollerblades when they were little. 
They also played with snails, climbed trees and surfed. Most importantly, they 
had inspirational science teachers and are both now scientists themselves. 
There’s more to bringing up children than toys, whatever colour they are (
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/11/the-pressures-still-on-for-pretty-in-pink>
, 12 December).
Helen Keats
Shorwell, Isle of Wight

• Andy Beckett helpfully recontextualises voters’ power, rural and urban (
Cities may dominate our culture but real power now lies in the countryside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/trump-brexit-cities-countryside-rural-voters>
, 13 December), but while Ukip et al can readily identify the metropolitan 
elites no one is yet doing the same for a rural equivalent.
Mark Robins
Exeter 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 