
The last three down clues in the new (November) Genius puzzle by Crucible (No 
113) were initially uploaded wrongly (despite which several of you somehow 
managed to solve it correctly before breakfast on the first day). My apologies. 
Those of you who downloaded it on Monday morning will wish to check what you 
have against the correct version, which is now on the website.
_____

My recommendation last month of David Crystal's new book on the origins of 
English spelling (Spell It Out, Profile Books, Â£12.99 hardback) provoked a 
lively correspondence, correcting some of my assumptions on the subject. 
Someone once told me that most of the differences between American English and 
English English mainly reflected the fact that the Pilgrim Fathers and the 
other early English settlers took with them English as it was spoken and 
written in the 17th century and that its forms were preserved on that side of 
the Atlantic to an extent that was not the case with us. 'Gotten' as the past 
participle of 'get', which survives in English English only in a word like 
'ill-gotten' was cited as evidence.

It is clear, though, that American spelling is to a large extent the result of 
the deliberate attempt by modernist reformers to simplify and make more logical 
the hybrid jumble that is English English spelling, an exercise that was never 
systematically attempted here. And the giant amongst these self-appointed 
reformers was Noah Webster, the New England lexicographer who followed in the 
footsteps of Samuel Johnson, producing the first American dictionary on 1806 
and his magisterial An American Dictionary of the English Language in 1828. 
What was to become the revered Oxford English Dictionary did not get even its 
first volume of entries for the letter A published until 1888.

It was largely Webster who persuaded Americans that it was right to take the 
'u' out of 'colour' and one 'l' out of 'traveller', though he failed with his 
more ambitious efforts to substitute 'tung' for 'tongue' or 'wimmen' for 
'women'.

I had also assumed that the relationship between English English and American 
English was pretty much a one-way flow in our direction. In volume terms 
Americanisms in modern English are clearly much greater than the reverse but 
there is an interesting article in theonline BBC News Magazine by Cordelia 
Hebblethwaite <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-19670686>, which shows how 
the traffic today is by no means all in one direction.
_____

I was asked a crossword question last month to which I should know the answer 
but don't. We all accept the convention that crossword grids have to be 
symmetrical but when was the convention first established and by whom? Does 
anyone have a convincing response?
_____

October's Genius puzzle (No 112 set by Tramp) got 23 correct entries on the 
first day (and 371 by the deadline). This month Tony was first in at 02:03, 
followed by Dave H. four minutes later. PSC from Australia at 05:05 was the 
first correct entry from abroad.

Congratulations to Bob Taylor from Exeter, who is October's winner.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 