
When the idea was first put to me at the end of last year, I rejected it as 
fanciful. From Jamaica, where Sudoku - at least until then - had apparently not 
become the rage, LH claimed that the arrival of her sister bearing two books of 
Sudoku puzzles had ruined her crossword performance. Apart from having "become 
obsessed with these wretched things" (distressing enough in itself), she found 
that she was now unable to complete the daily on-line cryptic crossword without 
"copious use of the cheat facility" (a vice in which she had previously not 
indulged).

The beneficial effects of crosswords in keeping senility at bay are well 
attested. (Another subscriber, who had suffered a serious brain injury, wrote 
recently to say that crosswords were recommended both by her neuropsychologist 
and her local brain injury advisory service, and that doing them had enabled 
her to make enormous progress.) But the idea that doing Sudoku actually harms 
the brain's ability to cope with crosswords seemed to me to be implausible.

Since then, however, I have had a stream of disturbing evidence from Sudoku 
addicts about its side effects. Here is a selection from the typical remarks 
that have been reaching me: "I find I can solve fewer clues ... less than half 
a Quiptic! ... my brain may have been working as hard, but less flexibly and 
with less creativity ... I need to get fit again" - "I find the puzzles more 
difficult ... have assumed that this is because I have been doing Sudoku first" 
- "Before Sudoku, I would go straight to the crossword and found that I 
established a sort of mental rhythm ... now it takes me significantly longer to 
find that rhythm ... by redirecting mental energy to the non-verbal part of the 
brain, does Sudoku interfere with the word logic bit?" - "Are those who 
complain that they find the crosswords more difficult recent Sudoku converts?"

I am beginning to wonder whether Sudoku puzzles should carry a health warning.

_____

This summer's exchanges about whether or not the Guardian puzzles have got 
more difficult has produced two pieces of quantitative research. I pass on a 
summary of the results.

1. Other things being equal, you would expect to find the puzzles of a 
particular setter getting easier over time, as you get used to his or her style 
and wiles. But the website's archive allowed KTL and her husband to conduct a 
controlled experiment. They now solve a Rufus puzzle significantly faster than 
when they started doing him (their first Rufus kept them engaged for the whole 
of a transatlantic flight). So they downloaded a selection of Rufus puzzles 
from 2003 and interleaved them randomly with his 2006 offerings. They found 
that the average time taken to complete today's puzzles is no more than for 
those that were three years old. If anyone were minded to do a similar 
experiment with other setters, I should be fascinated to know the results. The 
archive goes back to May 1999.

2. TD and his partner JE (combined ages 128) have a set routine of remaining 
in bed drinking coffee until the crossword is done. For the three months Oct to 
Dec 2005 they averaged 33 minutes a day (min Rufus 10, max Enigmatist 69). For 
the six months Jan to Jun 2006 their average was 31 minutes (min Rufus 11, max 
Paul 83). This time series, obviously, is not enough to be conclusive one way 
or another, but it does suggest that things have not changed dramatically in 
the last year at least.

An interesting by-product of this research was the average time taken in the 
first six months of this year to finish a particular setter's puzzles. In 
ascending order of difficulty (for TD/JE at least) the results were: Rufus, 
Arachne, Audreus, Janus, Logodaedalus, Auster, Rover, Orlando, Brendan, 
Quantum, Chifonie, Gordius, Brummie, Araucaria, Bunthorne, Taupi, Shed, 
Pasquale, Paul. Happily for me, this corresponds quite closely with the spread 
that I try to achieve over a typical week.

_____

DAE from Cambridgeshire has asked how many correct Genius entries we get each 
month. The figure normally runs between 150 and 250 per month. The lowest so 
far is 95 for the Enigmatist puzzle in October 2005 (the previous nadir having 
been 141). September's puzzle by Paul was vying (if that is the right word) for 
the record, having just 94 entries with a day and a half to go. I shall report 
the final result next month!

The August Genius by Brummie had 192 entries. Incidentally, if you have not 
already noticed, when the solution to each Genius is posted, there is a link at 
the top for you to click on if you want to see notes on how the clues were 
supposed to work. (The same service is also available for each Saturday prize 
cryptic puzzle.)

The order in which the entries are received has no effect on who wins the 
prize, but the first entries come in astonishingly fast on the Monday that the 
puzzles are published. Thus for August the first was in at 11.49 from 
Monmouthshire; and for September at 13.11 from Cambridgeshire.

Â· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 