
Donald Trump has said he supports a controversial oil pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/standing-rock-protest-north-dakota-shutdown-evacuation>
 that runs next to a Native American reservation in North Dakota – a project 
that the president-elect is personally invested in.

Dakota Access pipeline company and Donald Trump have close financial ties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-investment-energy-transfer-partners>
A briefing <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-pipeline-idUSKBN13Q609>
 from Trump’s transition team said that the real estate magnate supports the 
construction of theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> and that his 
backing “has nothing to do with his personal investments and everything to do 
with promoting policies that benefit all Americans”.

Financial disclosure forms released earlier this year show that Trump has a 
stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-investment-energy-transfer-partners>
 in Energy Transfer Partners, the Texas-based firm behind the pipeline, and 
Phillips 66, which will hold a share of the project once completed.

Trump’s investment in Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> 
Transfer Partners dropped from between $500,000 and $1m in 2015 to between 
$1,500 and $50,000 this year. His stake in Phillips 66, however, rose from 
between $50,000 and $100,000 last year to between $250,000 and $500,000 this 
year, according to the forms.

 The financial relationship has run both ways. Kelcy Warren, chief executive 
of Energy Transfer Partners, gave $103,000 to elect Trump and handed over a 
further $66,800 to the Republican National Committee after the property 
developer secured the GOP’s presidential nomination.

 However, Trump’s transition team dismissed any conflict of interest. “Those 
making such a claim are only attempting to distract from the fact that 
president-elect Trump has put forth serious policy proposals he plans to set in 
motion on day one,” said a briefing note that was sent to campaign supporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a63074bb2656c7d129b47bc611cfcadccaae823%2F187_0_2809_1686%2F2809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20supports%20Dakota%20pipeline%20%E2%80%93%20but%20claims%20it's%20not%20due%20to%20his%20investment%20in%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20supports%20Dakota%20pipeline%20%E2%80%93%20but%20claims%20it%27s%20not%20due%20to%20his%20investment%20in%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a63074bb2656c7d129b47bc611cfcadccaae823%2F187_0_2809_1686%2F2809.jpg>
 In this 25 November 2016 satellite image taken by DigitalGlobe, construction 
of the Dakota Access pipeline is shown at the top right. Photograph: AP 
 Mary Sweeters, a spokesperson for Greenpeace, said Trump’s support showed 
that “crony capitalism will run his administration”.

“This is the definition of corruption,” she said. “The president of the United 
States should not be trading favors with oil and gas corporations. Millions of 
people will lose access to a clean water supply, including the Standing Rock 
Sioux tribe, and the rest of America will face the impacts of catastrophic 
climate change from burning fossil fuels.”

A protest camp has grown in North Dakota since April, amid fears that the 
$3.8bnDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> will threaten the 
water and cultural artifacts of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe. The 1,170-mile 
pipeline will take oil from North Dakota’s Bakken fields to a refinery in 
Illinois and will cross the Missouri river – the main source of water for the 
tribe.

 The long-running protest has unified Native American tribes against the 
project, with repeated clashes between protesters and police. This week, North 
Dakota governor Jack Dalrympleordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/north-dakota-access-pipeline-evacuation-order-standing-rock>
 the immediate evacuation of the protest camp, amidaccusations of police 
violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/standing-rock-protest-north-dakota-shutdown-evacuation>
 from the mass arrests and water cannon deployment that have echoes of the 
civil rights protests of the 1960s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Native%20American%20North%20Dakota%20oil%20pipeline%20protesters%3A%20'We%20refuse%20to%20be%20Trumped'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Native%20American%20North%20Dakota%20oil%20pipeline%20protesters%3A%20%27We%20refuse%20to%20be%20Trumped%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video&media=>
Native American North Dakota oil pipeline protesters: ‘We refuse to be Trumped’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/native-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video>
'We opened eyes': at Standing Rock, my fellow Native Americans make history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/standing-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest>
 Barack Obama has suggested that the pipeline be rerouted to allay the fears 
of tribes but Energy Transfer Partners has vowed to push ahead and has accused 
the federal government of imposing costly delays upon the project.

 Trump has promised 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/_landings/contract/O-TRU-102316-Contractv02.pdf>
 an “America first” energy policy that will attempt to boost domestic oil, coal 
and gas production. The president-elect has already stated he wants to “lift 
the Obama-Clinton roadblocks and allow vital energy infrastructure projects to 
move forward”, including the Keystone pipeline, another controversial fossil 
fuel project.

North Dakota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota> senator John 
Hoeven, a Republican, said that he met with Trump and successfully urged him to 
support the Dakota Access pipeline.

“Mr Trump expressed his support for the Dakota Access pipeline, which has met 
or exceeded all environmental standards set forth by four states and the Army 
Corps of Engineers,” Hoeven said.

“Also, it is important to know that the new administration will work to help 
us grow and diversify our energy economy and build the energy infrastructure 
necessary to move it from where it is produced to where it is needed. The 
result will be more jobs, a more vibrant economy and affordable energy for the 
American people.”
 