
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has claimed he 
persuaded Ford to keep a Kentucky assembly plant open, despite the carmaker 
never having intended to close it.

The president-elect tweeted on Thursday:

Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Just got a call from my friend Bill Ford, Chairman of Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>, who advised me that he will be 
keeping the Lincoln plant in Kentucky - no Mexico
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799432403727028224> November 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799432403727028224> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I worked hard with Bill Ford to keep the Lincoln plant in Kentucky. I owed it 
to the great State of Kentucky for their confidence in me!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799435824622252032> November 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799435824622252032> 
Ford had planned to move production of the Lincoln MKC, a small SUV, to Mexico 
but had always intended to keep the plant in Louisville open to continue making 
another model, the Escape.

It was not clear how many jobs, if any, would have been lost, as the company 
was planning to expand production of the better-selling Escape at the plant.


After Trump’s tweets, the company confirmed it would not be moving production 
of the Lincoln MKC from Kentucky.

Ford to move all small-car production to Mexico as profits set to fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/ford-steep-decline-financial-performance-2017>
A spokeswoman, Christin Baker, said: “We are encouraged that President-elect 
Trump and the new Congress will pursue policies that will improve US 
competitiveness and make it possible to keep production of this vehicle [the 
Lincoln MKC] here in the United States.”

She said she did not know when the decision had been taken or whether Trump 
had any influence on it. On Tuesday, Ford’s chief executive, Mark Fields, said 
the election result would not change the company’s plans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-takes-credit-saving-ford-factory-not-closing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab1f1d5a0daedc19972548503af36713ff46c9b%2F0_55_3800_2281%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20takes%20credit%20for%20saving%20Ford%20factory%20that%20was%20not%20closing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-takes-credit-saving-ford-factory-not-closing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20takes%20credit%20for%20saving%20Ford%20factory%20that%20was%20not%20closing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-takes-credit-saving-ford-factory-not-closing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab1f1d5a0daedc19972548503af36713ff46c9b%2F0_55_3800_2281%2F3800.jpg>
 Mark Fields, president and CEO of Ford. The carmaker has repeatedly said it 
has no plans to close any US plants. Photograph: Frederic J Brown/AFP/Getty 
Ford has been locked in a year-long feud with Trump over plans to move 
production south of the border. The president-elect wants to renegotiate the 
North American Free Trade Agreement and has called for a 35% tariff on goods 
shipped from Mexico in an effort to preserve US manufacturing jobs.

Ford has attracted Trump’s ire over plans to shift small-car production from 
suburban Detroit to Mexico to improve profitability of the lower-priced cars. 
As well threatening tariffs, during his presidential campaign the Republican 
candidate said he would not allow Ford to open a new plant in Mexico.

But the carmaker has repeatedly said it has no plans to close any US plants 
and it probably could not do so under the terms of the United Auto Workers 
contract that expires in 2019. It has also said no US jobs would be lost.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
It is not the first time Trump’s comments about Ford production have been 
called into question. Last year he took credit for the company moving work from 
Mexico to Ohio, even though it had taken the decision in 2011, long before he 
announced a run for president.

In October the chairman, Bill Ford, said he had met Trump to talk about his 
extensive attacks on the carmaker’s investments in Mexico. He said Trump’s 
criticism was “infuriating” and “frustrating” because of the company’s 
extensive investments and employment in the US.

Ford employs about 4,700 people at the Louisville plant. It has sold about 
20,000 MKC SUVs in the US this year, compared with 258,000 Escape SUVs.

Last month it said it would suspend production of the Escape and MKC at its 
Louisville assembly plant for two weeks because of low demand.

 