
A loud whirring sound emerges from the kitchen at Villa Somis 
<http://www.villasomis.it/en/#>, a high-end Italian restaurant in the hills 
overlooking Turin. Perhaps it’s a coffee machine, or a prosciutto slicer. But 
when chef Antonio Chiodi Latini comes out, he’s holding two glasses of light 
green “vegetable extract”, to wash down our vegan biscotti.

People want to eat food that makes them feel good with their own body and soul
Chiodi Latini 
Chiodi Latini is 56, and until three years ago was known in certain local 
circles for his elaborately presented dishes, such as seafood pasta with edible 
flowers or perfect cylinders of raw beef. The menu at his new pop-up venture,
Chiodi Latini New Food <https://www.facebook.com/chiodilatininewfood/>, is no 
less fancy, but completely free of all animal products.

“My old customers say: ‘It’s amazing how you used to cook, you were good at 
making fish soup, and lovely meat,” says Latini, who opened for business on the 
top floor of the elegant villa this summer, having turned vegan himself three 
years ago for health reasons. “But people want to try new things, and spend an 
evening eating food that makes them feel good with their own body and soul.”

Turin is famous for cars, football, the winter olympics – and now 
vegetarianism, after new mayorChiara Appendino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/turin-mayor-italys-first-vegetarian-city-five-star>
 announced plans to turn it into Italy’s first “vegetarian city” earlier this 
year. Traditional butchers have expressed their horror at the proposals, which 
include introducing a weekly meat-free day, and teaching schoolchildren about 
animal welfare and ecology. In my hand, I have the city’s “veg map” for 
tourists. I’ve come for the tour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11276e39f3f11cdb99e5d69234a70cbe67c9450%2F0_400_2349_2934%2F2349.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turin%2C%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%E2%80%98vegetarian%20city%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turin%2C%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%E2%80%98vegetarian%20city%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11276e39f3f11cdb99e5d69234a70cbe67c9450%2F0_400_2349_2934%2F2349.jpg>
 Delizioso: vegan chop sandwich Photograph: Rika and Doni/Vegan Miam 
“In Turin, there are now more than 30 restaurants and shops serving vegan and 
vegetarian food, which for a city this size, is possibly the highest number in
Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>,” says Stefania Giannuzzi, the 
deputy mayor behind the initiative. “We wanted to value and recognise this 
aspect of the city.”

Vegetarian visitors wandering the streets of the northern Italian city won’t 
take long to stumble across one of the growing number of new vegetarian delis 
and cafés. Despite the reputation of the Piedmont region for hearty Alpine fare 
(one of the most famous local dishes is bollito misto, a stew made from boiled 
veal, beef and chicken) the choice on offer is impressive.

“Turin has always been at the forefront of things,” says Claudio Viano, who 
opened the city’s first vegetarian restaurant,Mezzaluna 
<http://www.mezzalunabio.it/>, with his partner Daniele 20 years ago. “Turin 
and maybe Milan are now the best places in Italy to visit for vegan food,” he 
says, praising theSlow Food Movement <http://www.slowfood.com/> which was set 
up in the nearby town of Bra.

At L’Articiocc <https://www.facebook.com/articiocc/>, a café in central Turin 
specialising in meat-free Ligurian food, a set menu offers three dishes from a 
selection behind the counter. I go for gnocchi tossed in a delicious red pesto 
made with ground nuts instead of parmesan, a courgette and quinoa bake and a 
vegetable focaccia. The dairy-free chocolate and almond torte is less 
impressive, but Giannuzzi recommends the desserts at another nearby vegan 
restaurant,Soul Kitchen 
<https://www.facebook.com/SoulKitchenVeganRawRestaurant/>, instead.

Elsewhere, it’s easy to steer clear of lazy vegan fallbacks tofu and falafel, 
and try creative adaptations of Italian classics instead. The garlicky mushroom 
lasagne at studenty caféIl Gusto di Carmilla <http://www.ilgustodicarmilla.it/> 
works without its usual heavy white sauce. Even dairy-free pistachio gelato, 
made with rice milk at an ice-cream shop calledMondello 
<http://www.manifatturagelati.com/>, is surprisingly moreish.

Giannuzzi insists that she is not trying to clash with the city’s meat 
producers and agricultural associations, who in May organised a barbecue in 
protest against falling sales and health scares using the hashtag “pork chops 
to the rescue”. She instead emphasises the environmental benefits of turning 
vegetarian, citing UN guidelines and the Paris climate agreement as good 
reasons to cut down on the city’s meat consumption.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbeeeee34c98fa548c9f52fb05bd8b5674a00eb40%2F0_600_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turin%2C%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%E2%80%98vegetarian%20city%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turin%2C%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%E2%80%98vegetarian%20city%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fturin-italys-first-vegetarian-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbeeeee34c98fa548c9f52fb05bd8b5674a00eb40%2F0_600_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
 Utterly scrum: Turin Estratto del giorno (watermelon, lemon and ginger) and 
fruttato del giorno (banana and melon) at Soul Kitchen. Photograph: Rika and 
Doni/Vegan Miam 
So far, finding vegetarian and vegan food in Turin has been easy, but it’s 
time for the final challenge: can I eat a fully vegan pizza, without having to 
skimp on cheese and pepperoni? Well, sort of. I’m invited to cool vegan 
restaurant and bakeryRatatouille <http://www.ratatouilleveganfood.com/> by a 
group of local animal rights campaigners. A small group of them recently staged 
a protest at a major food festival in the city, dressed up in “human meat” 
packaging and covered in fake blood.

They excitedly tell me that Radiohead singer Thom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thom-yorke> has been spotted in Coox 
<http://www.coox.it/>, one of the newest vegan places to open in Piazza 
Vittorio Veneto, where young people gather each evening for drinks and snacks. 
“It’s only in the last few years that Turin has changed,” says Monica 
Schillaci, an activist in her early 30s who was vegetarian until three years 
ago, when she decided to turn vegan after seeing an animal welfare campaign 
billboard. “Even a few years ago, you couldn’t get a breakfast as a vegan. But 
now in almost every bar there are soya milk cappuccinos and macchiatos. And 
sometimes even vegan pastries.”

We share a fluffy “tegamino”-style pizza, made in a pan, with “vegmozzerella” 
and Quorn sausage. Vegan cheese remains unappetising wherever you are in the 
world, but the pizza itself has a particular, mouthwatering taste only found in 
Italy. Not only do the vegetarians of Turin have the backing of the mayor, they 
also have Italian know-how. And that combination might just be enough to see 
the controversial “vegetarian city” project succeed.
 