
Not since I had the temerity to suggest there are at least three other 
legitimate ways of spelling "ukulele" (November 2003, Spelling Chekhov) has 
anything produced such a response as my assertion last month that "centurian" 
is a perfectly acceptable word for someone who has scored a hundred runs at 
cricket.

I should like to be able to report overwhelming support for my position. But, 
if I did, I would be lying. What my supporters lacked in numbers, though, they 
made up for in quality. I am particularly grateful to Virginia Preston for 
drawing my attention to three authoritative uses of the spelling "centurian":

1. Cricinfo Bangladesh 
<http://usa.cricinfo.com/db/PLAYERS/BDESH/H/HABIBUL_BASHAR_25002204/IMAGES/> 
(Habibul the centurian)
2. The Cricket Statistician 
<http://64.233.183.104/search?q=cache:bmNQY9YmlDwJ:www2.umist.ac.uk/sport/SPORTS%2520HISTORY/Current%2520Contents/CS/CS85.html+&hl=en&ie=UTF-8>
3. BBC Ashes 2001 report 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/cricket/the_ashes/photo_galleries/1510247.stm>

Most of what flowed in, however, was less helpful to the cause. Google was 
thrown at me time and time again, as if it was an oracle. For example, Gareth 
Rees did a Google search using "centurion cricket hundred runs" as the key 
words and got 12,600 hits, while "centurian cricket hundred runs" only clocked 
up 169.

In the same vein, Rahul Siddharthan in France tells me that the combination 
"cricket centurion" produced about 104,000 Google hits, but "cricket centurian" 
only 3,030, plus the unkind suggestion: "Did you mean 'cricket centurion'?". 
Worse still, "treble centurion" only produced 26 hits for him and "treble 
centurian" none at all.

One could reflect on the fact that in history many successful movements have 
counted on fewer than 3,030 supporters in their early stages, and that being in 
a minority does not necessarily mean that you are wrong or do not have rights. 
And what would the Guardian crossword be if it ceased to give asylum to 
alternative spellings?

______________

As a result of this debate much incidental, but interesting, information has 
come my way. Did you know, for example, that a suburb of Pretoria in South 
Africa is named after a cricket ground and not vice versa? The first class 
cricket ground at Pretoria has always been called Centurion. For obvious 
reasons, after the end of apartheid a new name was required for the suburb of 
Verwoerdburg - so they went for Centurion. I am grateful to Stephen Gelb in 
South Africa for this piece of information.

From Australia, Judy Barclay tells me that the Macquarie Australian Dictionary 
has no mention of cricket under "centurion", or any other sport; only our old 
friend the Roman officer. Which is rather surprising, given that Australians 
know how to score runs. In passing, she tells me that the same dictionary gives 
"wanda", not as a flower, but as a colloquialism for a white man (from an 
Aboriginal word meaning "white ghost").

The Macquarie Dictionary's omission is even more surprising in view of the 
fact, drawn to my attention by David Llewelyn Jones from Australia, that there 
exists an Australian "Centurions Club", whose members have all managed to walk 
100 miles in 24 hours. Who knows when some of this stray information may not 
come in useful?

____________

Shed's February Genius puzzle provoked a little pedantry. As a crossword 
editor, in my book there is nothing pejorative about the word pedantry. It's 
our bread and butter. For those who did not crack it, or even attempt it, the 
theme was ALCHEMY (18 down: "Setter's burdened with longing to throttle 
Liberal" A(L)CHE/MY) - the transmutation of base metals into gold.

The solutions to the seven clues involved in the process required GOLD to be 
substituted for some other metal. Peter Dick led the charge. "Are brass and 
silver base metals?" he asked. "Brass is an alloy, and silver is closer to 
precious than to base."

Since Shed, a man of many parts, published a book in 1998 that is largely 
about alchemy (Faith, Medical Alchemy and Natural Philosophy by John Young), I 
hoped that we were on strong ground. Here is his defence, though he does admit 
privately that including brass may have been pushing things a bit.

"According to Chambers, alchemy was 'principally concerned with turning other 
metals into gold'. It doesn't say anything about them having to be base or 
unalloyed.

"Admittedly, the Chambers definition is on the skimpy side. But people did get 
excited by all sorts of transmutations. There is a particularly interesting 
tract by Robert Boyle (he of Boyle's Law) in which he claims to have witnessed 
a transmutation of gold into silver.

"He admits that this is pretty pointless in financial terms, but thinks it 
suggests that, with further refinement, the process might be reversed."
 