
Football League 10, Irish and Welsh 2


What’s in a name? A great deal in football, it seems. A regrettably thin crowd 
went to Goodison Park, Liverpool, on Saturday to see two fine teams play a most 
entertaining match for theKing’s Jubilee Trust Fund 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/12/King's_Jubilee_Trust_Fund_2_March_1935.jpeg>
. Had these teams been labelled “Liverpool” and “Everton” and the match been 
called “F.A. Cup, sixth-round tie,” the ground would hardly have held the 
people eager to see it.

Twelve goals were scored. The Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> side shot ten of them, 
so they had a jubilee of their own. The combined eleven of Welshmen and 
Irishmen wore a brilliant uniform – purple vest, with scarlet sleeves and gold 
collar, the King’s racing colours. And Phillips, of Wolverhampton, had a pair 
of yellow stockings to boot. It was a gay scene on a day of summer sunshine.

The combined eleven were fairly and squarely whacked, but the game never 
looked half as lopsided as the score-sheet. Every Football League forward 
scored, though it was only three minutes from the end whenWestwood 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Westwood> robbed us of the chance of 
saying that the one funny thing about a twelve-goal match was that the best 
forward in it had not scored. If ever a man’s expression announced “I’ll score 
a goal now or die in the attempt” Westwood’s did as he drilled his way clean 
through Wales and Ireland. Westwood’s play was a joy to behold; his name in the 
team should be worth 5,000 more spectators at every First Division match next 
season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a37d5c365b2cc1e05afbd067ae34ae4b899ecf%2F0_269_3417_2410%2F3417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20(and%20two%20referees)%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20%28and%20two%20referees%29%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a37d5c365b2cc1e05afbd067ae34ae4b899ecf%2F0_269_3417_2410%2F3417.jpg>
 A West Bromwich Albion fan heads to the FA Cup final, April 1935. Photograph: 
S. C. Smith/Getty Images 
The four Bolton men had a good day. It was good to see Eastham once again 
revealing his abundant genius. He still beat, or tried to beat, an opponent to 
wasteful excess, but he became brimful of confidence, dribbled and feinted with 
a skill second only to Westwood’s, and shot two wonderful goals. One was from 
an angle that seemed to break the rules of geometry; the other was a full 
volley with his left foot from well outside the penalty area.


Hampson’s Big Tally
Hampson <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_Hampson>, of Blackpool, had a 
rare revel, scoring five goals – yet contriving to miss at least another five 
that should have been as easy to get. On one occasion he was a little lucky, 
for a referee and a linesman disagreed on an offside problem and undoubtedly 
distracted the Irish rearguard. Hampson’s constructive work was not of great 
account until late in the game. Geldard and Leyfield, cutting in from the 
wings, made up the League’s round total of goals.

The League’s defence, too, was immensely strong. Atkinson was a towering 
success against Bambrick, Britton a veritable ammunition factory for the right 
wing, and Robinson was daunted neither by Phillips’s dazzling raiment nor by 
the magic word “Arsenal” when Rogers and Phillips exchanged places in the 
second half. Smith cleared his lines with fine power and aim, and Cresswell, as 
usual, demonstrated the triumph of mind over matter. Holdcroft was his happy 
acrobatic self in goal – and as often out of it. How he delights to make his 
saves on the borders of the penalty area!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3949b7ebf51066088f8241af4384218db6794677%2F0_0_3543_2615%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20(and%20two%20referees)%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20%28and%20two%20referees%29%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3949b7ebf51066088f8241af4384218db6794677%2F0_0_3543_2615%2F3543.jpg>
 Arsenal fans at Highbury Stadium, c1935. Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
The Irishmen and Welshmen played gamely, gallantly, often with much grace, and 
never looked more than two goals down. They were inclined to dilettantism in 
the later stages of their attacks, but Astley shot one goal of thrilling 
contrivance and pace and conjured another. Murphy, the Welsh-born Irishman from 
West Bromwich, and John, the Arsenal veteran, earned many cheers for hard toil 
under the sun, and although Griffiths was sometimes drawn into false positions 
he disguised for a long time the fact that behind him were full-backs with an 
extremely leaky defence. Once Griffiths was beaten Breen’s position was 
blameless in respect of all ten goals he yielded.


We saw two referees at work – if work is the right word. There was little for 
them to do save keep the time and the score. Even so, the offside rule was not 
always happily applied. A referee may be too close to the ball – and long 
spells of inactivity may dull that fine edge of alertness that single control 
of necessity maintains so sharp and keen.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b31f52eba48e2bde677c7f3abaab183f09dc73b%2F151_65_695_331%2F695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20(and%20two%20referees)%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twelve%20goals%20at%20Goodison%20Park%20%28and%20two%20referees%29%3A%20archive%2C%2013%20May%201935&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fleague-charity-match-twelve-goals-1935-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b31f52eba48e2bde677c7f3abaab183f09dc73b%2F151_65_695_331%2F695.jpg>
 Team sheet, Manchester Guardian, 13 May 1935.  