
CHAMPIONSHIP

POST-POYET BRIGHTON

There can have been few messier divorces in English football than this 
summer's turbulent separation of Brighton and Gus Poyet and it is of great 
intrigue to see how the team fares under the Uruguayan's replacement, Oscar 
Garcia. Brighton finished fourth last season, thenlost a play-off semi-final to 
Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/13/brighton-crystal-palace-championship-play-off>
, and it is up to Garcia to maintain that momentum as well as the attractive 
style of play Poyet had instilled at the Amex Stadium.

QPR'S RESCUE MISSION

After a two-year spell in the Premier League that involved three different 
managers and a succession of poor signings, Queens Park Rangers crash land back 
in theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. Harry 
Redknapp must now instil a spirit of unity in a fractious squad and he has 
begun the process by getting rid of Djibril Cissé and Christopher Samba and 
signing such grizzled veterans as Richard Dunne and Karl Henry. Will it work? 
Who knows, but what's for sure is that QPR fans are in for another 
less-than-dull season.

YEOVIL'S INCREDIBLE RISE

A decade after joining the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>, Yeovil Town are now a 
promotion away from the Premier League. The chances of that happening are slim 
to non-existent but the Somerset club are sure to revel in their first campaign 
in the second tier, and so they should given their achievement. They have done 
so with an annual wage bill of barely £1m and a squad made up of journeymen and 
youngsters. Then there is their manager, Gary Johnson, back in the Championship 
again after losing the 2008 play-off final with Bristol City.

BLACKPOOL'S WONGA BACKLASH

It's been a bad few months for pay-day loan firm Wonga, what with irate Bolton 
fans, refusenik Papiss Cissé and now the Archbishop of Canterbury all turning 
their fire Wonga's way. But somewhat forgotten in all the rage against the 
company with 5,853% APR is that they have been sponsoringBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> since 2010. With all the fuss 
swirling around, the Seasiders may find themselves coming under pressure this 
season to declare there is something wrong with Wonga.

ROVERS KEEP TURNING

Along with death and taxes, a managerial change at Blackburn has become one of 
football's certainties, with five – yes five – men holding the post last 
season. Gary Bowyer took temporary charge of the team on two occasions and, 
come the end of the campaign, was given the job on a long-term basis. But 
long-term has come to mean little at Venky's-controlled Ewood and it is almost 
certain Bowyer, an experienced coach, will not be in situ for long. How many 
will follow him?

MILLWALL'S KENNY COMEDOWN

In stark contrast to Blackburn, Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> know what it means to stand by 
your manager, having had the same man at the helm for close to six seasons. 
That all came to an end in May, when Kenny Jackett resigned having kept the 
team in the Championship and led them to the semi-finals of the FA Cup. The 
former Northern Ireland international and West Ham midfielder Steve Lomas is 
the new man in charge and there is sure to be a great and perhaps difficult 
process of readjustment at the New Den.

ZOLA MUST STIR UP HORNETS

Few clubs can have experienced such a tumultuous end to last season as 
Watford. They missed out on automatic promotion on the last day of the 
campaign, andreached the play-off final  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/12/watford-leicester-city-championship-play-off>
in the most dramatic of circumstances before thenlosing to Crystal Palace at 
Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/27/crystal-palace-promoted-premier-league-kevin-phillips>
. Gianfranco Zola's side aim to go one better and having worked around a 
transfer embargo and the Football League's new rules on foreign loan deals to 
make 14 signings, Watford are certainly fattening up nicely for a promotion 
push.

PEARSON'S LAST CHANCE

Such was the nature of Leicester's defeat to Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> in the play-off semi-finals that 
many forgot it was something of a failure that the team found themselves in 
that position in the first place. Leicester looked candidates for automatic 
promotion until a late-season collapse in form meant they almost missed out on 
the play-offs. Nigel Pearson kept his job, but at a club of wealth and 
ambition, he is unlikely to get away with another failure to reach the Premier 
League's promised land.

LEAGUE ONE

HOMELESS COVENTRY

Coventry's fall from grace continues apace and the startling decision by 
owners Sisu to play their home games34 miles away in Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/08/coventry-city-northampton-football-league>
 has naturally led to outrage from supporters. Protests are ongoing but as 
things stand the Sky Blues are set to play their first home match at Sixfields 
on 11 August, against Bristol City. All eyes will be on how many spectators 
actually turn up – and how those that do express their dissatisfaction.

CARLISLE'S CROWD PUSH

How many people are prepared to watch League One's 17th-placed side? On 
average, 4,302 souls. That was Carlisle's typical gate at Brunton Park last 
season, almost 1,000 down on the campaign before and low enough to cause 
concern in Cumbria. "We're going to work even harder to win back the fans that 
have gone missing," says their manager, Greg Abbott, with winning matches his 
key tactic in the fight again falling attendances. But could the Cumbrians 
employ other lures? Maybe free pies, or even half-time unicyclists?

WOUNDED WOLVES ON REBOUND

Having become the first club to twice suffer back-to-back relegations from the 
top flight, Wolves know theirs is a scalp every other side in the division will 
be aiming to take this season. The appointment of the former Millwall stalwart 
Kenny Jackett as manager appears a shrewd one but he will be aware of the need 
to get off to a good start, beginning with Saturday's tricky visit to Preston. 
The return of goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey from a long-term injury was timely.

BLADES' THIRD PROMOTION PUSH

Having lost to Huddersfield in the 2012 play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/26/huddersfield-sheffield-united-league-one>
 andthen to Yeovil in last season's play-off semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/06/yeovil-town-sheffield-united-league-one>
 it could be said that Sheffield United are going backwards in their attempts 
to return to the Championship. But United's huge support means they are always 
a contender for promotion and having been busy in the transfer market under the 
new manager, David Weir – bringing in Febian Brandy, Stephen McGinn, Lyle 
Taylor and Conor Coady – this finally could be the year the Blades go up.

BRADFORD'S MAGIC TOUCH

Last season's most heartwarming football story was possibly Bradford's two 
treks to Wembley.The Capital One Cup final was lost to Premier League slicks 
Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/24/nathan-dyer-swansea-bradford-capital-one>
 but the brilliant Bantams then went andbeat Northampton Town in the play-off 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/18/bradford-city-northampton-town-league-two>
 and so are back in the third tier. Heroes such as goalkeeper Matt Duke have 
left but there should still be a spring in the step of Phil Parkinson's side 
and it will be interesting to see if they can get anywhere close to matching 
the magic of that memorable 2012-13 campaign.

CAN BRENTFORD BUZZ AGAIN?

Joy for Yeovil in last season's League One play-off final meant heartache for 
Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/19/yeovil-brentford-league-one-play-off-final>
, who were defeated at Wembley having missed out on automatic promotion to 
Doncaster afterseeing their last-gasp penalty go badly awry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/27/brentford-doncaster-league-one>
. Uwe Rösler's side could be forgiven for going into the new campaign in low 
spirits, but according to last season's top scorer, Clayton Donaldson, the Bees 
are buzzing. Surely, however, they will be desperate to go straight up having 
now failed to progress from seven successive play-off campaigns.

LEAGUE TWO

BEATTIE'S BOW

Putting the words "James Beattie" and "manager" together still looks odd but 
it will certainly be interesting to see how the former Southampton, Everton and 
England forward fares in his first full season in charge ofAccrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley>. The 35-year-old 
helped keep the club in the division as player-coach last season and a similar 
herculean task is likely to face him this time around at the Crown Ground.

AFC WIMBLEDON'S WOBBLES

Outside Milton Keynes there are surely few people who do not retain a soft 
spot for AFC Wimbledon. The club created by fans for fans prove modern football 
isn't all bad and their rise into the Football League two years ago was 
welcomed by many neutrals. But last season that almost came crashing, withAFC 
Wimbledon requiring a last-day victory over Fleetwood Town to survive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/apr/28/wimbledon-barnet-aldershot-dagenham-relegation>
. A tight budget means Neal Ardley's side are likely to be scrapping for 
survival yet again but that will only add to the sense of achievement if they 
can beat the odds .

PORTSMOUTH'S NEW DAWN

Few clubs feel as cheerful post-relegation as Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> did at the end of last 
season. Yes, the 2008 FA Cup winners are in the fourth tier but after years of 
turmoil and facing football extinction, the club are now in the hands of the 
Pompey Supporters' Trust and under the management of club legend Guy 
Whittingham. There is fresh optimism at Fratton Park, reflected in the sale of 
10,000 season tickets for the new campaign, and a sense that this most battered 
of clubs could be about to make a charge back up the divisions.

BIG JESSY

Anyone who believes that it is only Premier League clubs who make interesting 
foreign signings should head down to Gigg Lane this season, for there they will 
get the chance to see a full Rwanda international in action.

Jessy Reindorf has just arrived from the Belgian club Union Royale Namur and 
the 6ft 5in striker, who has two caps for his country, has already been 
dubiously dubbed the "new Kevin Francis" by his manager Kevin Blackwell.

MANSFIELD'S RETURN

Five years after they were last in the Football League, Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> Town are back and keen to make 
an impact. The club's owner, John Radford, and his wife-come-chairman, Carolyn, 
have spoken about achieving successive promotions, and while that seems 
unlikely for a club that recently had to spend £148,000 just to get their 
stadium up to Football League standards, the Stags are likely to make their 
presence felt in the coming campaign.

NEWPORT A CLUB REBORN

Also making a return to the Football League – and completing a remarkable 
journey with the club relegated from the fourth tier in 1988 and wound up a 
year later – areNewport County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newport-county>. Their rebirth eventually 
led to victory over fellow Welsh side Wrexham in May's Blue Square Bet Premier 
play-off final and now Justin Edinburgh's side will aim to build on football's 
feel-good factor in the principality established by the presence in the Premier 
League of Swansea and Cardiff plus Gareth Bale's sparkling form at Spurs.
 