
I am four weeks into rehearsals for the UK premiere of Šimon Voseček’s 2013 
opera, based on Max Frisch’s absurdist 1953 play Biedermann and the Arsonists, 
and the visceral impact of the music continues to entertain and disorientate in 
equal measure. Enter its soundworld and you’re hit by the wailing clarinets, 
giggling strings and wild percussion that accompany its colourful lineup of 
eccentric characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447170212422%2Fa6ab14aa-c9a0-4119-8c7d-98f80e2d7aa3-1324x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447170212422%2Fa6ab14aa-c9a0-4119-8c7d-98f80e2d7aa3-1324x2040.jpeg>
 Colourful characters … Schmitz the wrestler, in one of Jemima Robinson’s 
designs for Biedermann and the Arsonists. Photograph: Independent Opera 
Rehearsing the alcohol-fuelled finale, the cast become increasingly 
light-headed as they attempt to follow the composer’s directions in the score. 
“Falsetto: a climax of absurdity”; “chaos is desirable.”

Given the source material, it’s not surprising that Voseček’s opera revels in 
such mayhem. Frisch’s play is a major work of postwar European drama; a 
satirical fable about bourgeois guilt taken to hyper-theatrical extremes.

One evening in his quiet suburban home, successful businessman and respected 
member of the community Gottlieb Biedermann is enjoying a glass of wine and 
surveying the latest headlines about a spate of arson attacks in the area. As 
he looks up from his newspaper, he finds an enormous wrestler standing in his 
doorway, asking for shelter. Biedermann permits him to spend the night in his 
attic. The wrestler is soon joined by a second dodgy-looking individual, a 
former waiter, full of charm and panache. They then proceed to transport 
barrels of petrol into the attic, right under the noses of Biedermann and his 
wife, with the clear intention of burning down their home. The Biedermanns, 
however, are incapable of evicting the two criminals, or taking any 
preventative action at all – Biedermann assures his wife the best policy is one 
of appeasement. It all ends in a smoking pile of rubble and ash.

I responded immediately to the surreal, non-naturalistic elements of the 
original text. Several productions of the play, including a 1963 Austrian 
television adaptation and a2007 production at the Royal Court with Benedict 
Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/nov/01/thearsonistsstillburnsbrig>
, adopted a muted, realistic aesthetic to counterbalance the piece’s moments of 
madness and farce. But Voseček’s music calls for an overtly theatrical 
approach, particularly with the arsonists.

The wrestler-waiter double act parody middle-class etiquette with their 
impressive knowledge of bourgeois manners, culture and wine. They express their 
pyromania in playful rhapsodies on their love of flames and the sound of 
sirens. To create these demonic figures, designer Jemima Robinson and I decided 
to give Schmitz the wrestler an exaggeratedly muscular bodysuit and to char the 
waiter Eisenring’s uniform as if he has just emerged from a blaze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447170527887%2Fd9285437-4a93-491d-a19f-944306c723ec-1321x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447170527887%2Fd9285437-4a93-491d-a19f-944306c723ec-1321x2040.jpeg>
 Eisenring the waiter, by Jemima Robinson 
A trio of incompetent firemen offer another opportunity for stylisation. These 
three represent the moral centre of the piece, and scold Biedermann for his 
moral paralysis. But this caricature of a Greek chorus also proves unable to 
prevent the impending fire. I chose to add angel wings to their costumes, to 
suggest their role as guardians of society who preach about fire safety with 
great religious fervour.


The comic juxtaposition of the realistic uniforms and the wings helps to 
further ridicule these figures who alternate solemn chanting and singing with 
an emasculated head voice. Further inspiration came from Voseček’s menacing 
orchestra, which mocks, disorientates and collides with the singers – 
especially during the explosive finale. The sinister colours and textures of 
the instrumentation seem to represent the world of the arsonists as opposed to 
the Biedermanns’. Our production visualises this clash of worlds by creating a 
hellish pit of rusty barrels of petrol and old gas canisters underneath the 
Biedermann apartment. The orchestra –the Britten Sinfonia 
<http://www.brittensinfonia.com/> – reside in this subterranean world that is 
visible to the audience, which incidentally corresponds to Voseček’s 
instruction for the orchestra to abandon its usual role as accompanist and to 
have its own strong narrative identity.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447171893409%2F1bb9b842-4f06-4382-a1b0-ba6e740c8e95-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twisted%20fire-starters%3A%20staging%20the%20incendiary%20opera%20Biedermann%20and%20the%20Arsonists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbiedermann-arsonists-sadlers-wells-independent-opera-max-hoehn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447171893409%2F1bb9b842-4f06-4382-a1b0-ba6e740c8e95-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A chorus of disapproval … the firemen, designed by Jemima Robinson 
Biedermann and the Arsonists is not only a comedy of grotesque characters and 
bizarre humour but also a timeless, disturbing work about the collapse of 
secure cultural assumptions and values. Gottlieb Biedermann is no fool; Frisch 
wanted his audience to identify with his struggle. His failure to deal with the 
arsonists is driven by a toxic combination of liberal guilt, naivety and plain 
cowardice – weaknesses that resonate just as much in 21st-century Britain as 
they did with Frisch’s German audience more than 50 years ago.

When rehearsing Biedermann’s scenes with the tenor Mark Le Brocq 
<http://marklebrocq.co.uk/>, we stressed his everyman qualities. We wanted to 
share the character’s deep insecurities and contradictions with the audience. 
It seems to me that if the production concerns itself only with turning the 
stage into a nightmarish playground for the arsonists, full of theatrical 
effects and outlandish costumes, the opera risks becoming an exercise in style 
rather than a morality play for today.

But Biedermann could be any suited worker during the morning rush hour. 
Putting ourselves in his shoes, would we act any differently? Would momentary 
panic or a sense of charity blind our judgment? Come to Sadler’s Wells this 
week and decide for yourselves.

• Independent Opera’s production of Biedermann and the Arsonists 
<http://www.independentopera.com/productions/biedermann-and-the-arsonists> is 
at theLilian Baylis Studio, Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/independent-opera-biedermann-and-the-arsonists/>
, London, on 14, 17 & 19 November. Box office: 020-7863 8000.
 