
Over the weekend “pharma bro” Martin Shkreli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/martin-shkreli-suspended-from-twitter-for-alleged-harrassment-of-lauren-duca>
 was suspended from Twitter following his interactions withTeen Vogue 
journalist Lauren Duca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/who-take-on-donald-trump-teen-vogue>
. Today, the company briefly suspended Alexandra Brodsky, a fellow at the 
National Women’s Law Center, after she retweeted screengrabs of antisemitic 
abuse she received. Her abusers’ accounts were not suspended.

Martin Shkreli suspended from Twitter for alleged harassment of Lauren Duca
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/martin-shkreli-suspended-from-twitter-for-alleged-harrassment-of-lauren-duca>
These very different cases highlight the lack of transparency in the way 
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> handles harassment. 
From the outside, its abuse policies appear to be applied inconsistently, with 
some accounts being suspended with little explanation. Critics are calling for 
the microblogging platform to be more accountable for its moderation decisions.

“I’d like to see Twitter be more open about their priorities, expectations and 
practices,” said Stuart Geiger, an ethnographer and Berkeley postdoctoral 
scholar who has studied Twitter’s approach to moderating abuse. “It does seem 
to be haphazard.”

Shkreli, an entrepreneur and hedge fund founder, achieved notoriety in 2015 
when he acquired the drug Daraprim, used in the treatment of Aids and cancer 
patients, andhiked the cost of a pill from $13.50 to $750 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/21/entrepreneur-defends-raise-price-daraprim-drug>
. He has since built a name for himself as arightwing provocateur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/04/martin-shkreli-congress-daraprim-hearing-video>
.

In the last few weeks he’s turned his attention to Duca, a freelance writer, 
sending her direct messages asking her to be his +1 to Donald Trump’s 
inauguration and changing his Twitter profile picture to a doctored image that 
showed him sitting with Duca on a sofa. He also made his cover photo a collage 
of images of Duca with the caption, “For better or worse, ‘til death do us 
part, I love you with every single beat of my heart”, and changed his bio to 
refer to his “small crush on @laurenduca (hope she doesn’t find out)”.
Lauren Duca (@laurenduca) 
How is this allowed @jack <https://twitter.com/jack> pic.twitter.com/Wof8MlYHTL
 <https://t.co/Wof8MlYHTL>
 <https://twitter.com/laurenduca/status/818124094587752452> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/laurenduca/status/818124094587752452> 
Duca reposted the direct message and screenshots of Shkreli’s profile, calling 
on Twitter’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey, to help. “How is this allowed, 
@jack,” she wrote. Later that day, Shkreli’s account was suspended with no 
public explanation.

On Sunday, Duca told Buzzfeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/davidmack/martin-shkreli-suspended-from-twitter?utm_term=.tfYjnvQWE#.jsmpAXojK>
: “I don’t know how this could possibly be allowed because this is an act of 
targeted harassment.”


The suspension of Shkreli’s account follows a similar pattern to that of 
Breitbart journalist Milo Yiannopoulos, who waspermanently banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
 from the platform last year for his role in the online abuse of Ghostbusters 
actor Leslie Jones. It wasn’t until Jones publicly quit the platform following 
an onslaught of racist and sexist vitriol, whipped up by Yiannopoulos, that 
Twitter decided to act.

Twitter suspends accounts for a number of reasons, including abusive 
behaviour, sending spam or if the account has been hacked. These suspensions 
may be temporary or permanent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftwitter-abuse-martin-shkreli-lauren-duca-alexandra-brodsky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4717df6cf6c35c2772fb8c4edf5a6e15d43c6d0%2F0_147_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20cases%20of%20Twitter%20abuse%20highlight%20the%20obscure%20nature%20of%20suspensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftwitter-abuse-martin-shkreli-lauren-duca-alexandra-brodsky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20cases%20of%20Twitter%20abuse%20highlight%20the%20obscure%20nature%20of%20suspensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftwitter-abuse-martin-shkreli-lauren-duca-alexandra-brodsky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4717df6cf6c35c2772fb8c4edf5a6e15d43c6d0%2F0_147_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Actor Leslie Jones publicly quit Twitter after a campaign of abuse by 
rightwing journalist Milo Yiannopoulos. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images 
According to Twitter’s rules <https://support.twitter.com/articles/18311>, a 
user can be deemed abusive if they harass, intimidate or use fear to silence 
another user’s voice. This includes making threats of violence, inciting or 
engaging in targeted abuse of others, promoting hate against others based on 
race, sexual orientation, gender, age or disability, and publishing the private 
information of others, known as “doxxing”.

How Twitter applies these rules, however, is less clear. The platform appears 
to tackle abuse in a reactive, rather than strategic, way according to how 
high-profile the target of abuse is. Both Yiannopoulos and Shkreli had sent 
messages that could be interpreted as intimidating or misogynistic before they 
were suspended, but Twitter only acted when they targeted users with large 
followings.

In some cases, the platform blocks the victim rather than the antagonist, as 
happened in the case of Brodsky.

She found her account temporarily suspended after she tweeted screenshots of 
antisemitic abuse she was receiving. The accounts of the people who sent the 
abuse remained online.
Dana Bolger (@danabolger) 
This weekend, @azbrodsky <https://twitter.com/azbrodsky> and I got harassing 
anti-Semitic tweets. When she spoke out,@Twitter <https://twitter.com/Twitter> 
suspended HER account.@JACK <https://twitter.com/jack>, how is this ok? 
pic.twitter.com/dUW47KD1fn <https://t.co/dUW47KD1fn>
 <https://twitter.com/danabolger/status/818493340224262145> January 9, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/danabolger/status/818493340224262145> 
Brodsky’s account was reactivated after some of her 5,000 followers complained 
to Jack Dorsey and one of her friends told a journalist, who then called 
Twitter asking for comment.


“Twitter’s anti-harassment enforcement is still unacceptable,” she said on her 
Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/azbrodsky/posts/10208437084869386?pnref=story> after 
her account was restored. “Public criticism shouldn’t be necessary for the 
company to do the right thing.”

For Brodsky, Twitter is a crucial tool she uses at work. At the time her 
account was suspended she was in the middle of a campaignopposing the 
appointment of Jeff Sessions 
<http://knowyourix.org/wp-content/uploads/KYIX-NAESV-Testimony-Sessions-Nomination.pdf>
 of the role of attorney general.

“Twitter is a cesspool, but it’s a really important useful cesspool,” she told 
the Guardian. “A lot of us don’t have the option of disengaging because it’s a 
powerful tool to get the work done.”

These cases highlight the lack of transparency over Twitter’s decision-making, 
particularly as it is a key forum for public discourse and with President-elect 
Donald Trump noweven using it to announce policy changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/can-donald-trump-save-twitter>
.

“Twitter is becoming more like governments. We don’t expect them to be black 
boxes,” said Geiger.

Can Donald Trump save Twitter?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/can-donald-trump-save-twitter>
“I’m a law school graduate, so I like the idea of there being public 
justifications for these decision,” added Brodsky. “It would be helpful to for 
us to see if Twitter is being consistent and whether the size of the platform 
of the target plays into the decision making.”

Geiger said that abuse is particularly acute on Twitter because of the way 
it’s designed. “Twitter has one of the toughest jobs among the various online 
platforms because of its immediacy. The same stuff that happens on Facebook 
doesn’t get the same public reach. Twitter pushes us all together – I can tweet 
Donald Trump if I want to. It’s part of the thrill but also why it can be so 
problematic and dangerous,” he said.

He believes Twitter might be dragging its feet over really clamping down on 
harassment in the way it’s clamped down onterrorist accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/twitter-suspends-accounts-terrorism-links-isis>
 for fear of losing too many users. Already members of the “alt-right” are 
moving toTwitter alternatives like Gab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/gab-alt-right-social-media-twitter>
.

“If you look at it from a business perspective, if they have a dip in the 
number of users active on the platform they’ll have a dip in stock price,” he 
said. “It puts them in a tricky position.”

Twitter did not respond to questions about how exactly it decides which 
accounts to suspend and who is responsible for making the decisions. The 
company did, however, point towards ageneral explainer on its review process 
<https://about.twitter.com/safety/enforcement>. 
 