
One week after launching its self-driving pilot program in its home town of 
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>, Uber is 
packing up its failed trial and taking its fleet of autonomous vehicles to 
Phoenix, Arizona.

“Our cars departed for Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> 
this morning by truck,” an Uber spokesperson said in a statement. “We’ll be 
expanding our self-driving pilot there in the next few weeks, and we’re excited 
to have the support of Governor Ducey.”

Uber cancels self-driving car trial in San Francisco after state forces it off 
road
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/21/uber-cancels-self-driving-car-trial-san-francisco-california>
Within hours of the program’s launch, multiple cars were caught running red 
lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 – which Uber blamed on “human error” – and the department of motor vehicles 
ordered the vehicles off the road until the company obtained a permit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&media=>
Uber self-driving car drives through red light in San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Uber refused to apply for the permit, saying its intransigence was “an 
important issue of principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
”. On Wednesday, the California department of motor vehicles announced that it 
was revoking the registration of the 16 cars, and Uber finallyagreed to halt 
the program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/21/uber-cancels-self-driving-car-trial-san-francisco-california>
.

“Arizona welcomes Uber self-driving cars with open arms and wide open roads,” 
said Arizona governor Doug Ducey in a statement. “WhileCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> puts the brakes on innovation 
and change with more bureaucracy and more regulation, Arizona is paving the way 
for new technology and new businesses.”

Ducey, a technology enthusiast who went for a ride in a self-driving Waymo car 
on Monday 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2016/12/19/arizonas-governor-tries-out-googles-self-driving-car/95584862/>
, tweeted several invitations for Uber to move to his state in advance of 
Thursday’s announcement, using the hashtag #ditchcalifornia.
Doug Ducey (@dougducey) 
This is what OVER-regulation looks like! #ditchcalifornia 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ditchcalifornia?src=hash> https://t.co/RMbUkQY9ek 
<https://t.co/RMbUkQY9ek>
 <https://twitter.com/dougducey/status/811764550169083904> December 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dougducey/status/811764550169083904> 
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> will not have to violate 
its principles in testing self-driving vehicles in Arizona.

“Part of what makes Arizona an ideal place for Uber and other companies to 
test autonomous vehicle technology is that there are no special permits or 
licensing required,” the state department of transportation said in a 
statement. “In Arizona, autonomous vehicles have the same registration 
requirements as any other vehicle, and nothing in state law prevents testing 
autonomous vehicles.”

In August 2015, Ducey signed an executive order supporting the development and 
testing of autonomous vehicles in the state. Theorder 
<http://azgovernor.gov/file/2660/download?token=nLkPLRi1> established a 
committee 
<https://www.azdot.gov/about/boards-and-committees/arizona-self-driving-vehicle-oversight-committee>
 to advise state agencies on the development of necessary rules or statutes 
relating to self-driving cars.

Uber already has a significant footprint in Arizona. In June 2015, the company 
opened acustomer service office 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/center-of-excellence-in-phoenix/> in Phoenix. Uber 
also announced apartnership with the University of Arizona 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/us-arizona/driving-innovation-in-arizona/> for 
research on self-driving and mapping technology in August 2015.

Arizona has one of the highest rates of poverty 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/money/business/economy/2016/09/16/poverty-rates-arizona-still-among-nations-highest/90495336/>
 in the country. The state hasaggressively courted technology companies 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/money/business/jobs/2016/04/01/phoenix-area-attracting-west-coast-tech-companies/82478092/>
 looking for cheaper outposts from Silicon Valley in order to boost its economy.
 