
If your self-driving car crashes, who gets sued? Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, Uber, and Ford would rather it 
be you, according to some experts.

Tech companies making self-driving cars could become better protected under 
the law than those car’s owners, experts warn, as the announcement came of a 
powerful new coalition of automakers and big tech companies forming to take on 
US government regulations around self-driving vehicles.

Google, Uber, Lyft, Ford and Volvo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/volvo>
, all of which are working on self-driving car technology, will lobby as the 
Self-Driving Coalition for Safer Streets to bring autonomous vehicles to the 
road across the US.

We don't need self-driving cars – we need to ditch our vehicles entirely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/06/self-driving-cars-public-transportation>
Heading it up will be David Strickland, the former administrator of the 
National Highway Traffic Administration, the same group he will now be working 
to influence. The lobbying group argues that self-driving vehicles will reduce 
the severity and frequency of crashes. According to the US Department of 
Transportation, 94% of car crashes are caused by human error.

There’s general consensus that self-driving cars will eventually make roads 
safer <http://fusion.net/story/207965/driving-should-be-illegal/> (ask any 
parent of a Snapchatting teen how much they trust drivers). Motor vehicle 
crashes are the leading cause of death among those 15 to 29 years old.

The first task for the lobbying group will be just rolling out self-driving 
cars.

But the liability issues will be thorny. A powerful corporate lobbying force 
may pose a new challenge for personal injury lawyers, who are alreadywary of 
the technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/09/google-self-driving-car-crash-video-accident-bus>
, while some safety researchers and accident lawyers worry that the lobbying 
group could unfairly protect tech companies and app makers over their human car 
owners.

This 26-year-old hacker can make a self-driving car, but can he take on Tesla?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/05/george-hotz-comma-self-driving-car-tesla-elon-musk>
“I’m worried a lobbying group would try to shield manufacturers and app 
designers over drivers,” said Daniel Vega, an accident and personal injury 
lawyer based in San Francisco. “When these programs fail, who’s responsible?”

Statistician Susan Paddock said the only way to get self-driving cars out on 
the road was if consumers become comfortable with a great deal of uncertainty.

“It’s very challenging to test drive these vehicles as far and as long as they 
need to be in order to statistically know their performance,” Pollock said. 
“Even if autonomous vehicle fleets are driven 10m miles, one still would not be 
able to draw statistical conclusions about safety and reliability.”

“Uncertainty remains,” she added. “I don’t know how the general public will 
respond to it.”

In a statement on Tuesday, Strickland said the goal of the group would be to 
have one national self-driving car policy, rather than deal with regulations 
state by state.

“Self-driving vehicle technology will make America’s roadways safer and less 
congested,” Strickland said in a statement. “The best path for this innovation 
is to have one clear set of federal standards, and the Coalition will work with 
policymakers to find the right solutions that will facilitate the deployment of 
self-driving vehicles.”

 