
Stadium: Stadio Friuli, 1976, capacity 30,642


The Stadio Friuli is an amphitheatre with character and style. It will soon be 
a beacon of light among Italy’s ageing stadia as it goes through some extensive 
modernisation. The stadium’s gym, athletics track, fencing and martial arts 
facilities made it ultra-modern when constructed in 1976 – it was the only host 
venue for the 1990 World Cup that did not need refurbishment – and it is now 
being refurbished to keep up with 21st century standards.

The stadium’s huge, curved roof is being extended and all manner of modern 
extras are being fitted, from heated seats to Wi-Fi and restaurants. The New 
Friuli Stadium will help Udinese enter the modern era. Like at Juventus, the 
methodology will follow the Bundesliga model. The atmosphere is passionate when 
near full capacity – as was seen some years back whenUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> were battling for a Champions 
League spot – but most attendances are a lot smaller and the noise can be lost, 
despite the efforts of ultra groups.

Juventus: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/jul/22/juventus-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-fans-trezeguet>
“Reduce capacity, raise quality” was the slogan for the reworked stadium. The 
club wanted it to have 22,000 seats but the city preferred a capacity of 
30,000; being part-owned by local authorities it is a bureaucratic dilemma that 
many Italian clubs have to confront. The refurbishments were meant to cost €25m 
and be complete by the start of the 2013-14 season, but these delays are not 
uncommon in Italy.

The Udinese owner, Giampaolo Pozzo, has invested €30m into the stadium and 
expects it to be complete in time for the 2015-16 season. The new stadium will 
be multifunctional and used on days when football is not played. It will host 
concerts and will have a museum and swimming pools. “If we hadn’t done this, we 
would have lost a great part of our support over the next five to 10 years,” 
said Pozzo.

Contractors are currently working on the Stadio Friuli and the pictures look 
impressive so far. Refurbishments on the north and south stands have nearly 
been completed and, by the start of the season, Udinese should be playing in a 
modern stadium that has retained its character.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436276125396%2F7dd48d11-2f01-44ba-86d2-db4a8e6ac3f8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Udinese%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Udinese%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436276125396%2F7dd48d11-2f01-44ba-86d2-db4a8e6ac3f8-1020x612.jpeg>
 The renovations at the Stadio Friuli. Photograph: Udinese 
The ultras

Ultra groups: HTB (Hooligans Teddy Boys), Friulani al Seguito, Collettivo 
IncUdine, Ultras Udinese 1995, Nord Kaos, Brigata Pordenone, Briganti Baldassa, 
Suisse Tarzeons. 

 “O Zico o Austria” (“Either Zico or Austria!”) was the ultimatum. In the 
summer of 1983, Udinese were on the verge of signing the Brazilian icon. He had 
been approached by AS Roma and Juventus, so there was shock when the Flamengo
fantasista opted to join lowly Udinese.

The Italian Football Federation opposed the deal as they thought the transfer 
was far too expensive for a foreign player. This prompted a furore among the 
Udinese fans, who amassed in the city centre holding up placards reading “O 
Zico o Austria”. The threat may have been satirical but it wasn’t without 
historic and political resonance.

Verona v Vicenza: how one of Italian football’s great rivalries could be reborn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/jun/02/verona-vicenza-italy-serie-a-football>
Bordering Austria to the north and Slovenia to the east, the city of Udine has 
been at the crossroads of diverse cultures and peoples. During the 15th century 
it was a Venetian republic and only a 100 years ago it formed part of the 
Austrian empire. Pride of originating from Friuli, the region in which Udine is 
located, often trumps pride of being Italian. For much of the population, 
Friuliano is the native tongue. Some advocate a more autonomous or even 
independent Friuli in line with historical borders, such as the political party
Lega Nord Friuli-Venezia Giulia <>.

The Zico episode encapsulates the proud identity of the Udinesi. The 
federation eventually buckled and the man dubbed the “White Pele” signed for the
Bianconeri, leaving thousands delirious. Landing such a prestigious player was 
a major coup and one journalist even compared the move to “fitting the engine 
of a Ferrari into a Volkswagen.”

Despite failing to win a major honour during his two-year spell, Zico became a 
legend at Udinese, scoring 57 goals in 79 appearances. Others, such as Oliver 
Bierhoff and the club’s record goalscorer Antonio Di Natale, have since taken 
his mantle, but, to the supporters, their club transcends the achievements of 
any individual player. WhenLuca <https://twitter.com/lh_ramon25> spoke to the 
Ultras Udinese 1995, they made this abundantly clear:

Who are the Ultras Udinese 1995?

“Our group was born on 10 December 1995 by six guys who were already ultras on 
the Curva. Given that they were all from Pordenone, they wanted to create a 
group that united the Udinese ultras who came from the most westerly area of 
Friuli. Year after year the group has grown and now it also includes members 
from Udine. This year we are celebrating our 20th anniversary, during which we 
have continued to embrace the principles our founders gave to the group, 
supporting Udine wherever they play and promoting friendship between members, 
inside and outside the stadium.”

Can you tell us a little about the history of Udinese’s ultras?


“The Black and White Superstars are considered the first real group of ultras 
in Udine. They were founded at the end of the 1970s. Then, in 1980, the Teddy 
Boys were born. They are one of the most famous groups who still sit on the 
Curva today. In the 1980s, Nuova Guardia, Brigata Ultrà and Nord Kaos were also 
formed and it was from these groups that Ultras Udinese 1995 came to being. In 
the 1990s, groups such as Friulani al Seguito and the Supporters were born. 
Collettivo IncUdine was formed in 2003 while Nord Kaos disbanded in 2006. There 
have been many other groups throughout the years but the list would be very 
long. Those mentioned are the most renowned and established.”

What is the relationship like between the various groups of ultras?

“Every group is autonomous, producing their own memorabilia – scarfs, T-shirts 
etc – but there is also collaboration between the various groups, for example, 
to organise the away trips and other initiatives within the Curva. With regards 
to banners, every group has their own, but in the last two years groups have 
displayed banners in protest against the new anti-ultras laws in Italy, which 
are too restrictive and in our opinion non-constitutional.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436275123815%2Fb55f59ff-a1d0-4cd2-80f5-ce2dd6830301-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Udinese%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Udinese%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fudinese-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436275123815%2Fb55f59ff-a1d0-4cd2-80f5-ce2dd6830301-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Udinese fans at the Stadio Friuli in May 2015. Photograph: Dino Panato/Getty 
Images 
Which period has been most successful, not only for the club but also for the 
fans?

“It is difficult to say with any certainty. A period in which there was huge 
enthusiasm was when Zico played for Udinese. During those years the stadium was 
always full with around 40,000 supporters, an enormous number for a city of 
only 100,000. Another successful period was during the 1990s when Udinese 
qualified for Europe for the first time in their history and finished third in
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> during the 
1997-98 season. Another key moment was the 2010-11 season in which theTessera 
del Tifoso [supporters ID card] was introduced, a document we have always 
opposed. This has prevented us from sitting in the away section of grounds, 
however, the laws did not prevent us from buying tickets for other sections, 
therefore we often found ourselves among the home supporters, sometimes 
shoulder to shoulder with rival ultras. It was a very interesting period.”

Zico is a legend at Udinese and there is a supporters’ club dedicated to him. 
What does Antonio Di Natale represent to the club and fans?


“Along with other groups, we don’t support individual players. This is because 
players come and go, while the colours and the shirt remain. For this reason, 
we don’t even have chants for individual players. For the rest of the 
supporters this isn’t the case, and obviously Di Natale is considered a symbol 
of Udinese and has been for the last 10 years.”

You have been forced to move from the Curva to the Tribuna due to the 
reconstruction of the Stadio Friuli. How have you found this change?


“Moving to the Tribuna for the entire year has been a completely new 
experience. On one hand it has been positive because it united the supporters 
in the same section, but on the other hand it has been a hindrance with regards 
to choreographies and flags. We hope the new stadium will bring renewed 
enthusiasm and larger crowds and that this won’t just be transitory. Of course 
we will endeavour to make the best of it.”

What is your verdict on Udinese’s season?

“It has been a season of transition. It hasn’t gone well but we hope it is the 
start of a positive cycle. Players from Friuli are starting to appear in the 
squad and for us this is very important: we hope that they can, and want, to 
remain at Udinese.”

John Foot, an English author who wrote the book Calcio 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Calcio-A-History-Italian-Football/dp/0007175752>, said 
“The idea that politics and sport should be kept apart is laughable in Italy.” 
Do you have a political ideology?


“Our group is completely apolitical. We believe that politics and the world of 
the ultras have nothing to do with each other, and whoever brings politics into 
the stadium damages the movement.”

Given the history of the Friuli region, how strong is campanilismo (local 
pride) among the ultras?

“Udinese, other than being the team of the city, is also considered the team 
that represents the region, it is a symbol of the soil from which we originate. 
Friuli pride is widespread within the Curva and among the supporters. You can 
nearly always see the flag of Friuli, a yellow eagle with a blue background, 
flying at the stadium.”

In light of the ‘Either Zico or Austria’ ultimatum, is the pride of being 
Friulano stronger than being Italian?

“The banner was obviously satirical. No one actually thought of secession from 
Italy to Austria had Zico not signed. This despite the fact many consider 
themselves to be ‘Friuliani’ before Italian.”

Who are Udinese’s main rivals?


“The derby with Triestina is the most passionate, but unfortunately they 
haven’t been around for a long time after they went bankrupt and were relegated 
many divisions. Other big rivalries include a historic one with Hellas Verona, 
one with Napoli after violent fights with their ultras back in 2010, and with 
Bologna after our twinning with their fans was broken. With regards to 
friendships, we are twinned with Austria Salzburg –the real club of Salzburg, 
not Red Bull Salzburg – Vicenza and Arezzo.”

Napoli: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/oct/16/napoli-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
What are your opinions on the Italian ultra movement of today?

“It is a very difficult question. It is a period of change, above all due to 
the strict laws that have been introduced in the last few years. Supporters are 
divided on how to confront these difficulties, and these divisions are often 
among supporters of the same club. Unfortunately, this weakens the movement as 
a whole. With respect to the 1980s and 1990s, being ultras in Italy today is 
much harder because there is the risk of being punished for the smallest of 
transgressions, and for many the term ‘ultras’ is synonymous with delinquency.”

But there are also positive aspects, for example you engage in charitable work 
for victims of natural disasters?

“Yes, on different occasions we have shown solidarity with the victims of 
natural disasters, and, along with other groups in the Curva Nord, we sent 
essential aid to those affected by the earthquake in Emilia Romagna and the 
floods in Genoa. On other occasions we have organised events to collect funds 
for local charities. Many ultras do this kind of work. It is a part of our 
world that the mass media hardly cover, but we consider it very important.”

In your opinion, what are the differences between English fans and Italian 
ultras?


“From what we can see, the main difference lies in the fact that the ultras 
are very organised, with stringent rules and unwritten codes that form what we 
consider the ‘ultras’ mentality’, that should be respected by all groups. 
Unfortunately this is not always the case. Instead in England, support is more 
spontaneous. Here in Italy, the ‘English model’ is often lauded by politicians 
and the mass media when they speak about eliminating the ultras. But this has 
only pushed the problems outside stadia.”

Your choreographies are incredible and very much admired; it must be hard work 
creating them?

“Yes, it really is hard work, because they take thought and real ingenuity! 
The guys spend hours painting, sewing and creating these displays at a 
remarkable cost, which is covered by our own finances or collections. 
Coordinating all the supporters at the stadium in order to execute these 
choreographies is very difficult. However seeing a choreography executed to 
perfection is very satisfactory, especially for those who have contributed 
hours of work. It is truly a unique emotion.”

What do you think of the view that the ultras movement allows negative 
behaviour such as discrimination and violence to manifest?

“With regards to violence, it is one of the aspects that set the ultras apart 
from normal fans. It is difficult for people to understand but, for us, being 
an ultra means being prepared for physical confrontation with opposition 
ultras. But this also means respecting certain rules, like not using knives. 
Unfortunately these rules aren’t always adhered to, and this is something we 
resent. Discrimination, however, is often confused withcampanilismo between 
different cities or with episodes that aren’t actually fuelled by racism or 
discrimination. However, it is undeniable that episodes sometimes cross the 
line and they deserve condemnation. These episodes are exploited by those who 
want to eliminate a movement which authorities are uncomfortable with.”

Finally, can you summarise what it means to be an ultra of Udinese? 

“Being an ultra of Udinese is to love our colours and defend them wherever, to 
love and honour our land and its traditions, to constantly strive to improve 
our group and our Curva, to truly become the 12th man on the field, and to 
support our team with passion and pride.”

Classic player: Oliver Bierhoff
 Oliver Bierhoff on a bike in 1998. Photograph: Alexander 
Hassenstein/Bongarts/Getty Images 
In the 1997-98 season Oliver Bierhoff became capocannoniere in Serie A. An 
under-rated forward playing for an unfashionable team made 32 appearances and 
scored 27 goals <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTsbe9a6laE>, only two of 
which were penalties. In the days whencalcio ruled the world, “Das Boot” was 
scoring a goal every 105 minutes.

The German had tried to make a name for himself at Hamburger SV and Borussia 
Monchengladbach but could not make the grade. After a spell with Austria 
Salzburg he arrived in Italy with lowly Ascoli. Between 1991 and 1995 he played 
117 times and scored 48 goals, which was enough to turn the head of Udinese 
coach Alberto Zaccheroni. Now Bierhoff could test himself against the best.

He opened his account immediately, scoring on the opening day of the season in 
a 1-0 win over Cagliari at the Friuli. Bierhoff went on to fire theZebrette 
(Little Zebras) to a credible 10th-place finish, as he hit 17 goals for the 
season.

After famously winning Euro 1996 for Germany against the Czech Republic after 
coming on and scoring twice, his confidence was sky high. This new belief 
reached a crescendo in the 1997-98 season, when he went down in Udine folklore.

At 6ft 3in, Bierhoff could have been slow and encumbered. Far from it; he 
turned many Serie A defences in and out. He was extremely strong, mystifyingly 
good in the air, to the point of being ridiculous.Look at his header against 
Atalanta in week 16 of his-top scoring season 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xA4dZZW82QI&feature=youtu.be&t=9>.

He could read the game as quickly as any striker in the league at that time or 
since. This was shown perfectly in the third game of the season that yearwhen 
he jumped on a poor back pass to slot home 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTsbe9a6laE&feature=youtu.be&t=27> his second 
in a 2-1 win over a superb Milan side.

He was not without skill either, as shown by his 20-yard volley against Brescia
 <https://youtu.be/eTsbe9a6laE?t=51> in week nine of that year. It was 
Batistuta-esque but do we remember these strikes as much as we do from the 
great Argentinian? This mix attributes does not even go into the plethora of 
instinctive finishes in the box he scored that year.

Bierhoff is not revered as much as he should be. He scored goals that season 
against Milan, Napoli, Internazionale, Parma and more; he even scored four in 
two games against Roma. He was not a flat-track bully.

For a short time Oliver Bierhoff was the best of the best; he took on the 
world’s toughest defences and plundered them. He scored 143 goals in Serie A, 
which is one of the best totals for a foreigner in the league. He can also lay 
claim to having scored the most headed goals in Serie A. Never forgotten in 
Udine, he was certainly one of the club greats.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra> and Luca 
Hodges-Ramon <https://twitter.com/LH_Ramon25> on Twitter
 