
Uefa is investigating the Greek match-fixing allegations surrounding the man 
who is trying to buy Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/football-league-investigates-nottingham-forest-takeover-bid-banned-tycoon>
, the Olympiakos owner Evangelos Marinakis.

Marinakis denies the charges and in a statement published on the Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> website claimed the public 
prosecutor, Stamatis Daskalopoulos, was biased against the perennial Greek 
champions and the case was politically motivated.

Football League investigates Nottingham Forest takeover bid by banned tycoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/football-league-investigates-nottingham-forest-takeover-bid-banned-tycoon>
“The prosecutor’s proposal will be judged by the Athens Appeals Court in the 
coming months,” he said. “I expect a fair judgment by an impartial, independent 
and free judiciary.”

However, Press Association Sport has learned Marinakis is also being 
investigated byUefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa>, with European 
football’s governing body contacting the prosecutor several months ago.

“Uefa can confirm that an investigation is ongoing over Olympiakos FC,” a Uefa 
spokesman said. “Additionally, Uefa can confirm that an official request has 
been sent in order to get a copy of the report issued by the prosecutor, Mr 
Stamatis Daskalopoulos.”

The spokesman added that “no final decision” has been reached by the courts in 
Athens against either the club or its owner.

Uefa’s renewed interest in the case, which has been the subject of heated 
debate in Greece since 2013, is significant because, unlike English Football 
League rules, Uefa does not need a conviction to take action against clubs or 
individuals –the governing body can take sanctions if it is “comfortably 
satisfied” there is evidence of wrongdoing.

Olympiakos, Greek Super League winners for the last six seasons, were knocked 
out of the Champions League in the qualifying rounds but have reached the 
Europa League’s group stage.

The EFL declined to comment but it is clear that Marinakis would currently 
pass its ‘owners’ and directors’ test’ because he has no unspent criminal 
convictions, just asMassimo Cellino was allowed to buy Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/05/massimo-cellino-wins-appeal-leeds-ban-taekover>
 despite facing fraud charges of which he was subsequently convicted.

Marinakis, who spent £60million on one of Greece’s four main television 
channels last weekend, has been in talks with Forest’s Kuwaiti owner Fawaz 
al-Hasawi for several months.

Forest, who finished 16th last season, are seventh in the Championship after 
five games. The two-times European champions have been outside England’s top 
flight since 1999.
 