
Uefa has played down fears that Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> fans could be targeted 
by local gangs when they are in Odessa for the club’s final Europa League group 
fixture on Thursday night.

United wrote to the supporters who have bought tickets for the match against 
the Ukrainian side Zorya Luhansk, warning them of a threat exacerbated by 
“political sensitivity in the region”, but Uefa claims there is no concern.

A statement said: “We are confident that the host club together with the local 
authorities will take all necessary measures to ensure the safety and security 
of the players, the match officials and the supporters of the two teams.”

José Mourinho sticks to script after Manchester United draw at Everton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-everton>
Fans of Fenerbahce and Feyenoord, the other sides in Group A, were attacked 
when they played their games in Odessa, in September and November, 
respectively. United are expected to take at least 900 supporters from an 
allocation of 1,200, with some potentially having withdrawn following the 
club’s letter which offered the option of returning tickets.

The letter, sent last month, said: “For your safety and security you are 
advised not to wear Manchester United colours when in the Ukraine or attract 
attention to your presence in the city. Due to political sensitivity in the 
region it is not just opposition football fans who may potentially pose a risk 
to your safety.

“The stadium is within a short walking distance from the city centre and is 
located within a wooded park where the lighting is very poor. For your own 
safety, shuttle buses will be in operation from 5.45pm [local time] departing 
from Cathedral Square and you are strongly advised to travel to the stadium on 
these police escorted buses. At the previous group stage games in the city 
there have been attacks on visiting fans with some in the park around the 
stadium, so we therefore advise you not to walk through this park to the 
stadium.

“Incidents of serious disorder during the European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/whitehall-suspects-kremlin-links-to-russian-euro-2016-hooligans-vladimir-putin>
 in France last summer involving violent individuals and groups emanating from 
eastern Europe should be remembered when considering your movements and 
actions, and any potential risk.”

All Zorya’s Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> home matches are 
being played at Odessa’s Chornomorets Stadium, 495 miles from their own ground 
in Luhansk, while they have played their league games in Zaporizhia, 275 miles 
away.

United need only a draw against Zorya to ensure qualification for the knockout 
stage and can still progress with a defeat, if Feyenoord fail to beat 
Fenerbahce in the group’s other game.
 