
The UK has become the first country in the world to officially recognise 
parkour as a sport.

Parkour <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/free-running-parkour>, also 
known as freerunning orart du deplacement, involves negotiating terrain using 
only the natural strength of one’s body, principally through running, jumping 
and climbing surrounding features.

Recognition from all five UK sports councils, including Sport England, means 
organisations such as Parkour UK, which led the initial application for its 
recognition in 2009, will now be able to apply for government grants and 
National Lottery funding.

The sport could also soon be practised in schools after it gained support from 
both the Youth Sport Trust and the Association for Physical Education, who 
described it as an exciting and motivating activity.

Eugene Minogue, the chief executive of Parkour UK, said: “Recognition is a 
thing in its own right and that is what we are celebrating today, that the 
sport has been recognised as a sport. That’s no mean feat.

“Yes, it does give us the ability to apply for funding, and there are a number 
of other benefits that come out of it, but the biggest thing for us is how it 
will give the public an understanding of what parkour is and what benefits it 
has.”

Tracey Crouch, the minister for sport, welcomed the announcement. She said: “I 
want people to get out there and find the sport and physical activity that 
appeals to them and parkour is certainly a fun, creative and innovative option.

“I am pleased that it has been recognised as a sport, giving it the platform 
for further growth in this country, with Parkour UK as its governing body. The 
sport promotes movement and using the great outdoors as a space to get active 
in, and I encourage people to don their trainers and give it a go.”

The sport has often been deemed controversial since its inception in the late 
1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/04/tributes-british-free-runner-nye-frankie-newman-killed-paris-metro>
 as a result of some participants’ use of techniques to scale urban structures 
without the aid of safety ropes.

Cambridge University has been particularly critical 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/07/02/parkour-james-kingston-cambridge-university_n_3533649.html>
 after a video went viral of 22-year-old James Kingston leaping across the 
city’s many ancient buildings. It labeled parkour a form of trespassing that 
endangered the health of its practitioners and the public.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fuk-first-country-recognise-parkour-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c407318ee7a85ef36c4a4b43a95d75ac4bc6c0%2F0_1614_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20becomes%20first%20country%20to%20recognise%20parkour%20as%20a%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fuk-first-country-recognise-parkour-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20becomes%20first%20country%20to%20recognise%20parkour%20as%20a%20sport&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fuk-first-country-recognise-parkour-sport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c407318ee7a85ef36c4a4b43a95d75ac4bc6c0%2F0_1614_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
 Parkour founder Sebastien Foucan. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Parkour developed principally in France, but one of its founding fathers and 
now an elected president of Parkour UK,Sebastien Foucan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/20/sebastien-foucan-founder-free-running>
, said the UK was the first country to truly embrace the practice.

He is most recognisable for his role as Mollaka in the opening scene of the 
James Bond filmCasino Royale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/10/jamesbond.danielcraig>, in which 
Daniel Craig chases him through a building site.

Foucan, who also appeared in some of Madonna’s music videos and starred in 
Jump London, a Channel 4 documentary, called the decision a “groundbreaking 
moment for a discipline which started off as child’s play and continues as 
child’s play for all ages”.

“Parkour/freerunning is not a known discipline,” he said. “It’s very, very 
famous now, but in terms of institutions, there was no recognition. And now, 
finally, this is the first place in the world [to see it as a sport], and it’s 
history. We’re making history. And I’m sure the UK is the pioneer of that.

“The beauty of parkour/freerunning is that everyone, of all ages, can do it 
respectfully in almost any environment. We celebrate activity and playfulness 
whilst constantly challenging our mental and physical limits. It is more than 
just jumping, it is a health-driven way of life.”

Phil Smith, the director of sport at Sport England, said: “Parkour has already 
been offering something different for a few years now, but what recognition 
means is that Parkour UK is taking responsibility for its organisation.

“The safety and enjoyment of those taking part is paramount, so 
congratulations to Parkour UK on achieving the standards and showing their 
ambition to grow even further.”
 