
Spot the difference. Fracking, which is climate-polluting and unproven in the 
UK, gets “all-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/13/shale-gas-fracking-cameron-all-out>
” government backing, with ministers steamrolling over local opposition. 
Onshore windfarms, proven to be low-cost and low-carbon, get undermined by the 
government, withlocal opposition given power to block applications 
<http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/sn04370.pdf>.

The decision by the communities secretary, Sajid Javid, to overturn Lancashire 
council’s rejection of Cuadrilla’s plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 to drill four fracking wells in the county is, therefore, nothing short of 
hypocrisy.

It is a vital win for the nascent UK shale gas industry. But these are merely 
the opening skirmishes. To really know if fracking can provide significant gas 
for the UK, hundreds - if not thousands - of wells need to be drilled. Given 
the hand-to-hand combat that accompanieseven single wells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/23/north-yorkshire-council-backs-first-uk-fracking-tests-for-five-years>
 at the moment, the frackers still have an uphill struggle.

But the government has their back. It has promised cash handouts to local 
people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/06/fracking-local-people-payments-theresa-may>
 in fracking areas: compensation or bribes, depending on your point of view. 
Yet why are the same incentives not offered for windfarms? A key underlying 
reason for opposition to turbines is thefeeling of invasion of a community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/01/local-opposition-onshore-windfarms-tripled>
 which derives no benefit from the development.

Ministers cannot say they did not know. The government’s own public opinion 
poll 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/public-attitudes-tracking-survey-wave-17>
 shows nearly eight in 10 people agree that renewable energy developments 
should provide direct benefits to the communities in which they are located. 
The poll also shows 81% in support of renewables, with 4% against. Contrast 
that with fracking: 19% in favour and 31% against, with the rest undecided.

So why does the government persist? The heady fracking fumes drifting across 
the Atlantic from the US, where shale oil and gas have transformed the energy 
market, are intoxicating. Ministers initially argued that fracking in the UK 
would cut energy bills, only to discover thanno one else agreed with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/uk-advertising-watchdog-admits-it-was-wrong-to-ban-greenpeace-fracking-advert?CMP=share_btn_tw>
.

The US is huge, relatively sparsely populated and loosely regulated: a 
fracker’s dream. Europe is the opposite, meaning shale gas is unlikely to make 
more than small dent in its integrated gas market, particularly given 
widespread opposition across the continent. Shale gas could cost double to 
produce in Europe compared to the US, experts estimate.

This makes the energy department’s mantra - keeping bills low for hardworking 
families - another piece of hypocrisy. Backing fracking that won’t lower bills, 
while crushing low-carbon wind power, which will.

If not lower bills, then how about more secure energy supplies? North Sea gas 
is running out and a few thousand shale gas wells could significantly offset 
that. Such a shale gas boom would be needed to make the industry economic.

But, perversely, this could actually decrease energy security, according to 
analysts E&Y 
<http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Shale_gas_in_Europe_revolution_or_evolution/$File/EY-Shale_gas_in_Europe-revolution_or_evolution.pdf>
: “A shale gas boom in Europe could, in practice, weaken energy security in 
Europe through over-reliance on a single energy source.” A smart mix of 
renewables, efficiency, storage and interconnectors, as backed by the 
government’s ownNational Infrastructure Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/smart-power-a-national-infrastructure-commission-report>
, theNational Grid 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/national-grid-sees-major-boost-for-solar-electric-vehicles-and-batteries>
 and industry groupEnergy UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/28/top-lobbying-group-green-energy-u-turn>
, could deliver security cleanly and cheaply.

How about shale gas as a low-carbon fuel, as touted by its backers? Gas is 
only relatively low carbon if it replaces coal. But coal in the UK is already 
dwindling fast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/04/solar-outstrips-coal-in-past-six-months-of-uk-electricity-generation>
, before serious fracking has even begun, and the government has pledged a
complete coal phase out by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/18/energy-policy-shift-climate-change-amber-rudd-backburner>
.

Furthermore, the government’s official advisers, the Committee on Climate 
Change, say the UK’s electricity system must be all but decarbonised by 2030. 
That’s gives just a 16-year window for the ramping up and closing down of a 
fracking industry that’s still in nappies, unless carbon capture and storage 
(CCS) technology comes to the rescue to bury emissions - and thegovernment 
binned its flagship CCS policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/uk-cancels-pioneering-1bn-carbon-capture-and-storage-competition>
 in November.

Javid’s decision shows the government remains unwavering in its support for 
unproven, climate-polluting and unpopular fracking, whilst cracking down on 
proven, clean and popular renewables. The fight to deliver a smart energy 
policy is tough enough - supplies must be simultaneously affordable, clean and 
secure - without shooting yourself in the foot.
 