
Public support for fracking has fallen to new lows, a government survey has 
revealed.

Just 17% of people backed the process of extracting shale gas, compared with a 
third who opposed it, and just under half (48%) who had no opinion, the latest 
figures from the Department for Business,Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> & Industrial Strategy (BEIS) 
show.

It is the lowest level of support for fracking since the public attitudes 
tracker started asking about shale gas, and comes amid increased awareness of 
the process, with about four-fifths (79%) of those quizzed claiming to know 
something about it.

Fracking given UK go-ahead as Lancashire council rejection overturned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
The government has continued its push to develop a shale industry in the UK, 
which it claims could boost jobs, the economy and energy security.

Earlier this month ministers allowed a fracking site in Lancashire to go ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
, overturning a decision by the county council.

Opponents of fracking most commonly cited damage to the natural environment, 
while those in favour thought it was important to use energy sources, it was 
good for local jobs and investment and reduced dependency on fossil fuels.

A BEIS spokesperson said: “There are a lot of myths about the alleged risks of 
fracking that are not backed up by evidence, and this survey shows that the 
vast majority of people asked said that they do not know a lot about it.

“We have more than 50 years of drilling experience in the UK and have put in 
place strict regulations to ensure that a shale gas industry will be safe. We’d 
encourage people to look beyond the scaremongering to the benefits that this 
industry could bring, which include greater energy security, thousands of jobs 
and economic growth.”

Support for renewables remained high, the survey showed, with almost eight in 
10 (79%) backing the clean technologies, and just one in 25 (4%) opposed. Only 
1% strongly opposed renewables.

The survey of 2,080 UK households found that 71% of people backed onshore wind 
- the highest level since the tracker began - while 75% were in favour of 
offshore wind, and 82% backed solar.

Lancashire readers on the Cuadrilla fracking decision one month on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/lancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on>
The poll, conducted shortly after the government finally gave the go-ahead to 
a new nuclear power plant at Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/hinkley-point-ministers-sign-go-ahead-for-nuclear-power-plant>
, Somerset, also saw support for nuclear energy fall to 33%, from 36% three 
months earlier and 38% in the spring.

Juliet Davenport, chief executive of Good Energy, said: “Renewable energy 
still remains the UK’s favourite form of energy - it’s local, it’s sustainable 
and it’s pioneering.

“Government should listen to public opinion, champion renewable energy and 
throw its weight behind tackling climate change.”

Industry body RenewableUK’s chief executive, Hugh McNeal, said: “It’s great to 
see public support for onshore wind has reached its highest ever level, at an 
overwhelming 71%.

“Onshore wind is the cheapest form of new power generation available in 
Britain, so it makes sense to use it to keep people’s electricity bills as low 
as possible.”
 