
Unai Emery has been named coach of Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain>, replacing Laurent Blanc 
who left the club this week.

Emery had cut his ties with Sevilla two weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/unai-emery-laurent-blanc-paris-saint-germain-sevilla>
, having led them to three straight Europa League titles, after being heavily 
linked with the PSG job. He was under contract with the Spaniards until June 
2017 but negotiated an early release from his contract.

He was succeeded on Tuesday by Jorge Sampaoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/jorge-sampaoli-appointed-manager-sevilla>
, the former Chile coach agreeing a two-year deal with Sevilla.

PSG parted company with Blanc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/paris-saint-germain-laurent-blanc>
 this week after the Frenchman paid the price for failing to get past the 
quarter-finals of the Champions League last season. The former national coach 
won three league titles, and domestic trebles after being appointed three years 
ago.

Jorge Sampaoli appointed Sevilla manager on two-year deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/jorge-sampaoli-appointed-manager-sevilla>
“It is with great pride that I agreed to become the Paris-Saint Germain coach,”
Emery, 44, told the club website 
<http://www.psg.fr/en/News/003001/Article/76075/Unai-Emery-named-new-coach-of-Paris-Saint-Germain>
. “The club has become one of the biggest in Europe over the past few seasons 
and I am both happy and honoured to be able to help realise its great 
ambitions. I am eager to meet up with my new players as well as the people who 
work tirelessly every day to help the club grow.

“I know that an immense fervour exists around Paris Saint-Germain and I will 
be giving my best to ensure its millions of fans have a great deal to cheer 
about.”

The former Real Sociedad midfielder, who became a coach in 2004, was in charge 
of Valencia from 2008 to 2012 before taking over atSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> in 2013, transforming them into 
one of the most competitive sides on the continent.

“With 106 victories, he is the coach with the most wins at Sevilla in domestic 
and international competition and the second coach behind Joaquín Caparrós with 
the most games managed, 205,” Sevilla had said. “We wish Emery the best of luck 
in his next adventure.”

Emery, who has signed a two-year contract with an option for an additional 
season, will begin his duties immediately. “I am very happy to welcome Unai 
Emery as the new coach of Paris Saint-Germain,” Nasser al-Khelaifi, the 
chairman and CEO, said.

“Unai will bring to the club all his experience, his passion and his strong 
management skills and human qualities. He has a proven talent to get the most 
out of a team. I am convinced that our fans will love the spectacular style of 
football our team will play with Unai.”
 