
A summer afternoon and I am sitting in the Captain’s chair on the flight deck 
of the Starship Enterprise — if the Starship Enterprise had been made over by 
the cast ofMade in Chelsea.

Although 50-ish, dog-tired, under-groomed and altogether heavily pixellated by 
life, inside this techno-glamour Tomorrowville bubble with its inset strips of 
strobing floor lights (thinkSaturday Night Fever meets a 747’s night-flight 
exit route), I am remarkably relaxed receiving my first-ever Botox injections.

I know. I haven’t been this far behind the pop-cultural curve since I bought 
Blondie’sParallel Lines a month after everyone else in Five Lower had acquired 
theirs. Yet having been insufficiently 
vain/brave/aspirational/foolhardy/on-trend/interested, I’m now in the capable 
hands of Dr Fredrik Andersson — a fashionable, Swedish (indeed fashionably 
Swedish) buff and charming Harley Street dentist for whom the administration of 
Botox is a sideline (£300 a pop) after a busy day spent probing London’s 
upscale teeth. For the majority of Andersson’s chic client-patients (he is 
discreet about celebs, though celebs there are), Botox is entry-level 
maintenance on a par with a mani-pedi or a half-head-of-highlights. On the 
other (unmanicured since about 2004) hand, my disengagement from beauty 
consumerism isn’t a stance, just a lack of interest compounded by lack of cash. 
Or that’s my excuse; on a deeper level maybe I don’t believe I deserve to look 
better than I feel? Either way, these gratis jabs of Botulinum toxins are a 
leap.

On a deeper level, maybe I don’t believe I deserve to look better than I feel

Naomi Wolf <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiwolf>’s The Beauty Myth 
was the first feminist treatise on women’s looks I didn’t find alienatingly 
hirsute. Wolf (beautiful and presumably still depilating unapologetically) 
posited the idea that as women achieved more social and political power, there 
was commensurately more pressure on them to be “beautiful” as a means of 
undermining that empowerment. Interestingly, Wolf’s 25-year-old thesis (in the 
context of an article about Tinder) is re-aired in the current issue ofVanity 
Fair alongside a feature on the late Dr Fredric Brandt (who took his own life 
earlier this year). Described byVF as “the King of Collagen, the Baron of 
Botox, the Svengali of Skin Care”, the American dermatologist-to-the-superstars 
pioneered the use of Botox in the 1990s. WhenThe Beauty Myth was published (and 
before Brandt got his hands on Madonna) injections from dentists were still 
something to avoid and I defined myself as post-feminist (ie confused). However 
today feminism is back in fashion; younger women can look to “feminist” role 
models such as Miley Cyrus (22, net worth $160m), who invited the 
photographer/misogynist Terry Richardson to make her “Wrecking Ball” video and 
then declared: “I feel like I’m one of the biggest feminists in the world 
because I tell women to not be scared of anything.” To me that sounds less like 
feminism, more like cojones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441797206270%2F4e9dbfed-4d3b-4973-b5a4-41ddbfa3e6d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20'I've%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20%27I%27ve%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441797206270%2F4e9dbfed-4d3b-4973-b5a4-41ddbfa3e6d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smoothing the way: the late Dr Fredric Brandt, who championed Botox in the 
90s. Vanity Fair described him as ‘the King of Collagen, the Baron of Botox’ 
Photograph: Phillip Toledano 
So is it just confused feministas dotcom now? My friend and fellow former 
Observerista, the Grazia columnist and author of Hot Feminist Polly Vernon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/hot-feminist-by-polly-vernon-reducing-revolution-to-sloppy-self-help>
 (44, “and no Botox – yet”), says not.

“All the po-faced despair over Miley, Kim Kardashian etc, masquerades as 
‘feminism’, but strikes me as petty-mindedness and possibly discomfort over how 
unapologetically sexual these women are. All these women are living their lives 
at full volume, with minimal shame. They aren’t subdued and they aren’t 
shrinking, and that is inherently feminist – or at least, an empowering 
example. I think we need to stop thinking about women as sex objects and think 
of them instead as sexual beings – and I think Miley in particular is the 
modern poster girl for that.”

For more perspective I confess about my Botox to Caryn Franklin, the former 
Clothes Show presenter-turned-fashion commentator, “body image activist” and 
co-founder of the charityAll Walks Beyond the Catwalk <http://www.allwalks.org/>
. My question is, in her opinion and bearing Wolf’s thesis in mind, by going 
under the needle am I busily undermining everything that conceivably led me to 
make that decision in the first place – ie feeling sufficiently “empowered” to 
do whatever I want with my own body without fear of censure?

“Advertising cautions us,” she tells me, “with increased urgency, that we baby 
boomers are losing our beauty, and that that is a problem. Our brains do the 
maths:Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> equals Visibility and 
Acceptability; Ageing equals Social Exclusion. So women are effectively 
educated from birth to fear ageing in a way that men just aren’t – and it takes 
a different belief system, like feminism, to challenge the assumption that, as 
the years pass, for women there is only atrophy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441796878200%2F426fadf8-02c3-4248-8f90-701c15566f50-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20'I've%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20%27I%27ve%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441796878200%2F426fadf8-02c3-4248-8f90-701c15566f50-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Life lines: Dr Andersson and assistant Olga Loenko with writer Kathryn Flett. 
Photograph: Lee Strickland for the Observer 
So where does all this leave me and my Botox?

Polly Vernon: “Well, it’s no one’s business but the woman doing the Botoxing. 
The more time we spend actively changing things and the less time criticising 
and judging the actions/appearance of other women on the grounds that it’s not 
adequately feminist (according to our own limited idea of whatis) the better, 
frankly.”

Confusingly, I happen to agree with Caryn and Polly. And then there’s the 
Guardian’s beauty writer Sali Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sali-hughes> on the record saying: 
“Administered correctly and in moderation, [Botox] can be fantastic. But I do 
think it’s important to know you have anti-ageing options that don’t involve 
cutting your skin or injecting your face with foreign substances. Sometimes a 
perfectly satisfactory solution is available via the hairdresser [or] the 
dental surgery.”

Ironically I’m at my one-stop-aesthetic-shop-cum-dental-surgery, relaxing 
post-jabs (eight, painless) while being appraised by Dr Andersson, whose 
unblinking, penetrative and immovable gaze makes him, I realise, the spit of
Thunderbirds’ Alan Tracy. Dr A declares himself pleased. He explains that 
because they understand facial muscles, non-invasive cosmetic procedures are 
increasingly being offered by dentists whose interests are largely cosmetic. 
Meanwhile my own logical next step may be “the Nefertiti lift” – a Botox 
deployment that restores a saggy middle-aged jawline to its youthful tautness 
(he is currently practising on friends and family).

Obviously if I could afford it, I would sign up right now for a Nefertiti… and 
then I’d be off to source Juvederm fillers and CoolSculpting, some Lipo and 
maybe a Brazilian butt lift? After which I’ll doubtless Google “face 
transplant” and bathe only in Sisley’s Black Rose Precious Face Oil (at 140 
quid it’s the oil that’s precious, not your face). I’m already spending too 
much time onrealself.com  <http://www.realself.com/>– the TripAdvisor of 
Cosmetic Procedures.

Yet for all Dr A’s shininess – and both he and his practice are extremely 
shiny – my Botox dealer has a warmth and generosity of spirit that one doesn’t 
automatically associate with dentists. I like him enormously. I also know that, 
after hours, Dr A attends to far less glamorous patients even than me, 
voluntarily rebuilding destroyed mouths for those who can’t afford the Harley 
Street menu. He admits to being a workaholic, putting in 60-hour weeks and 
grins, shrugging: “I love my job.” On Friday afternoons he’ll sometimes crack 
open the champagne with his last patient-client, offering a little 
something-extra-for-the-weekend from the fridge where the fizz is lined up next 
to the syringes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441796631260%2Fe0bd90dc-4970-48ff-b660-083daf218a7a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20'I've%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncomfortably%20numb%3A%20%27I%27ve%20had%20my%20first%20Botox%20injection%20and%20I%20want%20more%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Five-had-my-first-botox-injection-and-i-want-more%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441796631260%2Fe0bd90dc-4970-48ff-b660-083daf218a7a-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘Unapologetically sexual’: Kim Kardashian. Photograph: Hubert Boesl/Corbis 
The Vanity Fair description of Dr Fredric Brandt as “only superficially 
superficial” could easily apply to Dr A, who dispatches me: “Don’t rub your 
eyes. Oh, and it will take about a week for the Botox to kick in.” Wearing dark 
glasses to hide the bruising, noting that everyone else walking down Harley 
Street is also wearing dark glasses, my dirty little secret and I head to the 
Tube.

So, Caryn Franklin, if we women have fought for the right to do with our 
bodies what we like, why do I feel so bad about doing it? “The thing is, if we 
have a whole generation of women my age [56] who are not rebelling or fighting 
against this then we also deprive younger women of our leadership. It’s an 
individual choice, and I defend any woman’s right to do as she wishes with her 
body. I’m fortunate enough not to be dependent on any one employer to feed me, 
however I am very sympathetic to women who feel less freedom to age naturally. 
And if that is their choice, I’m pleased if some women find cosmetic 
enhancement liberating.”

If we women have fought for the right to do with our bodies what we like, why 
do I feel so bad about doing it?

A week later I am still 51, though I am absolutely a bit more fabulously 51, 
looking brighter, well rested (I’m not). And, of course, I like what I see, 
preferring the novelty of the Botoxed version of me to the (boring, old) 
un-Botoxed version. A few weeks later I return to Dr A’s surgery- 
cum-beauty-suite for the photo shoot.

“You look great! No need for me to tweak!” he says. “Thank you!” I say, 
slightly disappointed. I’m a proper junkie for those needles in the fridge with 
the fizz. I am starting to wonder just what (aside from some menopause with a 
Botulinum toxin chaser) has got into me, precisely? The upside of the onset of 
alleged “maturity” is, of course, not minding much what other people 
(especially people you neither know nor care about) think of you. However the 
downside is that some of us may still be working out precisely who it is that 
we don’t care people think we are. Like a majority of women of my age, I am 
decreasingly visible/increasingly invisible and can sit on a busy train safe in 
the knowledge that I will be untroubled by an acknowledgement of my existence. 
For any woman used to being appropriately, contextually, seen-and-heard this 
very public disappearance takes getting used to. And yet my fabulous bright 
eyes mean my metaphorical tail will never be as commensurately bushy. Which 
also means that, as of precisely right now, I am poised at the top of the 
slippery slope – the North Face of the Beauty Eiger, if you will. I have spoken 
to smart women and succumbed to the ministrations of a smart man; I’ve heard 
what they have to say – and I believe every word.

So am I going to slip – or slide?

kathrynflettsfiftysense.com <http://www.kathrynflettsfiftysense.com/>
 