
It was reported this week that Paul Miller, the former Tottenham defender, has 
been recruited by a leading merchant bank to head a division that will help 
professional footballers organise their bloated incomes. Things have grown a 
bit more sophisticated since the days when players bought a pub as a pension 
scheme: offshore hedge funds and convertible stock options are more the 
financial order of things.

We can only assume, then, that Miller was not involved in advising his old 
Spurs colleague Steve Archibald, who is on the verge of concluding a 
transaction which, traditionally, has all the fiscal rectitude of using Â£50 
notes as emergency toilet tissue. Archibald is about to complete the purchase 
of Airdrieonians, the Scottish First Division Club that limped into liquidation 
last season.

"It's entirely my money. Don't even ask how much," Archibald explains, 
speaking this week from that hotbed of international finance, the Shyberry 
Excelsior stadium in Airdrie. "And no, I'm not happy with the possibility of 
losing the lot. I just felt that if I was coming in here doing the things I 
wanted it had to be my money I risked. If all goes well, I'll reap the 
benefits. And if it goes wrong, then there's only one person who will take the 
consequences."

The Scottish First Division is, financially, on another planet from the one 
Miller will be patrolling, that inhabited by Beckham, Bergkamp and Ken Bates's 
dividend payments. Here, profit is an entirely theoretical concept. As, 
apparently, is furniture.

Archibald arrived at his new domain last month to discover that, on the eve of 
the first match of the season, the previous chairman had turned up in the dead 
of night with a removal van and taken away what few assets remained at the club.

"Sofas in the players' lounge, office furniture, the lot," says Archibald, who 
was used in his playing career to the elegant surrounds of the Nou Camp. "In a 
way it was quite funny, but it gives you an idea of how the place used to be 
run."

Presumably standing up as he speaks on the phone, Archibald none the less 
appears in good spirits as he talks about his new purchase, using terms such as 
"project" and "attractive package" where others might have preferred "barge 
pole". What was it that persuaded him to leave his handsome home in Barcelona, 
where he has lived and prospered in business since retiring as a player, to 
risk all in Lanarkshire? Is he a diehard Airdrie fan?

 'A bsolutely not," he says. "I deliberately chose a club I had no association 
with. If you buy something you love, you lose all perspective. It can be very 
dangerous financially. No, I was looking for an opportunity like this for some 
time. We have an excellent new stadium here which was a big attraction. Plus I 
believe, business wise, Scotland is the land of opportunity."

A view not shared by Celtic and Rangers, who seem as determined as ever to cut 
their ties with their homeland and make their future overseas in an Atlantic 
League. Perhaps that was what tempted the former Spur, the chance to become the 
premier force in Scottish club football.

"I haven't made any promises like that," he says. "We're very wary of raising 
expectations which we can't fulfil. Our short-term vision is just to stabilise 
the club, to produce an attractive package on the park which will get the fans 
back in and provide financial solidity."

To that end, Archibald has been using his Barcelona contacts to bring in an 
assortment of Spanish and South American players - 10 so far - whose 
performance against Raith Rovers in a 1-1 draw last week was described by 
Scottish Television as "sexy stuff".

"Well, they moved the ball around on the deck," says the new man, drily. 
"Which can be said to be unusual here."

Nevertheless, he seems pleased with the critical response to his side - after 
all, he has been coaching them himself. But you have to wonder if a player of 
his reputation could not have found himself a managerial position without the 
necessity of buying a club first.

"My intention is not to be the coach, I'm just doing it in the meantime," he 
says. "When you buy a club, you've got to get the right people round you. When 
we find the right coach, he will come in."

In the meantime he is doing everything, from working out how to spring the 
offside trap to negotiating with creditors. "Every day I'm going through a 
mountain of stuff," he says. "Leases for this and that. The old administration 
was in hock up to its eyeballs. Even the pictures on the wall were leased. And 
the plants in the reception area. They owned nothing."

Except the furniture. 

"That's true, they owned that," he says. "Still do."
 