
“I explained it when I danced it,” Margot Fonteyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2013/dec/10/margot-fonteyn-dance-royal-ballet-youtube>
 supposedly said when asked what one of her performances meant. For the 
renowned ballerina, there was no need for exposition and analysis, she let her 
body do the talking.

How does it work for audiences? How much does it matter what you know about a 
performance and its creator before you see it? At this year’sDance Umbrella 
<http://www.danceumbrella.co.uk/> festival, those questions are being tested. 
The opening show,Unknown Pleasures 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/ccn-ballet-de-lorraine-unknown-pleasures/>
, features five new commissions whose choreographers’ identities will remain 
top secret. Audiences will know nothing about the works before they are staged, 
except that the creators are a mix of big names and newcomers, male and female, 
local and international, and all the pieces are being performed by French 
companyBallet de Lorraine <http://ballet-de-lorraine.eu/en/>.

It’s not an entirely new idea. The Royal Court has staged Surprise Theatre 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/surprisetheatre> performances, where 
audiences turned up with no idea what they were about to see. “It was just 
really, surprisingly glorious,” says the Court’s executive producerLucy Davies 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/whos-who/finance-and-administration/lucy-davies/>
. “You knew it was going to be an hour long but otherwise you had no baggage to 
bring to it, so it made for a really extraordinary atmosphere in the 
auditorium.”

But the idea goes against the grain in arts marketing, as venues increasingly 
provide preview trailers, rehearsal clips and artist interviews for audiences 
to watch in advance. Dance companies rely on familiar titles to bring in 
audiences. Asavvy choreographer such as Matthew Bourne 
<http://new-adventures.net/matthew-bourne> puts their own name into titles, 
because it’s their reputation that sells tickets.Wayne McGregor 
<http://waynemcgregor.com/> recently changed the name of his company, from 
Random Dance to Company Wayne McGregor, capitalising on the same thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf724ddc8d0a6111254075c20094b07f3f89f50a%2F0_0_4018_3092%2F4018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unknown%20pleasures%3A%20do%20we%20enjoy%20art%20more%20if%20it's%20anonymous%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unknown%20pleasures%3A%20do%20we%20enjoy%20art%20more%20if%20it%27s%20anonymous%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf724ddc8d0a6111254075c20094b07f3f89f50a%2F0_0_4018_3092%2F4018.jpg>
 Dominic North (Leo) and Ashley Shaw (Aurora) in Sleeping Beauty by Matthew 
Bourne at Sadler’s Wells in 2015. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
To cut out the choreographer altogether is a brave step, but for Dance 
Umbrella directorEmma Gladstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/16/festival-aims-to-reboot-community-traditions-of-dancing-in-the-street>
, it’s less a risk than an opportunity. “Often in contemporary dance we’re 
asking people to take a leap anyway,” she says. A lack of knowledge about the 
art form can stop audiences from coming to dance, so Gladstone wanted to free 
them from worrying about what they didn’t know. “I’m hoping this will liberate 
people to come and watch without feeling they need to know the history of an 
artist. They can just see what they take from it.” She’s hoping it will also be 
a chance for the five choreographers to experiment, unfettered by expectations. 
“If you could leave your identity behind, what would you make?” she asks.

Freedom from expectation sounds like a good goal, but findings in psychology 
suggest that if we want to maximise our enjoyment of something, then context 
and expectations are exactly what we need. Recent research from Goldsmiths 
University showed that spectators who were given specific information about the 
creation process of a new piece of dance reported higher enjoyment levels when 
watching it.

Goldsmiths cognitive psychologist Guido Orgs 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/psychology/staff/orgs-guido/> explains that for many 
viewers, expectations of dance – as a series of virtuosic moves set to music – 
can impede engagement with more experimental work. “Explaining the creative 
process of dance to spectators can help [them] to give up these dance 
‘prototypes’ and allows them to base their aesthetic judgment on other aspects 
of the dance,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240a37bbd8f483c65f59cd359724d3c7a915236d%2F0_319_3723_2233%2F3723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unknown%20pleasures%3A%20do%20we%20enjoy%20art%20more%20if%20it's%20anonymous%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unknown%20pleasures%3A%20do%20we%20enjoy%20art%20more%20if%20it%27s%20anonymous%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Funknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240a37bbd8f483c65f59cd359724d3c7a915236d%2F0_319_3723_2233%2F3723.jpg>
 Jean-Luc Godard in 1968 … Does brand loyalty work for both auteurs and cola? 
Photograph: Keystone Pictures USA/Alamy 
This idea chimes with broader research in neuroscience on how influential our 
beliefs are in creating our experiences. For example, put people in a brain 
scanner and do a blind tasting with two different brands of cola, and you get a 
fairly even split in terms of preference. But tell them what brand they’re 
drinking and their brain’s pleasure centres actually light up more if they 
think it’s their preferred drink. Brand loyalty is a powerful thing. And 
perhaps what’s true for fizzy drinks follows for Mozart,Godard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/08/jean-luc-godard-anna-karina-muse> 
or Merce Cunningham. Psychologist Paul Bloom writes in his bookHow Pleasure 
Works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/11/how-pleasure-works-paul-bloom> 
that this leads to a feedback loop. You think you like Pinter. Because of that 
you get more pleasure from watching his work, which reinforces the idea that 
you like it. And a fan is born.

So if you don’t know anything about what you’re watching, where does that 
leave you? “You’re slightly off your emotional and intellectual guard,” says 
Davies, “so I guess you might be more open, it might to tap into things you 
weren’t expecting.” For the Royal Court, that worked in their favour. “There 
was a qualitative difference in the auditorium that night. It was thrilling: 
the sense of appreciation and the way people talked about it afterwards.”

And it’s that focus on appreciating the work, minus preconceptions, that is 
Gladstone’s aim for Unknown Pleasures, much more than the guessing game of who 
might have made it (the identities will be released once the show has finished 
touring). “I think it will allow for more generous watching,” she says. “I just 
hope it will engender conversation and make people look critically at what’s in 
front of them.” Just as Fonteyn wanted.


 * Unknown Pleasures is at Sadler’s Wells, London, 7-8 October 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/ccn-ballet-de-lorraine-unknown-pleasures/>
.
 