
The director of the upcoming Sky Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-arts> series Urban Myths has defended 
the casting of a white actor as Michael Jackson, saying the decision was based 
on performance rather than physical resemblance.

The satirical comedy series, which portrays supposed events in the lives of 
figures such as Bob Dylan, Muhammad Ali and Samuel Beckett, includes a 
dramatisation ofa road trip rumoured to have been taken by Jackson, Elizabeth 
Taylor and Marlon Brando in September 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/05/liz-taylor-michael-jackson-marlon-brando>
.

The decision to cast Joseph Fiennes as Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/26/joseph-fiennes-michael-jackson-9-11-road-trip-sky-arts>
 has led to accusations of “whitewashing 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/joseph-fiennes-michael-jackson-casting-diversity-hollywood-whitewashing-1201690020/>
”. However, Ben Palmer, who directed four episodes of the series, said: “We 
were casting Michael Jackson in 2001 and that obviously is a challenge in terms 
of the physical resemblance.

“We were really looking for the performance that could unlock the spirit, and 
we really think Joe Fiennes has done that. He’s given a really sweet, nuanced, 
characterful performance.”

Palmer said people should not jump to conclusions before watching the episode. 
“It’s a really lovely, sweet film. I’m really looking forward to seeing how 
people react once they’ve actually seen it,” he said.

Last year Fiennes himself defended the casting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/05/joseph-fiennes-michael-jackson-shocked-to-be-cast>
 and described it as a “wonderful part”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle7214gXqB0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle7214gXqB0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle7214gXqB0&media=>
 Urban Myths trailer 
Other stories explored in Urban Myths include Muhammad Ali talking a man down 
from a ledge in LA, Samuel Beckett driving the future wrestler Andre the Giant 
to school when he was a child, and Bob Dylan having tea with a couple in Crouch 
End.

Palmer said he had enjoyed bringing to life these mostly unknown stories of 
celebrities in unlikely scenarios.

“They are really lovely things to do,” he said. “For a storyteller they are 
brilliant, these really fascinating scenarios filled with interesting 
characters. We’ve taken lots of poetic licence. It’s very much taking those 
iconic celebrities and putting them into the mundane and the everyday, which 
makes for great comedy.”

Noel Clarke, best known for writing and starring in Kidulthood, said playing 
Muhammad Ali, even in a satirical setting, was a daunting task.

“Muhammad Ali was such a great man, you are never going to be able to do him 
justice, so I just tried to do my own take on him,” he said. “He was a 
remarkably funny man and he was able to think so quickly that, no matter what 
insult you threw at him, he could make it 10 times better. I think in all the 
greatness of his achievements in boxing we forget his humour, so it was great 
to be able to highlight that.”

Of Ali’s intervention in LA, Clarke added: “Even though we don’t know exactly 
what happened, we do know that Muhammad Ali legitimately talked this man down 
from jumping out a window, and that’s amazing. Can you imagine any celebrity 
today turning up to help someone on a ledge? They’d be ridiculed. But that was 
a time when people thought celebrities could do anything.”

The Shameless actor David Threlfall takes on the role of Beckett, who, while 
living on the outskirts of Paris began taking his builder’s son to school.

“Beckett’s humour is very dry but he finds kinship with Andre, this surly 
child who is bullied for his size, perhaps because of not having any children 
of his own,” Threlfall said. “And this has been written almost as a Beckett 
spoof, which nods to the careful way he himself used language.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Furban-myths-director-defends-casting-of-white-actor-as-michael-jackson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14c616fca26847ae92250e1c8a7da88240457e0%2F500_0_7500_4500%2F7500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20Myths%20director%20defends%20casting%20of%20white%20actor%20as%20Michael%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Furban-myths-director-defends-casting-of-white-actor-as-michael-jackson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20Myths%20director%20defends%20casting%20of%20white%20actor%20as%20Michael%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Furban-myths-director-defends-casting-of-white-actor-as-michael-jackson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14c616fca26847ae92250e1c8a7da88240457e0%2F500_0_7500_4500%2F7500.jpg>
 Eddie Marsan as Bob Dylan in Urban Myths. Photograph: Publicity image 
Another episode brings to life the story of how Bob Dylan knocked on the wrong 
door while looking for the home of Dave Stewart, of the Eurythmics. A different 
Dave lived at the address, and his unknowing wife, Ange, let in Dylan – played 
by Eddie Marsan – for a cup of tea while they waited for him.

The IT Crowd actor Katherine Parkinson, who plays Ange, said: “I liked that 
this was supposed to have some basis in truth. The unlikelihood of Dylan just 
turning up at a house, having a cup of tea, and managing to sprinkle a bit of 
magic on their life. I love the contrast of something otherworldly and domestic 
here.”

She also marvelled at Marsan’s ability to assume Dylan’s distinctive 
mannerisms. “Eddie, who you just would not think would be physically a 
convincing Dylan, completely resembles him,” she said. “He had some fake 
eyelids, that was all. He does a masterly job.”

 * Urban Myths starts on 19 January at 10pm on Sky Arts
 