
Several miles off the coast of Rhode Island, a clean energy landmark quietly 
just powered up.

Five 560-foot-tall wind turbines are now spinning their 240-foot-long blades, 
sending electricity out onto New England’s regional grid. The wind turbines, 
which are connected to the sea floor via steel foundations, are linked to the 
broader grid by transmission cables deep under the sea.

Can America's first floating wind farm shake off environmental concerns?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/31/california-wind-farm-energy-trident>
The wind farm is quite small at just 30 megawatts. That’s a fraction of the 
amount of energy that can come from an average coal or natural gas plant – it’s 
enough energy to power about 17,000 average American homes.

But what the project lacks in size, it makes up for in importance. The close 
to $300m Block Island project, which came online yesterday, is the very first 
wind farm in America. Developed by a company called Deepwater Wind, the wind 
farm could pave the way for more successful projects in the US after other high 
profile American offshore wind projects have failed. A 468-megawatt project 
called Cape Wind was blown off course after wealthy residents of Cape Cod in 
Massachusetts protested the turbines marring their views.

The small size of the Block Island project and the placement of the turbines 
have helped the Block Island Wind Farm dodge strong criticism, though some 
local residents arestill upset 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/the-nations-first-offshore-wind-farm-is-ready-to-go-despite-critics-blow-back/2016/08/27/7a43c6d6-693f-11e6-99bf-f0cf3a6449a6_story.html?utm_term=.a40cebf0dd8c>
 about the new additions to their views.

Rhode Island also showed more support for offshore wind. The governor of Rhode 
Island, Gina M Raimondo, said on Monday that she was proud that the state was 
the very first to “have steel in the water and blades spinning over the ocean”.

Tapping the strong wind out in the ocean for electricity isn’t a new concept. 
For years, thousands of offshore wind turbines off the coast of European 
countries have been supplying the continent with an important source of carbon 
emissions-free electricity. Over that time, the European offshore wind industry 
has matured, and today the cost of electricity from wind turbines in European 
seas is at a record low.

If the US can follow in the footsteps of Europe, it could find an important 
source of power for coastal states that have been closing large coaland nuclear 
plants 
<http://www.power-eng.com/articles/2016/06/more-upstate-new-york-nuclear-plants-could-shut-down-early.html>
 and are looking for new clean energy sources. Some states with their own 
renewable mandates have struggled to find large sources of clean energy.

Over the years, the federal government has supported the development of an 
offshore wind industry. As of last year, the Department of Interior had awarded 
11 commercial leases for offshore wind development that could one day deliver 
14.6 gigawatts of capacity. That’s the equivalent power of 15 large coal or gas 
plants.

Other offshore wind projects are under development, including a 765-megawatt 
proposal in California that would erect wind turbines onfloating foundations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/31/california-wind-farm-energy-trident>
.

But the election of Donald Trump as the next president may weaken federal 
support and squelch an emerging industry. Trump has beenvehemently opposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/22/trump-resumes-fight-against-windfarm-near-his-golf-course>
 to an offshore wind farm off the coast of one of his golf courses in Scotland 
because it disrupted the course’s views, and has expressed hisdislike of wind 
farms in general 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html>
. Last month, he evenreportedly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/business/with-a-meeting-trump-renewed-a-british-wind-farm-fight.html>
 met with a British politician to discuss campaigning against offshore wind 
farms.

Historically, renewable energy businesses such as solar and wind have relied 
on generous federal tax credits to help reduce the initial high costs of 
developing the technology and building power plants. Those costs have fallen 
significantly as more solar and wind farms come online from California to 
Florida.

The still new offshore wind business is also counting on the same federal 
incentives, and it will need them more than the solar and onshore wind 
industries, both of which have grown large enough to compete in price with 
electricity from coal and natural gas power plants in parts of the country.

This new technology could save the troubled nuclear power industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/16/safer-small-nuclear-reactors-power-plant-technology>
The Block Island wind farm is eligible to get a tax credit worth 30% of the 
cost of building the project. That tax credit is setto be lowered in 2019, and 
its renewal will require an approval from Congress and support from the Trump 
administration. 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/nathanael-greene/extension-clean-energy-tax-incentives-major-bright-spot-congresss-new>

Trump could make it difficult for the offshore industry to take off even if he 
doesn’t oppose the extension of the tax credit. If he follows through with his 
campaign promise to reduce corporate tax rates, his actions could reduce the 
tax appetite of companies and likewise the interest in tax equity investments, 
according to Daniel Shurey, an analyst with Bloomberg NewEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Finance, in a new report.

Deepwater Wind refused to comment on the Trump administration’s possible 
effect on the offshore wind industry. The company has another offshore wind 
project in the works off the coast of Maryland, and its CEO, Jeffrey Grybowski, 
has noted that the industry has other sources of help, including tax and other 
incentives passed by states such as Massachusetts.

Offshore wind proponents hope the jobs that can be created with the new 
industry could win them support from Trump, who counts job creation as an 
important part of his agenda. The Block Island wind farm employed 300 local 
workers over the several years it took to build and commission.
 