
The United States Grand Prix has had 10 homes, more than any other grand prix, 
and according toFormula One’s new owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/f1-liberty-media-8bn-takeover-deal-agreed-bernie-ecclestone>
, Liberty Media, that number is about to increase.

There is talk of another race – perhaps two, with Los Angeles, Las Vegas and 
New Jersey among the possibilities. The US, remember, staged three races in 
1982, in Detroit, Las Vegas and Long Beach, California.

Before this weekend’s grand prix, Bobby Epstein, the chairman and co-founder 
of the Circuit of the Americas (Cota), is as excited as everyone else about the 
changing world ofFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> but 
he has mixed feelings about the prospect of more races in the United States.

Lewis Hamilton fastest in practice but Nico Rosberg stays in control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-f1-us-grand-prix>
The Cota facility is one of the most popular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 on the F1 schedule, an exhilarating circuit for drivers and race fans. And, in 
true American style, it is more than that.

It is a show, a spectacle, and this year it is more of a festival than ever, 
with a greater number and wider variety of attractions, including themed 
restaurants, jugglers, body painting and much more music, with the highlight a 
Taylor Swift concert.

Crowds have been falling since the race was first held here in 2012, and last 
year’s event was badly hit by rain – 25 inches of it in a week – though that 
helpedcreate arguably the best race of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/oct/26/lewis-hamilton-wins-us-gp-and-third-f1-drivers-title-in-pictures>
.

So Cota has responded by reducing prices and offering more. But Epstein says: 
“If we have more races here we will be competing for a limited base of fans, 
and we could be weaker for a number of years. Five or 10 years down the road we 
would build a bigger audience overall. But there could be some pain first.”

Epstein, who is impressed by the way Melbourne and Montreal promote their race 
weekends, added: “We are competing for the entertainment dollar. Promoters have 
to become more creative. I would like to see more money spent on promoting the 
sport. I think fees should be lower so we can lower the ticket prices.”

He would also like to see more cars on the grid and, most of all, an American 
driver. “Having an American driver would be huge. We can always be welcoming 
but there’s no substitute for the home town hero. People connect with 
personalities.”

At least the Americans have their own team this year. Gene Haas, who made his 
millions in machine tools, is the founder of the Haas team which has made an 
impressive debut this year. “From the standpoint of Formula One, being a global 
product, it’s important to be in the United States. You’ve got 340 million 
wealthy consumers, and there are a lot of F1 fans in the US,” he says.

“We’d love to have F1 better accepted here and we’d love to have another race 
here. We’d like to see more races in our time zone. We’ve got South America, 
central America, Canada and the United States. Between us we could easily stage 
half a dozen races. It would be better for transportation too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fus-grand-prix-austin-new-venues-worries-falling-crowds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd32b2c5a66ef8a8fad8b18ebcd428592c69317%2F0_0_5112_3067%2F5112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20Grand%20Prix%20could%20go%20to%20other%20circuits%20despite%20worries%20over%20falling%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fus-grand-prix-austin-new-venues-worries-falling-crowds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20Grand%20Prix%20could%20go%20to%20other%20circuits%20despite%20worries%20over%20falling%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fus-grand-prix-austin-new-venues-worries-falling-crowds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd32b2c5a66ef8a8fad8b18ebcd428592c69317%2F0_0_5112_3067%2F5112.jpg>
 Kimi Raikkonen in action at the Circuit of The Americas. Photograph: Clive 
Mason/Getty Images 
He adds: “There are a lot of possibilities here. We know how to put on a show, 
as Austin has proved. And I’d like to see more shows here. I think Las Vegas 
would be a natural.”

There are those who argue that America is too big and too insular to properly 
embrace the complexities of Formula One.

In 1991, when Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost were in their pomp, the Phoenix 
Gazette reported with some relish that a local ostrich festival had attracted a 
bigger crowd. But we are living in a fast-changing world.

There are Americans who will never be global. A few years ago this 
correspondent remembers being with the Red Bull driver Mark Webber when someone 
said to him: “Are you really Australian? Your English is so good!” Yet a year 
later, a couple of locals could be discussing the complexities of the various 
tyres, and if you understand tyre rubbers, you understand everything. “This 
year we are making a statement to reach a new audience,” says Epstein. “We are 
looking not only to keep the existing fanbase happy but also to bring in some 
younger folks who have never been exposed to this event. It’s F1 and more, and 
if people realise that, they will come back in numbers.”Ten venues that have 
hosted the US Grand Prix

Sebring, Florida (First race: 1959) 1 race

Riverside, California (First race: 1960) 1 race

Watkins Glen (First race: 1961) 20 races

Long Beach, California (First race: 1976) 8 races

Caesars Palace, Las Vegas (First race: 1981) 2 races

Detroit (First race: 1982) 7 races

Dallas (First race: 1984) 1 race

Phoenix (First race: 1989) 3 races

Indianapolis (First race: 2000) 8 races

Austin (First race: 2012) 4 races
 