
Mexico are still a good team

Let’s start with an obvious point — Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> are still a good team.

It’s no surprise that Mexico, having established a foothold early in the game 
against the US, went on to get a result. Yes, if the US had scored first, we 
might have seen a sterner examination of the Mexicans’ character – as Mike 
Tyson might have said of Juan Carlos Osorio’s elaborate preparations: “Everyone 
has a plan until they’re punched in the face.”

Rafael Márquez says win over USA will help Mexico at time of intolerance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/mexico-united-states-donald-trump-rafael-marquez>
That was the version of Mexico that crumbled 7-0 against Chile in the Copa 
America Centenario earlier this summer – a loss that put the technical Osorio 
on the backfoot, especially as popular support coalesced around the motivator, 
Miguel Herrera. Herrera is once again over-performing, this time with Tijuana 
in Liga MX, and Mexican soccer being the volatile world that it is, he was 
being tipped to come back to the job he lost in controversial circumstances 
last summer, should Osorio slip up in the early stages ofWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying.

Well Osorio’s team did not slip, and it managed to reintegrate some assets 
(Dos Santos, Vela) that other coaches have struggled to get the best out of. 
The team looked balanced in the first half, and when the US began to gain 
momentum in the second half they had the collective sense to break up the game 
before plotting their final devastating counter-punch.

There were question marks – Talavera in particular flapped at a few crosses in 
worrying fashion, and, of course, Salcedo saw a late red card after picking up 
a second booking for time-wasting, so Osorio will have to shuffle the pack 
again next time round. Luckily, that’s the part of his job that’s also his 
hobby.


Klinsmann’s gambles were one step behind Osorio’s

Watching Jürgen Klinsmann wheel out a 3-5-2, with Timothy Chandler as a 
surprise inclusion, might have been a more compelling master stroke, if within 
seconds of the kick off Miguel Layun hadn’t jogged calmly over to his head 
coach, signaling Klinsmann’s plan with five fingers, before nodding and jogging 
over to the other side of the field to take his place in Mexico’s instantly 
adjusted 4-4-2.

Mexico's Rafael Márquez scores late winner to stun USA in World Cup qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/mexico-stun-united-states-on-late-rafael-marquez-winner>
From there, Layun tormented Chandler for the opening 20 minutes of the game, 
as Mexico mercilessly exploited the gaps all over the field, from an unbalanced 
US team trying to learn a formation on the fly. By the time Klinsmann made his 
own adjustment to 4-4-2 around half an hour into the game, Mexico had scored 
once, hit the post twice, and cut off the USA’s routes to their attackers.

And late in the second half came another key adjustment. The USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> had equalized and were 
creating pressure in the Mexican half. Having been beaten in this game in each 
of the last four World Cup cycles, you could have forgiven any Mexico coach for 
bringing on a defender with his final substitution and bunkering for the draw. 
Instead, on came Lozano to torment Besler down the right, and generally make 
the US second-guess over-committing in attack. And when Klinsmann brought on 
Michael Orozco to replace Besler and counter the threat, Osorio immediately 
pulled Lozano over to the left, to leave the US coach chasing his agenda, as he 
had done all night.

Youth and exuberance, meet age and guile

Christian Pulisic was not yet born when Rafa Marquez made his international 
debut in 1997. On Friday night the pair shared a field, with the teenage 
Pulisic the subject of a pre-game mini-documentary, and Marquez the subject of 
a cutaway shot in the warm-ups, and a comment to the effect of: “He’s 37.”

Well, Pulisic ran willingly, sometimes exhilaratingly, and without fear all 
night. He looked at home on this stage, and was not intimidated by Mexican 
provocations during the more testy periods of the game. At one point he battled 
repeatedly to win the ball from Chicharito before arrowing down the left 
channel trying to find an opening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fusa-mexico-marquez-five-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b3d75bf6b57ba9ca23db20681415a7e624270b%2F0_0_3192_2305%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=USA%201-2%20Mexico%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20World%20Cup%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fusa-mexico-marquez-five-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=USA%201-2%20Mexico%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20World%20Cup%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fusa-mexico-marquez-five-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b3d75bf6b57ba9ca23db20681415a7e624270b%2F0_0_3192_2305%2F3192.jpg>
 Carlos Salcido goes in hard on Christian Pulisic. Photograph: Trevor 
Ruszkowski/USA Today Sports 
But he didn’t find many. It’s right that we should give talent time to 
develop, and not expect too much, but in World Cup qualifying play against the 
biggest regional rival, there’s an expectation that a player who’s ready, and 
cast in the creative role Pulisic occupies, should deliver. In the event 
Pulisic looked like he belonged more than he looked like he might transcend.

Marquez, meanwhile, has been here before, and his reading and management of 
the defense, particularly in the first half, gave the US nothing but scraps. 
And then he was there as the classic heel for the home fans, to send them home 
losers.

Marquez’s header at the near post came as the US had switched off. In thinking 
about the future they’d neglected to remember the past. Marquez hurt them when 
it mattered, while the last sight of Pulisic was some frustrated pushing after 
some more Mexican time-wasting. Marquez may have been on the scene — he’s not 
new to this.

Never mind Dos a Cero, the USA have another record to worry about

There was always a concern that if the US conceded the first goal in this 
game, they wouldn’t know what to do. The last four times these two teams have 
met in Columbus at this stage of World Cup qualifying, the US had won 2-0, 
inspiring a chant, a heap of fan folklore and a sense of expectation for each 
subsequent iteration of this match-up.

Sport picture of the day: Mexico and USA build a wall of unity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/nov/12/sport-picture-of-the-day-mexico-and-usa-build-a-wall-of-unity>
Add in the fact that the US had won each of their last five home openers at 
this stage of World Cup qualifying, without conceding a goal, and the prospect 
of giving up the first goal was always going to be a troubling one, whatever 
Klinsmann’s words about just playing the game as it unfolded.

So Mexico scored first, set the agenda for much of the first half, then when 
the game looked to be slipping away from them, they scored again. Not only was 
theDos a Cerosequence broken, so was the USA’s 15-game unbeaten streak at 
Mapfre Stadium – we may just have seen the last USA v Mexico game to 
automatically default to what’s historically been an intimidating but hardly 
lucrative venue for US Soccer.

No time for regrets, though. Having lost their first game, USA must now change 
their consistent losing record in World Cup qualifiers in Costa Rica. It won’t 
be easy.

Bobby Wood is becoming a key player

Bobby Wood got his goal on Friday night, but perhaps just as importantly, he 
did exactly what he was asked at key stages of the game. He’s not the USA’s 
most celebrated attacker, and was slow to convince when he first appeared in 
national team colors, but he’s willing, adjusts to play at various places along 
the attack, and is proving to be an effective foil for Jozy Altidore.

Altidore had a quiet game, though his turn and anticipation on the assist to 
Wood for his goal, were worth his inclusion alone, and he did a lot of 
unglamorous hold up play against a Mexican defense that is becoming more and 
more physical under Osorio.

But in the second half, Wood came into his own. There was his goal of course, 
even if that had a hint of fortune behind it, but there was also a lot of 
unselfish movement, coupled with Wood not shirking responsibility when the ball 
came his way, which made him good value for his place.

He has neither the blunt force threat of Altidore at his best, or the 
creativity, will and flair of the missing Clint Dempsey. He doesn’t have the 
cool touch of Pulisic or Alan Gordon’s “in case of emergency break glass” 
potential as a late-game desperation weapon off the bench.

But Wood is consistent. Other stars might rise and fall between now and the 
World Cup, but Wood is becoming an intrinsic part of the US roster.

Oh, and some things are more important that soccer:
Pancho Villa's Army (@VillasArmy) 
For many members this week has been scary. We needed this win, but more so 
this love! It’s been all class@ussoccer <https://twitter.com/ussoccer> & 
@AmericanOutlaws <https://twitter.com/AmericanOutlaws>! 
pic.twitter.com/tk3DUCZ0Ij <https://t.co/tk3DUCZ0Ij>
 <https://twitter.com/VillasArmy/status/797305564757983232> November 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/VillasArmy/status/797305564757983232>  