
Gulnara Karimova, the estranged daughter of Uzbekistan’s strongman leader 
Islam Karimov, is facing fresh allegations of corruption after an investigation 
accused her of accepting more than $1bn from telecoms companies wanting a slice 
of the lucrative mobile phone industry.

Gulnara Karimova speaks out over infighting in Uzbekistan's first family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/20/gulnara-karimova-uzbekistan-first-family>
The Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (Occrp), run by a group 
of investigative journalists,reported this week that  
<https://occrp.org/corruptistan/uzbekistan/gulnara_karimova/the-prodigal-daughter/how-the-presidents-daughter-controlled-the-telecom-industry.php>
Karimova had received the money in payments and shares from Scandinavian and 
Russian telecoms companies including TeliaSonera, Telenor, MTS, and Alfa Telecom



Occrp described her schemes as “audacious” accusing them of diverting money 
from Uzbekistan’s national coffers in to banks, an offshore hedge fund and
luxurious real estate 
<https://occrp.org/corruptistan/uzbekistan/gulnara_karimova/the-prodigal-daughter/following-gulnaras-money.php>
 around the world.”

The investigators accuse Karimova of demanding percentages of companies and 
extorting cash for her “personal services and lobbying efforts”.

Karimova “demonstrated a ruthless ability to acquire a share of ownership (her 
preferred rate was 26%) of lucrative telecom-related companies – without 
actually putting up any money,” they said.

Investigators say they have evidence that that Nordic telecoms giant 
TeliaSonera paid Karimova $381m and promised another $75m to order to start 
trading in Uzbekistan’s cellphone market. Russian company MTS is reported to 
have paid $350m, with VimpelCom, a joint venture between Russia’s Alfa Telecom 
and Norway’s Telenor, said to have spent $176m.


Occrp say that the data was compiled using an external review 
<http://www.teliasonera.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2013/2/statement-by-the-board-in-respect-of-the-external-review-of-teliasoneras-investments-in-uzbekistan/>
 of TeliaSonera conducted by law firm Mannheimer Swartling; a Dutch request for 
legal assistance; data from the US Securities and Exchange Commission; and 
other financial documents.

Uzbekistan's autocratic ruler may have found a way to silence his daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/uzbekistan-gulnara-karimova-faces-corruption-charges>
Allegations of mass corruption involving Karimova and the telecoms sector 
surfaced in 2012, when TeliaSonera wasaccused 
<http://www.svt.se/ug/teliasonera-i-miljardaffar-med-diktaturhttp:/www.eurasianet.org/node/65970>
 of shelling out $330m in suspicious payments for the rights to operate in 
Uzbekistan. That sparked acorruption probe 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/65970> in Sweden, which is linked to a 
money-laundering investigation in Switzerland in which Karimova is aformal 
suspect <http://www.eurasianet.org/node/68134>.


TeliaSonera, also under investigation in the United States 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/68154> and the Netherlands, denies 
<http://www.teliasonera.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2012/12/unfounded-corruption-allegations-against-teliasonera/http:/bigstory.ap.org/article/teliasonera-denies-charges-uzbekistan-bribery>
 allegations of bribery and money-laundering, but hasacknowledged 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/67818> that “the processes for conducting some 
transactions have not been in line with sound business practices”.

The Russian companies MTS, VimpelCom, and Alfa Telecom also deny any 
wrongdoing. Norway’s Telenor, which is being probed in Switzerland, the 
Netherlands and the United States over allegations it made “unlawful payments” 
of $55m in Uzbekistan, also denies bribery, andclaiming 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/zero%2520tolerance%2520for%2520corruption> they 
have “zero tolerance for corruption”.

Karimova is also under investigation in Uzbekistan on charges of corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/uzbekistan-gulnara-karimova-faces-corruption-charges>
. It was reported in September 2014 that she couldface a lengthly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/uzbekistan-gulnara-karimova-faces-corruption-charges>
 prison spell but there has been no movement on the case since.

Karimova has always denied any wrongdoing 
<http://www.freegulnaranow.com/en/in-defence-of-gulnara/>, claiming the charges 
against her are politically motivated. She has been under house arrest in since 
February 2014 and has not been seen for months.
 