
The theatre director Val May, who has died aged 84, was a renowned artistic 
director of theBristol Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bristol-old-vic> during a golden era of 
famous seasons and a series of productions that either toured to Europe or 
invariably transferred to the West End in London.

The Old Vic was for many years the most prestigious postwar British rep. May 
ran the company between 1961 and 1975, harnessing the nearby Little theatre as 
a forcing house for new talent. In 1972, he supervised a necessary but rather 
unappealing exterior redesign of the Old Vic's glorious, Georgian, 
green-and-gold theatre, and founded an instantly successful studio space in its 
new foyer in King Street.

May was a rare director, forming a creative bridge between the regional 
theatre and theWest End <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> without 
ever forsaking one milieu for the other. Tall, civilised, quietly spoken, 
always sucking on a pipe and sporting a bow tie, he was in many ways "old 
school".

But at Bristol he also presented the British premiere of Erwin Piscator's 
great adaptation of Tolstoy's War and Peace, translated byRobert David MacDonald
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/may/24/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
; the premiere of JB Priestley's adaptation of Iris Murdoch's A Severed Head 
(1963), which went on to London and New York; and the world premiere, starring 
Beryl Reid, of Frank Marcus's The Killing of Sister George (1965), a pioneering 
play about media celebrity and lesbianism that caused a great stir in the West 
End and on Broadway.

More conventionally, he co-wrote and directed Portrait of a Queen (1965), 
starringDorothy Tutin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/07/guardianobituaries.lyngardner> as 
Queen Victoria, a biographical pageant using many contemporary documents and 
letters; the play was visited in Bristol by the present Queen before moving 
successfully to the Vaudeville in London. In 1966, May directed Sixty Thousand 
Nights to celebrate the Bristol Old Vic's bicentenary.

His Tribute to a Lady (1975), an affectionate and very funny portrait of 
Lilian Baylis, manager of Sadler's Wells and the Old Vic in London, was given a 
special gala performance on the latter stage when the National theatre bade 
farewell to Waterloo Road. The cast on that memorable occasion included Peggy 
Ashcroft, John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Flora Robson and Albert Finney.

May was born in Bath, Somerset, the only child of Claude Jocelyn Delabere May, 
a doctor, and his wife, Olive Gilbert, descended from WS Gilbert, the 
lyric-writing partner of Arthur Sullivan. The family moved to Guildford, 
Surrey. By the time he was 12, Val was taking trains to London to see a movie 
in the morning, a matinee and an evening performance.

He was educated at Cranleigh school, Surrey, and studied English at 
Peterhouse, Cambridge, before training at the London Old VicTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> School with the influential French 
director Michel Saint-Denis. After national service with the Royal Navy, he 
made his London debut directing Cocteau's The Typewriter at the Watergate club 
theatre in 1950.

May learned the ropes as an assistant director at the reps in Dundee and 
Salisbury before being appointed director at the Ipswich theatre in 1953. A 
four-year spell in Ipswich was followed by a similar term at the old Nottingham 
Playhouse, a converted cinema, before he went toBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol>.

May doubled the size of the company in Bristol, produced and directed Barry 
England's Conduct Unbecoming in 1969 and welcomed Peter O'Toole for a 1973 
three-play season in which O'Toole, who had appeared with the company in the 
mid-1950s, played a scorching Uncle Vanya, a beguiling D'Arcy Tuck in Ben 
Travers's Plunder and an irresistible King Magnus in Shaw's The Apple Cart.

One of the Vic's biggest successes was Salad Days (1954) by Julian Slade and 
Dorothy Reynolds, and the theatre was always trying to find a successor: 
Fiorello! (1962), an American musical about a New York mayor, fell flat in the 
West End, while Slade's charming score for Trelawny (1972), an early production 
of Cameron Mackintosh, seemed to lose something in translation from Bristol.

That, at least, was the opinion of original cast member Timothy West, who 
recalled a great piece of direction by May in King Street when Hayley Mills ran 
on the spot while a row of shops passed across the stage behind her, and a 
fully dressed Victorian drawing room evaporated piecemeal "without any apparent 
human agency", leaving Ian Richardson singing on a vast empty stage against a 
blue cyclorama.

May returned "home" to the Yvonne Arnaud, Guildford, which he ran from 1975 to 
1992 as a classy West End launching pad. He then directed Shakespeare at the 
Ludlow festival for three years. His later West End successes included a return 
to The Apple Cart with O'Toole in 1986 and Richard Harris in Pirandello's Henry 
IV in 1989.

His last West End show was Jeffrey Archer's courtroom drama The Accused 
(2000), in which Archer himself entered the on-stage dock as an alleged 
murderer and was voted guilty or not guilty by the audience each night. The 
critics gave a concerted thumbs-down, finding Archer guilty not of murder but 
of bad writing and even worse acting.

May was appointed CBE in 1969. He is survived by his daughter Juliet, a 
television drama director, from his marriage, in 1955, to Penelope Sutton, and 
by his second wife, Petra Schroeder, whom he married in 1980, and their 
daughter, Kristina.

• Valentine Gilbert Delabere May, theatre director, born 1 July 1927; died 6 
April 2012
 