
Gary Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> is still 
without a win in two games since taking over as Valencia head coach after his 
new club had a man sent off and needed a fortuitous late goal to rescue a 1-1 
draw at Eibar on Sunday.

Neville was a surprise appointment to replace Nuno Espírito Santo and his 
first game in charge was Wednesday’s 2-0 reverse at home to Lyon that ended 
Valencia’s hopes of advancing to the Champions League knockout round.

Eibar 1-1 Valencia: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/dec/13/eibar-valencia-la-liga-live-gary-neville>
The former England defender presided over another disappointing performance at 
Eibar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eibar>, although they missed a 
number of key players, including the captain Dani Parejo and midfielder Sofiane 
Feghouli, through injury and suspension respectively.

Eibar had the better chances in the first half and took a deserved lead 
moments before the break when Sergi Enrich finished from close range after good 
work down the right from Ander Capa.

Valencia’s hopes of getting back into the game were dealt a blow in the 63rd 
minute when the defender Lucas Orban was dismissed for an innocuous-looking 
challenge on Dani García in the penalty area.

Jaume Doménech saved Saúl Berjón’s spot kick and Borja Bastón blasted the 
rebound over the bar with the visitors’ goal at his mercy.

Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> levelled five minutes 
from time when the ball ricocheted off André Gomes and Eibar’s David Junca and 
squirted past Asier Riesgo into the net.

The Eibar defender Ivan Ramis was then shown a straight red card for felling 
Paco Alcácer when the Valencia forward was through on goal in the second minute 
of added time.

Valencia have 21 points and are eighth after 15 matches while Eibar, who have 
one of the smallest budgets inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, also have 21 points in 
10th.
 