
Gary Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> admitted his 
relief after picking up his first league victory as Valencia’s manager – but 
insisted it would not be a night for celebration.

Denis Cheryshev’s diving header gave Valencia a nail-biting 2-1 win over 
strugglingEspanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol>, who had 
taken the lead early in the second half after an error from returning 
goalkeeper Diego Alves allowed Oscar Duarte to head home.

Cristiano Ronaldo double helps Real Madrid sink spirited Athletic Bilbao
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/real-madrid-athletic-bilbao-la-liga-match-report>
That looked set to condemn Neville to a third consecutive league defeat, which 
would have left his side just two points above the relegation zone. But the 
substitute Alvaro Negredo pulled them level with a deflected finish on 70 
minutes and the new recruit Cheryshev scored with a diving header six minutes 
later to giveValencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> the lead 
for the first time in 10 league games under their new manager.

Although the remaining quarter of an hour brought a couple of nervy moments 
for the hosts, they hung on to claim their first league victory since beating 
Celta Vigo 5-1 on 5 November.

“I think what the game tells us today is football isn’t about putting on the 
best performance, but today we got the result,” said Neville. “It’s not a night 
for any celebration whatsoever, not to get carried away, but we’ll gain some 
confidence. There’s a good feeling in the dressing room and we’ll take it 
forward.

“Relief’s probably a good word in some ways to describe what I felt. The last 
four minutes can be a long time in football – I wanted the final whistle to 
come as quickly as possible, and I saw the reaction of the fans, of the 
players. I think it [10 games without a win] is far too long for this club.”

Neville also praised the Mestalla fans for their support throughout the game, 
saying: “The most incredible bit was the fans stayed with us, they stayed with 
every single player, they stayed with me.

“It’s not down to tactics, it’s not down to the coach, it’s down to the fans 
and the way they responded after the goal. The game turned into an emotional 
game, the fans were pushing us forward, throwing us forward. We suffered a 
little bit but got there in the end and that’s the important thing.”

Juventus grab Serie A lead from Napoli with Simone Zaza’s late goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/juventus-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
Neville also announced that Pako Ayesteran, Rafael Benítez’s former assistant 
at Valencia and Liverpool, is to join his coaching staff with immediate effect.

“He’s not to replace current staff, I just wanted to bring in someone with 
experience alongside me. Please don’t interpret this as a problem in any way. 
I’ve been speaking to Paco for the last 10 days.”

The former Manchester United defender also said he was relaxed about the 
criticism that has come his way. “Hopefully we’ll push on from this and get 
more confident. That’s what I want, that’s what I hope for. In terms of media 
and fan reaction, they are well within their rights to say what they’ve been 
saying. I’d be saying it as a journalist, as a fan. I’m not expecting to be 
shielded or protected. I thrive on it. From my point of view I know I’m in a 
fight.” 
 