
In autumn or early spring at Venice’s Rialto fish market, among the vast array 
of seafood (some recognisable, some quite alien-looking) there’s likely to be 
an abundance of live soft-shell crabs,moeche, from the lagoon. They’ve been 
harvested for about 300 years and are a delicacy on a par with the white 
truffle.

The crabs are closely monitored during the season, and as soon they start to 
“moult” are removed from the water, cleaned and quickly transferred to the 
market, where they sell for upwards of €25 a kilo to hungry Venetians and 
restaurateurs.

Every restaurant offers moeche at this time of year and the classic 
preparation method is not for the faint-hearted: the crabs are soaked in 
seasoned beaten egg, which they absorb and eventually drown in. They are then 
dredged in coarse flour and deep-fried until golden brown and crisp. Served 
with sea salt and a squeeze of lemon, they are delicious and intense in a 
briny, iodine-y way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fvenice-moeche-soft-shell-crabs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf1eafdf3ee4c4c02f5c372aaa1452c20ede7ff9%2F0_0_5320_3540%2F5320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%E2%80%99s%20crisp%2C%20briny%20seasonal%20delicacy%3A%20fried%20soft-shell%20crabs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fvenice-moeche-soft-shell-crabs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%E2%80%99s%20crisp%2C%20briny%20seasonal%20delicacy%3A%20fried%20soft-shell%20crabs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fvenice-moeche-soft-shell-crabs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf1eafdf3ee4c4c02f5c372aaa1452c20ede7ff9%2F0_0_5320_3540%2F5320.jpg>
 Seafood heaven … Venice’s Rialto fish market. Photograph: Paul Williams/Alamy 
Moeche can also form part of the classic Venetian fritto misto, along with 
other seasonal delicacies such as anchovies, squid and mantis shrimp. Some 
restaurants in Venice add a more creative slant, such as a fennel and orange 
salad, thick, pungent alioli or a stew of sweet-sour onions with raisins, pine 
nuts and aromatic spices.

Try them at seafood-only restaurant Alle Testiere 
<http://osterialletestiere.it/Testiere/Welcome.html> or Trattoria al Gatto Nero 
<http://www.gattonero.com/en/index.html#.WBjXhdd4X9I>. But perhaps the best way 
to sample them is to stroll down to the Rialto and grab a plate of crispy, 
salty crabs and a glass of prosecco atMuro Rialto 
<http://murovenezia.com/?id_pagina=399&id_pagina_2=365&Lang=_2> or one of the 
other vendors in Campo Bella Vienna. You know it will be fresh.

• Ben Tish is chef director of Salt Yard, which launches its Veneta restaurant 
<http://www.saltyardgroup.co.uk/> in London on 7 November

 