
Second-placed Roma ended their run of four successive Serie A draws when they 
ground out a 2-1 win at Gianfranco Zola’sCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari>. Adem Ljajic and teenager 
Leandro Paredes scored in each half for Roma, who remain seven points adrift of 
Juventus after the league leaders beat Milan 3-1 on Saturday.

Juventus 3-1 Milan | Serie A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/juventus-milan-serie-a-match-report>
While Ljajic and Paredes scored the goals, Roma manager Rudi García’s 
selection of 18-year-old Daniele Verde may have made the difference. Starting 
his firstSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> match, 
forward Verde set up both goals for the visitors. The first came when Verde 
chipped the ball over the Cagliari defence and into the path of Ljajic, who 
fired into the roof of the net.

The Sardinian side, one point and one place above the relegation zone, 
dominated the second half and Duje Cop should have levelled but instead skied 
his effort with onlyRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> goalkeeper 
Morgan De Sanctis to beat.

Instead, Paredes wrapped up the points when he met Verde’s cross with a volley 
which went in off the foot of the post. It was the Argentinean midfielder’s 
first goal for the club since his move from Boca Juniors in July. Paul-Jose 
M’Poku scored a consolation for the hosts in stoppage time. After the match, 
García offered praise for the roles played in the win by teenagers Verde and 
Paredes, saying “Verde is an important member of the squad … aside from his 
speed and technique, he works very hard”. García added that “the young players 
have shown they can step up” when senior players are injured.

Milan unveil plans for new stadium ‘inspired by the Emirates in London’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/04/milan-plans-stadium-emirates-london>
Third-placed Napoli beat Udinese 3-1 at home with the visitors’ striker Cyril 
Thereau scoring at both ends. The hosts opened up an early two-goal lead 
through Dries Mertens and Manolo Gabbiadini, but Thereau brought Udinese back 
into the game before the half hour, only to turn a Mertens ball into his own 
goal in the second half.

Manual Pasqual scored an 89th-minute winner to give Fiorentina a 3-2 win over 
Atalanta as Mohamed Salah made his debut for the hosts following his move from 
Chelsea, while fellow Champions League chasers Sampdoria drew 1-1 at home to 
Sassuolo.
 