
Walter Zenga has long been known to Italian audiences as l’Uomo Ragno – 
Spider-Man. But by the time he got fired by Sampdoria, he had begun to sound 
more like Ross Geller from Friends. It was widely reported that he had flown 
out to Dubai on holiday after his team were beaten by Fiorentina on 8 November. 
Zenga protestedthat he was only ever on a break 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oEn9YvJ3Gfg>.

“A holiday?” he exclaimed when a reporter from the Genoese newspaper Secolo 
XIX got hold of him two days after that defeat. “Are we joking? I’m not here on 
holiday, my wife and children live here.”

As tempting as it is to explore the semantics of that sentiment, it would not 
make any difference to the substance of this story. Zenga had indeed been given 
leave bySampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> for a 
six-day sojourn in Dubai during this latest round of international fixtures. 
His decision to go ahead and take it was not the reason Massimo Ferrero gave 
him the sack.

Nor, indeed, did his axing have anything to do with facial fashion – much 
though less sympathetic fans enjoyed pretending that it had. Zenga had been the 
subject of some ridicule in recent days as it emerged that his designer stubble
was partially drawn on and highlighted with henna ink 
<https://twitter.com/Wordsfit/status/665119807780597760>. His barber explained 
that this style was popular in the Arab countries where the manager had been 
working over the five years before he took the Sampdoria job.

None of this mattered to Ferrero. What concerned the Sampdoria owner was his 
sense that Zenga did not share his lofty goals for the club. “Walter is a 
fantastic person and I chose him on a gut feeling,” he explained. “But at a 
certain point, looking into his eyes, I did not see the same ambition I have 
within myself.”

That much is hardly surprising. Ferrero has not exactly set the bar low. Just 
last December he declared that he wanted Sampdoria to win the Scudetto by 2018. 
They have done so once before in their history.

Internazionale hit four against Frosinone to end Serie A goals drought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/22/serie-a-internazionale-fiorentina-sampdoria-palermo>
Where would he find a manager who believed such a thing was even possible? 
Ferrero had an answer in mind. No sooner had the decision to fire Zenga been 
taken than he set out for Rome. Once there, he went directly to the house of 
Vincenzo Montella.

The two men are good friends, as are their partners, and the four of them had 
been spotted having dinner together on several occasions in recent months. But 
as Ferrero tells it, Montella refused to discuss football every time.Although 
no longer manager of Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/08/fiorentina-sack-vincenzo-montella-lack-of-respect>
, he was still contracted to them until 2017. As is common in Italy, he had 
technically never been fired – but instead placed on gardening leave.

Montella’s contract stipulated that it would cost €5m (£3.5m) for him to buy 
his release. Hardly capable of paying such a sum from his own pocket, he would 
need any would-be suitor to help out. That obligation had discouraged both 
Milan and Napoli when they enquired about his availability in the summer.

Ferrero had no intention of paying such a sum, either, but persisted anyway. 
The story goes that Montella rejected him once again, but he simply refused to 
leave. “Where else would you find a president who will go to a manager’s house 
to convince them to join,” Ferrero asked reporters, “and then stay there for 
hours and hours outside the front door [until they get the reply that they 
want]?”

It took almost a week to negotiate Montella’s release from Fiorentina. The 
impression is that the Viola softened their stance on the break clause, 
although accounts vary regarding what money, if any, changed hands. What we do 
know is that, come the end of the week, Montella had packed a few belongings 
into his little Smart car and hit the road.

“I drove from Rome to Genoa on my own,” he said, “so that I could best savour 
the old memories. It is pretty clear what Samp represent to me, I wanted to be 
here strongly. I have dreamed of being the boss ever since I was coaching at 
under-15 level.”

The nostalgic appeal of his appointment is evident. Sampdoria were Montella’s 
first-everSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> club as 
a player and it was there that he enjoyed the most prolific three-year spell in 
the top-flight. He had returned for a further loan spell shortly before his 
retirement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fvincenzo-montella-returns-sampdoria-no-quick-fix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e3c0b6acf006b5b04409ad610fd3112df456cb%2F0_32_2040_1398%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vincenzo%20Montella%20returns%20to%20Sampdoria%20but%20there%20will%20be%20no%20quick%20fix%20for%20club%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fvincenzo-montella-returns-sampdoria-no-quick-fix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vincenzo%20Montella%20returns%20to%20Sampdoria%20but%20there%20will%20be%20no%20quick%20fix%20for%20club%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fvincenzo-montella-returns-sampdoria-no-quick-fix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e3c0b6acf006b5b04409ad610fd3112df456cb%2F0_32_2040_1398%2F2040.jpg>
 Montella salutes the Sampdoria fans during his days as a player with the club. 
Photograph: Italo Banchero/AP 
But if he was the fans’ first choice to replace Zenga it was also because they 
knew that he was a fine manager. He had finished fourth in each of his three 
seasons at Fiorentina, as well as reaching the semi-finals of both the Europa 
League and Coppa Italia last season, and the final of the latter competition in 
the year before that.

Secolo XIX jokingly nicknamed him VinCento – a play on words to acknowledge 
the fact he had won 100 of his 209 games in senior club management (the verb
vincere means to win, while cento means 100). By that newspaper’s calculations, 
the only current Serie A managers with better victory ratios were Roberto 
Mancini (who had won 55% of his games) and Massimiliano Allegri (49.7%), each 
of whom had worked for clubs with far greater spending power.

Montella, furthermore, had achieved his successes while making sure that his 
teams played attractive possession-based football. Even Gigi Delneri, the 
former Sampdoria manager who had been viewed as the chief alternative to 
succeed Zenga, seemed delighted with the appointment. “He is the only one who 
plays a European style in Italy,” said Delneri. “He is the only one who has 
innovated in our football.”

But most important to Ferrero was the sense that Montella shared his 
willingness to dream big. The manager’s relationship with Fiorentina’s owners 
had broken down because he felt frustrated at what he perceived as a lack of 
ambition from the club, unwilling to make the transfer investments that he 
believed necessary to make the next step.

Given that Sampdoria’s wage bill to start this season was not much more than 
half of Fiorentina’s, it is hard to see how this move could be a forward step. 
But it was claimed in the Genoese press that Ferrero had matched all of the 
clauses in Montella’s Viola contract that guaranteed bonus payments for winning 
Serie A or achieving Champions League qualification.

The path towards such lofty goals began with a visit to Udinese on Sunday. 
There was an opportunity here for Montella to make an instant impression. 
Sampdoria had failed to win a single away game under Zenga – collecting just 
two points in five matches outside of the Stadio Luigi Ferraris.

Montella did not seek to revolutionise his team’s approach overnight. 
Sampdoria lined up in the same 4-3-3 that his predecessor had used for his 
final game in charge, with only one change to the starting personnel – Niklas 
Moisander drafted in at centre-back, allowing Ervin Zukanovic to move out to 
left-back and relieve the 17-year-old Pedro Pereira of his duties.

The manager will not be able to use the same XI when Sampdoria host Milan on 
Saturday. Zukanovic was sent off in the 90th minute for chopping down Emmanuel 
Agyemang-Badu. By that stage, Montella had a better picture of the job he has 
on his hands. Agyemang-Badu had put Udinese ahead in the first half, and Samp 
failed to get a single shot on target in response.

Montella sought to put a positive spin on that afterwards, arguing that shots 
off target from dangerous positions were more indicative of a quality 
performance than long-distance potshots that happened to trouble the 
goalkeeper. Even then, a clear-eyed assessment would note that Samp’s best 
chance had not been the product of elegant team construction but of an isolated 
flick of the heel by Luis Muriel that wrong-footed Danilo Larangeira on the 
corner of the six-yard box.

And as devious and delicious as that moment was, the Colombian did rather 
spoil it by pelting his shot so far wide of the goal that it went out for a 
throw-in.

Otherwise Sampdoria were, as they had been so often been on their travels 
under Zenga, disjointed and directionless on the ball. Montella can hardly be 
blamed – he has had only a week to work with his new players – but if nothing 
else this occasion should caution fans against believing in a quick fix.

There is work to be done if this team is to match last season’s seventh-place 
finish, much less take a step towards Ferrero’s greater goals. Sampdoria’s 
squad is not short on quality, with Muriel, Éder and Roberto Soriano offering 
complementary skills up front and Fernando a forceful presence in midfield.

Montella, though, may need to shake away some of the cobwebs that Spider-Man 
left behind, before he can really make this team his own.

Talking points

• For the first time all season, Inter beat someone by more than one goal, 
walloping Frosinone 4-0, and then celebrated that achievement by going two 
points clear at the top of the table. It was encouraging to see Roberto 
Mancini’s team cutting loose for once, and even better to see Jonathan Biabiany 
chip in with a goal and an assist on what was his first start since being 
diagnosed with a cardiac arrhythmia last September.

• Even so, you’ll have a hard time convincing me Inter are the best team in 
the division as long as Napoli continue to play as they have since the middle 
of September. Sunday’s win away to Verona made it 12 wins in 14 games across 
all competitions for thePartenopei, with the remaining two matches both 
finishing goalless against opponents who parked the bus. Napoli have scored 34 
goals in this run and conceded just three. For now they remain two points 
behind Inter, but perhaps not for much longer: their next game is against Inter 
at the Stadio San Paolo.

• Roberto Mancini: still got i … ah, hold that thought 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/668551769291517952>.

• Gigi Buffon celebrated the 20th anniversary of his Serie A debut last week. 
By playing in Juventus’s 1-0 win over Milan on Saturday, he also equalled 
Gaetano Scirea’s 552 appearances for Juventus. Lining up against him was Gigio 
Donnarumma, the Milan goalkeeper who was not even born until four years after 
Buffon’s debut. The pair swapped shirts and a hug on the pitch at full-time. 
“An embrace from the best goalkeeper in the world,”wrote Donnarumma on Facebook 
afterwards 
<https://www.facebook.com/GigioDonnarumma/photos/a.1628804407374195.1073741829.1609161336005169/1634478906806745/?type=3>
. “What an emotion.”

• While we’re on the subject of goalkeepers, how about this celebration from 
Mattia Perin <https://vine.co/v/izAgF9WwQmz>, after Genoa pipped Sassuolo with 
a 94th-minute goal from Leonardo Pavoletti? The impact of the goal was 
amplified by the fact that his team had only just been pegged back to 1-1 
moments earlier, but the strike itself was nowhere near as good as the one with 
whichTómas Rincón opened the scoring 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/668754386055663616>.

• Elsewhere in gorgeous goal news, this strike from Marcel Büchel for Empoli 
against Fiorentina <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5nbcJn0BX9w> wasn’t half 
bad. It looked for a while like it might be pretty significant, too, putting 
his team 2-0 up and set them on course for what would have been their first win 
over their close neighbours since 1997. But then Nikola Kalinic came off the 
bench in the second half and scored twice to rescue a point.

• In this era of players declining to celebrate against their former clubs, 
step forward Mattia Destroto single-handedly reverse the tide 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/668360785677037568>.

Results: Atalanta 0-1 Torino, Bologna 2-2 Roma, Carpi 1-2 Chievo, Fiorentina 
2-2 Empoli, Genoa 2-1 Sassuolo, Inter 4-0 Frosinone, Juventus 1-0 Milan, Lazio 
1-1 Palermo, Udinese 1-0 Sampdoria, Verona 0-2 Napoli.

 * NB: next week’s Talking Points will be published on Monday, with another 
piece – on the big Napoli-Inter game – up on Tuesday.  