
It’s the run-up to Christmas and everybody in Los Angeles, which to a Brit 
feels unseasonably sun-drenched, is bemoaning the chilly weather; as we settle 
down in the Beverly Hills hotel,Viola Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/viola-davis> draws a warm jacket around her 
shoulders. Not that she’s complaining: throughout our conversation, she is 
determinedly upbeat, celebratory, optimistic. She radiates a sense of 
excitement and satisfaction that, at 51, all the hard work is really beginning 
to pay off.

I have to be the mouthpiece for so many others who can’t speak for themselves

Five years ago, when Davis was playing the role of the maid Aibileen in The 
Help <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/27/the-help-film-review>, for 
which she was nominated for an Academy Award, she told me that, as a 
“dark-skinned actress in Hollywood”, she had done “what it was at my hand to 
do”, even if that didn’t give her as much scope for her talents and energies as 
she would have liked. “I’ve had to sink my teeth into a role that was probably 
a fried-chicken dinner and make it into a filet mignon.”

Now, with film roles coming out of her ears, the lead in the TV drama How To 
Get Away with Murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/25/how-to-get-away-with-murder-shonda-rhimes-review>
 and her own production company, she is opposite Denzel Washington in the film 
adaptation of August Wilson’s Pulitzer prize-winning playFences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/fences-trailer-denzel-washington-viola-davis>
. (After our meeting, she begins 2017 by winning a Golden Globe for her 
performance, saying in her acceptance speech that the film “Doesn’t scream 
moneymaker, but it does scream art and it does scream heart.”) Surely the role 
of Rose Maxson is a filet mignon.

She bursts out laughing. “This is absolutely a filet mignon – a medium-well 
filet mignon.” And Davis clearly relishes every bite: her performance as a wife 
and mother in 1950s Pittsburgh, struggling at every turn to hold her family 
together, to absorb the rage and disappointment of her husband Troy and to 
protect her son’s innocence and ambition, is electrifying – so involving that 
it invokes an almost physical response. We watch as Rose is beguiled and 
charmed by the charismatic, storytelling Troy, unable to chide him for his 
excesses without dissolving into mirth, and as she seeks to intercede on 
others’ behalves to limit the damage his temper and pride cause. It takes 
almost the whole film, however, for Rose to voice her own feelings and desires.

“That was the role of womanhood in the 50s,” says Davis. “You were an 
instrument for everyone else’s joy except for your own. The 50s in America had 
the highest rate of alcoholism and depression. There were whole manuals out 
there that were being passed out about how to make your husband happy – put on 
make-up when he walks through the door, after a long day of work, don’t weigh 
him down with any of your problems, ask him about his problems, greet him with 
a smile, make sure the children are fed and they’re clean, his favourite meal 
is on the table, and nowhere in that manual is anything about her joy, and the 
centre of her happiness.”

Most of us spend a lifetime holding on to the past, even when we feel we are 
letting go

She has been here before, and with Washington; they are reprising the roles 
they played in the 2010 Broadway revival of the play, for which they both won 
Tony awards; and they are rejoined byRussell Hornsby 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0395203/> and Mykelti Williamson 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0932112/?ref_=fn_al_nm_1> as Troy’s son and brother 
respectively. Part of Wilson’s 10-playCentury Cycle, in which the playwright 
chronicled the experiences of African Americans decade by decade,Fences’ 
transition on to the big screen has taken so long because its author, who died 
in 2005, insisted that its director be black – a simple demand revealingly hard 
to accomplish in Hollywood.

Now, Washington himself directs, and his key artistic choice is apparent the 
moment the film begins: he has preserved the work’s theatrical origins, with 
nearly all the action taking place in a confined domestic space, and dialogue 
ranging from quick-fire ensemble scenes to extended soliloquies. The effect is 
disconcerting – we rarely see such unfiltered staginess on film – but always 
riveting; there is not an inch of slack, a word wasted.

Davis herself has two show-stopping speeches, in which she first rails at life 
and at last attempts to make her peace with it. What was different about 
playing Rose this time around? She replies that she “had been sitting with this 
narrative for so long and never quite got the ending until I did the movie. And 
I keep saying to myself that the reason I didn’t get the end is because she is 
at a place that probably most of us as human beings never get to, and that is a 
place of forgiveness and grace. I think that most of us spend a lifetime 
holding on to the past, even when we feel like we’re letting go a bit.”
 Maid in Hollywood: a scene from The Help with Viola Davis as Aibileen Clark, 
and Bryce Dallas Howard and Ahna O Reilly. Photograph: Dale Robinette/DreamWorks
She holds close to the advice of psychiatrist Irvin D Yalom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/05/are-no-gods-mental-health> 
that one must “give up all hope of a better past”. Davis herself grew up in 
extreme poverty; she has spoken powerfully about the series of makeshift 
dwellings she, her parents and five siblings occupied in Rhode Island, about 
hunger and lack of sanitation, about her father’s violent abuse of her mother. 
The “letting go” seems to take two distinct but related forms: allowing herself 
to feel good about what she has achieved, and building platforms that will help 
broaden the possibilities for a new generation of actors, writers and directors 
of colour.

People say that as a dark-skinned woman you can’t be sexual, unlikable, 
damaged, smart…

She cites her delight at seeing Shonda Rhimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/27/why-i-love-shonda-rhimes-screenwriter>
, the producer behindGrey’s Anatomy, Scandal and How To Get Away with Murder, 
accepting aNorman Lear achievement award in Television  
<http://www.normanlear.com/backstory/awards/>last year. “She said: ‘I happily 
accept this award because I deserve it.’ I LOVE IT. Absolutely love it. It’s 
the waking up and understanding that OK, you may not be the best person out 
there, but you’ve put in enough work to understand that you deserve what you’ve 
got, that that is what is at the end of hard work. The happily ever after comes 
after you’ve done the work. And to literally understand, especially as a woman, 
that a closed mouth doesn’t get fed, you’ve got to ask for what you want and 
expect to get it.”

I remark that it’s noticeable how often women play down their successes; how 
they will even deflect minor compliments on appearance. Why does she think that 
happens? “I think tapping into one’s power and one’s potential is a very 
frightening thing,” she replies. “And for women it’s a very new thing. It is. I 
always used to feel that self-deprecation was an answer to humility – that 
people would see me as a humble person the more I put myself down. And people 
do say that: ‘Oh! I ran into so-and-so and they kept saying, “Oh, my work in 
this really sucked,” and they were great! I just thought it was so refreshing 
that they said that!’ And I often think to myself, what if someone says, ‘You 
know what, I’m confident, I’m really happy about the work I did. I really felt 
like I gave it my best and it came out great,’ the same way men do. Why is that 
not seen as humble?”
 ‘Motherhood has given me a different telescope to look at life’: with husband 
Julius Tennon. Photograph: Tibrina Hobson/Getty Images 
Her increasing ability to feel comfortable with her achievements is linked to 
an awareness of her emerging position as a figure of influence. “The more I’m 
pushed in a position of leadership and I know I have to be the mouthpiece for 
so many other people who can’t speak for themselves, the more confidence I’m 
gaining.” And that extends to the way she views her own past and the more she 
shares her story. She explains: “I can hear myself say, ‘Oh yeah, I took the 
bus five hours just to get to the theatre, then took it five hours back,’ and 
I’m listening to that, I’m being an objective observer, and thinking to myself 
– ‘I did that?’ It’s like looking at an old picture of yourself when you felt 
like you looked bad, and you go, ‘Wow, I was fabulous!’ That’s how I feel about 
my life now – that I’m looking back at it, and I’m like, ‘I’m pretty fabulous. 
I really am. I’m pretty fabulous.’”

Back in 2011, when we talked about Davis’s commitment – largely via JuVee 
<http://www.juveeproductions.com/>, the production company she founded with her 
husband, Julius Tennon – to addressing the limited opportunities afforded 
people of colour by the entertainment industry, she expressed her hope we 
wouldn’t be having the same conversation in five years’ time. Naturally, 
because challenging entrenched privilege takes time, we are, but it has shifted 
ground. Davis herself is scheduled to play the part ofHarriet Tubman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/24/harriet-tubman-20-bill-myths-freed-slaves-quotes>
, who liberated slaves in the Civil War era, and to star in Steve McQueen’s
Widows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/viola-davis-widows-steve-mcqueen>
, a revisiting of Lynda LaPlante’s TV series co-scripted byGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/22/gone-girl-review-film-ben-affleck-rosamund-pike-david-fincher>
’sGillian Flynn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gillian-flynn>. “It’s not 
even a role that would be necessarily written for an African American, but not 
according to him. He’s like: ‘Why not?’”

Davis brings up The Help, and says that although she loved making the film, 
she understands the criticisms levelled at it – that women of colour were once 
again placed in the role of maids, and “not portrayed as tapping into their 
anger as much as they could have. Tapping into all the things they could have 
been other than the maid.” Partly, she thinks, that relates to the image of the 
black maid as a nurturer, a second mother, so that “even within the movie, 
there are certain things that are not going to be explored, if it somehow 
messes up the memory of what the audience had, that perfect mother. She 
couldn’t be angry. She couldn’t be sexualised. She’s gotta stay that image that 
brings us comfort and joy knowing that we were loved and nothing more than 
that.”

Davis loves the riposte to that one-dimensional figure provided by the 
character of Annalise Keating, the firecracker law professor, ambitious, potent 
and flawed, that she plays inHow To Get Away with Murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/25/how-to-get-away-with-murder-shonda-rhimes-review>
. “It’s blowing the lid off everything that people say we should be, especially 
as a dark-skinned woman, that you can’t be sexual, you can’t be unlikable, you 
can be angry but with no vulnerability, you can’t be damaged, you can’t be 
smart. It blows the lid off all of it. And even if it’s not executed all the 
time in ways that people like, it doesn’t matter. What matters is that she’s 
out there. That’s it. She’s out there, she’s on screen, she’s making an impact.”
 ‘In the 1950s women were an instrument for everyone else’s joy except their 
own’: Viola Davis with Denzel Washington in a scene from Fences. Photograph: 
David Lee/AP 
Related: Fences review: Denzel Washington and Viola Davis set to convert Tonys 
to Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/22/fences-review-denzel-washington-viola-davis-august-wilson>

Another fundamental has changed in the past five years; in 2011, she and 
Tennon adopted a baby, Genesis, who is even as we speak frolicking in a nearby 
hotel room. When Davis and I are done, her babysitters release the six-year-old 
to bound along the corridor and leap into her mother’s arms, asking whether she 
can go and buy a swimming costume in the hotel boutique and head for the pool. 
Her mother observes that in such a luxurious joint, it’s a purchase that could 
easily come to a couple of hundred dollars, but concedes that they’ll work 
something out (you imagine somebody might be despatched to Gap).

Davis combines motherhood – which she says has changed her utterly, and given 
her “a different telescope” through which to see life – with work by clever 
stratagems and good planning; often taking Genesis with her, only making one 
film a year, having a TV shooting schedule that allows her days off and free 
weekends. She claims to live by two mantras – “I’m tired, and I’m doing the 
best I can” – but she doesn’t look remotely weary. And things might be about to 
get a whole lot busier. She was the first African American to win the 
outstanding lead actress in a drama series Emmy award for her role as Annalise 
Keating; alongside numerous other awards, she has hitherto been nominated for 
two Oscars forThe Help and Doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/08/doubt-film-review>. But now her 
role as Rose Maxson is being spoken about as a cert for nomination and a very 
strong contender to win her an Academy Award come February. Has she allowed 
herself to think about it? She pauses, laughs, parries.

“You know what I know about that? Because I don’t know if that’s going to 
happen or not. But what I will say about this is, and this is how I keep my 
perspective, whatever happens, I’ve gotta go back to work. The carpets are 
going to be rolled up, the people are going to stop calling like that, and I’ve 
gotta go back to work. And you can’t bring that Oscar on a set, and that Oscar 
can’t do the work for you. You gotta do it. That’s what I’ll say.”

Fences <http://www.fencesmovie.com/> is released on 10 February
 