
They say Canary Islanders are the Brazilians of Spain and when Vitolo was 
growing up in Gran Canaria his idol was Ronaldo. But he also sought inspiration 
in a man from Bethnal Green. TheSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> winger who will play for Spain 
at Wembley on Tuesday was raised in Las Palmas, played for Unión Deportiva de 
Las Palmas’s youth team and watched the first team from the stands at the now 
abandoned, crumbling Estadio Insular – when he didn’t watch them from the 
touchline, where he was a ballboy.

Ander Herrera: ‘Spain has the best midfield in the world by a long way’ | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/ander-herrera-spain-debut-england-wembley>
The last time Vitolo saw them win promotion, in 2015, he joined their 
celebratory bus parade, even though he had left the club two years earlier. The 
first time he saw them win promotion, in 2000, he was 11. At the heart of the 
Las Palmas team that year, and for six years, was a classy, tough midfielder 
who was an idol on the island. You’ll remember Vinny Samways. Vitolo certainly 
does. He was “a big fan”.

“Samways was on the pitch, I was in the stand,” he says. “I’d sit with the 
under-12s, eating sunflower seeds, and the players would celebrate goals with 
us. I remember waiting for autographs too: I don’t think I got Samways’s, but I 
had Turu Flores’s. The things you never forget. I talk to [former Deportivo La 
Coruña midfielder] Lionel Scaloni, who coaches here, and he says: ‘Yeah, but 
Vinny was a bit crazy, eh! Great player but crazy.’ I remember going to games 
with my dad and my friends and he’d lose his temper with everyone, or reading 
in the paper that he’d had a fight with Oktay [Derelioglu] at training.”

Vitolo is laughing now. Samways was sent off 13 minutes into his debut but his 
coaches adored him for his ability, the control and passing, as well as his 
attitude.He played 160 games and fans loved him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/apr/17/championsleague.sport>. Fans 
like Vitolo.

When Vitolo climbed on the bus celebrating Las Palmas’s 2015 promotion to 
primera, it was just days after he had taken a similar ride round Seville, 
having wona second consecutive Europa League title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/27/dnipro-dnipropetrovsk-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
. A third followed the year after,against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
. So, in March 2015, had a Spain call-up under Vicente Del Bosque.

Now England. It is not the Wembley where Samways won the FA Cup but it is 
still Wembley. “This call-up is special,” he says. “It’s the chance to play 
there against a team like England. Wembley’s emblematic: not just for English 
football, but for football itself.”

It is a chance that few anticipated four months ago. Del Bosque gave him the 
call but not continuity. Vitolo did not go to Euro 2016 and it took Julen 
Lopetegui’s arrival to bring him in fully – right into the starting XI.

“I’ll always be grateful to Del Bosque for calling me up, but I really wanted 
to go to France.” Did that hurt? “It didn’t hurt,” he replies, pausing to add: 
“Well, it did upset me at the time. But I can’t hold anything against Del 
Bosque because he gave me my debut and competition for places was high. But I’d 
have loved to go to France. Then Lopetegui came in, I’m playing regularly and I 
have a lot of confidence with him.” That confidence has been repaid.

Indeed, if there is an outstanding difference now, someone who symbolises 
Spain’s shift, it is the player who has scored three times in the first five 
games under Lopetegui, including in Turin and Saturday’s 4-0 home win over 
Macedonia, when he and David Silva, his fellowcanario, were Spain’s most 
impressive players.

Spain are fitting opponents for Gareth Southgate’s England template | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/13/england-spain-gareth-southgate-wembley-template>
“Vitolo is a regular,” Lopetegui said after Saturday’s win, and with good 
reason. “He’s a player with good technique, who always wants to improve,” 
Lopetegui added. El País called him Spain’s “most decisive player”.

“The first time I trained with the Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> squad I was surprised. You know 
the level is going to be high, but it was spectacular,” says Vitolo. “I 
remember the first session with Busquets. He might seem slow when you first see 
him but – uff! – he plays one-touch and it was so difficult to get the ball off 
him.”

Then there was Silva. “When I joined Las Palmas [B team] in 2008, Silva was 
already an important player; he’d played for Spain [since 2006]. He’s played 
100 games now and only great players reach that. He’s a legend at Manchester 
City, a role model [to me] that a player can come from the Canaries and 
achieve.” But with players such as Andrés Iniesta and Xavi Hernández alongside, 
few have recognised his significance. “Yes,” Vitolo agrees. “Maybe not giving 
interviews, not having a high profile hasn’t helped.”

Vitolo is proud of Silva, but he is different too. There is something about 
him that breaks up the Spanish style, a man with the talent of the Canaries, 
where he says football is “played on the street still”, embodied by players 
such as David Silva and Juan Carlos Valerón, but quicker, stronger, more 
direct, regularly topping 12km a game. “I’ve always been strong, but at Las 
Palmas I never ran as much as I do now,” he admits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f891c758e4c92db2557511edebd35d2b5a7497%2F0_86_1372_823%2F1372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vitolo%3A%20%E2%80%98Teams%20in%20Spain%20are%20better%20tactically%20%E2%80%93%20but%20English%20ones%20have%20power%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vitolo%3A%20%E2%80%98Teams%20in%20Spain%20are%20better%20tactically%20%E2%80%93%20but%20English%20ones%20have%20power%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f891c758e4c92db2557511edebd35d2b5a7497%2F0_86_1372_823%2F1372.jpg>
 Vinny Samways, right, in action for Las Palmas in 2000. The former Tottenham 
and Everton midfielder was an early idol for Las Palmas native and fan Vitolo. 
Photograph: Elvira Urquijo A./AFP 
At Sevilla he had to. Players invariably grow at the Pizjuan and he was no 
exception; he credits Unai Emery with the change and together they won three 
Europa Leagues in a row; now, a key man in Jorge Sampaoli’s exciting, 
attacking, high-intensity team, he is flying - often covering the entire wing 
on his own. So much the better for Spain.

“The míster tells me: we have a lot of quality players are good on the ball 
and come inside; he needs players who can get around the outside of teams and 
be very direct,” he says. “Spain’s style has always been the same: control 
possession, control the opposition by having the ball. But sometimes you need 
to change; you need various options when the opposition makes it difficult.”

Spain’s new coach Julen Lopetegui: Why I am passionate about English football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/spain-england-julen-lopetegui-wembley>
His qualities are a useful combination for Spain. And for England, too? One of 
Vitolo’s best friends is the Liverpool full-back Alberto Moreno. The pair were 
inseparable at Sevilla and Moreno, Vitolo insists, can be “a very special 
player for many years to come: I was sad to see that he got a lot of criticism 
afterthe [Europa League] final against us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
. He is still young and I think they got that signing right.” When he is asked 
what Moreno tells him about the Premier League, his response is swift and 
disarmingly honest: “He tells me it would really suit me.”

Really? Do you speak English? “Not much.” As much as Alberto? “That kind of 
level!” he laughs. “I was from the capital, Las Palmas, where there weren’t 
many tourists. When you go further south there are a lot more, but I didn’t 
pick up a lot of English.”

The directness is striking but a little less shocking coming from a player at 
Sevilla, theclub who have “normalised” departures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/sevilla-monchi-liverpool-europa-league-final>
. “Every summer the club sells players. That’s the policy and it’s brought 
success,” he says. “It’s true that at other clubs, results can be affected but 
at Sevilla it goes OK. Let’s see what happens. But I’m very happy here and 
above all my family is very happy here.” Perhaps Moreno should have a word with 
Jürgen Klopp, then? “Well,” Vitolo smiles. “It’s a great club; there are a lot 
of great clubs.”

Why, then, have English clubs struggled in Europe in recent years? If they 
have the talent and the strength, what do English teams lack? “In the first 
half of the [Europa League] final, Liverpool pushed us: they were strong, 
putting their foot in,” Vitolo says. “And that’s something you notice a lot 
with English teams. From what Alberto tells me and from what I’ve seen, the 
most noticeable thing is that they are powerful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4bb5bec45d7157753ab65c60874cd2e191e204%2F0_237_2567_1541%2F2567.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vitolo%3A%20%E2%80%98Teams%20in%20Spain%20are%20better%20tactically%20%E2%80%93%20but%20English%20ones%20have%20power%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vitolo%3A%20%E2%80%98Teams%20in%20Spain%20are%20better%20tactically%20%E2%80%93%20but%20English%20ones%20have%20power%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fvitolo-spain-england-wembley-sevilla-la-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4bb5bec45d7157753ab65c60874cd2e191e204%2F0_237_2567_1541%2F2567.jpg>
 Sevilla’s Vitolo, left, gets to grips with Lionel Messi in the recent La Liga 
game against Barcelona. Photograph: Marcelo Del Pozo/Reuters 
But? “Teams in Spain seem to be better tactically, more worked-upon,” he says. 
“Games in Spain are not so end-to-end. I think the success of Spanish teams in 
Europe is more a question of being right tactically than just having better 
players.” Too much speed, not enough thought? “Yes, maybe that’s the principal 
problem because if you look at the quality of players each team has it’s 
incredible. The good thing is the [tactical] side can be worked on, and 
everything else is already in place. It’s all there.”

It’s all there and it’s attractive too. Vitolo says he is happy in Seville, 
and you can see it, down at the club’s Ramón Cisneros Palacios training ground: 
he is chatty, chirpy, open. The way a Canary Islander is supposed to be. 
Seville may not be Las Palmas, but it’s close. Just ask Samways, who headed 
there from the island. Vitolo is settled and the place suits him, it has 
brought him success and taken him into the Spain team too, but the pull exists. 
“At some point in the future it could be good for me to try playing in 
England,” he says. On Tuesday, he will.
 