
The vote on the compulsory purchase of Millwall’s land around The Den was 
dramatically postponed on Tuesday evening just 24 hours before the 
controversial land-grab was due to be confirmed. The postponement until 
February comes at the end of a week of gathering pressure sparked bythe 
revelation in the Guardian that the club could be forced to leave their 
historic home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
 should the sale of its land to an opaque offshore-registered property 
developer be ordered by the Labour council.

Clamour grows to review Millwall scheme as Sadiq Khan urged to step in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/millwall-stadium-sadiq-khan-conservatives-letter>
In the past week politicians on all sides have called on Lewisham’s mayor and 
cabinet to halt a compulsory purchase order (CPO) that will see land occupied 
by Millwall’s prized community trust sold on to a small offshore-registered 
property company with historic ties to current and former Lewisham council 
officers.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, has described the prospect of 
Millwall being forced out of their home as “heartbreaking” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/millwall-having-to-move-heartbreaking-lib-dem-leader>
 while local Conservatives have written to the communities and local government 
minister Sajid Javid urging the Government to call in and review the entire 
scheme. Lewisham council has maintained it believes Millwall will not have to 
leave the borough and that its plans will be beneficial for the club and the 
area.

On Tuesday night Lewisham Labour’s own Councillor Alan Hall stated once again 
that the council should seek instead to work together with the borough’s only 
professional sports club. “As the CPO call in review is further delayed 
Lewisham Council must seize the offer of talks with both hands for the sake of 
its reputation, its residents and Millwall FC,” Hall said.

The cancellation puts a temporary halt on an increasingly fraught few days, 
with a routine monthly meeting in the town hall’s civic suite due to be deluged 
with interested parties, supporters, media and visitors from beyond the 
football world engaged by the wider themes of community, transparency and 
political intrigue.

Millwall admit council scheme could force club to leave Lewisham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
This is the third time in the past five months Lewisham council has cancelled 
its own CPO proceedings. The first came after the appearance of a sales 
brochure, published in the Guardian, that appeared to show one half of 
Renewal’s twin offshore owners had already considered the possibility of 
selling its interest in the scheme, throwing the council plans into disarray. 
After a lengthy investigation Lewisham has now satisfied itself the sales 
brochure was prepared on a speculative whim by the estate agents, acting 
entirely off their own backs and without instructions of any kind from Renewal, 
their clients.

The second postponement came last month after questions were raised about the 
sustainability of Millwall’s category‑two academy under the proposals. It is 
understood the current cancellation is a response to similar questions and the 
need for more time to investigate concerns raised in letters sent to the 
council on Tuesday afternoon by Millwall’s lawyers. The club are desperate for 
talks with the local authority in order to find a compromise. Lewisham council 
denies its plans are a threat. A statement last week read: “Lewisham Council is 
very supportive ofMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall>.”
 