
Kwongan Heath country in the midwest of Western Australia is one of the of the 
most biodiverse places on the planet. Whereas Europe and North America have had 
the evolution of their flora species reset to near zero several times due to 
extended glacial periods,Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> is host to the 
longest unbroken evolution of plant species on the planet. You can literally 
see evolutionary history written in the landscape. Nutrient poor soils and 
continuous wet and dry cycles over millennia have produced an incredible array 
of adaptations, specialisation and coping methods to fill every available 
ecological niche.

There’s no better time than wildflower season (now) to experience this living 
laboratory, and people from all over the country, and indeed the world, come to 
experience the carpets of colour and marvel at each unique specimen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdont-let-fracking-kill-our-ecologically-unique-wildflowers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0555519880dbaa886746e8798a26252ede94ae9%2F0_0_667_1000%2F667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20let%20fracking%20kill%20our%20ecologically%20unique%20wildflowers%20%7C%20Piers%20Verstegen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdont-let-fracking-kill-our-ecologically-unique-wildflowers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20let%20fracking%20kill%20our%20ecologically%20unique%20wildflowers%20%7C%20Piers%20Verstegen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdont-let-fracking-kill-our-ecologically-unique-wildflowers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0555519880dbaa886746e8798a26252ede94ae9%2F0_0_667_1000%2F667.jpg>
 Hakea conchifolia. Photograph: Eddy Wajon 
What still remains of our wildflower heritage is precious fragments of what 
existed when Europeans arrived. After several generations of land clearing to 
make way for wheat and sheep farming, there is very little of the original 
Kwongan Heath left remaining. Scientists such asHans Lambers 
<https://www.facebook.com/hans.lambers.14> have been calling for this area to 
be world heritage listed for some time but despite its global significance, 
incredible beauty and tourism values the area now facings perhaps its greatest 
threat yet.

Deep beneath our feet, and below the life-giving waters of the Yarragadee 
aquifer, lies a vast shale gas deposit known as the North Perth Basin. This gas 
is so tightly held within the rock strata that it can only be extracted by 
smashing and fracturing the deep, gas-carrying rocks where they lie sandwiched 
in the Earth’s crust. Withunfettered support from the WA government 
<https://www.australianmining.com.au/news/wa-government-gives-fracking-the-green-light/>
, unconventional gas and fracking companies plan to access the gas by drilling 
hundreds or even thousands of gas wells through the groundwater aquifer. They 
will then pump the wells with a cocktail of chemicals at extreme pressure to 
shatter the layer of shale stone where the gas is tapped.

A number of test wells have already been drilled including in the Lake Logue 
andBeekeepers Nature Reserve 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-02/beekeepers-oppose-fracking-in-nature-reserve/6267088>
 and on farmland a stone’s throw from the Leseuer National Park. With each new 
well gas companies try their luck, and test different methods and chemicals for 
extracting the gas. If this industry developed at commercial scale, not only 
would the gas fracking have a massive impact on the ancient ecology, it would 
produce massive greenhouse emissions that would accelerate our already changing 
climate.

Fracking is a form of climate-change denial | Josh Fox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/fracking-climate-change-denial-fight-fossil-fuel-madness>
The good news is we don’t need the gas, as renewable energy is growing faster 
than demand can keep up. The bad news is that the state government is 
subsidising the drilling by gas companies who are desperate to make a quick 
buck before gas fracking is banned or investors wake up to the risks and exit 
the industry.

The bumper wildflower season this year could not be coming at a better time to 
raise awareness of these issues. As WA heads towards an election, political 
parties will begin to tune into what voters want rather than what their 
corporate donors in the gas industry demand.

For more information about the campaign to protect WA’s unique and 
irreplaceable ecology from the threat of gas fracking go to
www.frackfreefuture.org.au <http://www.frackfreefuture.org.au/>
 