
Walsall have appointed Sean O’Driscoll as their new head coach. The 
58-year-old replaces Dean Smith,who left for Brentford earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/dean-smith-brentford-manager-walsall>
, and has signed an initial 18-month deal at the League One club.

The interim management team of Jon Whitney, Neil Cutler and John Ward will all 
stay on.

“The culture of the club was the main attraction more than anything else and 
what everybody at the football club have tried to build in the last few years,” 
said O’Driscoll. “I said to the chairman and the board of directors that in 
football it’s very rare that you get to contribute towards developing a culture 
and philosophy.

“I’ve watched Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> in the 
last two or three seasons and I’ve been entertained every time. There is an 
exciting project here and I’m relishing the opportunity to play my part in 
seeing that project through.”

The chairman, Jeff Bonser, added: “We are delighted that Sean has agreed to 
join us as our new head coach. We believe he is the right man for the job and 
will maintain the club’s philosophy of producing young players and playing 
attractive football.

“He has already experienced success at this level with Bournemouth and 
Doncaster and shares the values which lie at the foundation of Walsall Football 
Club. Sean ticks all the boxes in terms of the identity, blueprint and ethos 
that we work towards.”

O’Driscoll has been out of work since leaving Liverpool, where he was 
assistant manager, in October afterBrendan Rodgers’ sacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/05/brendan-rodgers-liverpool-sacking-disappointed>
. Before his four months at Anfield O’Driscoll had been England Under-19s 
manager.

He guided Bournemouth to League One in 2003 and earned promotion to the 
Championship with Doncaster in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/26/leagueonefootball.doncaster> 
– beating Leeds United in the play-off final – while O’Driscoll also had brief 
spells at Nottingham Forest and Bristol City.

O’Driscoll will take charge for the first time when Walsall, third in League 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, host Port Vale at 
the Banks’s Stadium on Sunday.
 