
Walsall have parted company with their head coach, Sean O’Driscoll, following 
Saturday’s 3-1 home defeat byLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> promotion rivals 
Barnsley.

The defeat, which saw Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> 
drop to fourth in the table on goal difference, was a sixth successive home 
game in which they had failed to win.

O’Driscoll said: “I am extremely disappointed for the players, their 
performances over the past month have not gained the points they deserved.

“This is a different phase of the season, and as we have repeatedly seen, 
teams have recognised the team’s strengths from the first half of the campaign 
and prepared to counter that when facing us.

“But the players deserve enormous credit for adapting, finding different ways 
to play and maintaining their performance levels even, at times, in the face of 
frustration and disappointment.

“They are a close group whose success so far has been built on the trust, 
understanding and respect among them. I wish them the best for the rest of the 
season.”

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Burton Albion 34 16 68 
2 Wigan 35 25 64 
3 Gillingham 35 17 59 
4 Walsall 34 14 59 
5 Millwall 35 14 58 
O’Driscoll joined the club in mid-December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/18/walsall-appoint-sean-o-driscoll-as-new-head-coach>
 and had been in charge for just 16 games. Despite beginning with three 
successive wins, his side had won only one of their last nine. The club 
announced the decision on Sunday.

O’Driscoll, who moved to the Banks’s Stadium following the departure of Dean 
Smith to Brentford, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/dean-smith-brentford-manager-walsall>
 was also the England Under-19 manager and had a short spell as assistant 
manager to Brendan Rodgers at Liverpool.

Football League: your thoughts | Niall McVeigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/mar/05/football-league-your-thoughts-charlton-rotherham>
The Walsall chief executive, Stefan Gamble, said: “On behalf of the board we 
thank Sean for his time, effort and dedication during his short spell at the 
club and wish him well for the future.”
 