
During the 1992 presidential campaign, Bill Clinton flashed a copy of Walter 
Mosley’s Devil in a Blue Dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/06/fiction.politics> and proclaimed 
the writer his favorite novelist, shooting Mosley to mainstream fame. Now 
Mosley’s legendary Los Angeles detective Ezekiel “Easy” Porterhouse Rawlins, 
played by Denzel Washington in a 1995 film adaptation of Devil in a Blue Dress, 
is celebrating his 25th anniversary in Mosley’s new novel,Charcoal Joe 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/239475/charcoal-joe-by-walter-mosley/9780385539203/>
.

“Bill was a really smart guy. He knew my books better than I did,” Mosley says 
in his soothing baritone, talking to me from St Louis on Charcoal Joe’s release 
tour. “He read them very closely. We were sitting at dinner one day and he was 
talking about how the books were about migration. Clinton was talking about how 
these characters had moved, and in that new place had created a place of 
power.” Mosley says that he strongly disagrees with some of Clinton’s policies, 
though he remains a supporter.

In fact, Mosley believes Toni Morrison’s contention that Clinton was America’s 
first black president 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/08/toni-morrison-wasnt-giving-bill-clinton-a-compliment/402517/>
, partly because Clinton grew up poor and disadvantaged, was on the money: 
“Working-class, southern, very close to being black … deeply influenced by 
black culture.”

But he is fonder of the country’s actual first black president. “I know Barack 
Obama must really be virtuous. I know the Republicans have hired 10,000 
detectives to find one thing he did wrong in his life. And they haven’t done it 
in eight years. I’m amazed.” Obama’s legacy is gathering momentum, Mosley says. 
“He’s been the most clearly committed president to bring together the disparate 
factions of American democracy, to form and forge a better America and a better 
world. He failed at that, but he really tried. He’s a black man who got elected 
as president, twice. That’s outrageous.

“Obama’s really smart. Obama’s attacks on Trump are incredibly eloquent. It’s 
bad enough that we’re running around saying Muslims did this, Muslims did that, 
like it’s [all Muslims are] one guy. It’s one isolated group in the Middle East 
[Isis] that we created through our warmongering.”

Mosley also believes black people will mobilise to elect Hillary. “Hillary is 
not Bill. They’re two different people. I don’t think the identity is the same. 
[But] very few people of color in the United States seeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as a valid option. Bill 
supporting Hillary, coming out and getting out the vote, will be very useful.”

He agrees Trump’s campaign symbolises Philip Roth’s old contention that 
American reality out-fictionalises fiction. “It’s hard to believe that this 
person is running for president. I don’t believe Donald Trump has enough 
awareness of anything outside of himself to actually be racist. You actually 
have to think about other people in order to be racist. I don’t think Trump is 
capable of that. He’s a lazy, spoilt guy.”

Mosley evangelists now range from Samuel L Jackson to Junot Díaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/junot-diaz>, the latter of whom once called 
Mosley “a national treasure” in the Austin Chronicle. His 50 books include the 
political nonfiction tracts12 Steps Towards Political Revelation 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/walter-mosley/twelve-steps-toward-political-revelation/>
,What Next: A Memoir Towards World Peace 
<http://www.blackclassicbooks.com/what-next-a-memoir-towards-world-peace-walter-mosley/>
, andWorkin’ on the Chain Gang 
<https://www.press.umich.edu/208537/workin_on_the_chain_gang>. His best known 
work – his 14 Easy Rawlins novels – raise the issue of police brutality. “I’ve 
been writing about it for 25 years. For 450 years, the police ran rampant on 
black individuals, black souls. They would attack them, beat them, kill them … 
if you don’t have a camera image, then you don’t know what is happenin’.”

Mosley’s complaints, like Easy’s, include America’s prison-industrial complex 
and “war on drugs”. “It’s ridiculous,” he exclaims wearily. “You have millions 
of people in prison in America, and three times that number cycling in and out 
of prisons … some guy when he was 28 years old who was selling some meth 
somewhere. Alright, that’s not so good, but … how much money do I have to pay 
to keep them incarcerated?”

In fact, Easy’s post-second world war migration from southern poverty to 
stylish private detective in Los Angeles, fighting for “for justice in an 
unjust world”, echoes Mosley’s father Leroy’s journey from Louisiana to 
southern California. Leroy remains the 64-year-old New Yorker’s biggest 
inspiration. “My father was a great guy. He had an indomitable spirit. He 
taught me about love and responsibility, about beauty, and how to make gumbo.” 
Leroy cooked their family’s dinner every night. “Because my father’s entire 
life was so hard, he self-medicated, in a lot of different ways,” Mosley adds. 
“He loved cooking; it always made him feel better.”

Leroy Mosley also had the playful sense of humour that his son displays in our 
conversation. Mosley won a Grammy writing liner notes for Richard Pryor 
collectionAnd It’s Deep Too!  
<https://www.amazon.com/Richard-Pryor-Complete-Recordings-1968-1992/dp/B00004YR3M>
“Richard Pryor was a great thinker. He really understood society, and he 
understood it through his own pain,” Mosley says. “Richard Pryor’s politics are 
always about love ... His relationship to the crack pipe and Jim Brown trying 
to pull him out of that misery. I don’t really know any contemporary comedians 
who get as close to the bone as Richard Pryor.”

Mosley himself is a former alcoholic and cigarette smoker. What did he replace 
those habits with? “Meditation.”

In Charcoal Joe, Mosley’s empathy toward the sex workers Augusta Tryman and 
Lolo Bowles is striking. American capitalism has “enslaved all workers”, Mosley 
says, energized by the subject of politics. “All I know is when you’re in 
America, there is no retirement. You are going to work until you die. I was 
talking toKareem Abdul- Jabbar <http://www.kareemabduljabbar.com/> last night, 
and he was saying that his grandfather was working in construction at a big 
building downtown, and he died at work, of colon cancer.

“Now, you know how much colon cancer hurts? And he was at work! At the very 
end of colon cancer. He just fell dead. That’s where we are again.”
 