
Walter Tull was one of Britain’s first black footballers and a first world war 
hero but now his biographer believes he has uncovered evidence why the British 
army refused to award him a Military Cross after his death in 1918.

Tull, who was born in Folkestone to a Barbadian carpenter and English mother 
in 1888, went on to become thearmy’s first black officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/03/walter-tull-first-black-officer-british-army-coin>
 before being killed in action. He played for Tottenham between 1909 and 1911 
and then moved to Northampton, where he is now commemorated with a memorial at 
Sixfields Stadium.

Walter Tull, the first black officer in the British army, to feature on £5 coin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/03/walter-tull-first-black-officer-british-army-coin>
Tull enlisted in December 1914 and rose through the ranks, fighting at the 
Battle of the Somme as a sergeant and then being promoted to second lieutenant, 
despite a military rule excluding “negroes” from becoming officers. After 
leading his company of 26 men to safety in Italy, Tull was cited for “gallantry 
and coolness”, although he never received a Military Cross despite a petition
supported by the former Tottenham striker Garth Crooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/25/tottenham-walter-tull-military-cross>
.

His story <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_UmKVYVrhw> was featured on the 
BBC’s Antiques Road Trip on Wednesday, which detailed his remarkable life in 
the Northamptonshire town of Rushton before the war through a series of 
photographs and documents. Filming was completed in April but Phil Vasili, who 
wrote his biographyWalter Tull, Officer, Footballer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/28/walter-tull-1888-1918-officer-footballer>
 in 2009, has since uncovered new evidence that could suggest a reason for the 
army’s reluctance to recognise him.

Dated 19 February, 1918, a top-secret memo sent by Gen White – the head of 
recruitment in New York – to the War and Colonial Offices made it clear that 
any “wooly [sic] headed niggers” were not wanted for the forthcoming spring 
offensive that eventually led to the Allied victory later that year.

“We now refuse to post coloured men to ‘white units,’” the memo reads. “These 
‘niggers’ must therefore go to native units if accepted. Can we take them for W 
Indies or other bns (battalions)?”

“A few weeks before Tull was killed in action the Army Council was still 
insisting black people should not be enlisted into British army regiments,” 
Vasili says. “It was a schizophrenic world, full of love, practical help and 
support and hate in the form of seemingly irrational prejudice. His full 
recognition will only occur when he is awarded his Military Cross and a full 
explanation is given as to why he was refused. There are politics behind the 
decision not to award him his medal and this further compounds the injustice.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwalter-tull-black-football-pioneer-military-cross-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfffa15242720c9f8f4b390427bbfc78bd3be7cd%2F178_422_3025_4534%2F3025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walter%20Tull%3A%20why%20the%20black%20footballing%20pioneer%20was%20denied%20a%20Military%20Cross&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwalter-tull-black-football-pioneer-military-cross-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walter%20Tull%3A%20why%20the%20black%20footballing%20pioneer%20was%20denied%20a%20Military%20Cross&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fwalter-tull-black-football-pioneer-military-cross-tottenham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfffa15242720c9f8f4b390427bbfc78bd3be7cd%2F178_422_3025_4534%2F3025.jpg>
 The memorial at Sixfields Northampton to Walter Tull. Photograph: Alamy 
Killed at the age of 30 near the village of Favreuil in the Pas-de-Calais 
region, Tull’s body was never recovered. He is remembered at the Arras memorial 
for those who have no known grave but it was not until his family and Vasili 
began to look into what had happened to him and twin brother, Edward, that the 
full story emerged.

Northampton’s tribute was erected in 1999 and these days there is a beer named 
after him sold at the ground. But plans for statues outside Tottenham’s new 
ground and the Imperial War Museum have not come to fruition.

“If there is a commitment to a statue for him it should be in Whitehall 
alongside other soldiers of much less importance and bravery,” Vasili says.

“He made a mockery of the firmly held view of the Army Council that white 
rank-and-file soldiers would not take orders from a black man. A soldier that 
inspired such love in contradiction of ‘commonsense’ notions and official rules 
and regulations should be a prime candidate for national recognition. Currently 
we are doing workshops about Tull in schools, funded by the Heritage Lottery 
Fund, and the incredulous response to not knowing him is always met with a 
desire by young pupils to energetically explore his life.”

Tull was featured on a special £5 coin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/03/walter-tull-first-black-officer-british-army-coin>
 in 2014 to commemorate the centenary of the outbreak of the first world war 
and his legacy is also kept alive through the Action for Children charity. The 
ancestors of the National Children’s Home – where the orphans Walter and Edward 
grew up – support an education project in the London boroughs of Brent and 
Newham and will be due a percentage of the profits should Vasili fulfil his 
dream of having a film made about one of English football’s pioneers.

“We have faced a lot of obstacles in bringing his story to the big screen 
despite the success of the play at the Bolton Octagon, which played to full 
houses in a three week run,” he says.

“Maybe Edward Tull foresaw this. His memoir was entitled The Film That Will 
Never Be Screened. If there are any film investors prepared to prove Edward and 
myself wrong please get in contact. Vinnie Jones has promised he’ll play Terry 
Warren, Tull’s trainer at Spurs, and I don’t want to be the one who lets Vinnie 
down …”
 