
I am always in awe of the fact that there is a garden under the sea; that 
plants can not only survive but thrive in a watery world that is turbulent and 
ever changing.

Seaweed is magical stuff in the water, and it’s somehow even more so when out 
of it. It’s incredibly healthful to us, to our animals, to our soils and our 
plants. It seems anyone who gets to ingest a little seaweed does better for it.

As seaweed breaks down into the soil, it encourages microorganisms whose 
activities help convert unavailable nutrients into forms that plants can use. 
It increases chlorophyll production and contains many micronutrients important 
for soil and plant health, as well as acting as a growth stimulant: it is rich 
incytokinins <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2785020/>, plant 
growth hormones that work above and below ground, improving root growth.

I recently went to Inagh Valley Trust 
<http://ebn.be/organisation/Inagh+Valley+Trust>, a seaweed research centre in 
Connemara, Ireland. They’re developing all sorts of interesting seaweed 
products, including adding seaweed to manufactured bread to increase its shelf 
life, and creating a seaweed feed for honeybees, to improve hive conditions and 
combat disease.

I spent a morning geeking out on seaweed spores swirling around in glass jars 
as they went through propagation, and munching on seaweed health bars. Then I 
went to the coast and wondered how much beach-strewn seaweed I could cram into 
my suitcase home – and whether Ryanair would complain about the smell.

It’s very important to collect only seaweed that has washed up; it’s not 
sustainable for everyone to go around the rocks pulling it off. Winter storms, 
however, often wash up great mountains of the stuff. There are brown, red and 
green algae, and all have different nutrient levels, so collect a variety, if 
you can. In general, seaweeds contain 10 times the mineral levels of land-based 
plants and are particularly rich in iodine and calcium. You can put them 
directly on beds; they will be salty, so you can’t plant direct into them, but 
a winter of rain will wash the excess salt away.

How to turn wood chips into a great compost heap | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/05/composting-wood-chips-gardening-alys-fowler>
If you don’t have beds that are suitable for such methods, add the seaweed to 
your compost, or compost it on its own. Once broken down, it’s the magic 
ingredient for growing thin-skinned new potatoes, as well as for top-dressing 
pots, where it will act as a mulch while continuing to break down. Rotting 
seaweed is always hopping with life.Springtails 
<http://www.extension.umn.edu/garden/insects/find/springtails/> (little jumping 
insects) seem to love the stuff, but don’t be put off; it’s part of seaweed’s 
magic that everyone wants a part of it.

If you are nowhere near the shore, you’ll have to buy some. And it’s well 
worth it: if I had the money for only one type of fertiliser, it would be 
seaweed. There are numerous brands; I like the Irish one calledSeafeed 
<https://www.quickcrop.co.uk/product/seafeed-organic-seaweed-meal-soil-and-plant-feed2>
, which does pure seaweed meal, just dried and ground. Whichever you use, your 
garden will thank you.
 