
I am standing in another man’s shoes, and those shoes are moist. It’s nothing 
to do with the other man. Most of me is wet by now: there is sweat running down 
the small of my back and dripping down into my eyes; my trousers are clinging 
to my thighs, and the pads of my fingers have wrinkled, as if I’ve been in a 
bath too long, which is curious given they are inside elbow-length black rubber 
gloves. But the water they are plunged into is so hot my hands, like everything 
else, are sweating. I am pulling a shift as a kitchen porter at The Ivy, and I 
am quickly coming to a stark conclusion: these are shoes I am not fit to fill.

The kitchen porter – KP for short – is the foot soldier in the restaurant 
kitchen brigade that you never see. When camera crews go in to professional 
kitchens they focus on the polished, spot-lit pass, not the roaring sink tucked 
away in the corner. It is the chefs in their crisp whites at the front they 
care about, not the men – and it almost always is men – in their rubber gloves 
at the back. And yet without them the kitchen would collapse. A head chef could 
dispense with half the brigade or more and the food would still get to the 
table, slower than usual, but it would get there. But without the KP to make 
sure there are clean pans for it to be cooked in and clean plates for it to be 
served on, those diners would stay hungry.

“The KP is vital,” says Michel Roux Jnr of Le Gavroche in Mayfair, who did the 
job as a teenager to pay for a record player. “Good food starts with a clean 
pan. I look for experience as a KP on the CVs of people applying for jobs in my 
kitchen. It means they understand the way it works.” Raphael Duntoye, head chef 
of nearby La Petite Maison, who also worked as a KP before training as a chef, 
agrees. “Everything’s connected. If the plates are not clean it doesn’t matter 
how good the food on that plate is. It’s coming back to the kitchen.”

Not that it’s a job which has always garnered respect. In Down And Out In 
Paris and London, George Orwell’s account of life lived at the very bottom of 
the economic heap and first published in 1933, the writer describes working as a
plongeur or pot washer in a Parisian restaurant called the Auberge de Jehan 
Cottard. Being aplongeur, he writes “is a job which offers no prospects, is 
intensely exhausting and at the same time has not a trace of skill or 
interest”. If anything, his view only hardens as time goes by. “Aplongeur is 
one of the slaves of the modern world … he is no freer than if he were bought 
and sold. His work is servile and without art.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992219125%2F7411456d-3cba-4add-874c-3a39e4750373-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992219125%2F7411456d-3cba-4add-874c-3a39e4750373-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kitchen porters at The Ivy, from left: Kwadjo Ohemeng, Peter Ofori, Femi 
Olaitan. 
Today it can be a way to advance up the kitchen hierarchy. At La Petite Maison,
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/jul/22/foodanddrink.restaurants>
 Duntoye has two cooks who started with him on the pot wash. “It starts with me 
wanting them to do some small jobs like peeling carrots or prawns and quickly 
you realise they can do more.” Mouctar Doukoure from Ivory Coast is now a chef 
de partie here, after starting as a KP. I ask him for advice for my own 
imminent shift. “You need to listen to the chef,” he says with a grin. “Because 
they get upset very easily.”

Like Mouctar, most of the kitchen porters in London appear to be from West 
Africa. I ask Bunmi Okolosi, maitre d’ ofArabica Bar & Kitchen 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/restaurants/grace-dent-reviews-arabica-bar-kitchen-9652594.html>
 in Borough Market, whose family is Nigerian, why this might be. “Firstly, it’s 
a very strenuous job,” he says. “These guys seem able to do it. Secondly, it’s 
very hot by the sinks and they are able to take those conditions. And then 
there’s the fact that many are academics.” It transpires that, as with too many 
of the toughest jobs in the urban economy, some of the most educated people in 
the restaurant kitchen are the ones working the sinks on the lowest wage. “The 
hours fit in with their studies.”

Bunmi sends me to meet Lanre Falese, who runs a crew of KPs and who supplied 
Arabica with theirs. (“We didn’t interview him,” I am told by James Walters, 
who co-owns the restaurant. “He interviewed us for our suitability to employ 
his boys.”) All of Falese’s team are West African though he has no particular 
theories for why this might be, save that, “if you are not fit you cannot do 
it”. His job, he says, is to make sure that the working conditions are good. “I 
want to check the kitchen is conducive, that it’s safe, that the floors aren’t 
slippery.” Are all chefs today aware of the importance of good KPs? Lanre 
shakes his head. “Too many chefs don’t care,” he says. “But without them the 
kitchen would be nothing.” And the money? “It’s not that good, it’s not that 
bad,” he says. Essentially this means they get paid minimum wage or slightly 
above.

So what is the worst job in the kitchen? He doesn’t hesitate. “Cleaning the 
deep fat fryer,” he says. “Oil goes everywhere.” And his advice for me? “It is 
all about health and safety. You need safety shoes and gloves. Check there is a 
constant supply of hot water and that the space is ventilated.”

Easier said than done. By chance, the day I am to work the 4pm to midnight 
shift at The Ivy is the hottest of the year, with outside temperatures north of 
35C. What’s more, while The Ivy has recently re-opened after a major refit, 
they are still dealing with certain snags, including a blast chiller on the 
roof which keeps tripping the electrics. Three or four times at the start of 
the shift the kitchen drops down to emergency lights and the air conditioning 
fails as the electrics cut out. Later, they decide to drop the air conditioning 
down to reduce power usage and the chance of tripping the system again. (All 
these problems have since been rectified.) It all means I am to work in the 
kitchen on the hottest day possible. The main walk-in fridge here is stacked 
with bottles of water and we are told to take them whenever we need them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992307895%2F027ddc76-6319-41e0-a0c8-0baca49d233c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992307895%2F027ddc76-6319-41e0-a0c8-0baca49d233c-2060x1236.jpeg>
In the chef’s office, a glass box that looks down over the shiny new basement 
kitchen, I am briefed by Gary Lee, head chef of The Ivy, who also did the job 
as a kid. “You learn about self-discipline and self-motivation from being a 
KP,” he says. He has a team of nine in his kitchen, working shifts to cover all 
14 services. “They’re extremely committed and extremely loyal and they’ve got 
this killer work ethic. Here, everyone knows the KP is as important as the 
chef.” He introduces me to Ghanaian-born Peter Ofori, who has been here since 
he was 17 and who at 25 is now the head KP. He is too polite to put it this way 
but, quite simply, I am now his. He looks at my leather shoes with disdain and 
hands me instead a pair of rubber safety shoes.

The way Peter describes it, he and his three other colleagues on this shift 
are the restaurant’s last line of defence. “If the council [environmental 
health officers] close us down it is because of the porters not doing the job,” 
he says. “Everyone comes to us to have problems solved.” And then, like a 
philosopher of the kitchen sink, he says: “It is a hard job but life is not 
fair. Life will give you what you fight for.”

He puts me to work alongside Kwadjo, also from Ghana, on the pot wash: two 
sinks in a small enclosed space up some stairs from the main kitchen. “Hot 
water is everything,” Peter says. “You must have hot water.” Industrial 
strength detergent is kept in a highly concentrated solution in a bowl to one 
side of the sink. My weapon is sponge overlaid by a separate scourer. 
Immediately the metalwork starts piling up: endless oval metal “flats” of 
various sizes on to which items are placed once cooked; bowls and pans; oven 
trays, some with caramel-based sauces cooked into them. All must be scrubbed to 
a mirror-like cleanliness; the sort of staining and tarnish which your pans at 
home might carry as a mark of service, is here a mark of failure. I scrub away 
and throw them into the rinsing sink to my left, only to have Kwadjo chuck them 
back to me because they are not clean. From the stoves behind us come the 
constant shouts of cooks who need flats and pans collected or delivered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992387501%2F8fb67aba-8c95-473d-80d3-10c393fb33be-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wash%2C%20clean%2C%20scrub%3A%20Can%20Jay%20Rayner%20hack%20life%20as%20a%20kitchen%20porter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcan-jay-rayner-hack-life-as-a-kitchen-porter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439992387501%2F8fb67aba-8c95-473d-80d3-10c393fb33be-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Kitchen porter Peter Ofori at the Ivy handing out cleaning instructions to Jay.
The first stint is half an hour, but the heat and the effort and the sheer 
speed are staggering. This, the hours just before evening service, is the 
fiercest part of the daytime routine. Metal trays arrive by the second. It is 
not the hardest job I have ever done; that was the pig tank in an abattoir, 
dragging hog carcasses through tanks of hot water. I lasted just 90 minutes on 
that. But this is meant to go on for eight hours.

Peter sees me sweating and takes me instead to the fridge, shoving pieces of 
thick clean blue material in my hands which I am to use as rags. I am told to 
stow the extras inside my apron so I “look pregnant”, or more pregnant than 
usual. I am grateful for the cool in there. “We clean the fridge every day,” he 
says. “Sometimes three times a day. If the inspectors come and find dirt here 
we are closed down.”

I am to lift off every Tupperware box and clean every shelf and every patch of 
wall behind, and then get the boxes back in the right order. I end up playing 
fridge Tetris, as a constant stream of cooks come and go looking for boxes of 
ingredients. Peter returns after half an hour. “You are too slow,” he says. Am 
I? “This is too slow. We have other jobs.” I have disappointed Peter. I am 
gutted.

Suddenly there is a shout. The rubbish truck is outside. Together we must 
shift everything from the rubbish room – sack after sack of putrefying 
material, huge compressed stacks of cardboard – up four flights to the street 
outside. It takes two of us to get the cardboard upstairs and I fear my back 
might go. I point out to Peter that he is almost half my age. “I am an old 
man,” I say. He tells me to stop complaining. The rubbish truck does not hang 
around for long.

The whitewashed stairs twist up and round and at one point pass the door into 
the dining room, where the early tables for dinner have just started being 
seated. Occasionally, as I pass, it flaps open. I glimpse the glitter and shine 
of the newly refurbished dining room; the endless bubble and warmth of chatter. 
Out here it is all strip light and hard surfaces. In there it is all soft 
banquettes and “Would madam like another glass of chablis?” Usually that is my 
world; not today.

I am to do the doors and stairwells all the way down to the staff toilets. And 
then I clean the toilets

As we head back downstairs, Peter tells me to grab some food. It is 5pm. I 
tell him I’m not hungry. “If you do not eat now, you will not eat.” There is 
some perfectly serviceable roast lamb, chips and carrots. I eat standing up by 
the stoves in about two minutes, before being told to fetch a bucket of soapy 
water and more blue cloths. I am to do the doors and stairwells all the way 
down to the staff toilets. “And then you clean the toilets.” I am beginning to 
suspect Peter is enjoying having me under his command. And so it is that I 
clean the staff bogs at The Ivy. Halfway through, one of the cooks comes in. He 
takes one look at me and says, “I’ll try not to miss the urinal.” I tell him 
I’m touched, but that I’m sure he’d enjoy the knowledge of who had to clean it 
up if he did.

The late afternoon becomes evening becomes night, though there is no daylight 
down here so it’s hard to tell. For a while I am on crockery. It’s the easiest 
job: stack the plates in the rack, spray them down, into the industrial 
dishwasher and out. Together Peter and I do the drains in front of the stock 
pots, cleaning out all the clammy vegetal matter that clings to the grids above 
them, and the coagulating fat below. He hands me a small chrome shovel and 
tells me to empty out the drained fish-stock pot, full of long simmered bones 
and tails and heads. I think about the sauces to accompany glistening sole and 
plaice dishes served upstairs in the restaurants that caused this foul job.

It is the second stint on the pot wash that breaks me. This time I manage well 
over an hour. Sweat runs everywhere. For a moment I stand in the fridge and 
watch myself steam. And then back in. I ask the others if this is the worst 
part of the shift. Apparently not. That’s at the very end, when the entire 
kitchen has to be cleaned down. This is just average. The theatres have just 
come out. The wife of Richard Caring, who owns The Ivy, is in the dining room. 
Actress Sandra Dickinson is in there, apparently. The night before I was too. 
Tonight though I am here, as far backstage as it is possible to be, draining my 
bodily fluids away into my clothes.

And then my fingers begin to cramp. I need my fingers. I type with them. I 
play the piano with them. They are important to me, and they have stopped 
working. I lift my hands out of the sink. The Spanish Ghanaian guy to my left 
who has only a smattering of English, looks baffled. I tell him I have to stop. 
I cannot do this. I am not worthy. It is just gone 10pm. I managed six hours of 
an eight-hour shift. Outside, in the street, Peter says, “You tried your best.” 
I thank him. He adds, “Some guys do what you do and they never come back.” This 
is meant to make me feel better, but suddenly I realise: I’m not coming back 
either. I have done just one shift of the hardest job in the restaurant kitchen 
and I have survived.
 