
Wave and tidal power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wave-tidal-hydropower> devices are 
close to producing electricity for mass consumption for the first time after a 
surge in investment, Alex Salmond has predicted.

The first minister said that the latest wave and tide machines being tested in 
Scottish waters were expected to become commercially viable by 2015 with 
several hundred megawatts of installed capacity, in a major breakthrough for 
the green energy industry.

Salmond's prediction came as it emerged that one developer, Aquamarine Power 
<http://www.aquamarinepower.com/>, which has one of the most advanced wave 
power machinesbeing tested off Orkney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/sep/20/orkney-renewable-energy-future>
, had won fresh investment of £7m in its latest design and pledges of another 
£18m by 2014.

Until now, the presumption was that wave and tidal power was still up to a 
decade away from full-scale production.

However, the first minister told a green energy investment conference 
<http://www.slciconference.com/> in Edinburgh that: "In the next few years, the 
wave and tidal industry will move from demonstrator machines towards 
substantial commercial development."

Tidal and wave power was "the most exciting and powerful thing", he added as 
he opened the conference on Tuesday.

Salmond also announced 
<http://www.scotland.gov.uk/News/Releases/2011/09/27104535> a new £35m Scottish 
government fund to help up to seven companies find advanced designs for the 
next generation of ocean-based wind turbines for deep waters up to 20 miles 
offshore, with turbines three times larger than current designs.

"Scotland's potential as one of the green power houses for Europe is beyond 
question," he told conference delegates, who are due to be addressed on 
Wednesday by Al Gore. "We mustn't let transient but severe economic 
circumstances deter us from that goal."

Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, he said, had 25% of 
Europe's offshore wind and wave resource. Current offshore windfarms were 
simply "onshore wind turbines in a puddle", being sited just a mile off the 
coast. "We want these 20 miles offshore, where the wind really blows."

Wave and tidal energy is still expected to produce only a small fraction of 
the total renewable energy output. The Crown Estate and Marine Scotland have so 
far licensed only about 1,400mw of wave and tidal power for future development, 
compared with 7gw of onshore and offshore wind power already in production or 
development.

Scotland's current share of offshore renewable energy production is still 
relatively small. Salmond's strategy is based on rapidly increasing its stake 
and eventual overall share, to help hithis ambitious target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/apr/14/snp-scottish-election-manisfesto-alex-salmond>
 to generate 100% of Scotland's electricity from renewable sources by 2020.

He believes Scottish wave and tidal energy firms could come to dominate the 
global industry. Aquamarine is also developing projects in Chilean waters, 
along the west coast of the US and Canada, and the west coast of Ireland.

Martin McAdam, Aquamarine's chief executive, said he believed his latest 
device, the 800kw Oyster wave machine, would be commercially viable by 2014. By 
the end of the decade, wave technology would be cheaper than offshore wind, he 
predicted.

"At the moment we're far too expensive [but] we will become more and more cost 
effective over time," he said. "As we move to 2020, we will get to a cost curve 
where we will be more competitive than wind."

Salmond's latest £35m offshore investment fund, the prototype offshore wind 
energy renewables support (Powers) fund, follows confirmation last week of a 
further £70m fund to develop green energy infrastructure. Industry and 
investment agency figures warn that up to £200bn is required by 2020 to realise 
the UK's full renewable energy potential.

The first minister conceded the industry overall still faces several 
significant barriers, including finding investors, protecting UK and Scottish 
government support through a levy on energy bills and making transmission 
charges on the National Grid much less expensive for Scottish power companies.

• This article was amended on 27 September to correct the name of 
Aquarmarine's chief executive, Martin McAdam. We originally called him Martin 
McEwan.
 