
This is not meant in any way as a slight against any of the six other teams 
who are still quite rightly enthusiastic about theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> prospects, but it cannot 
have escaped the attention of many that the draw in Nyon has created a 
bewitching collision course. The route to a possible final between Barcelona 
and Real Madrid has been cleared. Last season these sworn foes met in the 
semi-final, with the outcome in keeping with Barcelona's usual superiority 
these days, but such are the permutations this time, it is the final or nothing.

Barcelona have the tougher looking route, with a quarter-final against Milan 
and then a semi-final against Chelsea or Benfica. Real had to suppress their 
delight at drawing the courageous underdogs from Cyprus, Apoel, for their 
quarter-final. The semi-finals would pair them with the winner of Bayern's tie 
withMarseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>.

Barcelona remain the competition favourites, given their dazzling form not 
just in this season's Champions League but over the recent run which has seen 
them hoist the trophy in three of the last six editions. Before the revolution 
begun by Frank Rijkaard in 2006 and taken on by Pep Guardiola in 2009 and 2011, 
it seems extraordinary to recall that the chasm on the European Cup leaderboard 
hadReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> on nine wins, 
with Barça stuck on just one.

A decade has passed since Madrid last won Europe's grandest prize, with 
Zinedine Zidane marking the occasion with a famously beautiful match-winner.

José Mourinho, naturally, is anything but overawed by the challenge of taking 
Real to title No10 while maintaining their lead in La Liga. It is worth noting 
that on each of his Champions League successes thus far, with Porto in 2004 and 
Internazionale in 2010, he has won the domestic league in the same season.

Of course, let's not get too presumptuous here. There are six other 
contestants intent on having a strong enough say to ensure the two favourites 
are tripped up somewhere along the line. The only dream final they are 
interested in has their name on one of the dressing rooms.Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>, of course, already have 
their name linked with the host stadium, the Allianz Arena . They look 
perfectly equipped to trouble Marseille, who come into the match with selection 
problems. Their No1 goalkeeper, Steve Mandanda, and the defender Souleymane 
Diawara will both be suspended for the first leg. Both were crucial performers 
as L'OM knocked out Inter in the last round.Containing the attacking threats of 
Mario Gomez, flanked by Arjen Robben and the former Marseille winger Franck 
Ribéry, looks a tall order. Also in Bayern's favour, the second leg is in 
Munich, where they have scored 15 goals from four matches.

Didier Deschamps is mindful that it is not the easiest draw they could have 
had. "We must believe, anyway," he said. "We beat Dortmund twice [in the group 
stage] even if it was not easy. They are five points ahead of Bayern. But 
Dortmund only discovered the Champions League this year, while Bayern are used 
to it."

If their meeting in the group stages is any evidence, the Milan-Barcelona 
match up may be closer than people think. Barca shaded it 5-4 on aggregate, and 
Milan made a statement of sorts by drawing 2-2 in the Camp Nou in the opening 
match of this campaign. It was a spirited display, with the equaliser from 
Thiago Silva coming in stoppage time. Milan's director Umberto Gandini was 
quick to note that he felt confident "because I think we have also improved 
since then". Maybe so, but that certainly wasn't the case when they had a 
fright as they went down 3-0 at Arsenal in the last round. Massimiliano Allegri 
was keen to make sure lessons were learned from that and it is hard to see that 
if Milan have something to cling to in the second leg they will be allowed to 
be as feeble again. Whether they can succeed where most fail miserably, in 
keeping tabs on Lionel Messi, will doubtless be the most significant thing of 
all. It will be an interesting tie, top, for Milan's kingpin, Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic, who has been invigorated by his return to Italy after a difficult 
year atBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will take two former 
Benfica players to the Estádio da Luz in David Luiz and Ramires, both of whom 
excelled during Chelsea's uplifting triumph over Napoli. If Roberto Di Matteo's 
team can maintain the level of performance they showed to bamboozle the 
Italians, Benfica will not relish a second leg at Stamford Bridge.

Although the Portuguese club topped Manchester United's group that is not as 
useful a barometer as it would normally be, given how often United have been 
unnerved in Europe this season.Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> did a professional job on Zenit 
St Petersburg in the last round, although a helter-skelter game in the first 
leg showed a much more cavalier side to the Portuguese club.

Benfica's former player, and current director, Rui Costa is putting on a 
positive face. "We have our own threats and we do not fear anyone," he said. 
"We are prepared for anything. We have the energy and the will to go on in this 
competition."

It is safe to say that Apoel have the hardest task. Their vice-chairman, Antis 
Polydorou, reacted to the draw with the dry observation: "The ball is round." 
Indeed it is. Although, to paraphrase George Orwell, some balls are rounder 
than others. It would be a miracle were Apoel's ball not to go a bit flat 
against the combined forces of Cristiano Ronaldo, Karim Benzema, Gonzalo 
Higuaín and Mesut Ozil. To be headed to the Bernabéu is a wonderful achievement 
for Apoel and one they deserve to relish, but it is hard to escape the feeling 
their home match in Nicosia is the one which has the better chance of a happy 
ending.

Fasten your seat belts. The road to Munich could be a memorable ride.
 