
Wayne Rooney became Manchester United’s joint record scorer with Sir Bobby 
Charlton on 249, 4,484 days after his first goal for the club as the holders 
began theirFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> defence with 
this convincing victory.

Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> arrived managed by a 
United former favourite in Jaap Stam and left having had scant chance of 
doubling their victory tally over these opponents, the only previous win coming 
in the competition in January 1927.

Wayne Rooney equals Bobby Charlton’s Manchester United goals record of 249
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-goalscoring-record-bobby-charlton>
This was United’s eighth straight win in all competitions and stretched their 
unbeaten sequence to 14 to leave José Mourinho particularly pleased. He said: 
“Very professional. I could feel it from the first minute. When we had two big 
chances to score, the team was intense, dynamic, playing well. For a long time 
the game was still open at 2-0 but I’m really happy with our attitude.”

The day belonged to Rooney. Seven minutes had been played when he made 
history. The captain was making a first appearance following three games out 
due to a thigh injury. The 31-year-old had already offered one classy moment 
when controlling a high ball in Reading’s area. A shot saved by Ali al-Habsi 
followed and this proved an augury of what was about to occur.

The strike that took this finest of footballers equal with Charlton also 
impressed as it displayed Rooney’s quicksilver brain. Anthony Martial made a 
run along the left, pulled the ball back to Juan Mata and from a mishit effort 
Rooney improvised to use a right knee to beat Habsi.

Cue a celebration that consisted of a few steps, then a triumphant punch of 
the air. In the posh seats, members of United’s board stood to applaud and 
Charlton wore a broad smile. All around the ground the old cry of “Rooney, 
Rooney” went up to hail a run that began with a Champions League hat-trick 
against Fenerbahce here on 28 September 2004.

The Liverpudlian was running the show for United as in days of yore. In their 
last outing in this stadium, on New Year’s Eve, Martial had been the 
outstanding performer. Then, he scored a late equaliser in a 2-1 win over 
Middlesbrough. Now, 15 minutes were gone when he struck – and he could thank 
Rooney. The French winger executed a slick one-two with the United captain, ran 
down the inside-left channel and gave Habsi zero chance with a right-foot 
finish.

Manchester United 4-0 Reading: FA Cup third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-v-reading-fa-cup-third-round-live>
This opening half became a tale of Rooney, Martial and Marcus Rashford 
terrorising Stam’s side, who had no answer to the pace of their opponents. 
Rooney found Rashford and after the centre-forward’s long run he blazed wide. 
Later, the No19 rounded Habsi with ease but missed from a tight angle on the 
right.

Next came the pick of the period’s passes as Rooney pinged a first-time ball 
into Rashford and his attempt deflected for a corner.

Mourinho had made nine changes from Monday’s victorious starting XI at West 
Ham, with only Michael Carrick and Marcos Rojo retained. However, on 19 minutes 
the manager witnessed precisely what he did not want: the latter going off 
injured.

Mourinho is without another of his centre-backs, Eric Bailly, for up to six 
weeks because of Africa Cup of Nations duty and his concern was illustrated by 
the quick word he exchanged with Rojo, presumably to ascertain how serious the 
problem was, as Phil Jones came on in the Argentinian’s stead.

Mourinho said: “It is a muscle. I have lots of question marks always and I 
don’t like to say. People like to say ‘first degree, X days out, second degree 
X days out’. Let’s wait to see.”

At the start of the second half Rashford created a half-chance for Rooney to 
break Charlton’s tally. Yet again the 19-year-old burst down the right but his 
ball in was stabbed at unconvincingly by the No10.

Rooney went closer when a quick exchange between Marouane Fellaini and 
Rashford put him in near goal but Habsi blocked his effort. The tie was about 
to be settled, though, as between the 75th and 79th minute United’s lead 
doubled. Both goals came from Rashford, who broke a drought stretching back to 
24 September.

His fifth of the season derived from a pinpoint 35-yard Carrick pass. Rashford 
rushed forward, then allowed Habsi no opportunity to save. His second was 
courtesy of a mix-up between Liam Moore and Habsi. The defender fed the ball 
back to his goalkeeper, whose attempted clearance became an air-shot and 
Rashford smashed home.

United were comfortably through to the fourth-round draw and 12 years, three 
months, and 10 days since Rooney first struck in the club’s livery, he walked 
off to applause, one goal away from the golden 250 for United.
 