
Wayne Rooney insists his team must focus on their final league game of the 
season and not be distracted by next Saturday’s FA Cup final. Manchester United 
head into that last game fifth in the Premier League, having passed up the 
chance to overhaul fourth-placed Manchester City on Tuesday. The3-2 loss at 
West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/west-ham-manchester-united-premier-league-report-upton-park>
 means United must beat Bournemouth at Old Trafford on Sunday and hope their 
bitter rivals City are defeated at Swansea.

It is a challenge that leaves Rooney unable to accurately assess a topsy-turvy 
campaign for the club, especially with the final against Crystal Palace to come.

“At the minute we’re still waiting to see,” the 30-year-old captain said. “It 
all depends on where we finish in the league before we can properly judge how 
good a campaign it has been, but hopefully we can get the result we need to 
guarantee us a top-four finish with the FA Cup final still to come.

“It could be a good season for us in terms of qualifying for the Champions 
League and winning a trophy or it could be worse if we don’t end up doing that, 
so we have to focus on the final league game before we look ahead to the final.”

Failing to reach the Champions League could cost Louis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> his job despite the 
manager’s insistence he is staying at Old Trafford. The executive 
vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, sidestepped the subject of the manager’s position 
following the release of the club’s third-quarter results but was full of 
praise for the talent given a chance under Van Gaal.

“People forget how young Anthony Martial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/09/anthony-martial-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-west-ham>
 is,” Rooney told United Review. “The club bought him so he hasn’t come through 
the academy, but he’s still only a really young lad. He’s still learning, 
improving and the same goes with Memphis Depay, Marcus Rashford, Jesse Lingard, 
so it’s an exciting time for the club. Hopefully, they keep improving as 
players and it’ll be a really bright future for Manchester United.”

The most remarkable breakthrough has come from Rashford. “At the minute he’s a 
young lad and he doesn’t need that much advice from me,” Rooney said. “The most 
important thing for him and the team is to just let him go and play and enjoy 
it.” 

Louis van Gaal promises Manchester United will fight until the end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-champions-league-bournemouth> 