
Wayne Rooney scored goal No248 for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> as José Mourinho’s 
side moved to within a point of the Europa League knockout stage and the 
captain to just one more strike from equalling Sir Bobby Charlton’s record for 
the club.

United need only draw at Zorya in the final group match after a satisfying 
night in which Zlatan Ibrahimovic forced a late own goal from Brad Jones – the 
goalkeeper deflecting in the striker’s pass – before Jesse Lingard scored in 
added time. Rooney can be especially pleased with his display as he also 
created Juan Mata’s goal and gave what was his best display in a United shirt 
for a while.

Wayne Rooney’s delight at Manchester United record spoiled by wedding fallout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-goal-record-wedding-fallout>
The team Mourinho sent out had six changes. In came Daley Blind, Ibrahimovic, 
Luke Shaw, Henrikh Mkhitaryan, Rooney and Sergio Romero fromthe 1-1 draw with 
Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday. A question was where Paul Pogba and Rooney might operate given 
the selection of Mkhitaryan for what was only the second start at United. The 
answer was the captain at No10 and Pogba in central midfield, with Mkhitaryan 
along the left.

All three were involved in a bright start as Rooney sent over a crisp cross 
towards Ibrahimovic, then Pogba blazed at Jones’s goal from a Mkhitaryan header.

About 8,000 Feyenoord <https://www.theguardian.com/football/feyenoord> fans 
had made the trip, of whom 4,000 had done so without a ticket. Those who were 
in a packed away section sounded in hearty voice on a night when there was a 
markedly larger police presence inside the stadium.

As is often the case with Mourinho’s United, they struggled to maintain their 
rhythm, although Pogba impressed with a willingness to make something happen. A 
strong run down the left may have ended with the midfielder on his backside but 
at least he was having a go. Mkhitaryan fed him once more and he struck a shot 
at Jones that kept the goalkeeper on his toes.

In contrast to their raucous fans Feyenoord had begun quietly but when they 
awoke United had problems and came close to conceding. First up, Eljero Elia 
made a mug of Phil Jones on the left. The No11’s ball then found Rick Karsdorp 
in the area. His shot was saved well by Romero, who after springing to his feet 
stuck a leg out to repel Dirk Kuyt’s goal-bound effort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmanchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199e5d77ec73b4223e471e99c3cbdd33a0e17dd0%2F0_59_4932_2959%2F4932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wayne%20Rooney%20ignites%20Manchester%20United%20in%20rout%20of%20Feyenoord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmanchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wayne%20Rooney%20ignites%20Manchester%20United%20in%20rout%20of%20Feyenoord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmanchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199e5d77ec73b4223e471e99c3cbdd33a0e17dd0%2F0_59_4932_2959%2F4932.jpg>
 Wayne Rooney sets up Juan Mata’s goal with a clever assist. Photograph: Carl 
Recine/Reuters 
United’s response was to fashion their clearest chance up to that point. 
Again, Pogba was the main man as he chipped the ball to the onrushing 
Mkhitaryan, though the Armenian’s finish was weak enough for Jones to collect 
calmly.

Next up it was Rooney who placed the ball on an inviting trajectory – this 
time Pogba was the target and he might have been more physical when challenging 
but losing the aerial duel.

Rooney’s opener was delightful. The 31-year-old took possession inside his 
half, drove along the left, peered infield and passed to Ibrahimovic. As the 
Swede probed the Feyenoord defence Rooney continued his run. Ibrahimovic’s 
clever ball back to him made the move a one-two and from close to the advancing 
Jones the forward chipped the keeper.

Cue a particularly fierce celebration from Rooney, which may have been a 
release of emotion following his recent troubles. Goal No39 in European 
competition made him United’s record scorer in Europe and separated the sides 
at the interval.

United had finished strongly and continued into the second half in the same 
manner. Mkhitaryan had done far better than in his only previous start – when 
he was hauled off during the break inSeptember’s Manchester derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 at Old Trafford.

The 27-year-old was the recipient of a crafty pass from Shaw as he lurked in 
the area and was unlucky to see his shot blocked. Moments later Mkhitaryan was 
pulled back – obvious to all apart from the referee, Manuel Gräfe, and his 
assistants because nothing was given.

Wayne Rooney rolls back years to help Manchester United hit right note
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-feyenoord>
Mourinho was peeved, though his emotion changed to admiration when Mata went 
close to beating Jones with a sublime sand wedge of an attempt with his left 
foot that caused the goalkeeper to scramble before tipping over.

As was the case against Arsenal, United were the far better side yet were 
struggling to finish off their opponents. Feyenoord posed their first threat of 
the half with 25 minutes left but it was United who struck and in the end ran 
out convincing winners.

Rooney sealed his impressive contribution by setting up Mata to at yield 
material reward for United’s supremacy with 20 minutes left. Ibrahimovic put 
the result beyond doubt via the inside of Jones’s leg before Lingard, on for 
Mkhitaryan, wrapped up the scoring. Mourinho will hope this is the start of a 
winning sequence.
 