
Ross Barkley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ross-barkley> believes 
England will still lean heavily on Wayne Rooney’s experience at this summer’s 
European Championship and stressed the role the captain will play both on and 
off the pitch in bringing the best out of a young squad.

James Milner to captain England against Holland as Daniel Sturridge starts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/28/james-milner-captain-england-holland-friendly>
The emergence of Harry Kane and Jamie Vardy, who have 40 Premier League goals 
between them this season, and the manner of England’simpressive attacking 
performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 against Germany in Berlin on Saturday has prompted debate overwhether Rooney 
should still command a place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/27/roy-hodgson-wayne-rooney-euro-2016>
 in Roy Hodgson’s starting XI.

The Manchester United striker is recovering from ligament damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/wayne-rooney-ruled-out-up-to-two-months-knee-ligament-damage>
 to his right knee, sustained in a defeatat Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/sunderland-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 last month, and although he has now started running again, he is unlikely to 
return to his club side until late April.

Hodgson suggested on Sunday that it would be unfair for Rooney, who is 
England’s record goalscorer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/sep/05/wayne-rooney-england-equals-record-goalscoring-charlton>
 with 51 and who will be a pundit in the ITV studio at Wembley for England’s 
match against Holland on Tuesday night, to be “jettisoned in some way” in light 
of the progress made by Vardy and Kane.

Vardy and Daniel Sturridge will start against Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>, with Barkley earning his 21st 
cap and providing a supply line from midfield in another inexperienced English 
selection.

The Everton playmaker joined his manager in placing his support behind the 
absent captain, pointing out that Rooney’s influence is felt just as keenly off 
the pitch as on it.

“Wayne is the captain, he leads the side,” Barkley said. “He has the 
experience and he passes it on to the younger lads in the squad, and he helps 
us younger lads around the place with the knowledge he has built up in the past 
tournaments and qualifying stages. That helps us all.

“I am still pretty new to this squad but the team mixes really well. The squad 
is a blend of young lads and a few experienced players.

“A few of us younger lads have mixed together in the national age groups over 
the years, so we know each other really well.

“It’s just a great bunch of lads and there are lots of options for the 
manager. We’ve got a few lads who aren’t even in the squad, like Wayne, and 
there are goals all around the squad.

“That’s good to see because we all know the goals we need can come from 
anywhere.”

Barkley had made an impressive cameo against Germany, entering the fray 
alongside Vardy 19 minutes from time, with the visitors trailing 2-1, and 
playing a part in the team’s comeback, which was capped by Eric Dier’s 
stoppage-time winner.

“As a young team, that win will have done our confidence the world of good 
because we were playing against the world champions,” Barkley added.

“To have come from 2-0 down to win 3-2 will give us a lot of belief. It’s 
great to see but we know we still have a lot to learn and that we have a lot of 
games before we get to the Euros.

“We are staying level-headed and we know we have got to stay focused to keep 
improving.”
 