
Apparently anything can happen in the FA Cup. With due respect to Sheffield 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited>, who played 
extremely well and deserved a replay, nothing happened here until Memphis Depay 
won a penalty in stoppage time to allow Wayne Rooney to spare the home side’s 
blushes. To say the result was an injustice would be to risk the understatement 
of 2016. Rooney put away the penalty confidently enough after Dean Hammond had 
fouled Depay, but before the ball was placed on the spot the Premier League 
side seemed to be having difficulty working out where the goal was.

Paul Scholes: Manchester United players looked bored against Sheffield United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/paul-scholes-manchester-united-players-bored-sheffield-united>
Even by Manchester United’s recent standards this was almost comically dull. 
The 10th successive Old Trafford first half without a goal was followed by 
another 45 minutes of the same. Being held scoreless by Chelsea or West Ham is 
one thing but when a League One side can manage it questions need to be asked. 
The late face-saver cannot hide the fact that Manchester United’s first shot on 
target took 70 minutes to arrive.

Once again Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> played far too much 
sideways football, favouring possession when penetration was called for and 
consequently barely managing any attempts on goal worthy of the name. When 
Depay came on as a second-half substitute and was impudent enough to go for a 
goal almost immediately he was cheered as if he had just supplied the winner at 
Wembley. Against a lower-division side Depay should probably have been on from 
the start just for his pace and directness, yet Louis van Gaal preferred a 
cautious approach and slow build-ups that failed to gain any momentum, and he 
somehow kept a pedestrian Bastian Schweinsteiger on for the whole 90 minutes.

Sheffield United’s brief was clear and well-executed: to stay compact behind 
the ball and make their opponents work hard for an opening. Manchester United 
seem to have been working to create an opening for weeks now and Van Gaal 
admitted beforehand that he hoped the stylish goals against Swansea last week 
might signal the end of what he called a “terrible” spell at the end of last 
year.

Manchester City ease past Norwich City as Sergio Agűero shows his class
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/norwich-city-manchester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
No such luck. Anthony Martial was back to being peripheral on the left, Rooney 
struggled to find space in the middle and Juan Mata was involved without being 
effective. Old Trafford regulars have become accustomed to first-half 
performances without any goals but this one was almost devoid of chances or 
excitement. To Sheffield United’s credit it did not look as if one side was two 
whole divisions lower than the other, though equally the ease with which the 
visitors kept their hosts at bay reflected poorly on the quality of Manchester 
United.

The only goalmouth incidents of any note before the interval amounted to a 
couple of through-balls for Rooney to chase – he latched on to one but took it 
too wide, George Long came out to smother the other – and a decent opportunity 
for Schweinsteiger from Daley Blind’s diagonal ball. The German fell over, 
claiming a foul in the area, a decision which was not forthcoming, though he 
should really have stayed on his feet and done better with a pass that picked 
him out perfectly in a good position in front of goal.

David de Gea had relatively little to do at the other end. He reacted well to 
save from Conor Sammon, only finding out afterwards that the referee intended 
to penalise the striker for handball in the build-up. The home side’s attacking 
efforts in the first half were best summed up by what happened in stoppage 
time. Mata successfully conned the Sheffield United defence into expecting a 
cross from a free-kick from a wide position, then rolled the ball backwards for 
Blind to shoot from the edge of the area. It was a neat training-ground move 
only spoiled by a shot that almost reached the visiting supporters in the top 
tier of the East Stand.

There was ironic applause from the away end when Mata managed a cross from the 
right early in the second half. It was comfortable for Long to deal with but it 
was as if Manchester United had forgotten how to get men wide or make forward 
runs. Van Gaal tweaked his tactics for the second half to the extent of 
deploying Marouane Fellaini higher up the field. There should have been ironic 
cheers at that, really. Sheffield United coped, so Van Gaal’s next wheeze was 
to send on Jesse Lingard and Depay for the last half hour.

Depay actually managed a shot a few minutes after coming on, quite a slick 
effort that flew only a foot or so outside Long’s right-hand upright. This time 
there was ironic applause from the Manchester United supporters. The 
mini-standing ovation in the main stand was going on behind Van Gaal’s back but 
he will get the idea eventually that a point is being made.

In the end “Fergie time” came to the rescue. Easily Manchester United’s most 
threatening attacker, Depay managed to make the difference during a whopping 
six minutes of stoppage time, carrying the ball into the box and drawing a wild 
challenge from Hammond. Tough on Sheffield United, but only the League One 
club’s accountant could have been looking forward to another 90 minutes of 
this. The cheers for the winning goal were not ironic, or wild, just sheepish.

James Morrison saves West Brom with late equaliser against Bristol City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/west-bromwich-albion-bristol-city-fa-cup-match-report> 