
Wayne Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> has described 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>’s 
draw withLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> as the 
start of a defining period that could shape a Premier League title challenge.

United became the first side to take a point from Anfield this season when 
they stifledLiverpool in a dour stalemate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/liverpool-loris-karius-jose-mourinho-tactics-manchester-united-goalless-draw>
 on Monday.José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho>’s 
team host Fenerbahce in the Europa League on Thursday, face another demanding 
away fixture in the Premier League at Chelsea on Sunday and have a derby with 
the league leaders City in the EFL Cup next Wednesday. Remaining hard to beat 
and recording positive results at Stamford Bridge and Old Trafford, insists 
Rooney, would provide the platform for United to overcome an inconsistent start 
under their new manager and emerge as title contenders.

Liverpool’s Loris Karius says José Mourinho’s tactics were a compliment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/liverpool-loris-karius-jose-mourinho-tactics-manchester-united-goalless-draw>
The United captain said: “Liverpool was the toughest game before the Europa 
League and then we’ve got Chelsea and City. It is good for us to have those 
games in this period. If we can come out of them with positive results it can 
be the start of something for us this season.

“I do think we’ll be challenging this season. We’ve still got that belief and 
it is even stronger after working with this manager and the players over the 
last few months. I think we’ve got a fantastic squad that is ready and capable 
of challenging.”

United are seventh in the table, five points behind City and Arsenal, and 
Mourinho attracted criticism at Anfield for his latest safety-first approach to 
a big game. Rooney admitted the priority was to avoid defeat against Jürgen 
Klopp’s team but was adamant United carried a threat.

“He [Mourinho] knew it was a massive game, probably the biggest game of the 
season,” Rooney said. “It was a game we didn’t want to lose, we knew it, the 
manager knew it, but we also wanted to try to win the game. We had a few 
chances and tried to get a goal. We stuck to the gameplan well but we just 
couldn’t get that goal.”

Mourinho has taken criticism not only for United’s tactics at Liverpool but 
for struggling to create a clear style of play from an expensive squad. Rooney 
is convinced one will emerge over the course of the season. “It is about what 
the manager wants from us and that is going to take time. I’m sure over the 
next few weeks or couple of months that we will have our way of playing, and it 
will be his way of playing. We had more time to work on the team forLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> with the game being on a 
Monday night and that helped us.

“It wasn’t like last time after the international break when we had an early 
kick off on a Saturday [the 2-1 league defeat against Manchester City] and we 
had more time to prepare. It is a different way of playing but if you’re an 
individual you should learn what the manager wants. As a team its going to take 
a little bit longer. We knew it was going to take a bit of time.”

Desert fire: the world cup rebels of Kurdistan – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/oct/14/desert-fire-the-world-cup-rebels-of-kurdistan-video>
Rooney was among the United substitutes for the fourth consecutive game at 
Liverpool and, despite his record for club and country for almost 15 years, 
accepted he has to seize his next opportunity in Mourinho’s starting lineup.

“It’s football,” said the striker who turns 31 on Monday. “I’ve started 
through all my career. This is a new challenge, it is a new period. I want to 
play. I just have to keep working and get into the team. I’m sure chances will 
come then it is up to me to take them. I like to think I can play every game 
but it’s the manager’s decision and I respect that. I will be ready when I’m 
needed. I’m 31 next week. I’ve got a lot of football left.”
 