
Never mind the novelty of seeing Henrikh Mkhitaryan on Manchester United’s 
wing, the sights that had Old Trafford rubbing its eyes in disbelief were a 
third game in a row for Michael Carrick and what looked suspiciously likeWayne 
Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> proving his critics 
wrong.

The latter may have his limitations as a wedding pianist but here was evidence 
he can still lead defenders a merry dance. José Mourinho has taken a lot of 
stick this season for believing his captain can still make a useful 
contribution, even bowing to public opinion and dropping him at one point, but, 
restored to the No10 position behind Zlatan Ibrahimovic, the England striker 
rolled back the years and both made and scored the first goal in one of his 
most convincing performances of the season.

Wayne Rooney ignites Manchester United flair in rout of Feyenoord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report>
Carrick making three consecutive starts has not happened before under 
Mourinho, who has tended to use his veteran midfielder sparingly, though the 
manager appears to have formed the same conclusion as everyone else. Not only 
does Carrick anchor the midfield and use the ball when it comes his way, his 
positional discipline allows Paul Pogba a much freer attacking role.

The Frenchman had two attempts on goal within the first five minutes, first 
heading over the bar when he might have been better leaving the chance to the 
better placed Ibrahimovic, then blazing into the Stretford End from a position 
where he at least ought to have tested Brad Jones. It was a bright start from 
United, who knew defeat would mean an early exit, though wastefulness in front 
of goal has been a feature of their recent performances. Mourinhobelieves his 
side have been unlucky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-arsenal-burnley-stoke-draws>
, which to an extent they have, yet there can be no denying the statistics that 
show their shots-to-goals ratio is one of the worst in the Premier League.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwayne-rooney-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rooney's%20goalscoring%20record%20at%20Manchester%20United%20is%20amazing%2C%20says%20Mourinho%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwayne-rooney-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rooney%27s%20goalscoring%20record%20at%20Manchester%20United%20is%20amazing%2C%20says%20Mourinho%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwayne-rooney-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-video&media=>
Rooney’s goalscoring record at Manchester United is amazing, says Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/25/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-video>
What United needed to do was be more clinical in the final third, both in 
terms of creating clear-cut chances and finishing them. They did not get off to 
the most promising of starts when Ibrahimovic nodded down Rooney’s cross to 
present Mkhitaryan with a close-range opportunity he was not alert enough to 
accept. At least Pogba had found his range by the mid-point of the first half, 
shooting from distance but accurately enough to force a tip over the bar. That 
was nothing to the succession of saves Sergio Romero had to make when Feyenoord 
threatened on the break and almost took the lead through Dirk Kuyt, a reminder 
the visitors hadwon in Rotterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/feyenoord-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 and possess the sort of speed on the counterattack that United seem to have 
misplaced.

Then, wonder of wonders, United struck on the counter to take the lead. The 
goal had all the hallmarks of vintage United, including touchline-hugging wing 
play and a deftly audacious finish, and was all the more remarkable for both 
these ingredients being provided by Rooney. As he reminded reporters last week, 
he is not finished after all, and whenever the time comes to write his obituary 
this will go down as one of his better goals. Operating on the left wing in the 
position where Mkhitaryan started the game, Rooney turned defence into attack 
by just managing to keep the ball in play, found Ibrahimovic in the centre then 
moved up to take the return pass. On his way he gave Renato Tapia the gentlest 
of nudges that resulted in the defender obligingly falling to the floor, then 
used the free space to stay narrowly onside before expertly dinking the ball 
over the goalkeeper.

Though notionally deployed in the centre of United’s front three Rooney kept 
popping up to good effect on both wings, a freedom he was allowed because Pogba 
was playing so far forward and Juan Mata kept drifting into the middle. If 
Carrick is the key to all this then United may finally have arrived at an 
effective formation that best uses their resources. Even Mkhitaryan came out of 
his shell and began enjoying himself in the second half, and though his appeals 
for a foul were rather harshly overlooked when he took on and almost beat the 
entireFeyenoord <https://www.theguardian.com/football/feyenoord> defence, the 
smarter option might have been to pass to Rooney who was up in support and 
unmarked. Moments later Rooney could be found back in his own half, helping out 
the defence, just before he turned up on the right again to provide the cross 
from which Mkhitaryan volleyed narrowly over.

United still need to convert a greater proportion of their chances, though as 
the old saying goes, at least they are making chances. Even before Carrick and 
Rooney helped set up the second goal this front four, with Pogba just behind, 
look as lively and inventive as anything seen at Old Trafford this season. It 
is perhaps a pity Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial have been squeezed out in 
the process, though time is still on their side.

Mkhitaryan perhaps needs a few more games for full sharpness – no surprise 
there – but Rooney’s sharpness was the story of the match. United may not have 
managed without him and it has been a while since anyone said that.
 