
Wayne Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> has stressed 
that he does not take his place in the England team for granted and finds the 
increased competition for places up front “exciting” as the injured national 
captain watched Roy Hodgson’s side slip to defeat against Holland.

The Dutch rallied with two controversial second-half goals to inflict 
England’s first defeat at Wembley since November 2013 and check the momentum 
generated bythe encouraging win in Germany on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
. Rooney, who hopes to return to full training at Manchester United in “seven 
to 10 days”, was working as a pundit for ITV at the game and saw Jamie Vardy 
score a second goal in successive international games, as well as appearances 
for Daniel Sturridge, Harry Kane and Theo Walcott.

England frustrated as Luciano Narsingh goal seals Holland’s comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
The progress of Kane and Vardy – they boast 40 Premier League goals between 
them this season – has thrust greater scrutiny on whether Rooney,England’s 
leading scorer with 51 goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/09/wayne-rooney-england-scoring-record-sir-bobby-charlton-roy-hodgson>
, should return to the starting lineup when fit. “As I’ve said throughout my 
career with Manchester United and England, I never take my place for granted,” 
the striker said. “Obviously you want to play, and it is great that that 
competition is now there. With the quality we have got, it is exciting to be a 
part of.

“I don’t think of it in terms of needing to fight for my place. I think it is 
exciting. In previous tournaments, if everyone is fit, more or less the team is 
set. But now, no one knows what is going to happen. The manager can play three 
or four teams with different combinations if he wants, because I really believe 
we have got that quality. It is an opportunity for us to do really well in the 
summer.

“Obviously, the decision is down to Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson>, but I want to be there, 
involved and trying to help and hopefully leading the team to success.”

Hodgson had made eight changes from the starting lineup in Berlin and, despite 
dominating possession against Danny Blind’s Dutch – who have not qualified for
Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> – the home side 
failed to create enough opportunities to hurt the visitors. Leading through 
Vardy’s first‑half goal, they gifted Holland an equaliser when John Stones 
slipped as he tried to turn away from Vincent Janssen. In the confusion which 
ensued, Danny Rose handled to concede a penalty that was converted by the 
striker.

The manager defended Stones’s performance post-match. “He slipped up, and when 
he slipped up it put them in and Fraser Forster made an excellent save, 
practically his only save of the game,” Hodgson said. “But they still scored 
from it because, from trying to block the cross, Danny Rose was adjudged to 
have handled. I won’t judge John on the fact he slipped over. He showed quite a 
lot of assurance out there. He tired before the end of the game, but that’s 
because he hasn’t had too many clubs games. He looked assured and comfortable.

“There weren’t many occasions when I thought the Dutch would score against us, 
but they did score two. Perhaps I’m kidding myself.”

The manager bemoaned the non-award of a foul by Janssen on Phil Jagielka as 
having cost his team a draw. “I don’t think the decisions were particularly 
favourable to us for either goal,” he said. “The second was exceptionally 
harsh. But I was more disappointed we didn’t reach the same level of intensity 
and creativity as we did on Saturday, and our domination of the ball and 
territory didn’t realise enough goal chances.

“I still wouldn’t have come in here feeling particularly happy had we drawn 
because I was hoping for a better performance in front of a fantastic crowd. 
I’ve aired the squad. That might be to my advantage in the future, thinking 
about players and decisions I have to make. But, at the moment, I’m bitterly 
disappointed having lost a home game at Wembley in front of 82,000 after such a 
good performance on Saturday. This was a low after such a high.”

Hodgson will announce his 23-man squad, with seven standbys, on 12 May before 
Uefa’s deadline at the end of that month, with this a last glimpse of his 
players in anEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> shirt 
before that cut-off. “All I can say is tonight was a different team to the one 
which played against France and Germany,” he said. “A lot were playing today 
who haven’t played many games of late, so the task for them was obviously a bit 
harder. But we’ve got plenty of games to get our momentum back: we have three 
further preparation games before France, so there are opportunities to gain 
momentum and learn lessons from this defeat.”
 