
We all know that British theatre still suffers from a gender imbalance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/sep/23/theatres-must-act-now-about-gender-inequality>
, both off the stage and on. But if it’s now accepted that women’s voices are 
less often heard than men’s, and many areworking to rectify that situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/23/shakespeare-trilogy-five-star-review-donmar-kings-cross-harriet-walter>
, what about the way women are routinely presented? When you show a female 
character being violated or degraded, is it more problematic than if it was a 
man?

We live in a culture where images are often more powerful than words, and in a 
piece inthe Stage, Natasha Tripney 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2017/natasha-tripney-5-things-id-like-to-see-in-theatre-in-2017/>
 calls for less sexism on stage from male directors. She cites the examples of 
Rupert Goold’s production of Richard III at the Almeida, in whichRichard 
brutally rapes Elizabeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/19/richard-iii-almeida-review-ralph-fiennes-vanessa-redgrave>
; the rape by Dr Faustus (played by Kit Harington) inJamie Lloyd’s West End 
revival of Marlowe’s play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/02/kit-harington-faustus-west-end-jamie-lloyd>
; and the appalling degradation ofRuth Wilson’s Hedda Gabler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/18/hedda-gabler-ruth-wilson-observer-review>
 by Rafe Spall’s Judge Brack in Ivo van Hove’s production at the National 
Theatre.
 Kit Harington and Jenna Russell in Doctor Faustus. Photograph: Marc Brenner 
Violence is often more visceral in the theatre than it is on film. On the 
whole people don’t faint during horror movies, but they did duringLucy Bailey’s 
Titus Andronicus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/11/titus-andronicus-globe-review> 
and atKatie Mitchell’s revival of Sarah Kane’s Cleansed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/24/five-people-faint-40-leave-violence-cleansed-national-theatre-sarah-kane>
. But that doesn’t mean that theatre should eschew graphic images. Mitchell’s 
production was almost unbearable to watch, but it was never gratuitous. The 
violence in Kane’s play, and Mitchell’s painfully precise, relentless staging 
of it, were purposeful. It would hardly be a true reflection of the world if 
theatre-makers chose to ignore violence towards women and presented only 
strong, positive images.

When it comes to violence on stage, context is all. The eye-gouging that takes 
place inBlasted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/12/sarah-kane-blasted-was-dismissed-by-critics>
 and King Lear is not there merely to shock, it’s there because it demonstrates 
the breakdown of human relationships in a world of wars, where all morality 
becomes tainted by the brutality of the battlefield. Goold’s Richard III 
highlights the limitless damage that unfettered male ambition inflicts on 
wives, mothers and daughters.
 Flora Spencer-Longhurst as Lavinia in Titus Andronicus. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
In the case of Van Hove’s Hedda (not his most compelling production, but 
always of interest, particularly forWilson’s extraordinary performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/03/ruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre>
), Brack’s ugly treatment of Hedda fits very well in a production that stresses 
her desire to live a beautiful life. InJan Versweyveld’s design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2015/aug/18/designs-jan-versweyveld-antigone-view-from-the-bridge>
, the whole thing appears to be taking place in an art gallery, one where Hedda 
had expectations of holding soirees but which increasingly becomes a prison. 
Two pistols are already exhibited on the otherwise bare wall; there is an 
extraordinary moment when, in her growing frustration, she stapleguns dead 
flowers to the wall, like exhibits in an avant garde gallery.

One way of reading Van Hove’s production is as an acute study of depression, 
in which Hedda is desperately trying to keep up appearances as things go from 
bad to worse. Like many suffering from depression, she often manages to keep up 
a pretty good show despite the fact that she can’t get fully dressed on a daily 
basis.

That inability to get beyond her dressing gown provides one explanation for 
the difficulty that arises with all contemporary Heddas, whether presented by
Carrie Cracknell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/aug/30/theatre>, 
Thomas Ostermeier <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/feb/29/theatre1>, or 
Van Hove: why, when she is unfettered by the societal conventions of the 19th 
century, doesn’t she just get up, walk out the door and make her own life? But 
this woman cannot get out of hernightwear, let alone get herself a job 
<http://exeuntmagazine.com/reviews/review-hedda-gabler-national-theatre/>. She 
may have married for all the wrong reasons, including cowardice, but that 
marriage has put her in a place from where she cannot escape herself. Or indeed 
Judge Brack.
 Ruth Wilson and Kyle Soller in Hedda Gabler. Photograph: Jan Versweyveld 
Spall’s repellent Brack may be too overtly villainous at times, but it is a 
convincing study of a man who is not just a philanderer, but a misogynist who 
uses sex as a weapon to show how much he hates women. In the circumstances, the 
final indignities he heaps upon Hedda are indeed sexist, but it is the sexism 
of the character, not the director, that is being exposed. The scene – like 
watching a spider torment a trapped fly – serves a real purpose, because for 
Hedda it destroys the last shreds of dignity she has left.

I’ve often watched Hedda Gabler and never really understood why in the end she 
kills herself. Through this depiction of Brack, and with that appalling final 
scene, Van Hove makes us understand completely why she believes that pulling 
the trigger is her only option, her one last, misguided, chance to find beauty.

“People don’t do this,” says Brack in the final line of the play. But she has, 
and Brack knows why and so do we, because of what we have just witnessed. Hedda 
had her finger on the trigger, but it was Brack who primed the gun by sensing 
her fragility and preying on it. Showing it may not be pretty, and it is 
painfully uncomfortable to watch, but I’m not convinced it’s sexism. It is a 
clear reminder that despite the distance between Ibsen’s 19th century and our 
own times, we are still living in a man’s world.
 