
English fizz and South African wines are likely to enjoy a sales boost as the 
price of European and US vintages rises with the falling value of the pound, 
according to the boss ofMajestic Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine>.

Rowan Gormley, chief executive of the off licence chain, which also owns the 
online business Naked Wines, said shoppers would look for alternatives as the 
cost of importing goods valued in dollars or euros was likely to rise after an 
average 15% fall in sterling against those currencies since the Brexit vote.

Gormley said that in the short term, Majestic Wine’s shoppers would not see 
price rises as it had agreed deals which would last “a period of months” ahead. 
He said there had yet to be any impact on trading.

Majestic Wine <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wine> is also looking 
at mitigating cost rises by importing more wine in bulk and bottling it in the 
UK and other cost-saving measures.

Wine: how to beat the post-Brexit price rise | Fiona Beckett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/how-to-beat-post-brexit-wine-price-rises-fiona-beckett>
But he admitted: “In the long run, if exchange rates remain where they are, 
all importers of foreign manufactured products are going to have to raise 
prices.”

He said the weakness of the rand against the pound meant that South African 
wine, which was already growing in popularity before the Brexit vote, was 
likely to benefit.

“English sparkling wine quality has been improving and 2016 is the best 
vintage for years and years because of the long warm summer. I predict its time 
has come and the exchange rates are going to help,” he added.

In contrast, Gormley predicted that producers from the traditional French 
regions of Bordeaux and Burgundy, who have been trying to push through price 
increases for some time, were likely to have a tough time as exchange rates 
moved against them.

Gormley was commenting as he revealed a 13.2% rise in sales to £205.6m 
underpinned by strong growth at Majestic Wine’s established stores and a 26.7% 
rise in sales at Naked Wines. However, underlying pre-tax profits dived 99% to 
just £100,000 afterthe company blew £2m on an unsuccessful leafleting campaign 
for Naked Wines in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/majestic-wine-share-price-plunges-25-after-profit-warning>
 while income from the group’s commercial division was £2m lower than hoped.

Gormley said he believed profits were now on the turn as the company had 
enlisted more customers and would not repeat its marketing mistake.

He admitted the UK market was likely to remain challenging for some time to 
come. “We have done everything we can to control the controllables but what we 
don’t have is a crystal ball that tells us what is going to happen with 
consumer confidence and exchange rates,” he said.
 