
Saturday's Football League action has been decimated as the freezing weather 
conditions tighten their grip on sport.

Three matches in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> have fallen foul of the 
cold spell and Leagues One and Two have been even harder hit, with only five of 
the 24 scheduled fixtures surviving inspections today.

Rugby and racing, too, have been badly affected, with no National Hunt racing 
in Britain set to take place until Tuesday at the earliest.

The Championship basement battle between Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> and Peterborough is 
one of the biggest casualties, along with Reading's match at home to league 
leaders Newcastle, Watford v Sheffield United and Preston v Doncaster.

The pitch at Hillsborough is protected by undersoil heating but areas 
immediately surrounding the stadium have been covered in a thick blanket of 
snow, making roads and pavements in the vicinity treacherous.

Wednesday's chief executive, Nick Parker, said: "While we are still two days 
away from the fixture againstPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>, the areas surrounding 
Hillsborough are covered in snow and ice. It is highly unlikely these areas 
could be cleared to the extent that would allow fans to come to the game and be 
guaranteed of their safety. Obviously the safety of our supporters is the 
club's main concern in these circumstances and we would not want to put fans in 
danger by encouraging them to use icy roads and pavements around Hillsborough."

Preston's match against Doncaster was called off after a lunchtime pitch 
inspection and earlier the League One matches betweenBrighton and Brentford, 
Charlton and Hartlepool and Oldham and Leyton Orient as well as the League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> game between Cheltenham
 andHereford were also postponed.

A decision will be made tomorrow on whether Sunderland's Premier League home 
clash with Bolton on Saturday can go ahead. The city's Safety Advisory Group 
called an extraordinary meeting today to discuss the implications of the 
ongoing wintry conditions gripping much of the country.

The group, which comprises representatives of Sunderland City Council, police, 
ambulance and fire services as well as the club, will meet again tomorrow, with 
weather forecasts suggesting that conditions will worsen over the weekend.

Group chairman Ken Scott, of Sunderland City Council, said: "It is too soon at 
this stage to make a definitive decision regarding the status of the match. 
However another meeting will take place tomorrow after which we will make a 
further announcement. In the meantime, we will continue to monitor the weather 
conditions and associated safety issues."

In Scotland the early casualties include the fourth-round Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> ties between Ayr United and 
Brechin City, Forfar Athletic and St Johnstone, Raith Rovers and Airdrie United,
 Mortonand Celtic and Kilmarnock and Falkirk.

The ties between Albion Rovers and Stirling Albion, Edinburgh City and Montrose
, and Ross County and Inverurie Loco Works were all subject to 1pm pitch 
inspections this afternoon and failed. 

In the Irn-Bru Scottish Second Division match between Cowdenbeath and Arbroath 
and the Third Division game betweenBerwick and Stranraer have also been called 
off.

Matches postponed because of weather

Coca-Cola Championship

Preston v Doncaster

Sheffield Wednesday v Peterborough

Watford v Sheffield United

Reading v Newcastle

League One

Brighton v Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>

Bristol Rovers v Stockport

Carlisle v Millwall

Charlton v Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>

Gillingham v Tranmere

Milton Keynes Dons v Swindon

Oldham v Leyton Orient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>

Southampton v Huddersfield

Yeovil v Colchester

League Two

Aldershot v Rochdale

Bury v Darlington

Cheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> v Hereford

Crewe v Grimsby

Lincoln City v Accrington Stanley

Port Vale v Bradford

Rotherham v Bournemouth

Shrewsbury v Barnet

Torquay v Dagenham & Redbridge

Notts County v Macclesfield

Active Nation Scottish Cup fourth round

Albion Rovers v Stirling Albion

Ayr United v Brechin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> City

Edinburgh City v Montrose

Forfar Athletic v St Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>

Inverness CT v Motherwell

Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> v Falkirk

Livingston v Dundee

Morton v Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>

Raith Rovers v Airdrie United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/airdrie>

Ross County v Inverurie Loco Works 





Irn-Bru Scottish Second Division

Cowdenbeath <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cowdenbeath> v Arbroath

Irn-Bru Scottish Third Division

Berwick v Stranraer <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stranraer>

East Stirling v Queen's Park

The postponed matches list will be updated throughout the day
 