
Brexit is going to bring change that some of us may find hard to swallow. The 
price of croissants may go up. It could be more difficult to get hold of proper 
Greek yoghurt, or German rye bread, and we may have to look further afield for 
breakfast inspiration – so perhaps Weetabix is to be applauded for getting 
ahead of the game with the American-inspired serving suggestioncurrently 
gracing some of its boxes 
<https://twitter.com/jennycolgan/status/818814845411880960>.

“Benedict’s eggs” is an eggs benedict in which the traditional, and very 
American “English” muffin is replaced by, wait for it, one of its very British 
wholegrain breakfast biscuits. You could say it’s taking our country back, one 
baked good at a time.

Happily, Weetabix is probably a fairly Brexit-proof product, given that it is 
mostly made of wheat grown within 50 miles of the company’s Northamptonshire 
mills, so this sounds like a useful thing to keep up one’s sleeve for the 
moment of departure. After all, nothing cheers you up after a hard Brexit like 
a hearty breakfast. So, in the interests of being prepared, I decide to give 
the idea a test-run.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fweetabix-with-ham-and-eggs-i-nearly-choked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879a2f76ef280165471d6b0b77c3bb9abcb4e3a9%2F0_0_810_539%2F810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Weetabix%20with%20ham%20and%20eggs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20nearly%20choked%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fweetabix-with-ham-and-eggs-i-nearly-choked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Weetabix%20with%20ham%20and%20eggs%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20nearly%20choked%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fweetabix-with-ham-and-eggs-i-nearly-choked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879a2f76ef280165471d6b0b77c3bb9abcb4e3a9%2F0_0_810_539%2F810.jpg>
 Weetabix’s recipe is light on detail. Photograph: Kellogg's 
The back of the box is light on detail (sound familiar?), calling simply for 
two Weetabix, two poached eggs, two slices of ham and two tablespoonfuls of 
hollandaise sauce, so I use my usual recipe, but decide not to toast the 
Weetabix, given that it would probably set fire to my house if brought within 
two metres of a heat source. The results look pretty good on the plate – I’m 
actually quite excited about tucking in.

And then I do. And then I reach for a large glass of water. There’s a reason 
Weetabix are traditionally served drowned in milk (indeed, normally, I wouldn’t 
countenance tucking in until at least half of it had been absorbed, turning the 
crisp little cakes into a satisfyingly stodgy bog of nostalgic pleasure) – they 
are quite possibly the driest substance ever to come out of this damp island, 
and no amount of viscous egg yolk, or rich, thick hollandaise is going to 
change that. I nearly choke.

The dog, overjoyed to get the leftovers (ie, the abandoned Weetabix) coughs 
crumbs all over the floor. This, it turns out, is a great way to cut down on 
carbs, because there is no way anyone is getting through two of these without a 
large amount of money resting on it.

Frankly, I don’t think the idea was ever going to work, and the company’s 
shamefaced admission on Twitter that it may have got “a ‘little’ enthusiastic 
at that brainstorm” suggests it knows it.

Whatever next, Bran Flake bagels? Crunchy Nut croissants? Come on, Britain, we 
can get through this mess together – one fry-up at a time.
 