
At midday, strains of the national anthem escaped from Wembley Stadium as the 
soundcheck accompanied some of the earliest supporters wandering in from the 
surrounding stations. An ice cream van backed into a spot in the eyeline of 
children casting their first glances up towards the arch and slid open the 
window for a bumper afternoon’s take. Touts prowled Wembley Way looking for 
spares as the numbers grew.

“Ten pound your chequered flags!” Everyone, it seemed, stopped for a selfie in 
the shadow of the arch and next to an electronic sign welcoming first timers. 
The women’s FA Cup final has attracted large crowds before – three east 
Midlands finals between 2007 and 2009 attracted more than 23,000 each – but 
never before has it been invited to the home of football. There were fans 
aplenty in the blue of Chelsea and black and white ofNotts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, but they were joined by 
supporters in all colours, here to celebrate this transformative year for the 
women’s game.

Though it was the London side who had more of the crowd, when the teams were 
announced before kick-off the loudest cheer came at the announcement of the 
County captain and scorer of the unfortunateown goal that put England out of 
last month’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/womens-world-cup-heartbreaking-own-goal-kills-englands-dreams>
 semi-final, Laura Bassett.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438449296616%2F642f231c-67af-446f-87aa-7f17aeb23e55-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wembley%20roars%20its%20approval%20as%20women%E2%80%99s%20FA%20Cup%20final%20takes%20centre%20stage%20%7C%20Georgina%20Turner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wembley%20roars%20its%20approval%20as%20women%E2%80%99s%20FA%20Cup%20final%20takes%20centre%20stage%20%7C%20Georgina%20Turner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438449296616%2F642f231c-67af-446f-87aa-7f17aeb23e55-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Notts County fans shout their support prior to the women’s FA Cup final at 
Wembley Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
Around 19,000 of the record 30,710-strong crowd bought their tickets after 
England’s unprecedentedvictory over Germany in the third-place play-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/04/germany-england-womens-world-cup-third-place-match-report>
. People such as Cathy Lucas, a self-described footie nut, who had not seen 
much women’s football before following England’s success in Canada on 
television and travelled from Preston to be at Wembley. These are the 
conversions that the Football Association has long hoped to make: turning fans 
in to matchday supporters.

Chelsea 1-0 Notts County | Women’s FA Cup final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/chelsea-win-womens-fa-cup-final-with-1-0-win-over-notts-county>
Packed in to the lower tier of the stadium, the crowd filled the air with 
noise, even without the aid of the band that trumpeted intermittently from the 
south stand. Chelsea fans had not had far to travel, while County, formerly 
Lincoln Ladies, have consistently attracted some of the Women’s Super League’s 
highest attendances since their move to Meadow Lane 18 months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/31/notts-county-meadow-lane-wembley-womens-fa-cup>
. Crowds across the league are at record highs since the World Cup and there 
certainly seemed to be more baritone voices in the cheers (and occasional boos 
- the referees are still referees, after all) than there have been at cup 
finals in the past.

Previous international tournaments had been supposed to light the blue touch 
paper on women’s football in this country, but as we all stood back and braced 
for the bang, the crowds drifted away again – after the north-west hosted Euro 
2005, after England’s defeat to Germany in the final of Euro 2009. Now, 
finally, it seems we have the fireworks. England’s most successful Women’s 
World Cup is clearly at the heart of this; their trials and eventual 
third-place triumph won hearts across the globe. The Lionesses have moved from 
being the sort of team that attracts well-worn post-match platitudes to one 
that can be backed without attracting accusations of jingoism. Now the game is 
benefitting from the sense of occasion and recognition bestowed by venue – 
whether that is the national stadium or BBC One on a Saturday night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438449209567%2F3c1603fc-c246-4bcc-ac6a-29b24b9028bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wembley%20roars%20its%20approval%20as%20women%E2%80%99s%20FA%20Cup%20final%20takes%20centre%20stage%20%7C%20Georgina%20Turner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wembley%20roars%20its%20approval%20as%20women%E2%80%99s%20FA%20Cup%20final%20takes%20centre%20stage%20%7C%20Georgina%20Turner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fwembley-roars-its-approval-as-womens-game-takes-another-step-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438449209567%2F3c1603fc-c246-4bcc-ac6a-29b24b9028bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chelsea fans in the stands during the women’s FA Cup final at Wembley Stadium. 
Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
The FA made the most of things, inviting the England manager, Mark Sampson, to 
be guest of honour and present the trophy. The much-requested bronze-medal 
walkabout was not possible, but this match was marketed with images of 
Chelsea’s and County’s England players lined up in national kit, with the words 
“Rivalries resumed”. At the centre was theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> forward Eniola Aluko and the 
County goalkeeper, Carly Telford, and so it proved once the match began.

Having started England’s first two matches, Aluko watched much of the World 
Cup from the bench, but there was no doubt that she would start for Emma 
Hayes’s side – especially as one of the players to have experienced playing 
here with England last year and as part of the GB team in 2012.

She had described it as a “unique, out of body experience”, though she seemed 
comfortable enough out there on the turf. It was her surging runs that brought 
the match, and Chelsea’s attacks, to life – switching from one flank to the 
other her directness and speed had County’s backline twisting and turning.

Telford watched Aluko’s first effort into the side-netting and was forced 
twice to save from her England team-mate, but there was nothing she could do 
when Aluko turned Sophie Walton and fed the ball to Chelsea’s Ji So-Yun, who 
placed the ball past Telford at the second attempt.

When Aluko was replaced with nine minutes to go, limping slightly having been 
just been prevented from causing more havoc the only effective way – painfully 
– it was to a standing ovation.

Chelsea’s 1-0 win brings them their first silverware. Hopefully they will be 
the first of many women’s FA Cup winners to lift the trophy as Wembley roars 
its approval.
 