
Andy Carroll says West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> are targeting winning the 
FA Cup and securing a Champions League place, with the striker also hopeful of 
being selected for England’s Euro 2016 squad.

Slaven Bilic’s side drew 1-1 with Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/manchester-united-west-ham-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 at Old Trafford on Sunday in the Cup quarter-final, with the tie to be 
replayed at Upton Park.

West Ham are unbeaten in seven matches, a run that has taken the club to fifth 
place on 49 points, two behind Manchester City, who are fourth. West Ham have 
not won the Cup since 1980 and have never qualified for the Champions League.

“We want both, definitely,” said Carroll. “The way the lads are and the 
manager is, it’s both. We are not going to play a weaker squad for one and 
stronger for the other. We are going to go all out for both.”

Slaven Bilic defends Dimitri Payet against Louis van Gaal’s ‘dive’ accusation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/slaven-bilic-dimitri-payet-louis-van-gaal-west-ham-manchester-united-fa-cup>
Carroll was in the Liverpool side that lost the 2012 FA Cup final 2-1 to 
Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/05/chelsea-liverpool-fa-cup-final>
. He scored and a later header was adjudged to have been saved by Petr Cech 
when appearing to cross the goalline.

He said: “I have unfinished business with the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. I got to the final with 
Liverpool in 2012, which feels like a long time ago, and haven’t been back 
since. It is a game I look back on a and wonder: ‘What if?’

“I have watched the final against Chelsea back a few times. I had a header 
saved right on the line by Petr Cech and there were questions over whether it 
went in or not. It was just disappointing that we didn’t get anything out of 
the game.

“If I can make the final with West Ham, it would be a great way to end the 
season for me and the club. We just have to keep pushing for that and in the 
league.”

Of his hopes of being selected by Roy Hodgson for Euro 2016 he said: “It’s 
been hard – I have been injured a lot. My run hasn’t been continuous but it’s 
still a dream to play for my country. It’s something I want to do and I will 
never give up on it.

“I have great memories of Euro 2012 and would love to be there again. My love 
for my country is not going to go away. Hopefully I will stay fit, keep 
playing, score goals and I will get a chance to go.”

There has been no contact from Hodgson. “No, nothing at all. I know he has 
been at the games watching a few of us. We have some great English talent in 
the team. He is watching everyone and he has a tough job to do [to pick a 
squad]. Hopefully I can cause a bit of a headache for him and get myself in 
there.”

Carroll’s team-mates Mark Noble and Aaron Cresswell have impressed this season 
and are hopeful too of an England call but the striker denied Hodgson was being 
unfair in not selecting any of them.

“No. The talent in England is massive, there are so many great players,” the 
27-year-old said. “It’s a tough one for some people to be left out, like at 
West Ham, where you’re thinking: ‘Why?’ when they’re such a great player. But 
having so many players to choose from means you have to leave a lot more out.”

Dimitri Payet opened the scoring on 68 minutes for West Ham at Old Trafford 
before Anthony Martial’s late equaliser. “I am disappointed we didn’t get the 
win,” said Carroll. “There are not many teams who come to Old Trafford that are 
feeling like that after a 1-1 draw. But we have done well and it’s important to 
realise that.”
 