
Simone Zaza’s less-than-successful loan spell at West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> will come to an end in 
January, his agent, Vincenzo Morabito, has reportedly claimed.

West Ham paid £5m to take Zaza on loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/west-ham-simone-zaza-loan-permant-move>
 from the Serie A champions Juventus, with the deal automatically becoming a 
long-term one, at a cost of a further £20m, if he made a set number of Premier 
League appearances for the club this season. Having made 11 in all competitions 
and failed to score, the London club look set to cut their losses.

Juvenews reported that Morabito said: “Zaza will definitely go back to Juve, 
because West Ham do not want to keep him. He could well stay in Turin, given 
thatJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> might need another 
striker. If not, there are plenty of other options.”

One player who will not leave West Ham in January is Dimitri Payet, according 
to Slaven Bilic. Reports in France recently claimed the midfielder could be on 
his way to Manchester United, with his fellow Frenchman Anthony Martial heading 
in the opposite direction.

“I can’t see any truth in that,” Bilic said before Saturday’s visit of Hull 
City. “Regarding Payet, not regarding Martial. He is a good player, a great 
player. But I don’t see this happening.

Mark Noble counts his spot luck as West Ham see off bullish Burnley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/west-ham-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
“Do I expect Payet to stay? Of course. Great players are always the centre of 
interest. Payet is one of the best in the world and they are always the ones 
who are linked with the big clubs. But I hope, and I expect, he will stay with 
us.”

While speculation about Payet’s future is likely to be a continuing theme of 
next month’s transfer window, West Ham have tied down another talent in the 
shape of Reece Oxford. The defender was a target for Arsenal, Manchester City 
and Manchester United but marked his 18th birthday by signing a 
four-and-a-half-year contract at the London Stadium.

“It is great news for us,” Bilic said. “It is great news to sign one of the 
best talents, for him to stay with us for the long term, and it is a great 
thing for him as well. This is the best club for him to continue his 
development.”
 