
With West Ham hosting Arsenal at the London Stadium this weekend, it is an 
appropriate time to consider how clubs perform when they up sticks for a new 
stadium. Ten years ago Arsenal proved that changing grounds is not so 
straightforward. When West Ham resettled this summer they became the 32nd club 
to move to a new ground in the last 28 years, sinceScunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> United left The Old Show 
Ground for the relatively palatial surroundings of Glanford Park back in 1988.

Scunthorpe’s move to a purpose-built stadium was the first by an English club 
since 1955 (when Southend United moved to Roots Hall) and marked the start of a 
plethora of moves following the Taylor Report of 1990, which recommended the 
introduction of all-seater stadia in the top two divisions of theFootball League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>. Things have almost 
come full circle after 28 years, as Scunthorpe are on the move again to a new 
stadium, possibly as early as next season. Scunthorpe will want to avoid the 
pitfalls experienced by many clubs over the intervening years.

1) Beware the sense of loss by the fans
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9bd46e57b2fc49399926a8751b69c2020dd1474%2F105_0_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9bd46e57b2fc49399926a8751b69c2020dd1474%2F105_0_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
 Arsène Wenger pictured at the Emirates Stadium in 2005. Photograph: Eddie 
Keogh/Reuters 
Supporters are generally a conservative bunch who are fiercely attached to the 
history of their club so their main concerns are over the loss of heritage and 
tradition that have been established over so many decades. These are eradicated 
in a trice, as they have to say farewell to a ground they have known and adored 
their entire lives. It can be quite emotional.

While many of the old grounds have grown tired and showed signs of wear and 
tear, there is generally a deep-rooted yearning for the ground. When Upton Park 
was demolished in front of the film cameras it was a poignant moment for many 
Hammers supporters who were wary of moving to the former Olympic Stadium. For 
many this was the end of an era and a sizeable number have not embraced the new 
ground with too much enthusiasm.

Speaking on the eve of Arsenal’s first trip to the London Stadium, Arsène 
Wenger warned West Ham that it will take years for them to feel at home. “It’s 
a bit like when we moved to the Emirates,” he said. “You feel a bit like you’re 
playing on neutral ground for a while. It takes a few years, because you have 
to make memories and build a little history. You move from somewhere full of 
history, and suddenly you move to a stadium where nothing happened before you 
came in. You feel a bit lonely there. You have to rebuild the environment. You 
can try, but you cannot create something artificially that doesn’t exist.”

2) Avoid moving to an interim stadium
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69edafbad41098380130af8b24940c6488bebef3%2F319_403_4559_2735%2F4559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69edafbad41098380130af8b24940c6488bebef3%2F319_403_4559_2735%2F4559.jpg>
 Spurs at Wembley was, like Arsenal at Wembley, a disaster. Photograph: Matt 
Lewis/The FA/Getty Images 
Wembley has hosted Champions League games for both Tottenham and Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, and their experiences have 
proved how troublesome settling into a new environment can be. While the 
players have to adapt to new surroundings, striving to ensure that they feel at 
home as quickly as possible, such acclimatisation takes time. Opposing teams 
are often lifted by the thought of playing at an iconic stadium and can be more 
inspired than the home team.

Tottenham have lost both of their games at Wembley this season, following the 
rather dismal form Arsenal suffered there when they only managed two wins 
against relatively weak Greek opponents and failed to get out of the group 
stage on both occasions in 1998 and 1999 – the last time they failed to do so.

3) Never ground-share
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0c8c62fd6207c66695982380615a32b7eb2ec34%2F0_103_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0c8c62fd6207c66695982380615a32b7eb2ec34%2F0_103_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Coventry fans protest ... in Northampton. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty 
Images 
Brighton suffered a similar fate in 1997 when their old home, the Goldstone 
Ground, was sold to property developers by the owners with indecent haste and 
before they could secure a new one. This proved to be a very unhappy and 
worrying period for the Seagulls and for 14 years they were effectively 
homeless, spending the years between 1999 and 2011 at the less than ideal 
Withdean stadium, which was built for athletics and proved entirely unsuitable 
for hosting football matches. Before the Withdean they ended up in a miserable 
ground sharing agreement at Gillingham’s Priestfield Stadium for a couple of 
years, as they stayed marooned in the lowest division.

Although there are a handful of successful ground-shares in European football, 
such as in Milan, Rome and Munich, they are few and far between in England.
Charlton Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> fans 
still bemoan the years they had to share Selhurst Park and to a lesser extent 
Upton Park when The Valley was out of action. There is a sense of resentment in 
being coerced into playing in a rival’s backyard.

But perhaps the most miserable of all ground-shares was suffered by Coventry 
City, who had to vacate the Ricoh Arena in 2013 after endless rental wrangles 
with the stadium’s owners. So less than 10 years after moving into their new 
home they were forced to make the 30+ miles trek to Northampton’s Sixfields for 
a year and unsurprisingly many of their supporters boycotted the ‘home’ games.

4) Expect form to improve before the move and down after it
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad8c0b03f244b287c9c7887e9cc2133bd9378362%2F0_0_1521_713%2F1521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad8c0b03f244b287c9c7887e9cc2133bd9378362%2F0_0_1521_713%2F1521.jpg>
 Matt Le Tissier waves goodbye to the crowd after the last game at The Dell. 
Photograph: Mike Hewitt/Getty Images 
There are a couple of familiar traits in the form of teams just prior to their 
move and in the seasons immediately following. Arsenal and Southampton are two 
clubs who have made moves while in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> and one of the most 
significant aspects of their performances during this transitional period was 
the uplift in their form in their last few seasons at Highbury and The Dell 
respectively.

Simon Gleave <https://twitter.com/SimonGleave>, head of analysis at Gracenote 
Sports <http://www.gracenote.com/sports/sports-data/>, has identified a clear 
trend in this improvement. “From 1996 until 2003, Arsenal averaged 58% of their 
points at home. But in the club’s final season at Highbury the proportion 
increased to 67%. So, the improvement on the baseline figure of Wenger’s first 
seven seasons was almost 10%.” That is a significant level of improvement, 
which exerts an added pressure on the first season at the new stadium.

When they moved to the Emirates that ratio went down to 62% and, although it 
was higher than the first seven seasons of Wenger’s reign, it was a drop on the 
club’s final season at Highbury. That dip in form from the previous season was 
the comparison that everyone would focus on, giving the impression that life at 
the Emirates was a struggle but those last two seasons at Highbury were 
unusually strong and the fairer comparison would be between the period from 
1996 until 2003 and the seasons since the move, when Arsenal collected 58% of 
their points at home. So although it felt like a serious dip in form, that 
first season was a relative success.

There was a similar pattern with Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> when they moved from the 
Dell to St. Mary’s. They won 64% of their points at home between 1991 and 1998, 
a figure that increased to 67% in their final season. One explanation for this 
fillip in form could be that everyone involved at the club – players, coaching 
staff, fans – try harder to provide a fitting tribute to their former ground 
but are not able to replicate this form at their new ground.

As with Arsenal, Southampton suffered an appreciable drop in performance 
during their first season at their new ground, claiming only 58% of their total 
points there in the 2000/01 season. Having not won a home league match up until 
late November, they turned in desperation to help from a pagan priestess whose 
exorcism of the ground lifted a supposed curse as they duly beat Charlton 1-0.

6) Don’t count on your fans for unquestioning support
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46cc2ac66564713bec3f8e748b6e7528d3bb39f%2F0_116_1476_885%2F1476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%2C%20Arsenal%20and%20lessons%20for%20football%20clubs%20who%20move%20grounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwest-ham-arsenal-football-clubs-move-grounds-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46cc2ac66564713bec3f8e748b6e7528d3bb39f%2F0_116_1476_885%2F1476.jpg>
 José Mourinho was upset when Antonio Conte tried to rouse the Chelsea 
supporters at Stamford Bridge. Photograph: Matthew Peters/Man Utd via Getty 
Images 
 Aside from the changes in physical, logistical and tactical considerations of 
playing away there is also a range of psychological factors to consider. Sports 
psychologistMichael Caulfield 
<http://www.sportingedge.com/team-michael-caulfield.html> explains that a “boo 
culture” has developed that affects the way crowds respond. “The research in 
all walks of life regarding negativity is compelling. We are now almost wired 
to complain, protest, find fault, humiliate and look for the negative in a 
story, and this has spread to football,” Caulfield says. The result is that 
home crowds are more likely to turn on their team rather than give them 
unconditional support. “If the away team takes the lead, the home fans moan, go 
quiet, or even leave.”

Ray Parlour: ‘Champions League at Wembley? Arsenal got a few hard lessons’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/ray-parlour-arsenal-wembley-tottenham-hard-lessons>
This has also affected the approach of managers, as they now have to make a 
concerted effort to gain the backing of their own fans. In Caulfield’s 
experience as a psychologist, working with Steve Bruce, Mike Phelan and Gareth 
Southgate among others, he has witnessed a change in attitude. “For home games, 
I often hear them say to players ‘get the crowd with you’ whereas in the past, 
you didn’t have to do that, you just supported your team, even if they were 
playing poorly. Actually, particularly if they were playing poorly.”

This fundamental shift in the mindset of supporters has eroded the advantages 
of playing at home as the raucous backing of previous years has largely been 
replaced by a mixture of apathy and disaffection. West Ham’s teething problems 
may be part of this larger trend rather than just an aversion to their new 
ground, so the club should give Bilic a little leeway as they seek home 
comforts.

• This article is from the author of The Agony and the Ecstasy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Agony-Ecstasy-Comprehensive-Play-Offs/dp/191090600X>
• Follow Richard Foster <https://twitter.com/rcfoster> on Twitter
 