
West Ham’s long search for a striker has led them to make a new approach for 
Wissam Ben Yedder but they face competition fromLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> for the Toulouse forward, 
with a year-long loan move for Argentinian striker Jonathan Calleri also close 
to completion.

Having failed with bids for Michy Batshuayi, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/west-ham-michy-batshuayi-marseille-offer>
 Alexandre Lacazette and Christian Benteke, West Ham had hoped to convince the 
Colombia striker Carlos Bacca to sign afterhaving a £26m bid accepted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/west-ham-carlos-bacca-negotiating-milan>
 by Milan. Negotiations with the 29-year-old’s representatives have failed to 
reach a breakthrough and Bacca appeared to rule out a transfer to West Ham over 
the weekend. He said he wants to play in the Champions League and Atlético 
Madrid, Arsenal and Paris Saint-Germain are among other clubs interested.

How £30m-plus fees have become the norm in the Premier League | Alan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/17/how-30m-plus-fee-become-norm-premier-league-summer-transfer-window>
West Ham sounded out Ben Yedder’s representative Meïssa N’Diaye once again 
after they made an approach in January, with the 25-year-old former France 
Under-21 player thought to be available for €10m (£8.3m) because he has only 
one year left on his contract withToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>. Leicester have also registered 
their interest in a player who scored 17 goals in Ligue 1 last season despite 
his club only just avoiding relegation. Claudio Ranieri is keen to strengthen 
his forward options. N’Diaye refused to comment when contacted by the Guardian 
on Monday.

Calleri, a 22-year-old who made his name at Boca Juniors before signing for 
the Uruguayan side Deportivo Maldonado in January, has spent the past six 
months on loan at the Brazilian club São Paulo but is now set to move to West 
Ham despite interest fromSevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla>
. Reports in Brazil on Monday stated that Calleri had sought the advice of the 
former West Ham striker Carlos Tevez before deciding to commit his future.

Ben Yedder came to close to joining Sevilla in June before their new coach 
Jorge Sampaoli decided against completing the deal but they retain an interest 
and he is also wanted byRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> and 
Lyon. Crystal Palace have also scouted him in the past.

The Toulouse coach, Pascal Dupraz, appeared to invite any suitors to make 
their interest known, with the club hoping to complete a deal in the next week. 
“I am astonished French clubs, including the largest, are not interested in 
him. In France, it is rare for a player to be able to do what he does in the 
area,” he told the French radio station RMC.

Born in Sarcelles, a suburb of Paris where Leicester’s Riyad Mahrez also grew 
up, Ben Yedder moved to Toulouse from the amateur side UJA Alfortville in 2010 
and has scored 63 goals in 153 appearances.

Any move for Ben Yedder could allow West Ham to sell Enner Valencia, with 
Lazio and Swansea linked to the Ecuador striker. Diafra Sakho is also wanted by 
Sunderland, although reports over the weekend claimed the Senegal striker had 
refused to travel to the team’s pre-season training camp in Austria having 
submitted a transfer request earlier this month.
 