
Although news of Andy Carroll’s return will send a shiver down the spine of 
Arsenal’s defenders, Slaven Bilic is taking care to manage expectations about a 
player who does not need anyone to show him round the treatment room at West 
Ham.

The striker who scored a hat-trick in a 3-3 draw with Arsène Wenger’s side 
last season is back in full training and what a story it would be if he bullies 
Arsenal again when they visit the London Stadium on Saturday. That scenario is 
almost too good to be true for West Ham, which is why Bilic erred on the side 
of caution before his side’s EFL Cup quarter-final atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>.

Slaven Bilic hails 'brave' Andy Carroll after gunpoint ordeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/west-ham-striker-andy-carroll-threatened-by-gunmen-while-in-car>
The West Ham manager said he will not hold back Carroll from the Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> game. Yet he has not played 
since suffering a knee injury in August and, although Bilic has problems in 
attack with Diafra Sakho awaiting the results of a scan on a hamstring injury, 
he knows it would be reckless to gamble on a player with such a patchy fitness 
record.

West Ham are a point above the bottom three in the Premier League and their 
team against United are likely to reflect their worrying position, with Havard 
Nordtveit, Edimilson Fernandes, Sofiane Feghouli and André Ayew in line for 
rare starts and Adrián likely to replace Darren Randolph in goal.

“I know this game on Saturday could be a little bit easier if it was on 
Sunday,” Bilic said. “It’s a little bit tight between the games but I don’t 
approach it that way. We decide on Andy based on can he bring us something. The 
Arsenal game is more important but this one is also important for us. They are 
both important.

“Andy also has to train. We are talking about a player who hasn’t played since 
thegame in Romania [in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/andy-carroll-no-nearer-comeback-knee-injury-west-ham>
]. For Andy Carroll it should be good to play 20 minutes, half an hour here, 
for Saturday.

“It should be crucial. You can’t keep the players in the fridge and then throw 
them in and expect them to score again or score a hat-trick like he did at 
Upton Park. For Andy and every player in that condition it would be great to 
take part but, if you are talking about 90 minutes against United and 90 
minutes on Saturday, it is suicidal.”

West Ham’s need for greater potency in attack is clear, yet they have already 
been burnt by Sakho’s latest setback. Having seen a £15m move to join West Brom 
in the summer fall through when his medical revealed a back problem, Sakho 
worked his way back to fitness and into Bilic’s plans, making his first start 
since May in the3-2 defeat at Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/tottenham-hotspur-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 on 19 November.

How West Ham had missed the Senegal international’s speed, work rate and 
poaching instincts was illustrated byhis early goal in Sunday’s 1-1 draw with 
United. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/manchester-united-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
It was the first by one of Bilic’s strikers this season, a damning indictment 
of the club’s summer signings. Yet Sakho limped off in the second half and 
there are fears that he may be out for a month.

West Ham may not have had to rush him back if they had shown better judgment 
during a summer that ended with the arrival of two disastrous loan signings and 
Ashley Fletcher on a free transfer from United, leaving them short of strikers 
ready for the Premier League.

Fletcher has shown promise despite his inexperience but Jonathan Calleri has a 
hamstring injury and could return to Deportivo Maldonado in Uruguay in January, 
while Simone Zaza has failed to impress on loan from Juventus. Given that he 
has been forced to use Michail Antonio and Ayew as makeshift strikers at times, 
Bilic needs Carroll fit and firing again even if the slight whiff of 
desperation hanging over his return harks back to the Sam Allardyce era.
 