
Slaven Bilic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slaven-bilic> said he was 
“gutted” after confirming Andy Carroll’s latest injury setback is likely to 
keep the striker out for two weeks.

Carroll felt a problem in his groin while he was warming up against Norwich 
City last Saturday and although he came off the bench to help West Ham United 
fight back from 2-0 down andrescue a point at Carrow Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/norwich-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
, he is set to miss Sunday’s visit to Blackburn Rovers in the FA Cup and league 
matches against Sunderland, Tottenham Hotspur and Everton.

Slaven Bilic wary of Blackburn inflicting another FA Cup upset on West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/19/slaven-bilic-wary-of-blackburn-inflicting-another-fa-cup-upset-on-west-ham>
“It is not a big one, it is just a couple of weeks,” Bilic said. “We are 
gutted and he is gutted. He felt that during the warm-up when he was preparing 
to come on against Norwich, but he played and made a huge impact. But after it 
turned out to be a minor, but still an injury.”

West Ham are short of strikers for the trip to Blackburn, with Enner Valencia 
out with an ankle problem and Diafra Sakho not expected to return to training 
until next week after recovering from the thigh injury that has kept him out 
since November, meaning Bilic is likely to hand Emmanuel Emenike his first 
start since the Nigerian international joined on loan from Fenerbahce last 
month.

While Valencia could be fit for the visit of Sunderland next Saturday, Bilic 
also has problems in defence. Winston Reid is missing with a hamstring injury 
and Michail Antonio is likely to fill in at right-back because James Tomkins 
and Joey O’Brien are injured and Sam Byram is cup-tied.

The only piece of positive news coming out of the treatment room for Bilic is 
that Manuel Lanzini should be involved against Blackburn after recovering from 
thethigh injury he suffered in the win over Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/west-ham-manuel-lanzini-injured>
 on 2 January.
 