
Michy Batshuayi’s future could be resolved this week, with West Ham and 
Juventus battling it out to sign the Belgium striker fromMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> and Tottenham considering 
whether to make an offer.

Batshuayi, who is yet to play a single minute for Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> at Euro 2016 having been named 
as a substitute for all three group stage matches, has been the subject of 
increased transfer speculation since Marseille’s caretaker coach Franck Passi 
admitted last month that the 22-year-old will leave the Stade Vélodrome this 
summer.

Real Madrid asked to pay up to €120m for Paul Pogba by Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/paul-pogba-real-madrid-juventus-contract>
West Ham submitted an official offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/west-ham-michy-batshuayi-marseille-offer>
 worth up to €40m (£31m) for the former Standard Liège striker at the start of 
May and it is understood that bid – which would include more than €30m up front 
plus significant add-ons – remains on the table.

However, the Italian champions Juventus have also entered the fray after 
selling Álvaro Morata back to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/real-madrid-alvaro-morata-juventus-buy-back>
 this week, having been put off a move for Batshuayi’s Belgium team-mate Romelu 
Lukaku because Everton want more than £40m. They are understood to have offered 
a deal worth €30m which was rejected by Marseille but are now expected to 
increase their bid.

The French club, who were put up for sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/marseille-for-sale-margarita-louis-dreyfus>
 by owner Margarita Louis-Dreyfus in April, are reported to be under pressure 
to sell their prized asset before the end of the month to avoid a fine from the 
DNCG (Direction Nationale du Controle de Gestion) which rules on financial 
matters in France although it is understood that they could decide to wait in 
order to gain the best price possible.
Michy Batshuayi 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Michy%20Batshuayi&team=Belgium&isSimple=true>
That could allow time for Tottenham to make a bid as well, with the player 
believed to favour a move to Mauricio Pochettino’s side if given the choice. 
The Spurs manager admitted at the end of April that Batshuayi was a potential 
target this summer, although it remains to be seen whether Tottenham will offer 
enough.

“We are looking for a striker this summer, that’s clear,” Pochettino said. 
“Michy’s a young player who has a lot of talent. He is on the list of many 
clubs. We have quite a few people who have given us information about him. He 
has good potential. We’ll see. We have other players in our sights too.”

Atlético Madrid have also registered an interest in signing Batshuayi, while 
Borussia Dortmund could also make a move should Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang leave 
the club this summer.

Meanwhile, Juventus are reported to be considering a €27m (£20.6m) bid from 
Wolfsburg for the Italy striker Simone Zaza, whohas also been linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/west-ham-talks-juventus-italy-striker-simone-zaza>
 with West Ham, Southampton, Everton and Crystal Palace in the past.
 