
Black Swan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137726/black-swan>, 
directed byDarren Aronofsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/darren-aronofsky>
, claims to penetrate to the romantic, obsessional heart of ballet. Based 
loosely onSwan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jul/14/swan-lake-review>, the film 
follows Nina, its ballerina heroine, as she grapples with learning the dual 
role of Odette and Odile (the white and black swans in Swan Lake).

Nina, played by Natalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/jan/02/observer-profile-natalie-portman>
, is bullied by her mother and director, works herself punitively hard and 
becomes violently paranoid about her rival, Lily. What tips her over the edge 
is the challenge of dancing the Black Swan. As Nina tackles the sexy, 
malevolent role, she unleashes dark forces within herself that plunge us into 
full-on cinematic horror.

Prior to the film's US release last month, the dance community had imagined 
Black Swan to be an update of Powell and Pressburger's ballet classicThe Red 
Shoes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/10/the-red-shoes-film-review>. 
As they've since discovered, the film has more in common with Roman Polanski's
Rosemary's Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/rosemarys-baby-polanksi-horror>: 
a terrifying portrayal of one woman's descent into madness, set in a world of 
claustrophobia and pain. Feathers have been ruffled: Robert Gottlieb, the New 
York Observer's dance critic,found 
<http://www.observer.com/2010/culture/dancing-dark-ballet-reduced-campy-cliches-black-swan>
 Aronofsky guilty of "recapitulating all the old ugly misrepresentations of 
ballet", and of portraying ballet as one great "sadomasochistic trip".

Certainly, from the vomiting of guilty calories to the torments inflicted by 
her sadistic choreographer (with a foreign accent, of course), Aronofsky runs 
with every stereotype. And the dance sections are brutal: the deliberately 
choppy style of filming isn't just alienating; it also robs those moving bodies 
of their true power and beauty.

Portman has been widely praised: she spent months in training, allowing her to 
do some reasonable faking with her upper body, arms and head. Her main dance 
material, though, is performed by body doubles.

But what do real dancers think of Black Swan? In Britain, the film isn't out 
for another fortnight, so the Guardian invited five of the biggest names in 
British ballet to an advance screening. Were their screams those of 
recognition, terror – or sheer hilarity?

Tamara Rojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/dec/05/tamara-rojo-royal-ballet-interview>
Principal dancer with the Royal Ballet

Natalie Portman needs to work on her port de bras 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/470854/port-de-bras>. I really have 
a problem with this film using an actress, not a dancer, to play Nina: the 
director seems to think that, in a few months, you can learn a profession that 
it takes years just to understand, let alone be good at. And in the film, Nina 
is supposed to be awesome.

This is a very lazy movie, featuring every ballet cliche going. If you want to 
look at the dark side of ballet, do it properly, don't just give us shots of a 
ballerina suddenly vomiting. Nina's mother was beyond the cliche of a ballet 
mum – she was a psychopath. And the only people who looked like they were 
having a good time were the ones having sex.

The ballet movies that dancers go back to are the ones that have had great 
dancers in them, likeMikhail Baryshnikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/feb/18/dance>, Moira Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/feb/02/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, 
Roland Petit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/sep/30/photography-willy-rizzo-best-shoot>
 andZizi Jeanmaire <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0419929/>. Ballet isn't 
something you can just add on. The characters are important because they're 
dancers – and if they aren't very good ones, it doesn't make sense.

Lauren Cuthbertson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/dec/01/theatre3> 
Principal dancer with the Royal Ballet

I wish I wasn't a dancer looking at this film, so I could see it from another 
perspective. Portman is an incredible actress, and I can see why she jumped at 
this role. But, good as she is, it's impossible for her to look like a 
professional dancer. Maybe they needed her to sell the film, but [co-star] 
Vincent Cassel is a big name, too. And I'm sure they could have found a dancer 
of the right calibre to act the part.

Some of Nina's character felt accurate. We're all obsessive in how we approach 
a new role: it can dominate our thoughts for months. And some of us like to 
wear pastel colours sometimes. But in the film it's all so extreme. And Nina's 
such a good little girl; she wears pink all the time, and her hair in a bun, 
even when she's outside.

The film makes ballet look as though it's all blood, sweat, tears and 
sacrifice. Of course, that's suitable subject matter for a horror movie, but it 
doesn't show any of the pleasure.

Edward Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/apr/09/dance> Principal 
dancer with the Royal Ballet

The sad thing is that while this film shows the drive ballet dancers have to 
become perfect, it makes what we do look so naff and laughable. It doesn't show 
why ballet is so important to us – why we would want to try so hard.

The best part is the opening sequence, where you see Nina completely involved 
in her dancing. I didn't think Portman was bad: she had a good neck, face and 
focus. And the film was accurate about the stress levels in the profession. 
I've had those kind of dreams where I've missed performances, when I'm hearing 
the music, but I can't make it on to the stage in time.

But otherwise, it looked like they had taken all the cliches that they had 
been told about ballet and bundled them into a film. I've seen some 
choreographers play mindgames with dancers about who they are going to cast, 
but not with that kind of intensity.

The one cliche they didn't go for so much was the bitching. I thought there 
would be much more of it. I thought there would be dancers pushing each other 
down the stairs.

Elena Glurdjidze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/30/chanel-tutu-glurdjidze-ballet>
Principal dancer with English National Ballet

I was quite shocked by this; it wasn't at all what I expected. I thought 
Portman did quite well for someone who wasn't trained. She didn't look out of 
place at the barre, and I found it hard to tell when she was dancing and when 
it was the body double.

But so many scenes were exaggerated. And I didn't recognise anything about the 
ballet Swan Lake. When I was preparing for my first Odile [the Black Swan], I 
had a great dancer from theMariinksy <http://www.mariinsky.ru/en/> telling me 
that I had to be seductive like a cat, but it was all within the context of the 
choreography. Yes, you have to use you imagination to get into a role – but not 
like Nina. I must say, though, I did like the Black Swan eye makeup they gave 
her. She looked amazing.

Cassa Pancho <http://www.balletblack.co.uk/company.html> Artistic director of 
Ballet Black

You can tell they did some research. Some of the smaller details, like the 
broken toenails and the way Nina works on her ballet shoes [scoring the soles, 
breaking down the blocked toes], were accurate. And I've seen dancers get 
paranoid, just like Nina, when they miss a rehearsal and find someone else has 
been standing in for them – although obviously not to the point where they 
smash the rival dancer in the mirror and drag her into the toilet by the ankles.

I hated the ballet director. He was ridiculously patronising and bullying. 
That scene when he comes into the class and starts telling the story of Swan 
Lake, then taps the shoulders of the dancers he doesn't want to use – if I 
tried that, my company would tackle me to the ground and send me to the 
hospital.

The most realistic character was Lily, who smokes and has fun. But even with 
her there are inaccurate details, like when she's rehearsing with her hair all 
loose. It's another cliche: "Look at me, I'm so relaxed because I don't put my 
hair into a bun."

Of course, this is a horror movie; it's meant to be extreme. There's been 
incredible feedback on Twitter, but what most people are saying is: don't worry 
about the ballet – go for the great lesbian action and the horror.

• Black Swan is released on January 21. Elena Glurdjidze dances Swan Lake at 
the Coliseum, London, in March; Tamara Rojo and Lauren Cuthbertson dance Swan 
Lake at Royal Opera House, London, March to April
 