
There have been very divergent responses to the questions I raised last month 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/03/hugh-stephenson-editors-update>
 about technical terms that also have generally understood non-technical 
meanings; about when 'incorrect' common usages cease to be incorrect and become 
legitimate; and about how far 'alternative' spellings are acceptable. One 
correspondent's view was simple: 'I was always led to believe that Chambers was 
pretty much the bible â€“ if it doesn't allow a spelling or contain a word, the 
setter cannot use it (at least without mentioning the fact). Proper nouns 
excluded obviously.'

It is true that Chambers has long been the setters' dictionary of choice, 
partly (I suspect) because it includes many more Scottish, dialect and 
Shakespearean or Spenserian words than the other leading single-volume English 
dictionaries, thus giving a 'legitimacy' to the use of these words in clues and 
solutions that might otherwise be lacking. (Incidentally, I have begun of late 
to discourage the use of Spenserian words and also those clearly identified as 
archaic, even when they are given the Chambers Good Crosswording Seal of 
Approval, on the grounds that they are not really fair on younger solvers, 
though I cannot guarantee that the odd one will not still slip though the net.)

A particular bone of contention relates to mathematical and scientific terms 
that also have 'common usage' meanings, such as ratio, proportion, or apogee. 
Derek L.'s view was uncompromising: 'Dictionary writers are not mathematicians 
and are hence not reliable on the subject, so don't waste your time quoting 
them.' This may not be a position that many crossword setters or editors would 
support!

People's names pose other problems. Some publications rule them out entirely, 
which seems a bit restrictive; but how well-known do people have to be before 
it is fair to put them into a crossword. The Times has a slightly quaint rule 
that people have to be dead first. That means that BLAIR can be used if he is 
George Orwell but not if he is an ex-Labour prime minister; and that BOADICEA 
(alternatively BOUDICCA) is fair but MRS THATCHER is not. Still, the Times' 
crossword editor must be thankful that at least he has a clear rule. Chambers 
does not include people at all. Collins used to do so but for some inexplicable 
reason dropped them all from is 2003 edition. So Churchill is now only in 
Collins as a river in Canada and not as a wartime leader. The excellent 
single-volume Oxford Dictionary of English includes quite a wide range of 
people, though not as many as the old Collins. In short, I cannot escape the 
conclusion that the decision on whether or not to include particular people in 
Guardian puzzles is a subjective responsibility that the crossword editor 
cannot dodge.

_____

The Quick <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12931> and Cryptic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25458> puzzles for 20 October 
prompted Brian of Maidenhead to ask whether it was an in joke that the answer 
to 12 down "Monkey puzzle tree (or Chile pine) (9)" was ARAUCARIA, who also 
happened to have set that day's Cryptic. The answer is that it was pure 
coincidence as the two streams of puzzles get selected and edited by at 
different times by different bits of my brain. Also, in case anyone was 
wondering, I have checked and the Quick that day was not set by Araucaria 
either.

A similar question was provoked by Arachne's puzzle No 25,446 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25446> on 7 October. The 
solutions to the top two clues across were BASEMENT and BERTHA. An American, 
Bob M., asked whether Arachne was by any chance a fan of the sports cartoonist 
Bill Gallo, who drew and wrote for the New York Daily News and died in May. 
Basement Bertha was one of his characters, a sort of cleaning lady who 
incorporated in her person the ineptitude of the New York Mets baseball team. 
Arachne came clean and admitted that she had to her regret never heard of 
Basement Bertha.

A footnote on Arachne: she did set a world record on 9 October in the Chester 
marathon for the fastest time run by a woman dressed as a bottle. She covered 
the distance in 4 hours and 33 minutes, 20 minutes less than the previous 
record and is very grateful to those who sponsored her.
_____ 

Our 100th Genius puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27412,00.html> (for October 
set by Paul) for some reason attracted a large early entry from down under. 
First in was DH from Ilkley in Yorkshire at 01:52, followed by the regulars, 
Ian and Tony from London N14 and W5 respectively. But the next batch was made 
up of Peter from Montville (Queensland), Tim and Andrew from somewhere else in 
Australia, Mike from Keri Keri in New Zealand and Jeremy from Canberra. It was 
not until Ian of London SW3 came in at 10:53 that we had another UK submission. 
There were 13 entries on the first day and a total of 326 in all.

Congratulations to Alastair Hunter from Glasgow, who is October's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 