
Is your personality making you fat? Given that, all around the world, obesity 
is – quite literally – a growing problem, researchers have begun to explore the 
personality traits associated with whether someone is underweight, normal 
weight, overweight or obese, and people’s perceptions of their weight – which 
can be very different. To measure your own personality, rate from 1 (disagree 
strongly) to 7 (agree strongly) the extent to which you are…

a) Extroverted and enthusiastic 

b) Dependable and organised 

c) Emotionally stable and calm 

A recent US study found that people who score high for extroversion rate 
themselves as leaner and taller than they actually are, with male extroverts 
weighing more than introverts. Conscientiousness is associated with a healthier 
weight, with the most conscientious (in the top 25%) weighing on average almost 
5kg less than the least conscientious (in the bottom 25%). Participants scoring 
low on emotional stability tended to overestimate their weight, although women 
who gave themselves a low score did actually weigh more than others with higher 
scores on this trait.

These findings held across all of the ethnic groups included in the study. 
While some links are unsurprising (eg conscientious people stick to their 
diets), some are not so easy to explain. Why, for example, do extroverted men 
weigh more? Is it because they’re always in the pub? If so, perhaps the “beer 
goggle” effect explains why they rate themselves as taller and thinner than 
they actually are.


A fully referenced version of this article is available at benambridge.com 
<http://pcwww.liv.ac.uk/~ambridge/links.htm>. Order Psy-Q by Ben Ambridge 
(Profile Books, £8.99) for £6.99 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305948/s/psy-q/>
 