
Now that winter is here, garden writing veers from celebrations of autumn to 
gloom and doom – all that talk of “battening down the hatches” and “tucking in 
the garden”. Yet there’s still much to do and enjoy. WheneverChristopher Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/christopherlloyd>, the great plantsman of 
Great Dixter <http://www.greatdixter.co.uk/> garden and former Guardian 
columnist, was asked his favourite time of year in the garden, he would always 
reply, “Now.” So forget hibernating until spring: dress for the weather and get 
out into your garden or allotment. Here’s what you can get up to.

Plant a pot

Perrone’s law of winter gardening runs like this – the amount of care you are 
likely to lavish on a plant is in direct proportion to its distance from your 
back door. So don’t hide winter-flowering treasures such as witch hazel (
hamamelis <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=368>), wintersweet (
Chimonanthus praecox 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/chimonanthus-praecox-wintersweet>
), winter honeysuckle (Lonicera purpusii 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/54843/Lonicera-x-purpusii-Winter-Beauty/Details>
) and winter cherry (Prunus ‘Autumnalis’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/94024/i-Prunus-i-times;-i-subhirtella-i-Autumnalis/Details>
) away at the back of the garden: if they are planted in pots, bring them close 
to doors, windows and pathways so you can enjoy the colour and scent: if they 
are planted in the ground, cut generous armfuls of stems to display in vases 
indoors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd22bdcc3ad4b46fd09503ec705225ef3a28307%2F0_107_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20to%20do%20in%20the%20garden%20this%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20to%20do%20in%20the%20garden%20this%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd22bdcc3ad4b46fd09503ec705225ef3a28307%2F0_107_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
 Place winter-flowering treasures such as witch hazel close to your back door. 
Photograph: Alamy 
If your garden feels bare of plants offering winter interest, buy some in: 
hellebores <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=113>, skimmias 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/gardening/plants/plant_finder/plant_pages/8309.shtml>, 
heucheras 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/search-results?form-mode=false&query=heuchera>, 
euphorbias <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/search-results?nm=euphorbia> and 
evergreen grasses such as the grey-greenFestuca glauca 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Festuca_glauca> and black mondo grass (
Ophiopogon planiscapus ‘Nigrescens’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/93120/i-Ophiopogon-planiscapus-i-Nigrescens/Details>
) look good throughout the winter months when arranged in frostproof pots (add 
pot feet to ensure they don’t get waterlogged). Winter bedding such as violas, 
pansies andCyclamen persicum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclamen_persicum> 
can offer a jolt of colour, but they are more susceptible to winter wet and 
cold, so put them in the most sheltered spot possible, such as a windowbox or 
in an unheated porch. Consider too that they only last a season: perennials may 
be more expensive initially, but will go on and on, especially if planted out 
in spring.

Rug up

Working in the garden is so much more pleasant if you can keep warm long 
enough to get a few jobs done. I love myDickies Redhawk overalls 
<http://www.dickiesstore.co.uk/cat/overalls?gclid=CPLkkMbbr9ACFQeeGwod404ENQ>; 
no draughts can whistle up your back, and you can either wear thermals 
underneath or an extra layer on top. The key is keeping extremities warm: wear 
silk glove liners (£15 from Genus <http://www.genus.gs/silk-glove-liners.html>) 
under ordinary gardening gloves so you can still tie a length of twine and 
prune your apple and pear trees (another job that can be done this month: if 
you don’t know where to start,YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=winter+fruit+tree+pruning> is a 
rich source of video guides). Keep your feet toasty with a pair ofWiggly 
Wigglers’ mohair goat socks 
<http://www.wigglywigglers.co.uk/goat-socks-more/all-our-goat-socks.html> (from 
£12.50).

Watch the weather

Amid all modern life’s mess of screens and charger cables, you may feel as if 
a weather station is just another gadget, but it’s vital for gardeners to see 
whether temperature and humidity are rising or falling. Get a weather station 
with a couple of showerproof remote sensors and you can monitor conditions in 
different locations, keeping you abreast of conditions from indoors.Oregon 
Scientific <http://store.oregonscientific.com/uk/> has a good range: choose one 
with Bluetooth and you can connect it to an app on your phone. If you want 
something more involved, weather stations with a rain gauge and wind sensor 
start from around £100. For a budget option, maximum and minimum thermometers 
start from £11.95 atthermometerspecialist.co.uk 
<https://www.thermometerspecialist.co.uk/>. When a freeze is coming, add extra 
protection to vulnerable plants (tryHarrod Horticultural’s fleece plant jackets 
<https://www.harrodhorticultural.com/fleece-plant-jackets-pid7852.html>, 
£11.95).

Help wildlife

Resist the urge to tidy up. I’m itching to cut back the unruly ivy in my 
garden, but I’m holding back until spring, because right now it’s providing 
valuable thick cover for wildlife: its flowers and berries are valuable winter 
food sources, too. Many creatures will be sheltering in leaf litter and the 
hollow stems of dead perennials. Hedgehogs should be hibernating in drifts of 
dead leaves and log piles, so avoid strimming or burning leaf piles. They may 
still venture out on mild evenings at this time of year: leave dog or cat food, 
or mealworms, out as an extra food source.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5dc68c3ae68028a845822ceacb68a75af70c41%2F0_0_5100_3401%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20to%20do%20in%20the%20garden%20this%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20to%20do%20in%20the%20garden%20this%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhat-to-do-in-the-garden-winter-jane-perrons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5dc68c3ae68028a845822ceacb68a75af70c41%2F0_0_5100_3401%2F5100.jpg>
 Hedgehogs could be hibernating in piles of leaves, so don’t tidy up. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Fresh water is also vital: add logs or stones to your pond so wildlife can 
clamber in and out. If you don’t have a pond, a water- and pebble-filled 
upturned dustbin lid dug in so it’s flush with the ground makes a fine watering 
hole for ground dwellers and birds alike. If you have spare bricks, rockery 
stones or rubble, pile them up into a mini cairn: toads and newts will use this 
as a place to spend the winter. Toads and hedgehogs may hole up in compost 
heaps, too, so take care if you are turning or emptying yours.

Clear leaves from paths and patios where they’re a slippery hazard, and mow up 
leaves smothering grass on the lawn on a dry day. They can be bagged up and 
tucked away in a corner to turn into leaf mould, or gradually layered into 
compost heaps between nitrogen-rich green plant material. But let them pile up 
in flowerbeds, where they’ll form a weed-suppressing, soil-enhancing mulch. 
Just push leaves away from the crowns of silver-leaved plants such as artemisia 
and lambs’ ears so air can circulate.

Finally, have a clearout in the shed, but take care – many beneficial insects 
such as lacewings, ladybirds and butterflies such as the peacock and small 
tortoiseshell may be treating your shed like a giant insect hotel, hibernating 
in nooks and crannies; don’t turf them out. If you want to do even more to help 
insects, treat yourself to a bug hotel for Christmas (wildlifeworld.co.uk 
<http://www.wildlifeworld.co.uk/c/products-by-species_other-insects> has a good 
selection). Alternatively, make your own super-simple, thrifty bug houses by 
bundling up bamboo canes and placing inside a terracotta or plastic pipe; leave 
them in a sheltered part of the garden.
 