
The problem facing any new streaming service is one of scale. Without a 
sizeable user base, a new platform can’t afford to build a decent catalogue, 
and without a decent catalogue it can’t attract new users. Somewhere between 
this rock and a hard place currently sitsYaddo <https://yaddo.com/browse>, a 
new documentary-only streaming site launched by former BBC Storyville editor 
Nick Fraser.

Documentaries have exploded in popularity in recent years, thanks in large 
part to the commitment platforms such as Netflix and Amazon have shown to 
non-fiction film-making. If it’s hard to imagine Fraser’s site competing with 
those megaliths, Yaddo can at least hope to capitalise on their good work, and 
become a one-stop-shop for a burgeoning horde of documentary enthusiasts (its 
daft but memorable name is presumably a bid for Yahoo-style ubiquity).

For now, though, the site is hamstrung by its own lack of content. At the time 
of writing, Yaddo boasts just 43 titles, only four of which were made in the 
last three years. The vast majority are drawn from the 2000s and early 2010s, 
when Fraser was at the BBC; indeed, a whopping two-thirds were previously 
broadcast on Storyville. By contrast, Netflix has more than 600 documentaries, 
including around 70 made this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnick-fraser-yaddo-documentary-platform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d11329a1936cd569387c7574dd0b814f94c656%2F0_268_2992_1794%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%E2%80%99s%20up%20doc%3A%20Nick%20Fraser%E2%80%99s%20taking%20on%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnick-fraser-yaddo-documentary-platform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%E2%80%99s%20up%20doc%3A%20Nick%20Fraser%E2%80%99s%20taking%20on%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnick-fraser-yaddo-documentary-platform%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d11329a1936cd569387c7574dd0b814f94c656%2F0_268_2992_1794%2F2992.jpg>
 A man with a plan… Nick Fraser. Photograph: Joe Pepler/REX 
Competing with that offering will require Yaddo to embrace documentary’s move 
towards the mainstream, but instead the site seems determined to reinforce the 
notion that non-fiction films are inherently niche. Take the inexplicable 
decision to turn Fraser into a kind of mascot for the site, whose filmed video 
introductions and first-person film synopses (“I think it’s a brilliantly 
simple and touching film”) don’t even identify him by name. Instead, his 
authority is presented as a given, pitching the site exclusively at the handful 
of documentary insiders who know him from Adam.

More encouraging is a promised raft of original programming. Upon its launch 
in September, Yaddo promised 100 original films of varying lengths in its first 
year, and Fraser says the first of these will be along shortly. Alongside those 
commissions will sit a selection of work-in-progress videos by emerging 
film-makers, hosted on the platform to gauge audience reaction prior to 
commissioning.

Asked if this scheme could be seen as unpaid commissioning in and of itself, 
Fraser instead characterises it as “a service we are performing for 
film-makers”, granting them access to Yaddo’s audience. Whether that’s access 
worth having is another question.
 