
If what’s wanted is farce and tragedy, drama and very black comedy, the 
inauguration of the 45th president ought to be just the ticket. As pertains to 
theater, theBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> spring season 
promises helicopters and gypsy cabs, woodchucks and gentlemen callers, French 
naifs sand New York sophisticates – a mix of serious art and candy-coated 
entertainments.

The best and worst of Broadway 2016: from innovation to ineptitude
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/12/the-best-and-worst-of-broadway-2016-from-innovation-to-ineptitude>
There’s nothing her to rival the playful innovations of the fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/08/best-american-theater-shows-fall-2016-broadway-san-diego>
 – Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812;Dear Evan Hansen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/05/dear-evan-hansen-social-media-musical-broadway>
;Oh, Hello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/10/oh-hello-on-broadway-review-nick-kroll-john-mulaney>
; The Encounter – and a few too many works are revivals and movie adaptations. 
But there’s seemingly sufficient variety. Unless, of course, one falls victim 
to a Groundhog Day-style loop and must repeat the same show over and over, 
which is actually how a lot of seasons feel.

 Most of the new musicals are not precisely new, with Groundhog Day perhaps 
the most eagerly awaited of the bunch. Composer Tim Minchin and director 
Matthew Warchus have a go at replicating the magic of Matilda in this 
adaptation of the beloved Bill Murray film, which is part caustic comedy and 
part Zen koan. Andy Karl stars as a reporter in existential and temporal crisis 
and the advance reports from London suggest this role might just make him a 
star. As his character must relive the same day, expect a lot of reprises.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9j5ML4bM21Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9j5ML4bM21Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9j5ML4bM21Y&media=>
 Another film-based London import is Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, with 
Christian Borle in the plum-colored finery originally modeled by Douglas Hodge. 
With any luck this is the show to help Broadway up its dreary concessions 
routine. An adaptation of a less edible film, Anastasia, with its Hartford 
Stage pedigree and proven creators (Terrence McNally, Stephen Flaherty, Lynn 
Ahrens), brings a white Russian to the Great White Way. Amélie, the first 
post-Hamilton show for actor Phillippa Soo, also owes a debt to cinema, and 
imports a madcap Frenchwoman.

The rare musical to defy the film adaptation trend is Come From Away, which is 
based on the true story of planes grounded in Newfoundland just after 9/11. In 
the present political climate, this may take on an aura of wish fulfillment. 
And there’s also Bandstand, an original musical that merely sounds like an 
adaptation, a tale of a ragtag group of second world war veterans aiming to 
become sultans of swing.

Meanwhile, helicopter blades will whirr as the London revival of Miss Saigon 
transfers here and petticoats will swish as the indomitableBette Midler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bette-midler> greets Hello, Dolly!

 Midler is perhaps the biggest musical star to grace the stage this season. It 
is seemingly a brilliant concurrence of actor and role and she has the advance 
box office to show for it.

 But many other film and television stars are set to appear in revivals, 
including Allison Janney (Six Degrees of Separation); Laura Linney and Cynthia 
Nixon (The Little Foxes); Kevin Kline and Cobie Smulders (Present Laughter), 
Sally Field and Finn Wittrock (The Glass Menagerie), and John Turturro, Tony 
Shalhoub, Jessica Hecht and Danny DeVito as a family plus a furniture dealer in 
Arthur Miller’s The Price.

The Present, a new version of Anton Chekhov’s chaotic first play, stars Cate 
Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> and Richard 
Roxburgh. August Wilson’s Jitney, the only of his century cycle plays never to 
have appeared on Broadway, includes a cast of seasoned Wilson interpreters.

 The wholly original plays, all of which played off Broadway, include Paula 
Vogel’s enchanting Indecent, based on true events concerning Broadway’s first 
lesbian kiss and the obscenity charges that ensued. Meanwhile, the queer hero 
of Joshua Harmon’s affecting, Significant Other can’t even get a date, let 
alone a vice rap. Relationship are even trickier in JT Rogers’s shrewd Oslo, in 
which a couple of Norwegians nearly make peace in the Middle East.

 If that all sounds rather serious, though by no means humorless, there’s the 
purportedly uproarious The Play That Goes Wrong, a farce about a disastrous 
evening of amateur dramatics. Because it’s funny when it’s a play. Less so when 
it’s an election.
 