
According to a recent report, you only need to answer two very simple 
questions about your childhood to find out your earning potential for your 
whole life. When you were 10 years old did you live in an urban or rural area? 
And, secondly, how many non-school books were there in the house: (a) 0-10 or 
(b) 11 or more?

A study by the World Economic Forum <https://www.weforum.org/> found that, on 
average, an additional year of education boosts lifetime earnings by around 9%. 
The study was restricted to those already in, or nearing, retirement. It was 
also all male, presumably because – in at least some of the countries studied – 
it was relatively uncommon for women to work full-time in the relevant era. But 
these gains were not evenly spread: an additional year of education was 
associated with a 21% gain in lifetime earnings for those with 11 or more books 
at home, but only a 5% gain for those with 10 or fewer. Furthermore, the gains 
associated with having more books at home were greater for those raised in the 
countryside than urban areas.

Of course, we have no idea whether the (then) children actually read those 
books more than half a century ago. We do know it wasn’t simply that having 
more books was a sign of affluence. Over 50% of “blue collar” homes were in the 
11 books or more category, suggesting that children whose families value books 
– regardless of income – are indeed able to benefit more from school.

lly referenced version of this article is available at benambridge.com 
<http://pcwww.liv.ac.uk/~ambridge/links.htm>. Order Psy-Q by Ben Ambridge 
(Profile Books, £8.99) for £6.99 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/psy-q-306056.html>
 