
Can a ballet production from 1978 still be relevant today?

The Australian Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> believes so: 
its final production for 2016, which opened on Friday, is a restaging of the 
company founder and first artistic director Peggy van Praagh’s interpretation 
of Coppélia – nearly 40 years later.

Coppélia is a tried-and-true crowdpleaser – the classic tale of an inventor 
and his lifelike dancing doll that captivates the heart of a local village boy, 
Franz, causing him to jilt his betrothed, Swanilda.

But the ballet’s artistic director, David McAllister, explains that this 
particular interpretation is also a piece of company heritage. 

Kinky Boots producer signs 'groundbreaking' deal to prioritise Australian 
actors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/01/kinky-boots-producer-agrees-deal-to-prioritise-australian-actors>
The company performed Coppélia in 1962, the year it was founded, then revived 
the work in the late 1970s “from a different angle”. Taking the modern standard 
choreography and adding some her own, van Praagh worked with the prolific 
theatre and film director George Ogilvie and the reclusive but renowned 
designer Kristian Fredrikson to create what McAllister believes is a “timeless” 
production.


Audiences may well agree: the company has restaged van Praagh’s version 
repeatedly over the past four decades, the last time in 2010. That it continues 
to succeed upon revival is a testament to its aesthetic endurance – but at the 
same time, it raises questions about the diversity of programming.

One of the biggest challenges facing the heritage performing arts companies in 
Australia today is the need for broad appeal: many of Australia’s major 
companies have their origins in the 50s and 60s; the audiences that grew up 
with them and, in many cases, still make up the bulk of their subscriber base, 
are now older and often much wealthier than their younger counterparts. The 
need to retain these audiences appears to push companies towards conservative 
programming choices, thereby alienating younger audiences.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd0ada139fbd48b2b6b566cef804711ea64d60e%2F0_0_3000_1999%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20next%20for%20the%20Australian%20Ballet%3A%20'We%20have%20to%20create%20the%20classics%20for%20the%20future'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20next%20for%20the%20Australian%20Ballet%3A%20%27We%20have%20to%20create%20the%20classics%20for%20the%20future%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd0ada139fbd48b2b6b566cef804711ea64d60e%2F0_0_3000_1999%2F3000.jpg>
 A tried-and-true crowdpleaser: Coppélia was one of the first works produced by 
the Australian Ballet. Photograph: Daniel Boud 
But the ballet’s audiences, McAllister says, have proven to be less 
predictable. “A number of years ago we did a lot of research on who comes to 
what programs,” he says.

The results flew in the face of expectations. “The older audiences had seen 
all of those classics 25 million times, and … there was a real appetite in our 
older audiences for the new works, and new productions of big titles.”

At the same time, classics like Swan Lake and The Nutcracker were functioning 
as gateway works for the younger demographic, whom the company had believed 
were their primary audience for contemporary material.

McAllister has been with the Australian Ballet “for a hundred years” (or, more 
precisely, 33 – he joined as a dancer in 1983). Given that he has been part of 
the company for more than half its lifetime, what is his vision for it over the 
next decade?

“Excellence,” he says. “That we continue to push the envelope on what we 
perform … I want every person in Australia, even if they don’t have any desire 
or knowledge or understanding about ballet, to have pride in the fact that we 
have a national company that’s as good as our Olympic team, our cricket team, 
our rugby team.”

The word “excellence” has accrued new baggage in the Australian arts community 
ever since funds were stripped from the Australia Council in 2014 by the 
then-arts minister, George Brandis, to set up the National Program for 
Excellence in the Arts (since rebranded as Catalyst). Much of the discourse at 
the time viewed “excellence” as a conservative policy buzzword which, in the 
context of arts funding, asBen Eltham argued 
<https://overland.org.au/previous-issues/issue-221/feature-ben-eltham/>, “means 
the performance of the western canon by performing arts companies … [favouring] 
the dead, the white and the male over the living, the not-white and the female”.

The Australian Ballet has been criticised on this score before: the bulk of 
its work is classical or classically derived, and productions are regularly 
recycled or revived, sometimes just two or three years apart.

But McAllister doesn’t believe that “excellence” necessarily means defaulting 
towards conservative choices. “On one hand, yes, because we are a ballet 
company and the big, narrative classical ballets are the ones that the dancers 
train to dance and they love doing … and there’s a high recognition factor 
[with audiences], so they love coming to see them,” he says.

“But every year we do a contemporary program … and there’s a growing audience 
for that new, more athletic contemporary work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fee448b6b027357dbf4dff11b8e4f7d3e1eb800%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20next%20for%20the%20Australian%20Ballet%3A%20'We%20have%20to%20create%20the%20classics%20for%20the%20future'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20next%20for%20the%20Australian%20Ballet%3A%20%27We%20have%20to%20create%20the%20classics%20for%20the%20future%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhats-next-for-the-australian-ballet-we-have-to-create-the-classics-for-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fee448b6b027357dbf4dff11b8e4f7d3e1eb800%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Chengwu Guo and Ako Kondo in Coppélia. Photograph: Daniel Boud 
Still, McAllister admits, this year’s production of John Neumeier’s 
contemporary full-length ballet Nijinsky was “a bit of a gamble” – the 
Australian Ballet was only the third company in the world to produce it. “I 
said, ‘Guys, this isn’t Sleeping Beauty, it’s not going to be little girls in 
pink tutus waiting out the front, but it’s a really important work and it will 
develop the artistry of the company.’ And that’s exactly what happened.”

And what of local choreography? The resounding success of the 2015 triple-bill 
20:21 – and in particular, the critical acclaim for Australian choreographer 
Tim Harbour’s commissioned piece, Filigree and Shadow – is evidence that 
audiences are yearning for diversity and want to see new, homegrown works on 
their stages.

The Ring Cycle review – thrilling spectacle matched by talent, over 16 hours 
of unforgettable opera
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/29/the-ring-cycle-review-thrilling-spectacle-matched-by-talent-over-16-hours-of-unforgettable-opera>
The current major change, however, comes down to access: specifically in the 
cinema screenings of the company’s works, following the lead of the Met Opera 
in New York, and further inroads made by the Royal Ballet in London, and 
Russia’s Bolshoi and Mariinsky. After Sleeping Beauty in October and Cinderella 
in November, Coppélia will be the final act in a triptych of live Australian 
Ballet performances shown in cinemas across the UK and Europe.

This month the company will also play host to a megastar of both American 
Ballet Theatre and the Bolshoi Ballet, David Hallberg, in a post-injury return 
to the stage for four performances during Coppélia’s Sydney season. It’s the 
continuation of a tradition of international collaboration that perhaps most 
famously saw Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev dancing in Australian Ballet 
productions in the 60s.

“I think that you’ve got to continue to push those boundaries,” McAllister 
says. “You can’t just sit back on the classical repertoire and get flabby … We 
have to create the classics for the future.”

• Coppélia is playing in Sydney 
<https://australianballet.com.au/the-ballets/coppelia-2016?gclid=CODiisqN1NACFYSWvAodKBQACw>
 until 21 December and will screen in the UK viaCinemaLive 
<http://www.cinemalive.com/index.php?p=view&id=202> in April 2017

 