
Do you worship at the altar of Cate Blanchett or kiss a framed photo of Jake 
Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> each night before 
bed? Do you obsess over the eyebrows of Rachel Weisz or the biceps of her 
husband, Daniel Craig? Do you thrill to the high baritone of Josh Groban or the 
growls of Liev Schreiber? Then you’re in luck this Broadway season. Actually 
you’re in luck most Broadway seasons, as Hollywood stars and pop crooners 
continue to get above-the-title billing off-Broadway and on.

The Cherry Orchard review – Diane Lane stars in disarrayed Chekhov comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/16/the-cherry-orchard-review-diane-lane>
Is this a good thing for theater? Well, that depends on your criteria. 
Certainly, it brings people in who otherwise might not attend and givesBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> a welcome shot of the glamour it 
can sometimes lack, making the lights of the Great White Way glow more 
brightly. But too often celebrity casting seems a cheap ploy to increase box 
office totals and keep the publicity machine churning. These actors drum up 
excitement for new plays and goose otherwise bland-seeming revivals.

 To look at lists of Tony award winners and nominees past is to see that 
Broadway and Hollywood have had a mutually supportive relationship for several 
decades, with film actors taking on the occasional play and Broadway sending 
its luminaries west. Many actors – like Blanchett and Schreiber – move between 
theater’s relative exteriority and film’s greater interiority with ease. Others 
don’t and their work doesn’t serve the play or burnish a reputation. Too often 
producers seem so eager to attract a bold-face name that they stop worrying 
about niceties like whether an actor is right for the role, whether she really 
wants it, whether he can pull it off.

Last year, for example, there were plenty of articles about celebrity “snubs” 
during Tonys time, the fact that the likes of Bruce Willis, Clive Owen,Keira 
Knightley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley>, Forest Whitaker, 
Linda Lavin, Matthew Broderick, James Earl Jones, Jim Parsons, Jesse Tyler 
Ferguson and Jennifer Hudson were not honored. With a few exceptions, these 
weren’t so much deliberate brush-offs as pragmatic announcements that the 
performances – some disastrous, some respectable – had fallen rather short of 
virtuosic. When the nominees were announced, Hudson wrote and then removed an 
embittered tweet reading: “I was used for my celebrity not my talent.” And this 
was mostly true. Hudson was an odd fit to play the forthrightly sexual Shug 
Avery; she might have made a fine Sofia. Whitaker seemed similarly out of place 
as a slick gambler.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a2057c331a822f96368fd9727f493b34c0d7592%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Hollywood%20meets%20Broadway%3A%20the%20big%20star's%20fatal%20attraction%20to%20theater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Hollywood%20meets%20Broadway%3A%20the%20big%20star%27s%20fatal%20attraction%20to%20theater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a2057c331a822f96368fd9727f493b34c0d7592%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Al Pacino in China Doll. Photograph: Jeremy Daniel/AP 
Sometimes even when the casting is spot on, the use of a celebrity still 
doesn’t work. Having stepped away from the stage for so long, Willis, as the 
persecuted writer of Misery, and Pacino, as the mercenary entrepreneur of China 
Doll, both apparently had trouble learning their lines. (In Pacino’s case, this 
was apparently exacerbated by frequent script changes.) Pacino, a multiple Tony 
winner, countered by flailing around the stage, calling on a series of verbal 
and physical tics and quirks rather than anything like a coherent character. 
Willis, by contrast, barely seemed to show up to the performance at all, 
disappearing into his hospital bed as an earpiece offered him his lines.

Knightley was more or less appropriately cast as the title character of 
Therese Raquin, a stifled wife who conspires with her lover, and she knew her 
lines. But she seemed to be applying filmic techniques to the theater, doing 
the sort of interior work that a cinematographer might have caught, but which 
was almost invisible, even to those in the first several rows. Other actors 
were abler (Broderick, Ferguson, Parsons, Jones), but brought something less 
than the charm and intensity of their onscreen work. It was hard not to imagine 
that somewhere in New York lurked an underpaid theater actor who might have 
done the job rather better. And let’s not forget that while famous actors were 
muddling through, the relative unknowns of Hamilton and The Humans were tearing 
up the stage nightly.

Still, there’s no denying the excitement when celebrity casting works. Who 
else would you want to play the Queen, but Helen Mirren, who won the Tony for 
that role a few years ago for The Audience? (Of course Mirren benefits from 
rigorous training and a varied stage career.) And Denzel Washington’s muffled 
charisma lent a particular poignancy to Fences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda20e10ef14f632a8ba7ae4df8424b48481a1ce6%2F0_384_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Hollywood%20meets%20Broadway%3A%20the%20big%20star's%20fatal%20attraction%20to%20theater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Hollywood%20meets%20Broadway%3A%20the%20big%20star%27s%20fatal%20attraction%20to%20theater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbroadway-cast-hollywood-star-theater-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda20e10ef14f632a8ba7ae4df8424b48481a1ce6%2F0_384_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
 Nicole Kidman in The Blue Room. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 Even when the casting doesn’t really work, there can be certain 
compensations. Theater is an erotic space, one in which beauty, allure and the 
charisma that precedes stars into a room are hardly detriments. This is 
sometimes distracting – Ewan McGregor’s good looks and easy charm seemed to 
work against his portrayal of an emotionally stymied playwright in the revival 
of The Real Thing two seasons ago. But sometimes it’s wonderful. Rather than 
wondering why last season’s Old Times had an iceberg in the center of its 
living room set, it was much nicer to look at Owen in his beautiful suit. And I 
know a couple of male colleagues who will cite Nicole Kidman’s Blue Room and 
Catherine Zeta-Jones’s A Little Night Music as career theatergoing highlights, 
regard which has little to do with the overall quality of those productions.

The first celebrity performance of this season, Diane Lane’s moony, 
melodramatic Ranevskaya in the Cherry Orchard revival, was a triumph of 
costuming and little else. It’s still too early to know how the rest of the 
current crop will fare, but enough charm, enough thrill, enough splendor and 
enough leg and what they do onstage might not really matter.
 