
As an Aberdeen fan you may have been forgiven for thinking that things could 
not get any better than the night of Wednesday 11 May 1983. For the thousands 
who had made their way to Gothenburg on fishing boats and for those who had 
slept in the streets, the trip was most definitely worth it.Winning the 
European Cup Winners’ Cup was an outstanding achievement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7vCuldMDSDI>, even more so when you consider 
that Aberdeendefeated Bayern Munich in the quarter-final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VaDK9ev3J_A>, and the mighty Real Madrid on 
that unforgettable wet Wednesday in Sweden. How could you better that?

Fortunately for Aberdeen, they had a young manager who was never willing to be 
satisfied with his achievements. Alex Ferguson had already brought a great deal 
of success to Aberdeen during his reign but there was still more to come. Just 
take a look at the honours won under Ferguson before the start of the 1983-84 
season: the league title in 1979-80, back-to-back Scottish Cups in 1982 and 
1983 and the memorable European Cup Winners’ Cup in 1983. Ferguson had built a 
young squad shaped in his own image, all seemingly addicted to success. 
Fortunately for all involved, the 1983-84 season would take them to further 
highs, withAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> scooping 
three trophies and coming close to two more. Heady days indeed.

Ferguson “formed a squad who are the envy of every club in the land,” to use 
the words of the Times’ Hugh Taylor, with goalkeeper Jim Leighton playing 
behind a rock-solid defence that included the centre-back partnership of 
skipper Willie Miller and Alex McLeish, who helped Aberdeen to concede only 21 
goals in their 36 league matches that season, with 21 clean sheets along the 
way. Neil Simpson, Neale Cooper and Doug Bell were key cogs in midfield, with 
width coming from Peter Weir and Gordon Strachan. Up front Mark McGhee, Eric 
Black and John Hewitt scored over 50 goals between them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Faberdeen-scottish-football-alex-ferguson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3bded6b34d6204a6ec0b90f391a8bc9be30da01%2F0_0_1940_3030%2F1940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Aberdeen%20ruled%20Scottish%20football&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Faberdeen-scottish-football-alex-ferguson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Aberdeen%20ruled%20Scottish%20football&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Faberdeen-scottish-football-alex-ferguson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3bded6b34d6204a6ec0b90f391a8bc9be30da01%2F0_0_1940_3030%2F1940.jpg>
 Alex Ferguson in 1983. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
Since winning the Premier Division in 1979-80, Aberdeen had come very close to 
repeating the feat. Runners-up in 1980-81 and 1981-82, and third in 1982-83, 
when they were just a point behind champions Dundee United, the club were 
favourites for the title before the season began.Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> were trying to come to terms with 
the departure of manager Billy McNeill and star man Charlie Nicholas, and 
Rangers, who were experiencing a period of relative decline, had not finished 
in the top two since 1978-79. Defending champions Dundee United would be strong 
contenders once again.

Results in August suggested the season would be prosperous for Aberdeen, but 
there would be bigger tests to come. An impressive 3-0 win against Dundee at 
Pittodrie on the opening day was tarnished by Strachan suffering a leg injury 
that would keep him out of the next eight matches, but with new signing Billy 
Stark slotting in well, Strachan’s absence wasn’t telling.

Stark scored a hat-trick in the 9-0 League Cup second round first-leg 
thrashing of First Division Raith Rovers, but even this was overshadowed by 
Eric Black’s four goals, as Aberdeen easily progressed to the group stage. 
Dundee, St Johnstone and Meadowbank Thistle were never likely to cause Ferguson 
too many sleepless nights, and so it proved. Five wins and a draw saw Aberdeen 
top the group with ease, to set up a semi-final clash with Celtic.

After a 5-0 demolition of St Johnstone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1iWogKzLIGA>, Aberdeen dropped their first 
point of the season in a 1-1 draw at Motherwell, John Gahagan’s goal the the 
first conceded by Leighton in 530 minutes of action. However, a 2-0 win at 
Ibrox against a woeful Rangers side pleased Ferguson greatly. “Rangers were 
unlucky to catch us on a day when our concentration and commitment were total. 
We had some exceptional performances this afternoon,” said Ferguson as the 
pressure on Rangers boss John Greig increased.

There were no such problems for Ferguson, although he would show his fiery 
side as autumn approached. A first defeat of the season against Dundee United 
at a packed Pittodrie saw Aberdeen slip three points behind the visitors, 
Celtic and Hearts and, in the days of two points for a win, it left Ferguson 
talking about the “uphill fight on our hands”. Full-back John McMaster’s missed 
penalty proved crucial, as shortly after Dundee United doubled their lead, and 
although the returning Strachan scored his own penalty after coming off the 
bench, the champions looked to have landed a big psychological blow.

Wins against Hearts and St Mirren suggested that Aberdeen had recovered from 
their loss but a 2-1 defeat at Hibs resulted in Ferguson blowing his top 
publicly. He had history in this regard – the bollocking he gave his team after 
they had beaten Rangers 1-0 in the 1983 Scottish Cup final had gone down in 
folklore. With anger oozing from every pore, Ferguson called his team’s 
performance that day at Hampden Park “disgraceful”. Although he may have 
apologised later, his players were unquestionably madeaware of the standards 
expected at Aberdeen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoSiBq2Q0MU&t=2m20s>.

Aberdeen began the defence of their European Cup Winners’ Cup trophy in 
laboured fashion, a 3-2 aggregate win over Icelandic team Akranes described as 
“undignified” in the Times. On the eve of their second-round match against 
Beveren, Ferguson decided his players needed another tongue lashing. Accusing 
them of a lack of professionalism, Ferguson even went as far as hinting that he 
might need to break up his side. “I have to face up to the realities before it 
is too late,” he fumed. “Great clubs like Manchester United, Liverpool and 
Celtic had no hesitation in breaking up their sides.”

If Ferguson wanted a reaction, it worked. Aberdeen’s goalless draw in Belgium 
was mainly down to a fine performance by international keeper Jean-Marie Pfaff, 
and an easy 4-1 win in the second leg put the holders through to the 
quarter-finals. But this only tells part of the story. Post-rant, Aberdeen 
embarked on a run of 27 matches unbeaten in all competitions, taking 30 out of 
a possible 32 points in the league, winning a European trophy/plaque, and at 
one point appeared to have a realistic chance of winning five trophies. The 
very open dressing down seemed to have done the trick.

The league run started with an emphatic 3-1 win over Celtic, with goals from 
Hewitt, McLeish and Strachan pushing Aberdeen back into second a just a point 
behind leaders Dundee United. Six straight wins propelled Aberdeen to the top 
and opened up a three-point lead, with many memorable performances. A Hewitt 
hat-trick resulted in another 5-0 defeat for St Johnstone; Rangers were totally 
outclassed, 19-year-old midfielder Ian Porteous scoring the last goal in a 3-0 
win; and a pivotal 2-0 win away at Dundee United, pushed Aberdeen’s odds out to 
4/5 for the title, with Ferguson gushing about his team’s form. “I cannot 
remember us playing so well at this time of the year. I think we always play 
much better during the second half of the season, and if that’s to be the case 
this time, it’s going to be marvellous for us.”

During this period, Greig had resigned his post at Rangers and naturally 
Aberdeen fans were fearful that Ferguson would fill the vacant role. Any 
worries were banished, however, when Ferguson put pen to paper on a new 
five-year deal worth £250,000. When Dundee United manager Jim McLean also 
turned down the Rangers job, it gave a clear indication of the relative 
positions of the clubs at the time. Come the end of the season, Ferguson also 
rejected three separate moves from Tottenham. “I like preaching loyalty to my 
players, now I have to set an example myself.”

Player loyalty was to be an issue as the season concluded, with Aberdeen’s 
success attracting plenty of other clubs to Ferguson and his staff. Indeed in 
December, Aberdeen’s No2 Archie Knox left the club for the manager’s hot seat 
at Dundee, with full-back Doug Rougvie, Strachan and McGhee departing after the 
Scottish Cup final. The unfortunate side effect of a successful team is that 
the vultures will circle, especially if the club is a relative minnow.

Ferguson coped with these departures, but struggled to find a right-back. 
Stuart Kennedy’s career-ending injury before Gothenburg had seen Ferguson try a 
variety of options as a replacement – Rougvie, Cooper, and 19-year-old Tommy 
McIntyre all featuring – but the purchase of Stewart McKimmie in December for 
£90,000 from Dundee went a long way to solving the problem. McKimmie would 
spend 14 years at Aberdeen; his second appearance at his new club would be some 
occasion.

A 2-0 win over European Cup holders Hamburg at Pittodrie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdTjKcqzQmU> added the European Super Cup to 
Aberdeen’s trophy cabinet, or should that be a rather underwhelming plaque; 
vice-chairman Chris Anderson had enquired about a more fitting prize for the 
winners, but his appeal met deaf ears. After drawing the first leg 0-0 in 
Germany – mainly due to excellent performances from Leighton, Miller and 
McLeish - Simpson and McGhee scored in the return leg to earn Aberdeen their 
second European trophy.

The excellence of Aberdeen’s squad was beginning to be recognised at a higher 
level, with international call-ups for Leighton, Miller, McLeish, Rougvie, 
Cooper, Strachan, Weir, and McGhee at various points of the season, along with 
places in under-21 parties for reserve keeper Bryan Gunn, Simpson, Bell, Black, 
and Hewitt. As 1984 progressed, this squad would be tested to the max, the 
winter in Scotland causing postponements and fixture congestion that created 
many a headache.

At the turn of the year, Aberdeen held a healthy four point lead over Celtic, 
but would only play one match in the whole of January,a scrappy 1-1 draw at 
Ibrox <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xo0foEGBGo>which saw Black sent off 
along with Rangers’ Ally Dawson. The situation was hardly helped when a power 
failure and then a blizzard meant Aberdeen’s match against St Johnstone was 
abandoned at half-time with the Dons leading 3-0. Ferguson took his players off 
to Marbella for a break, yet with fixtures piling up as much as the snow in 
Scotland, the last four months of the season would be hectic to say the least.

A 1-0 win over Celtic at the start of February stretched Aberdeen’s lead to 
six points, on an afternoon that once again showed Leighton at his finest. In 
truth Aberdeen rode their luck, leading the Glasgow Herald’s Ian Paul to write 
that “Aberdeen illustrated the old football truism that champions win even when 
they don’t play well.” It didn’t quite put the league to bed, but for the next 
few weeks cup football would dominate proceedings.

The last thing needed in Aberdeen’s diary was a cup replay, but a late 
equaliser scored by Brian Gallagher gave First Division Kilmarnock another 
chance in the Scottish Cup third round, the replay at Rugby Park played just 
two days later. Aberdeen won 3-1, before beating Clyde 2-0 in the fourth round, 
in a six day period that had seen them contest three cup ties. There was little 
time to rest, however, with the League Cup semi-final looming against Celtic.

The first leg at Pittodrie had ended goalless, Strachan hitting the bar on a 
night when Arsenal caretaker manager Don Howe was in the crowd to watch the man 
who was attracting a lot of interest south of the border. Alas the return leg 
proved a step too far for Ferguson’s team, a 1-0 loss ending hopes of a clean 
sweep of trophies,Celtic’s goal coming from a hotly disputed penalty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nlAE0EeSnI&t=0m25s> awarded by referee Bob 
Valentine. It would not be the last we would hear of Valentine in 1984.

The League Cup disappointment had come just three days after a defeat in the 
quarter-finals of the Cup Winners’ Cup that appeared to have ended Aberdeen’s 
hold on the trophy. Despite avoiding the giants of Juventus, Barcelona, and 
Manchester United,a 2-0 defeat in Hungary against Ujpest Dozsa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y7h_Ju5eabg> left Ferguson irate regarding 
missed opportunities, Aberdeen losing their first match in 27. When this was 
followed by the Celtic defeat, and then a 0-0 draw at Pittodrie against Dundee 
United in the Scottish Cup quarter finals, Aberdeen were in danger of exiting 
three cup competitions in as many weeks.

The mini wobble was averted in some style. On a glorious night in the Granite 
City <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZBk45shKnTY>, a Mark McGhee brace sent 
the match into extra time. When McGhee completed his hat-trick, and Hungarian 
keeper Jozsef Szendrei was later sent off for headbutting McLeish, the comeback 
was complete.

“Whatever happens you can be certain that we will be absolutely exhausted at 
the end,” Ferguson had proclaimed before the match, so part of him must have 
been pleased when Aberdeen’s next league match at Dundee United was postponed 
due to a flooded pitch. On the other hand, this did little to help the growing 
fixture congestion. From this point on, Aberdeen would play 17 matches in just 
50 days.

The road to a third successive Scottish Cup final continued, with both Dundee 
clubs beaten on the way to Hampden Park. In the quarter-final replay, McGhee 
scored after two minutes and Aberdeen, aided by a strong performance by 
Leighton and some poor Dundee United finishing, held on for a semi-final date 
at Tynecastle with Knox’s Dundee. A comfortable 2-0 win, with Porteous and 
Strachan scoring, set up another encounter with Celtic (and Bob Valentine), but 
before then there would be a rare low moment in an otherwise joyous season.

When the draw was made for the Cup Winners’ Cup semi-finals, many felt that 
Aberdeen had drawn the easiest option in Porto, avoiding the mighty Juventus, 
and a Battle of Britain against Manchester United. The bookies immediately 
installed Aberdeen as 2/1 favourites to win the tournament but Ferguson knew 
the size of the task ahead. “We will have to play well. But if we do I am 
certain we are capable of reaching the final.”

Aberdeen fell just short in two very closely fought matches. A 1-0 defeat in 
Portugal looked to have set up the second leg nicely 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xQlF9YXieCI> but, try as they might, Aberdeen 
failed to break down a strong Porto side, who would provide nine of Portugal’s 
squad that would go close to reaching the final of Euro 84.A 76th-minute strike 
from Silva <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ffMIwqR2a4U> killed any chances of 
Aberdeen becoming the first team to successfully defend the Cup Winners’ Cup, 
but fast forward a week and the mood was very different.

A 1-0 defeat at Celtic at the end of March and a 1-1 draw against Hearts in 
the next league match had given Celtic a glimmer of hope, but the door was 
resoundingly slammed by Ferguson’s team. Six straight wins put Aberdeen on the 
brink of the title, and a trip to Edinburgh on 2 May proved to be the 
coronation.McKimmie’s first career goal sealed the deal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5O8nweq-Ago>. Ferguson celebrated with his 
players on the pitch in front of the travelling support, with the champagne 
flowing in the dressing room afterwards.

The title was claimed with four league games remaining, but inevitably 
thoughts drifted towards the Scottish Cup final. They may have lost their final 
league match 3-2 at St Mirren (without Miller and McLeish), but the champions 
had gone through the whole season letting in just nine goals away from home.

Before the cup final, it was announced that Strachan and McGhee were to leave 
at the end of the season, moving to Manchester United and Hamburg respectively. 
Their transfers were hardly unexpected, but when Rougvie left for Chelsea later 
in the summer, Ferguson was faced with the task of rebuilding the team. It was 
a challenge he was openly relishing: he had bought Stark at the start of the 
season fully predicting that Strachan would leave and would later sign Frank 
McDougall to cover McGhee’s departure.

But the rebuilding could wait. On 19 May, Aberdeen had the chance to win their 
third Scottish Cup in a row <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zqb8h_NDvJI> – 
only Rangers had done that in the 20th century – and become the first club from 
outside of Glasgow to win the double. Priced as 11/8 favourites (to win in 90 
minutes), all looked to be going smoothly enough when Black scored the opener 
after 24 minutes – although Celtic’s players were adamant that the striker was 
offside – but a decision taken by referee Valentine after 38 minutes would turn 
a final that had initially flourished into a scrappy affair.

Roy Aitken’s sending off for a crunching tackle on McGhee changed the 
complexion of the match. Celtic were furious, manager David Hay later citing 
pre-match interference by SFA secretary Ernie Walker, who had demanded that the 
final be a showpiece occasion, and with previous gripes regarding Valentine – 
at the end of the League Cup final, Valentine had to be protected by police 
after Celtic’s players attempted to protest over two penalties he had awarded 
Rangers – feelings were running high.

It was great credit to Celtic that they managed to take the match to 
extra-time, Paul McStay equalising with nine minutes remaining, but they were 
out on their feet during the extra half hour. When McGhee slammed home his last 
ever goal for Aberdeen in the 98th minute, the double was secured. The cup may 
not have been won in style, but it didn’t really matter. Thousands of 
supporters lined the streets of Aberdeen to celebrate the win and 15,000 fans 
turned up at Pittodrie to see the cup paraded.

It was the culmination of a stunning campaign: 63 (and a half) matches; a 
league title won with four games to spare; 25 league matches won out of 32 by 
the time the championship was secured; just 21 goals league conceded (16 in 
“live” matches); a third consecutive Scottish Cup and the first double claimed 
outside of the Old Firm; two semi-finals, including a sterling defence of the 
European Cup Winners’ Cup; and the European Super Cup success, making Aberdeen 
the only Scottish club to have won two European trophies. Now that’s what I 
call an impressive football season.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 