
The schematic for beating Holland had been drawn up for months, but they 
needed the will to see it through. “Before we played Holland, Terry Venables 
gave us the most brilliant team talk,” saidPaul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne>. “He made it clear this 
was going to be one of the biggest games in any of our lives.” It was an ego 
massage that lasted for an hour and a half, analysing the strengths and 
weaknesses of both sides and concluding there could be only one winner. “Every 
player left that meeting convinced he was better than his counterpart,” wrote 
Tony Adams, “and that the Dutch were simply there for the taking.”

It would be the only game at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/englandfootball/story/0,9565,540935,00.html>
 where the opposition fans weren’t dwarfed by the home crowd. There were huge 
swathes of orange around the stadium, which helped to give the game the 
atmosphere of a cup final. As the camera panned down the England team during 
the anthems they looked relaxed and ready to go. Paul Ince and Gascoigne were 
trying to make each other laugh; Gary Neville stared blankly at the floor, 
showing all the emotion of an Easter Island statue; Stuart Pearce sang 
zealously; Adams did too, but using the wrong words.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-euro-96-4-1-football-when-came-home-paul-gascoigne-terry-venables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffad3d8c5334eab3aef6e0711d437196717693d21%2F0_131_1000_1251%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20football%20came%20home%3A%20England%E2%80%99s%20rapture%20against%20Holland%20at%20Euro%2096&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-euro-96-4-1-football-when-came-home-paul-gascoigne-terry-venables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20football%20came%20home%3A%20England%E2%80%99s%20rapture%20against%20Holland%20at%20Euro%2096&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-euro-96-4-1-football-when-came-home-paul-gascoigne-terry-venables%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffad3d8c5334eab3aef6e0711d437196717693d21%2F0_131_1000_1251%2F1000.jpg>
England would get the first chance. Darren Anderton whipped in a low corner, 
the Tottenham corner routine, to near the penalty spot.Alan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> shot on the half-volley and 
Richard Witschge, stationed on the line, cleared the ball to safety. Shortly 
afterwards, Aron Winter missed a glorious chance to score from two yards after 
mistiming a header from a corner.

Both sides were fizzing the ball across the pitch at a crackling pace and with 
real quality. The Dutch had quickly found a rhythm and purpose that suggested 
harmony on the pitch at least. England were moving it around with freedom and 
confidence, as if they’d collectively had their legs removed from manacles. ITV 
commentator Brian Moore happily noted this new trend. “You sounded so surprised 
there, Brian,” said Kevin Keegan. “As you said: ‘Good movement and good passing 
byEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>.’ We can play like the 
Dutch, we’ve just got to believe a little bit more in ourselves.”

England had adopted a policy of containment, remaining coiled to hit the Dutch 
on the counterattack. One such break put England in front. Teddy Sheringham 
picked up a clearance from a corner and floated a pass that sent Steve 
McManaman haring free into the Dutch half. As McManaman cut across to the area 
he rolled it to the on-rushing Ince, who improvised a Cruyff turn at full pelt. 
It was too quick for Danny Blind, who threw out an instinctive leg and tripped 
him over. Blind was booked and England had a penalty.

“The penalty was down the far end from where we were,” remembers Alex 
Dyakowski, taken to the game by his father, John, as an 11th birthday present. 
“I seem to remember most of the game being stood on my seat, and everyone spent 
the whole game stood up. I said: ‘I can’t see.’ My dad picked me up and was 
holding me, and in the end he put me on his shoulders while he was stood on his 
seat.

“When Shearer ‘Shearered’ it into the corner, I remember having to hold on 
pretty tight through all the jumping and hugging and all the rest. It felt 
pretty unstable, my dad was trying to avoid jumping too much.” The rickety old 
stadium was in for a rough old night. England 1,Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> 0.

The rest of the half was controlled by the Dutch. For someone just 20 years 
old, Clarence Seedorf was a frighteningly mature force in midfield. The most 
un-Dutch play imaginable – some long balls over the top of the defence to 
Dennis Bergkamp – created a few shuddering moments of panic. Long shots were 
deflected wide and the corners piled up. The Dutch had eight in the first half 
alone, and from one Winter put another simple header over the bar from six 
yards. Michael Reiziger then skipped past Anderton and crossed to Bergkamp, who 
put another good header off target.

Football: Rob Smyth: On second thoughts: England 4-1 Holland, Euro 96
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/feb/15/1> 
As he had done against Switzerland and Scotland, David Seaman intervened with 
a crucial save. Gareth Southgate mistimed a header back to him, which put 
Bergkamp clean through on goal. Bergkamp waited and waited, eventually shooting 
low to the left corner. Seaman threw out an arm and palmed the ball behind for 
a corner. “England really need half-time here,” observed Barry Davies over on 
the BBC. To help stop the flow, Ince hauled down Jordi Cruyff and was booked, 
which ruled him out of any quarter-final.

Half-time arrived with England still in the lead. The Dutch made a change. 
Johan de Kock replaced Witschge, who had been guarding the right-hand post at 
corners. Someone failed to give him the memo about where to stand in the event 
of an English corner. That oversight precipitated the greatest 45 minutes for 
English football that didn’tinvolve an Azerbaijani linesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/30/world-cup-final-1966-england-west-germany-live>
, a mini pitch invasion and Nobby Stiles jigging like an uncle that had 
overindulged on the table wine at a family wedding.

McManaman was the out-ball for England. Sheringham found him again early in 
the second half, and he pinned his ears back and took on De Kock. His cross was 
wildly hacked out by Reiziger for a corner. Gascoigne floated it over, a 
harmless-looking ball with no real pace on it. Sheringham climbed above Winter 
and cushioned a header towards the bottom-right corner. It drifted harmlessly 
past Seedorf and the goalkeeper Edwin van der Sar. With De Kock at the other 
post doubling up on Adams, no one was protecting that part of the goal. From 
the most elementary of errors, England were 2-0 up.

Six minutes later came England’s best piece of play in the whole tournament. 
After some interplay with Anderton, Gascoigne played a quick one-two with 
McManaman. The return ball wasn’t great, but Gascoigne used the bounce to poke 
the ball past Winter, shrugging him to the floor as he advanced into the 
penalty area. Blind came to him, and Gascoigne cut it back to the edge of the 
area. Sheringham was waiting, and threw his right arm out as if he was about to 
put his foot through the ball.

That pulled De Kock across to block the shot. Sheringham subtly opened his 
body out to let the ball run across him, and cushioned a square ball across the 
face of the area that was just begging to be blasted. Shearer, who had detached 
himself from the play as the Dutch defence was pulled out of position, stepped 
in to oblige. Van der Sar threw himself at Shearer, like a bodyguard taking a 
bullet for the president. It was a futile gesture. Shearer’s shot was 
surgically precise, clipping the inside of the post as it tore into the net.

Golden goal: Paul Gascoigne for England v Scotland (1996)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/12/golden-goal-paul-gascoigne-for-england-v-scotland-1996>
The players ran off in two separate groups; Shearer and Sheringham milked the 
moment on one side of the pitch, Gascoigne, McManaman and Ince on the other. 
The camera panned to Guus Hiddink on the bench, with a facial expression torn 
between bewilderment and fear. “England in control,” said Davies. “And doesn’t 
he know it.”

Five minutes later it switched to fear alone. Shearer reached a flick-on first 
and bounced De Kock out of the way to get control of the ball. He must have 
wondered what the hell he’d walked in to. Shearer’s short ball found Anderton, 
whose shot deflected off Blind and was parried back to the penalty spot by Van 
der Sar. The first to react was Sheringham, who slid in to drive the ball into 
the inside of the post. “Now we’re going in to the unbelievable!” said Keegan. 
England had scored three times in 11 minutes and led 4-0.

England had had less possession, fewer shots and corners than the Dutch but in 
one short blast after half-time had become the first team to put four goals 
past them for 21 years. In and around England’s cathartic blast of goals, the 
Dutch had missed golden chances of their own. Three fell to Bergkamp and he 
missed them all. England were on the edge, always one good pass from being 
opened up. The Dutch couldn’t find it. As the scores stood, Holland were out.

McManaman was causing havoc, released by one gorgeous ball from Gascoigne that 
required Bergkamp to chase back and bring him down deep into the Dutch half. 
There seemed to be space everywhere, with Sheringham dropping into it to 
receive the ball and get things moving. He had a guiding hand in everything 
England did. Another searching pass by Sheringham set McManaman free again. His 
whipped cross just missed the foot of Anderton for a fifth goal.

Hiddink turned to one of the Ajax Youth Academy alumni to get Holland out of 
the hole they were in. TheEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> should have been 
Patrick Kluivert’s tournament, but 1996 had been a turbulent year so far. 
Kluivert was involved in a car crash in September 1995, which killed one person 
and permanently invalided another. He was convicted of vehicular homicide and 
sentenced to 240 hours’ community service just weeks before Euro 96, and then 
required an operation ahead of it. Holland had only used him as a substitute 
thus far.

His impact was instant and vital. Bergkamp delicately lofted a pass over 
Southgate which Kluivert drifted on to. He rolled the ball through the legs of 
Seaman for a consolation goal that might just keep the Dutch in the tournament. 
There were 11 minutes left.

By the time Kluivert scored England had started to shut down. David Platt took 
the place of Ince, an obvious course of action given that Ince was unavailable 
for the next round. Shearer and Sheringham, who were both at risk of suspension 
if yellow- carded, were removed for Nick Barmby and Robbie Fowler. Both were 
hungry to get involved. Fowler narrowly put a header over the bar, and when he 
slid a return ball through to Barmby in the area a desperate man and ball 
tackle from De Kock could easily have been given as a penalty.

The final few minutes belonged to one man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/aug/13/vault-paul-gascoigne-wondergoal-scotland-euro-96>
. When Platt had entered the fray he gave the ball straight to Gascoigne. “Come 
on, you take it,” Platt told him. “It’s your game.” Gascoigne had arrived at 
the game without his boots, and had to borrow a broken pair from Sheringham in 
the first half that were a size and a half too big for him. Now in more 
comfortable footwear located for him at half-time, he taunted the Dutch by 
instigating a session of one- and two-touch keep ball, each pass drawing anolé! 
from the crowd. The referee eventually brought the love-in to an end. Gascoigne 
held up four fingers and pointed at the scoreboard. Holland 1 England 4. “It 
has been a great night for the English,” said Davies, the understatement of the 
decade.

On Second Thoughts: Rob Smyth says Euro 96 wasn't how it is usually remembered
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/jul/04/1> 
“It totally stunned everybody in the ground and it stunned us up here as 
well,” said Jack Charlton. Underneath Wembley, in the changing rooms in the 
bowels of the stadium, the England players sangThree Lions and took turns 
throwing each other in the huge communal bath.

In the initial post-match interviews Venables did his best to play it down, 
but it was pointless. Messages of congratulation flooded his way, from Stanley 
Matthews to John Major. The following day, the press went into hyperbolic 
overdrive.The Independent led with the headline “ENGLAND’S NIGHT OF RAPTURE”. In
The Sun Martin Samuel evoked the Battle of Britain, “Our finest hour? Oh boy, 
you’d better believe it.”

“I can sleep easily now,” Venables said in the days that followed. “This makes 
all the years of hard work, the planning and the worrying worthwhile. I’m full 
of pride, because to beat Holland like this means so much to me.” To everyone, 
it seemed. Most of the England players involved than night rate it as the 
greatest England performance they ever took part in. The crowd had been stunned 
into ecstasy. “I have never known it like this before,” said Venables of the 
atmosphere at Wembley. “It has been special – an incredible feeling of 
patriotism and unity.”

Ten days had shaken the country. Momentum soon gathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/englandfootball/story/0,,540916,00.html> 
when a team hits its stride. In an editorial two days later about Euro 96,The 
Guardian noted: “It has exploded into the largest, most contagious shared 
experience in recent memory.” The game is now enshrined in folklore as one of 
England’s greatest ever performances. Most people who saw it can recall the 
goals from memory, and seek them outon a brief internet video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0JTOUq0REjI> if they need an instant hit of 
nostalgia. Anything the Dutch did in the game has long since been forgotten. 
“We thrashed them,” said Venables in the BBC’s end of year reviewWhen Football 
Came Home. “There’s no doubt about it – it’s nice to say, that’s what we did.”

This is an extract from When Football Came Home 
<http://www.pitchpublishing.co.uk/shop/when-football-came-home>, the story of 
the 1996 European Championship in England. It is published by Pitch Publishing, 
priced £12.99
 