
Traditionally, the words "family" and "football" have gone together like 
Cristiano Ronaldo and self-effacing. Our national game shirked any kind of 
customer care; spectators – relatively few of them women or children – just had 
to accept that a football club's "product" began and ended on the pitch. Take 
it or leave it.

But since the last Guardian survey of football clubs' attitudes to families, 
in 2006 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2006/aug/19/familyandrelationships.football>
, we have witnessed a step-change: flexible pricing, supporter consultation, 
family zones and imaginative matchday entertainments have become (almost) the 
norm, as clubs wake up to the fact that the support of the next generation 
cannot be taken for granted.

This is in no small part down to the work of supporters' groups all over the 
country, and initiatives such as theFamily Excellence awards 
<http://www.football-league.co.uk/page/FamilyExcellenceAward>, which since 2007 
have been arranging mystery shopper-style visits by families to every Football 
League club twice a season.

The impact of this work is clear at every level. Last season, 29% of Premier 
League supporters went to one or more matches accompanied by children, and 13% 
of season-ticket holders are now juniors. Cardiff City's efforts have seen an 
increase in family season ticket holders from 459 four years ago to nearly 
8,000 last season, long before promotion to the Premier League was clinched.

So while the general picture is encouraging, some clubs are worthy of 
particular praise for pioneering new initiatives that make football matches 
fun, safe and fulfilling days out for all the family. Here are 20 of those 
clubs …

Premier League <http://www.premierleague.com/en-gb.html>

Cardiff City

Cardiff City stadium

cardiffcityfc.co.uk <http://www.cardiffcityfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0845 
345 1400; family stand season ticket: £59 (u16); £379 (adult)

Cardiff were the first two-time winners of the Football League's Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Club of the Year award. One 
innovation is turnstiles that automatically recognise a young fan's birthday, 
triggering a special greeting, gift and even a treat such as sitting in the 
manager's dugout before the game. The family stand's concourse has a magician's 
school where kids learn to perform tricks of the non-footballing kind, while 
visiting supporters are welcomed by catering staff wearing the away club's 
shirts.

Manchester City
 Manchester City runs a website just for young fans. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
Etihad stadium

mcfc.co.uk <http://www.mcfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0161 444 1894; family 
stand season ticket: £115 (u16); from £450 (adult)

A club built on uniquely strong bonds with fans has in recent years introduced 
many excellent family friendly initiatives, including junior-sized kiosks (and 
portions) at family stand food outlets, breast-feeding facilities, and 
match-day entertainment including magicians and face painters. City's 
green-jacketed Play Makers are there to provide a warm welcome and answer any 
questions from new fans of any age. The club have also launched a website, City 
Kicks, especially for young fans (citykicks.mcfc.co.uk 
<http://citykicks.mcfc.co.uk/PreLogin?returnUrl=/>).

Sunderland

Stadium of Light

safc.com <http://www.safc.com/>; ticket hotline: 0871 911 1973; family stand 
season ticket: £450 (1 adult + 1 u16)

As well as impressive ticket discounts for family groups (including season 
tickets for under-16s at £99),Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> are another club to have 
transformed the traditional dowdy image of a stadium concourse. The south-east 
corner of the Stadium of Light has been made over into a brightly coloured and 
engaging family zone, where children can spend time before games playing 
"virtual projected football", watching cartoons and having their faces painted. 
The zone extends outside the stadium too, with a live stage building the 
atmosphere and ensuring that kids have a day to remember.

Liverpool

Anfield

liverpoolfc.com <http://www.liverpoolfc.com/welcome-to-liverpool-fc>; ticket 
hotline: 0843 170 5555; family stand season ticket: £200 (u17); from £760 
(adult)

Anfield's Fan Park, opened last season, offers inspiring initiatives for young 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> fans, such as the 
chance to post a letter to their favourite player or submit their own match 
report. Children can also try to catch the eye of coaches in pre-match 
five-a-side games and penalty shoot-outs. Last season, their stewards were 
given the award for "warmest Premier League welcome".

Fulham

Craven Cottage

fulhamfc.com <http://www.fulhamfc.com/>; ticket hotline: 0843 208 1234; family 
stand season ticket: from £125 (u16); £449 (adult)

Fulham have pioneered the My First Game initiative, offering children coming 
to their debut match a day-out to remember. Typically, this includes a stadium 
tour, a match-pack ofFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> 
goodies, and a certificate signed by the manager, Martin Jol. It's a sensible 
move: with so many kids tempted to support the biggest clubs, a strong first 
impression can create a fan for life. Newcomers are further welcomed by 
Fulham's tireless supporter liaison officer, Tommy Guthrie, who won last 
season's unsung hero award for his commitment to making new fans feel welcome 
and well-informed.

Championship

Reading



Madejski stadium

readingfc.co.uk <http://www.readingfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0844 249 1871; 
season ticket: £145 (u17); from £395 (adult)

You can tell a lot about a club's commitment to young supporters by their 
cookie bags. Well you can at Reading, anyway: for years, they have sold cookies 
to home fans in bags designed by their junior supporters (a different design 
each week), and last season extended this to the away end too, asking in 
advance for designs from young fans of the visiting club. While home family 
areas are served by baseball-style food sellers,Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> also reserve an area in the 
visitors' section for family groups, and go to the trouble of sending young 
fans experiencing their first away game a matchday programme signed by their 
team's players. Not surprising, then, that last season the club received 
thank-you letters from fans of every single visiting Premier League club.

Brighton & Hove Albion
 Young Brighton & Hove Albion supporters. Photograph: Ed Simons/Alamy 
American Express community stadium

seagulls.co.uk <http://www.seagulls.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0844 327 1901; 
family stand season ticket: £125 (u16); £485 (adult)

Since moving to their smart new Amex stadium two seasons ago, Brighton have 
stepped up their efforts to welcome families, with entertainments for Young 
Seagulls backed up by flexible ticket prices and free access to the team's open 
training sessions. The knock-on effect has been regular sell-out crowds and an 
upgrading of the stadium's capacity to more than 30,000. The players buy into 
the ethos too: Spanish defender Iñigo Calderón received last season's Football 
League Player in the Community award for his work designing and delivering 
educational workshops to schoolchildren and other young people in the area.

Doncaster Rovers

Keepmoat stadium

doncasterroversfc.co.uk <http://www.doncasterroversfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 
01302 762576; family stand season ticket: £80 (u17); £379 (adult)

Doncaster Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> – who as 
well as clinching the League One title won their sixth consecutive Family 
Excellence award last season (one of eight league clubs to achieve this feat) – 
have pioneered the use of supporter consultation to continually improve their 
match-day experience. As well as face painting and Wii games, the Family Zone 
offers young fans a chance to form the club's guard of honour and even take 
penalties on the pitch.

Huddersfield Town

John Smith's stadium

htafc.com <http://www.htafc.com/>; ticket hotline: 01484 484123; family stand 
season ticket: £104 (u18); from £224 (adult)

From the kids' pull-out section in the matchday programme to a community 
project serving up free hot breakfasts to hundreds of local schoolchildren,
Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> Town's 
commitment to young fans is unstinting. Another club that has won the Family 
Excellence award every year since its inception, their aim is to give families 
a whole day's worth of excitement for their matchday money – starting with the 
morning academy match at Canalside, all the way through to collecting 
autographs in the Stripes bar after the final whistle. Another innovation last 
season was the Town Family: a team of club experts who cheerfully greet new and 
existing fans before each game.

AFC Bournemouth

Dean Court

afcb.co.uk <http://www.afcb.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0844 576 1910; family 
stand season ticket: £300 (1 adult + 1 u16)

Last season's League One family club of the year offers free entry to matches 
for all under eights, as well as a 25% discount on family tickets. Lauded for 
its "outstanding delivery of activities to attract and retain family 
attendance", Bournemouth's Junior Fanzone boasts everything from giant Jenga 
and Connect4 games to street dancing and the one-and-only Mr Balloon Man. As if 
that wasn't enough, look out for visits from injured players and the cuddly 
club mascot, Cherry Bear.

Birmingham City

St Andrew's

bcfc.com <http://www.bcfc.com/>; ticket hotline: 0844 557 1875; family stand 
season ticket: £399 (1 adult + 1 u16)

Not so long ago, Birmingham's reputation for serving the needs of families was 
woeful. Not any more: the pace of change has been heartwarming, with the club's 
family area getting a striking (and entirely deliberate) makeover last season 
by renowned local graffiti duo, KeMeF Inc – who once appeared on Birmingham's 
"most wanted" list ... Inside, footie-themed lunchboxes and candy floss are 
served to youngsters at the Home Sweets Home kiosk, while excitement levels are 
maintained with pre-match and half-time competitions, former player appearances 
and special big-screen features.

League One

MK Dons


stadiummk

mkdons.com <http://www.mkdons.com/>; ticket hotline: 01908 622900; family 
stand season ticket: £24 (u18); £324 (adult)

A club that has attracted torrents of abuse from rival fans for their 
controversialmove from Wimbledon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2004/jun/21/newsstory.mkdons> in 2003 
cannot be criticised for the work they do to entertain younger fans on 
matchdays. With no traditional fanbase in Milton Keynes, the club has worked 
hard to attract families to stadiummk, and as a result boasts the highest 
proportion of under-21 season-ticket holders in the Football League (currently 
35%). Matchdays full of family entertainment are backed up with supremely 
competitive pricing for juniors: season tickets for under-18s cost just £24 in 
the family stand, while under-sevens get in free.

Bristol City

Ashton Gate

bcfc.co.uk <http://www.bcfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0117 963 0600; family 
stand season ticket: £339 (1 adult + 1 u18)

The Robins of Bristol have been recognised as the Football League's 
friendliest club. The warm, family focused welcome begins on the club's website 
with avideo guide by City legend Scott Murray 
<http://www.bcfc.co.uk/fans/bring_your_kids/>, and is maintained throughout 
matchdays by staff who are hand-picked for their ability to make families feel 
welcome. Oodles of pre-match fun and games are on offer for kids at the indoor 
community park, with music provided by local bands and DJs. What's more, 
youngsters attending their first match are awarded a signed cap by a City 
player.

Tranmere Rovers

Prenton Park

tranmererovers.co.uk <http://www.tranmererovers.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0871 
221 2001; family Stand season ticket: £396.50 (1 adult + 1 u17)

Another multiple winner of the Family Excellence award, Tranmere Rovers were 
the first league side to produce their own welcome to our club video, given out 
to all families visiting Prenton Park for the first time to tackle any concerns 
they may have. With the mighty Liverpool and Everton on their doorstep, the 
quality of matchday experience is vital toTranmere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tranmere> maintaining healthy attendances 
– as is their impressive work in the local community, which now boasts 22 sport 
and education projects and nearly 35,000 local participants.

Crawley Town

Broadfield stadium

crawleytownfc.com <http://www.crawleytownfc.com/>; ticket hotline: 01293 
410000; family stand season ticket: £115 (u18); £395 (adult)

Since joining the Football League in 2011, Crawley's reputation has grown off 
the pitch as well as on it – with children and families at the forefront. Last 
season's efforts were rewarded when the club was named the Football League's 
most improved family experience, thanks to initiatives such as the 
transformation of the old police control room, with its panoramic view of the 
stadium, into a space to host kids' matchday birthday parties. Other nice 
touches include selecting a family to sit in the home dugout before each match, 
and a competition that brings young fans out on to the pitch during half-time.

League Two

Portsmouth

Fratton Park

portsmouthfc.co.uk <http://www.portsmouthfc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0844 847 
1898; family stand season ticket: £90 (u17); £360 (adult)

Even as Pompey reached a new low on the pitch last season, with relegation to 
the league's bottom division, off it they continued to set new standards for 
fan engagement, with Fratton Park's family friendly atmosphere seemingly 
undimmed by the club's financial woes. The interactive Kidzone has a cinema 
showing footage of matches, as well as loads of games, quizzes – and free fruit 
juice. APortsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> player 
visits the zone before each match to answer questions, while one lucky family 
get to sit in the coaches' dugout as the players warm up. At the end of last 
season, the club even organised a junior blues sleepover, showing a film and 
dishing up pizza before everyone bedded down for the night – on the middle of 
the pitch!

Wycombe Wanderers

Adams Park

wycombewanderers.co.uk <http://www.wycombewanderers.co.uk/>, ticket hotline: 
01494 441118; family stand season ticket: £90 (u19); £270 (adult)

Wycombe's stewarding team, led by dynamic safety officer Richard Stanford, 
have long been hailed for their friendly, positive approach – with particular 
emphasis on cutting out bad language and making families with young children 
feel welcome (under-eights qualify for free season tickets in the family 
stand). Another boon for families (and the environment) is the stadium's free 
car-parking initiative for cars carrying four or more people. Just make sure 
you arrive in plenty of time to visit the large marquee outside the ground, in 
which Sports and Education Trust coaches run activities and games for children 
of all ages.

Plymouth Argyle

Home Park

pafc.co.uk <http://www.pafc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 0845 872 3335; family 
stand season ticket: £384 (1 adult + 1 u18)

Last season's League Two family club of the year offers football lessons as 
part of its Matchday Magic package for home and away fans. The club and its 
community trust have transformed a section of Home Park into the family zone, 
where budding Argyle supporters can enjoy a variety of invigorating pre-match 
activities "for mind and body". In addition, Plymouth, in partnership with
Barnardo's <http://www.barnardos.org.uk/>, have established Young Carers, an 
initiative that offers matchday respite to young people who find themselves 
caring for others.

Oxford United

Kassam stadium

oufc.co.uk <http://www.oufc.co.uk/>; ticket hotline: 01865 337533; family 
stand season ticket: £93 (u16); £375 (adult)

The reflectively glazed area at the entrance to the Kassam stadium has proved 
a popular matchday meeting point for families, with tables, televisions, club 
shop stall and licensed bar. United's excellent football in the community 
scheme offers morning-of-matchday training sessions for young fans, followed by 
a pre-match meal, a half-time lap of honour and, for a lucky few, a nail-biting 
competition on the pitch.

Scottish Premier League

St Johnstone
 Celtic FC recently opened a family zone and runs the Young Hoops club. 
Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images Europe 
McDiarmid Park

perthstjohnstonefc.co.uk <http://www.perthstjohnstonefc.co.uk/>; ticket 
hotline: 01738 455000; family stand season ticket: £325 (1 adult + 1 u17)

The Perth-based club capped last season's successful on-pitch showing (third 
place) by picking up the Scottish Premier League's Family Champions award. The 
glowing praise of visiting mystery shopper families meant the decision was 
unanimous, with Saints hailed for everything from their welcoming website – 
with its first-time visitor page detailing healthy (locally sourced) food for 
children inside the ground – to free tickets for fans under 12 and Super Js 
young supporters club. The club also offers children's birthday parties that 
include an hour's play on the all-weather pitch and a football signed by the 
team for the birthday child. Families are becoming a much bigger priority among 
Scottish clubs, with Rangers and St Mirren also at the forefront. Celtic 
recently opened their first family zone.
 