
At only 34, Whitney Cummings has packed an enormous amount of success – and a 
few notable failures – into her career. Namedone of Variety’s “Comics to Watch” 
a decade ago 
<http://variety.com/2007/film/features/whitney-cummings-2-1117960261/>, she 
went on to become a regular at Chelsea Lately and at the Comedy Central roasts. 
In 2011, she exploded – her sitcom Whitney premiered on NBC to withering 
reviews, only lasting two seasons; a short-lived talkshow would follow. At the 
same time, she was creating and executive-producing CBS’s 2 Broke Girls, a bona 
fide hit now in its sixth season.

Comedy in 2017: Chris Rock, Dave Chappelle and the French Seinfeld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/30/comedy-in-2017-chris-rock-dave-chappelle-gad-elmaleh>
She’s set to appear at Literary Death Match during LA’s Riot Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> festival and took time out of 
a busy schedule to talk writing, suffering from co-dependency and comedy in 
Trump’s America.

You seem like you’ve got a lot going on these days. What did you work on when 
you woke up this morning?

I’m writing a book at the moment. It’s a nightmare! It’s hard and it’s 
embarrassing. I’ve been doing standup long enough, but it felt like there was a 
lot of stuff that I had to say that wasn’t funny enough or just didn’t work on 
stage. I’ve been hoarding these stories; it’s really sort of all the most 
intimate stuff that I’m frankly too embarrassed to say on stage. Stuff that, if 
I admit it and then someone’s looking at me, I’ll just probably cry or run 
away. So if I just write it in a book, you can read it on a beach, and I don’t 
have to make eye contact with you.

Maybe I just want to be single forever, I don’t know why I feel the need to 
reveal all this stuff. I have a condition called co-dependence, which I 
developed from growing up in an alcoholic, dysfunctional home. The idea is to 
put other people’s needs before your own, basically, and it’s been debilitating 
for me. I went into recovery for it, into a 12-step program, and started doing 
EMDR [eye movement desensitization and reprocessing] and all this trauma 
therapy to try to rewire my brain.

And Lena Dunham asked me to write about something that I’ve overcome for her 
website Lenny Letter 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/health/a182/whitney-cummings-miss-codependence>. 
And [after], people would come up to me on the street crying like, “Thank you 
for writing that. I knew I had something wrong, but I didn’t have a word for 
it.” It’s such a nefarious condition because it’s basically disguised as being 
nice, but it can be a pretty debilitating preoccupation with the needs of 
others. A lot of co-dependents don’t go to doctors and they don’t take care of 
themselves, and it manifests in some really scary ways sometimes. So I wrote 
about it and people really responded, so it encouraged me to start the book, 
because it’s a lot about that.

So yeah, I’m in this weird place where I’m doing all these things I’ve never 
done before – writing a book and directing a movie. I’m really very outside of 
my comfort zone.

Tell me about the movie. 

It’s based on the book The Female Brain, it’s a neurology book. I came to a 
point where neurology started to kind of become my religion, it was the only 
way I could kind of make sense of a lot of the conflicts in my life. I just 
couldn’t believe it wasn’t taught in schools. I was trying to figure out the 
root of these stereotypes that women are crazy, women are too sensitive and men 
are stupid and violent. I was like, is there a biological basis for this? Is 
this nature, is this nurture? For whatever reason, that was a question that 
kept me up at night. And I think I was also at a point in my life where I was 
like, am I crazy? Maybe I am crazy. Which part of this is by choice, and which 
part of this is my primordial neurology? That kind of became my obsession.

I ended up writing the script with a brilliant comedian named Neal Brennan, 
who made The Chappelle Show with Dave Chappelle. I wanted to make sure it 
wasn’t just a female voice, because it’s about the male brain also. I wanted to 
make a movie for women and men, and then I ended up directing it for a myriad 
of reasons. And that’s been intense, I’ve never made an independent movie 
before. It’s basically a science comedy, which is very insane. I don’t advise 
anybody to try to make a cerebral half-documentary, half-scripted neurology 
thing. That’s been really all-consuming, and that’ll come out at some point 
this year.

What was the appeal of directing? It seems so overwhelming. 

It’s a nightmare. There’s no appeal. I only did it because I knew no one else 
was gonna make it. No guy was gonna make a movie called The Female Brain. And 
you know, I’ve made TV shows, I’ve created things, directing is – you really 
just have to be incredibly decisive, which I am. Neal directs commercials and 
movies, [but], he’s said to me, nothing’s as hard as standup. So I was like, 
OK, if it’s not harder than standup, I guess I’ll try it. So I tried to apply 
the same principles of writing a good standup special to making a good movie. 
Doing test screenings, because I trust strangers to tell me if something’s 
funny. My approach was just, let’s screen it for strangers and see where they 
laugh. If people aren’t laughing, I have to cut it.

I’m sure this is the question that every comedian is getting these days, but 
how much do you feel an obligation to talk about Trump and the current 
political situation in your comedy, even if it’s not necessarily something you 
normally would discuss?

How comedians struggled to parody Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-comedians-parody-satire>
I think I’m still in shock. My whole [Twitter] feed is comics talking about 
this and retweeting articles and I definitely feel a pressure to talk about it, 
but at the same time, I don’t know if people care about my opinion on politics. 
I don’t believe that’s my skill, and maybe I just have low self-esteem or maybe 
this is a healthy take, but my thing is like, let me get out of the way so the 
people who actually know what they’re talking about can be heard. Let me just 
stick to what I’m good at, and I can speak with authority about mental illness, 
co-dependence, alcoholism, addiction, comedy, relationships – that’s enough. 
FollowTrevor Noah <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/trevor-noah>, follow 
Judd Apatow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juddapatow>, follow Samantha Bee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/samantha-bee>, that’s their 
wheelhouse, and I’m gonna let them do what they do best.

I don’t want to feel like I’m capitalizing on a lightning-rod topic, just to 
get attention. It’s like when someone dies and a celebrity who’s never met the 
person is like, oh I miss this person, rest in peace. It’s like, what are you 
doing? Are you just trying to get retweets? I just don’t think my motives are 
clean enough. I don’t want to be yelling because everyone’s yelling about the 
same thing. It feels slightly conformist. I think it’s important to know your 
place in the band. I’m a drummer, I’m not the singer, when it comes to politics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJY1iE880Zp8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJY1iE880Zp8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJY1iE880Zp8&media=>
So I noticed that IMDb says you were the first woman to do comedy in Dubai and 
Beirut. Is that true?

People are like, you performed standup in the Middle East, isn’t that scary? 
Like, the scariest place to perform standup these days is America. We are in 
the most polarized, raw time since I’ve been doing standup. I was in Napa three 
months ago and I was like, “Oh, Hillary’s running.” And everyone was like 
“Boooo!” Like, a fight broke out, six people had to be removed, people were 
waiting for me in the parking lot. The most dangerous place I’ve ever performed 
standup is in my home state of California. Now might be the most dangerous time 
to have opinions in the United States, because everyone’s just so emotional and 
have so much skin in the game. I was in San Diego, and fights were breaking out 
in the crowd between Republicans and Democrats, and people were kicked out. It 
was crazy.

I feel like I’m hearing more stories like that from comics. There was a time 
you could make fun of George W Bush, and even the people who like him got that 
it was part of the deal.

Totally. And I did The Roast of Donald Trump 
<http://www.cc.com/shows/roast-of-donald-trump>. I’ve been making fun of Donald 
Trump – we all have – for 10 years, and just bringing up his name … I mean, 
even if you’re supportive of Donald Trump, there’s still a lot to make fun of. 
Even if you’re his biggest fan, there’s a couple joke premises that you’re 
gonna have to be into, and I was making fun of him and this guy was like, 
“Fucking liberal cunt!” I was just like, you paid to come here. You knew what 
you were coming to see. But it’s like this third rail. Everyone so intense 
right now.

I know you’ve been doing a lot more acting recently, and I wonder how, as 
you’ve gotten more well-known for things that aren’t necessarily just your 
standup, how have your relationships with the audience changed? Does it feel 
different do do standup now that a lot more people know who you are?

Yes. Three years ago, it would have been, “it’s so much easier! Everyone knows 
me!” But that was before I was actually touring, and I realized people have 
higher expectations. Being known doesn’t get you anywhere, it just makes the 
bar and the expectations higher, especially if the venue wants to charge a 
certain ticket price because you’re known. So people are like, “I paid $60 to 
see you and you’re on TV. Let’s see what you got, bitch. You better be funny.” 
I feel a little bit of that, which is totally – I think people should have that 
expectation.

There’s also a little bit of pressure, because people know you, so you can’t 
lie. I can’t get up there like, “I’m so wasted!” People know that I’m not like 
that, so you can’t sort of do cheap generic stuff. I have to be very authentic. 
I just have to dig deeper and deeper, which is great. I think the audience 
pushed me to do that, which makes me better, but it’s harder. When nobody knows 
you, you can pretend to be anyone. You can go, “Last night, I did … heroin.” 
Joke, joke, joke. I can’t do that now.

And then there’s the interesting new anxiety and fear of people recording. The 
obligation to give an audience what they deserve and want, which is videos and 
photos, but also trying to maintain a modicum of privacy when you perform so 
that you can work on new material without it being on the internet the next 
day. There’s kind of an interesting challenge that I didn’t anticipate. You 
have to be vigilant, and then it’s tricky because then you become sort of a 
mom, where you’re like, “Excuse me, can you turn your phone off?” Especially 
with younger crowds and college crowds, which I do a lot, it’s like, how do you 
embrace the change and use it in a positive way and not alienate your audience, 
but also make sure that that stuff’s that not ready isn’t getting out before 
it’s good?

 * Whitney Cummings is appearing next weekend at Literary Death Match 
<http://www.riotla.com/event/literary-death-match/> at the Riot LA Comedy 
Festival <http://www.riotla.com>. She’s also touring this spring 
<http://www.whitneycummings.com/tour/>
 