
Where is Copeland, and why is there going to be a byelection there?

Copeland is a large constituency on the Cumbrian coast, taking in Whitehaven 
(the old name of the constituency), part of the Lake District National Park and 
theSellafield nuclear power plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/sellafield-nuclear-plant-riddled-safety-flaws-according-bbc-panorama>
. Labour’s Jamie Reed has been MP here since 2005 but he announced on Wednesday 
thathe will quit at the end of January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
 to take a job as Sellafield’s head of development and community relations. 
Reed has been a fierce critic of Jeremy Corbyn – he resigned from the front 
bench virtually the moment Corbyn’s election as leader was announced in 2015 – 
but he insists he is leaving parliament not as a Corbyn protest, but so that he 
can be at home as his children are growing up.

On paper, who should win?

In normal circumstances, a Labour hold would be a very safe bet. Copeland, and 
its predecessor seat, have been held by the party since the 1930s and, even 
though Reed’s majority was just 2,564 over theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> at the last general 
election, it is highly unusual for the government to gain a seat at a 
byelection. In fact, it hasn’t happened since the Tories took Mitcham and 
Morden in 1982, after the Labour MP defected to the SDP and fought a byelection 
on behalf of his new party, ensuring that the 1979 Labour vote in the seat was 
split in half. Oh, and polling took place while the Falklands war was being 
fought, which didn’t help Labour either.

Surely things aren’t that bad for Jeremy Corbyn – why do the Tories think 
they’ve got a chance?

Because Labour’s national poll ratings are dire, and this will be the first 
byelection fought in a Labour/Conservative marginal since Corbyn was elected 
leader. At the 2015 general election, the Conservative share of the vote was 
38%, and Labour’s 31%. The latestGuardian/ICM poll 
<https://www.icmunlimited.com/polls/> puts the Conservatives on 41% (+3) and 
Labour on 27% (-4), a swing of 3.5% from Labour to the Tories. In Copeland, 
Reed was on 42% at the general election and his Conservative opponent 36%. A 
3.5% swing here would be just enough to enable the Tories to do a Mitcham.

Is that how byelections work?

Er, no. Sometimes there is a connection between how a party is doing in the 
national polls and how it performs in byelections, but sometimes there isn’t. 
In the five byelections held in Labour seats since Corbyn became leader, Labour 
has retained all five of them, with its share of the vote going up in four 
(Oldham West and Royton +7.5%; Sheffield Brightside and Hillsborough +5.8%; 
Tooting +8.7%; Batley and Spen – where other parties stood aside – +42.6%) and 
falling only fractionally in the fifth (Ogmore, -0.3%). Voters might have their 
doubts about Corbyn, but the party has not been choosing Corbynites as 
byelection candidates and votingLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in a byelection won’t result in 
Corbyn becoming prime minister.

What is going to decide who wins?

At this stage, we just don’t know. The parties have not selected candidates, 
and it is not clear yet what is going to emerge as the key campaign issue.

There is a good chance that it could be the NHS. There is a huge row in the 
constituency at the moment aboutplans to downgrade maternity services at West 
Cumberland hospital in Whitehaven, 
<http://www.nwemail.co.uk/news/millom/Plans-to-reduce-West-Cumberland-maternity-services-branded-dangerous-by-Millom-councillors-bf302e7a-acfe-48ff-af5f-c6b3be5add64-ds>
 which would involve some patients being sent 40 miles away to another hospital 
in Carlisle.Theresa May has defended the proposals 
<http://www.itv.com/news/border/2016-10-19/prime-minister-general-consensus-to-downgrade-maternity-at-west-cumberland-hospital/>
, in words that could end up as a millstone around the neck of the Conservative 
candidate.

But, equally, it could turn into another Brexit byelection. Copeland council 
(which overlaps broadly but not exactly with the constituency) voted 62% to 
leave and, with Reed leaving parliament at the end of January, campaigning may 
start very soon after thesupreme court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>
 in the article 50 case, which could trigger a bout of media hysteria about 
Brexit supposedly being blocked. Ukip were third here at the general election, 
with 15.5% of the vote, and if they were to pick up more new votes from Labour 
than from the Tories, a Ukip surge could let the Tories in. Ukip’s new leader,
Paul Nuttall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/04/ukip-leader-paul-nuttall-under-fire-over-phd-claim-and-nhs>
, who is from the north-west, might have some appeal here, but financially and 
organisationally the party is in a weak state, and might not have the capacity 
to mount a strong campaign.

With Sellafield essential to the local economy, nuclear power will feature, 
too. Labour supports nuclear energy buta policy document Corbyn released 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/jeremyforlabour/pages/119/attachments/original/1438938988/ProtectingOurPlanet_JeremyCorbyn.pdf?1438938988>
 during his 2015 leadership campaign saying he opposed “new nuclear power” (ie, 
new power stations) could be problematic.

So, will the Conservatives win?

The bookies think so, because they have the Tories as favourites 
(Conservatives 5/6, Labour 5/4). 
<https://sports.ladbrokes.com/en-gb/betting/politics/british/local-by-elections/>
 But in practice Labour’s prospects are probably quite a bit better than these 
odds suggest.
 