

And the winner is ... Who would you place in the spotlight? Photograph: Getty 
Images

There's no shortage of British theatrical talent, but who's our best director? 
I was discussing the question with an actor recently at a party and we both 
came up with the same answer. But, before revealing the name, maybe it's worth 
exploring the ramifications of the question.

What do we mean by "best"? And how does one judge a director? For some, the 
director is increasingly seen as an auteur on continental lines: a role 
currently fulfilled byKatie Mitchell 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/drama/reviews/story/0,,2034369,00.html>, 
Simon McBurney <http://arts.theguardian.com/critic/review/0,,1710896,00.html> 
andEmma Rice 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/drama/reviews/story/0,,2077419,00.html>. 
For others, the director is judged by the ability to realise a written text: 
something done to perfection by Max Stafford-Clark, Peter Gill, Ian Rickson and 
many more. Then again, there are horses for courses: Michael Boyd and Greg 
Doran for Shakespeare, Trevor Nunn for musicals. There is also an extraordinary 
tribe of young directors, spearheaded by Rupert Goold, Rufus Norris andDominic 
Cooke 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/theatre/article-23384457-details/Courting+controversy/article.do>
, who combine daring visual concepts with detailed attention to text. And, if 
you judge a director by the ability to shape events,you have to mention Jude 
Kelly <http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1750564,00.html> and, 
pre-eminently, Peter Hall, who created the RSC and defined the National Theatre 
as we know it today. Hall is, in fact, theprincipal architect of postwar 
British theatre <http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1750564,00.html>.

I could go on: a measure of the abundant talent we possess. But the director 
whom my actor-friend and I both nominated wasHoward Davies 
<http://www.playbill.com/celebritybuzz/whoswho/biography/7605.html> - which in 
itself is revealing. Davies is not a household name. He doesn't run a theatre. 
And he does not, as far as I know, aspire to Hollywood movies. Yet his work is 
astonishing. And, for proof, I would citehis current production 
<http://www.nt-online.co.uk/philistines> of Gorky's Philistines 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/theatre/2007/06/coming_soon_to_a_theatre_near.html>
 at the National. It starts with a visual coup in its image of figures trapped 
inside a rambling Russian mansion. It is stuffed with informative social 
detail. What is more, every actor seems to bring on stage a character with a 
life history. If this production had hailed from Russia or Germany, we would be 
hymning it to the skies and saying it showed the benefit of their extended 
rehearsal periods.

But Philistines is not a one-off. Davies has proved himself a master of 
American realism with his productions of O'Neill, Albee and Miller: remember 
his remarkable All My Sons, which made it look like a great play? It was also 
Davies who first directed Les Liaisons Dangereuses and brought out all that 
work'scool, predatory cynicism 
<http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,964288,00.html>. And was 
there ever a better Coward revival than his West End Private Lives, which was 
drenched in post-coital tristesse? Like all the best directors, Davies has had 
his bummers: I notice Cyrano de Bergerac is tactfully not mentioned in the 
current National programme. But, for me, Davies is a model director who 
achieves a perfect synthesis between text, image and performance.

In lauding Davies, I've no wish to diss other directors. And even the notion 
of "best" is faintly absurd and subject to constant challenge. In recent weeks, 
I've seen a brilliantly lucid Three Sisters from Declan Donnellan and a revival 
of Pinter's Betrayal by Roger Michell that explores every crevice of the work. 
And I realise, to my shame, I haven't even mentioned Deborah Warner, Marianne 
Elliott, Josie Rourke, Michael Grandage, Nicholas Hytner, Stephen Daldry, 
Richard Eyre, John Tiffany or a veteran Shakespearean like John Barton. There 
is an army of directors out there I revere, and doubtless you too will have 
your own favourites. All I can say is that when I came out of Philistines I 
felt I had seen a Russian play realised on stage with a richnessStanislavski 
himself might have envied <http://www.kryingsky.com/Stan/Biography/bot.html>.
 