
Tony Mowbray’s resignation from Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/coventry-city-manager-tony-mowbray-resigns-winless-run>
 had been coming. Mowbray’s team were bottom of League One and a parting of the 
ways was inevitable after 10 league games without a win. However, struggles on 
the pitch and the loss of a manager are not the biggest concerns for 
supporters, who are enduring a long battle with the club’s owners.

When the Coventry Telegraph launched a petition calling on current owners, 
Sisu, to sell the club last month, fans jumped to attention –10,000 signed it 
within 24 hours 
<https://www.change.org/p/sisu-put-coventry-city-football-club-up-for-sale> – 
but there was also a weary, almost resigned acceptance that yet another group 
of fans had reached the end of their tether. It is not uncommon for supporters 
to have the odd spat with owners, but there is currently a rash of clubs whose 
followers are in open revolt against owners and there appears to be little 
chance of resolution for any of them. Angst and antagonism has almost become 
the new normal up and down the country and across the divisions.

So, at a time when their advice and guidance is in most demand, it is bitterly 
ironic thatSupporters Direct <http://www.supporters-direct.org/> has reached a 
crossroads in its history. Established to help fans get a foothold in the 
running of their clubs via supporters’ trusts, Supporters Direct announced in 
mid-September that it is facing “ongoing uncertainty over its future funding 
and revenue sources 
<http://www.supporters-direct.org/news-article/message-to-members>.” While the 
top end of the game is awash with cash, this is not filtering down the pyramid 
and the cries for help are growing in number and in volume.

Supporters Direct has achieved a great deal in helping fans express their 
views but many of those views are distinctly negative and show how much further 
there is to go before fans gain proper representation at clubs. As John 
Sillett, the man who led Coventry City to FA Cup glory in 1987, said of the 
club’s owners: “They areslowly poisoning us 
<http://www.coventrytelegraph.net/sport/football/football-news/it-time-sisu-go-time-11950180>
, so let’s bring the club back to the people.” Sadly, the tales of decline are 
not hard to find and they sound very similar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aaabdda983b77953b04b7d86cdfcde266fcdc1d%2F0_0_5184_3126%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aaabdda983b77953b04b7d86cdfcde266fcdc1d%2F0_0_5184_3126%2F5184.jpg>
 Coventry fans asked their owners a very simple question when they had to play 
home games in Northampton in 2014. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Blackpool have suffered more than most as Andy Higgins, a spokesperson for the 
Blackpool Supporters Trust 
<http://www.blackpoolsupporterstrust.com/Site/Default.aspx>, points out. The 
trust has been at odds with the Oyston family, who have been in charge of the 
club since the late 1980s when Owen Oyston snapped up the club for the princely 
sum of £1. The club reached the promised land of the Premier League under Ian 
Holloway in 2010 but the main beneficiaries of this season in the sun were the 
Oystons.

Not only did a company owned by Owen Oyston receive a one-off payment of £11m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-conn-inside-sport-blog/2012/mar/06/blackpool-karl-oyston-players-wages>
, which was more than the manager and all his players combined, but also the 
Oyston group of companies allegedly bagged£24m in interest-free loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/29/blackpool-chairman-karl-oyston-open-letter>
. All this largesse was displayed while the players were still awaiting their 
promised bonuses from a previous season with Charlie Adam having to resort to 
appealing to the Premier League foran unpaid bonus of £20,000 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-1332665/Charlie-Adam-wins-20-000-Blackpool-bonus-dispute.html>
, which he succeeded in doing in November 2010.

Since reaching the Premier League, Blackpool’s decline has been alarmingly 
rapid. Just six years ago they were riding high in the top four of the Premier 
League after four matches, but their slide down the divisions was completed 
with relegation to League Two last season. Even though Owen Oyston’s reign was 
unpopular and ended in disgrace whenhe was jailed for the rape and indecent 
assault of a 16-year-old in 1996 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/dec/08/paulkelso1>, his son Karl has 
plumbed new depths of unpopularity through a high-handedness that beggars 
belief. He infamously called one of the supporters“a massive retard” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/23/blackpool-chairman-karl-oyston-charged-calling-fan-massive-retard>
 in a text message and was consequently and justifiably punished by the FA as a 
result, being banned from all football activities for six weeks and fined 
£40,000.

Matters have been turning progressively sour as the relationship between fans 
and the club’s hierarchy has descended into name-calling and several spats have 
ended up in court. Unsurprisingly, attendances at Bloomfield Road have dropped 
alarmingly with only a few thousand hardy souls watching their struggles in the 
lowest division. Higgins insists that the Trust are continuing to work on 
bringing a change of ownership but admits that after such a long struggle that 
there is a certain weariness among the fans. “Apathy and protest-fatigue are 
understandably setting in for quite a few supporters as the Oystons show no 
sign of even entertaining the idea of going,” Higgins says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d2b80f6fbfcb2e7288c066e4f7c0c02cbfcec0a%2F230_10_1897_1138%2F1897.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d2b80f6fbfcb2e7288c066e4f7c0c02cbfcec0a%2F230_10_1897_1138%2F1897.jpg>
 Blackpool fans share their thoughts with the club’s owner at Bloomfield Road 
earlier this year. Photograph: BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Charlton Athletic’s descent has not been quite as dramatic as that of Blackpool
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> but their conflict with the 
club’s current owners has probably been the most vocal of all, with a variety 
of high-profile protests held over the last few years. The current impasse with 
Roland Duchatelet is all the more galling because not too long ago Charlton 
were seen as the epitome of a community-based club after their return to The 
Valley back in 1992.

“Charlton Athletic have been relegated six times in my lifetime,” says Richard 
Wiseman, chairman of theCharlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> Supporters Trust. “But 
no one took to the streets or threw beach balls on the pitch. Supporters 
weren’t happy but they saw it as part of the game – brought about by bad luck, 
shortage of money or a few bad decisions.”

Wiseman says that the club’s decline during Roland Duchatelet’s ownership, 
which began in January 2014, “has provoked extraordinary levels of anger 
fuelled by the fact that this decline is the result of a toxic mixture of 
arrogance, incompetence and stubbornness.”

The fans have mounted a sustained and at times highly imaginative campaign of 
protests, which they have funded to the tune of almost £30,000. They have 
carried out a mock funeral procession, delayed kick-offs by throwing objects on 
to the pitch, printed spoof match programmes and released a protest replica 
shirt. These tactics have generated plenty of publicity for their plight as 
well as generating a unity of spirit in defiance of the current regime.

Duchatelet antagonised the fans from the start by undermining the manager at 
the time, the popular and reasonably successful Chris Powell, by wresting 
control of player recruitment from him and handing it to a small cohort of 
reviled and mysterious advisors who succeeded in bringing in inferior players. 
Powell paid the ultimate price when he was sacked.

Duchatelet went on to appoint four coaches with little or no experience of 
English football, including one straight from the Belgian third tier. Not 
surprisingly, he was forced to sack them all. Meanwhile, dozens of 
underwhelming players arrived on generous contracts and failed to perform.

The only person who may match Duchatelet for unpopularity among the fans is 
CEO Katrien Meire, whose expertise in European competition law is way above her 
experience in football or indeed in communicating with fans. She had never run 
a business before, never mind a football club but given Duchatelet’s absence – 
he hasn’t attended a game for two years – she is in charge. Her injudicious 
comments about how Charlton were going to develop stars and sell to Premier 
League clubs inflamed an already incensed group of supporters.

The opposition to Duchatelet is only partially about what is happening on the 
pitch, says Wiseman: “It was noticeable that Charlton supporters at Oxford 
recently sang their plaintive ‘Please sell our club’ song most vigorously when 
the team were leading 1-0. This is a message that the protests are only partly 
about results. Many believe that it is more about the heart and soul of a club, 
which was once the national model for achievement and supporter inclusion.”

Meire once claimed that “Roland doesn’t do failure” but the fans wish he would 
admit that his ownership has been a disaster and sell up. “There isn’t much 
optimism in London SE7 at the moment,” Wiseman concludes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5fe1707c9e2b91d2a15608ddd6239bc07ad335%2F0_68_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5fe1707c9e2b91d2a15608ddd6239bc07ad335%2F0_68_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Charlton Athletic protesting against club owner Roland Duchatelet earlier this 
year. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
There isn’t exactly a wave of optimism emanating out of BB2 either, as 
Blackburn Rovers’ plight has centred on a radical shift from the benign and 
generous patronage of Jack Walker, which deliveredthe Premier League title in 
1995 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2013/oct/23/blackburn-premier-league-title-earned-1995>
, to the distant and disdainful ownership of Venky’s since 2010.

Blackburn have not fallen as far as Coventry or Charlton, but they languish 
towards the bottom of the Championship with falling attendances and there is 
considerable friction between the owners and theRovers Trust 
<http://www.roverstrust.com/>, which was set up in 2012 with the aim of 
bringing the club into community ownership.The fans’ mood 
<https://www.change.org/p/remove-owen-coyle-as-manger-of-blackburn-rovers-fc> 
was hardly improved when former Burnley and Bolton manager,Owen Coyle, was 
appointed to take over at Ewood Park in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/blackburn-rovers-owen-coyle-championship>
 and a poor start to the season fuelled the negativity.

The standoff at Blackburn has been going on for some time and, despite 
continuous requests over the last five years by the Rovers Trust to meet the 
owners, no such meeting has taken place. This lack of co-operation has forced 
the Trust to call for a change of ownership recently, a move that was backed by
97% of the Trust members who responded 
<http://www.supporters-direct.org/news-article/fans-trust-calls-for-blackburn-rovers-sale>
. Wayne Wild, chairman of the Rovers Trust, sums up the exasperation: 
“Blackburn Rovers has become a toxic brand for the Venky’s. The present 
situation is clearly not working.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d864a2b9f6756ed3c2b3127d976077701a2647e%2F54_212_3235_1941%2F3235.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20so%20many%20football%20fans%20protesting%20against%20club%20owners%3F%20We%20asked%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffootball-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d864a2b9f6756ed3c2b3127d976077701a2647e%2F54_212_3235_1941%2F3235.jpg>
 Blackburn Rovers fans making their thoughts known at QPR this season. 
Photograph: Craig Mercer/CameraSport/Getty Images 
Like at Charlton, the owners are rarely seen at Blackburn matches and have not 
been in attendance for a couple of years, which implies a lack of interest in 
football affairs. Blackburn, Charlton and Coventry have all lost money over the 
last few years, so one has to wonder what the motivation is for Venky’s, 
Duchatelet and Sisu.

This conundrum only adds to the mounting frustration of the fans as they see 
their clubs stagnate and suffer.Blackpool are very much the exception, as they 
still managed to rack up a profit of £7.5m in the 2014-15 season, despite being 
relegated to League One, based mainly on the income from their Premier League 
parachute payments. Still, the vast majority of Blackpool fans would dearly 
exchange profit for progress.

If English football is short of coaches, why are badges cheaper in Germany?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/sep/07/england-grassroots-football-iceland-germany-coaching>
The Coventry situation had become even more fractious in recent weeks, as the 
ownersbanned the local paper, the Coventry Telegraph 
<http://www.coventrytelegraph.net/news/coventry-news/banned-telegraph-locked-out-press-11927436>
, from interviewing the manager or players because of the paper’s support of 
the petition urging Sisu to sell up. There is a glimmer of light for Coventry, 
who can take heart from the club who hosted their games for well over a year 
when they were forced into exile at the Sixfields Stadium because of a 
long-running dispute with the Ricoh Arena’s owners.

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> Town fans 
succeeded in ousting their highly unpopular chairman, David Cardoza, towards 
the end of last year and almost immediately embarked on a club record of 31 
unbeaten games, a run that started in December, securing the League Two title 
with ease and was only ended at Chesterfield on 17 September. Their renaissance 
gives some hope to fans of Coventry, Charlton, Blackburn and Blackpool that, 
however grim things may seem, there is always a chance that a much sought-after 
change of ownership can start to reverse years of decline.

• This article is from the author of The Agony and the Ecstasy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Agony-Ecstasy-Comprehensive-Play-Offs/dp/191090600X>
• Follow Richard Foster <https://twitter.com/rcfoster> on Twitter
 