
Do you know my favourite moment in The Princess Diaries 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1332456,00.html>
 (subtitle: Royal Engagement)? It’s when the queen throws off the shackles of 
respectability and does what is right for her (she proposes to her long-time 
commoner bodyguard <https://youtu.be/WhoTnSViqUE>). A teen film is not the 
obvious home for such deep “real world” wisdom, but it is a common thread in 
the work of the film’s screenwriter, Shonda Rhimes. She specialises in 
reminding girls and women – messy, smart, pretty or otherwise – that they are 
enough.

Rhimes, 46, is impressive, and the details of her success are staggering. She 
createdGrey’s Anatomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/24/greys-anatomy-which-tv-doctor-should-we-lust-after-next>
 (which coined, among other things, the term “McDreamy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BhjRJoHq7t0>”) and Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/04/scandal-review-kerry-washington-white-house-olivia>
 (which gave us Olivia Pope and needlessly dramatic, breathless monologues), 
executive producer onHow To Get Away With Murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/25/how-to-get-away-with-murder-shonda-rhimes-review>
. Rhimes gets what TV audiences want: to feel, deeply, for an hour or two, once 
or twice a week. And she gives it to us: Drs Bailey, Yang and Grey are our 
avatars, failing and trying again, over and over. They feel like real women, 
and that’s validating as hell. “I have against the odds courageously pioneered 
the art of writing for people of colour as if they were human beings,” 
Rhimes saidwhen collecting an achievement award in January 
<http://www.vogue.com/13391329/shonda-rhimes-pga-acceptance-speech-diversity/?mbid=social_onsite_twitter>
, a sentiment she brings up again and again. Plus she finds timeto quip on 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/shondarhimes/status/696189477652279296> and cameo 
on The Mindy Project as a beer pong champ 
<http://jezebel.com/shonda-rhimes-played-a-beer-pong-queen-on-the-mindy-pr-1646590409>
.

Crush of the week: Bruce Willis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/12/crush-of-the-week-bruce-willis-bim-adewunmi>
In a recent TED talk 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/shonda_rhimes_my_year_of_saying_yes_to_everything?language=en>
, Rhimes spoke about saying yes to things that scare her. It’s not 
groundbreaking advice, but her delivery absolutely sells it: sharp, funny and 
clear-eyed about her own influence and power. She’s not perfect, but I still 
want to be her when I grow up.
 