
Isn’t it the law in Bake Off that only Mel and Sue do double entendres? If so, 
Candice Brown didn’t get the memo. “Do you need a hand?’ asked Andrew in 
biscuit week. “Yeah, can you come and grab my jugs please?” she replied, 
pouting at the blushing engineer as he retreated in giggles.

At first, thanks to such saucy moments, I had Candice pegged simply as a 
cheeky minx of a baker with intriguing lips. Which is how I like my women, and 
indeed men. These qualities would have been enough to cheer up Wednesday 
evenings. But there proved much, much more to the secondary school teacher who 
lives in Bedfordshire with boyfriend Liam and pug Dennis (or maybe it’s the 
other way round).

Great British Bake Off stars to cook up a storm in tense BBC finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/great-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4>
In the same week she made Andrew blush, she did something that, baking-wise, 
floated my fougasse. She produced a gingerbread replica of her parents’ old 
north London pub for her showstopper, piping the name, King Billy IV, in icing. 
In a show in which mimsy contestants bake oversized breads evoking Norse 
legends or witter smugly about using eggs from their own plot, how refreshing 
that Candice created England’s answer to Proust’s madeleine – an edible boozer 
evoking her youthful memories of pulling pints.

But it was a detail in the gingerbread pub that really got me. The carpet. It 
was made from ginger, and slightly sticky. Is there anything more British than 
a pub carpet, soaked with who knows what kinds of toxic material, holding for 
all eternity the odour of fags and disappointment? No, there isn’t. Then what 
genius it was for Candice to alchemically transmute this abject icon of British 
culture into something beautiful and filled with bittersweet childhood memories.

Of course, even though she’s the bookies’ favourite to win, some people don’t 
like Candice. They don’t like that she changes the shade of her lipstick for 
each show. They don’t like that she sometimes bakes in heels. I’m not saying 
they’re all misogynists, but the safe money says many are.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7ac4e87bffe562bd40f8db88802c22c7c3229c%2F0_0_2852_4290%2F2852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Candice%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Candice%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7ac4e87bffe562bd40f8db88802c22c7c3229c%2F0_0_2852_4290%2F2852.jpg>
 The haters, as Taylor Swift realised, gonna hate; but the bakers, as Candice 
knows, gonna bake. Photograph: BBC/Love Productions/Tom Graham 
“Figured it out!” tweeted someone unpleasantly. “Candice reminds me of Greta 
from Gremlins #GBBO #Candice.” No she doesn’t – you’re just being mean (Greta, 
in case you don’t know, is a mutant with green hair that matches her scaly 
skin, an ill-advised leopardskin bikini and a smear of lippy over her frog-like 
lips). Fortunately, Candice has a skin thicker than Henry VIII’s game pies: 
rather than getting hurt by the hate, she superbly retweeted this toxic blah.


And when someone else tweeted unpleasant stuff about her lips (She pouts! Get 
over it!), Candice counter-tweeted an image of Daffy Duck, adding: “Night 
all!!! Loveliness appreciated as always!! Time to rest the duck face #daffy 
#loveliness #itsjustmyface.” The haters, as Taylor Swift realised, gonna hate; 
but the bakers, as Candice knows, gonna bake.

And then there was Peacockgate, in which Candice was accused of copying 2015 
winner Nadiya Hussain’s peacock for her Tudor week showstopper. Allow me to 
retort. First, Nadiya’s peacock was made out of Rice Krispies, marshmallows and 
a pinch of desperation and, what’s more, unacceptably, contained no cake, while 
Candice’s peacock was a shimmering work of art fashioned from Tudor marzipan 
and – finally! – cake. And second, why was Twitter bleating about Candice’s 
bird when it should have directed its attention to the historically ludicrous 
Mexican fillings in the otherwise delightful Benjamina’s purportedly 
16th-century Tudor pie?

I don’t want to go on about this, but Candice’s peacock tail demonstrated the 
marvellous truth about her approach to Bake Off: she always fulfils the brief 
and then keeps going. Her peacock had a marzipan tail made of yellow lemon 
flavoured feathers and green feathers that tasted of mint. Plus inside there 
was a surprise of fresh blueberries. “You’ve ticked all the boxes and then 
some,” said Paul Hollywood. Which doesn’t make any sense but I know what he 
means.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710be2c7707c9bc38c4347992cda4a99f40e3450%2F0_135_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Candice%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Candice%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-candice-brown-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710be2c7707c9bc38c4347992cda4a99f40e3450%2F0_135_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
 Candice always fulfils the brief … and then keeps going. Photograph: BBC/Love 
Productions/Tom Graham 
Candice is a better baker than her fellow finalists, more of an artist even 
than Jane, the garden designer, and as skilled an engineer of edible forms as 
Andrew. Plus, she’s much better telly than the others: I love the way she pep 
talks herself (“Come on CB!”), and now that Selasi has been evicted, she’s the 
only remaining contestant with the moxie to work the camera.

In the semi-final, Candice was still going beyond the brief. She made two 
kinds of fondant fancy for the showstopper, one involving chocolate praline, 
the other a cherry Bakewell. Neither was as showy as the pub or the peacock, 
but rather something the TV audience couldn’t appreciate – they were delicious. 
“You’ve made,” said Mary Berry, between mouthfuls, “two cracking fondant 
fancies.” Personally I could die happy if I knew that was going to be my 
epitaph. But such praise wouldn’t do justice to Candice’s talents. Only the 
Bake Off crown can do that.

 