
Do people still exclaim: "It's not cricket," when someone bends the rules or 
offends a code of practice? If the sentiment could survive the bodyline crisis 
of the 1930s then presumably it will recover from the recent ball-chucking, 
bat‑throwing spat involvingMarlon Samuel and Shane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/08/the-spin-shane-warne-marlon-samuels>
.

It is unlikely that anybody will ever declare: "It's not football," in a 
similar context, for footballers have always tended to regard the laws of their 
sport as more of a challenge than an obligation. In short, much of the game is 
about what you can get away with. Football would be a dull business if 
everybody observed the rules all of the time. Fouls, free-kicks and penalties 
are part of the entertainment.

Yet if one thing gets up people's noses more than the most crippling tackle it 
is seeing a player deliberately handle the ball either to give his team an 
advantage or, equally, avoid a disadvantage. Maybe it is because this strikes 
at football's very soul. In a fast‑moving body-contact sport people will get 
hurt, sometimes seriously, but using a hand in a sport devised primarily for 
the feet, goalkeepers excepted, is a dull‑eyed contradiction.

All of which goes some way towards explaining the fuss that ensued after Luis 
Suárez had scored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jan/07/luis-suarez-liverpool-handball-problem>
 Liverpool's second goal in their FA Cup tie at non‑league Mansfield on Sunday 
having first appeared to pat the ball down with his right hand. Some television 
viewers and those at Field Mill who had a clear view of it may have sympathised 
with the gut reaction of the ESPN commentator who condemned the moment as"the 
work of a cheat" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/07/luis-suarez-liverpool-espn-apologise>
.

Suárez did not help matters by kissing the hand in question, which apparently 
is what he does whenever he scores as a gesture of affection towards his wife 
and daughter. On this occasion he would surely have done better to leave the 
family out of it. In fact the nonchalant manner in which the Uruguayan put the 
ball into the net, much as players sometimes do when they know they have been 
caught offside, suggested that he did not expect the goal to stand.

That Suárez handled was unarguable but the way the ball bobbed up did present 
a reasonable doubt that this was his intent. Apparently the referee accepted 
that the handball was unintentional because he allowed the goal. In which case
Mansfield were entitled to misquote Coleridge 
<http://www.online-literature.com/coleridge/646/> – "I fear thee Andre 
Marriner! I fear thy skinny hand!' – because even if this was an instance of 
ball hitting hand rather than the opposite the effect was the same. A hand had 
controlled the ball and the goal should have been ruled out.

For a lot of critics, Suárez's reputation ruled out any mitigating argument. 
The way he denied Ghana a probable winning goalin the quarter-finals of the 
2010 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/02/uruguay-ghana-world-cup-report>
 by sticking up a mitt to keep out a header from Dominic Adiyiah, getting a red 
card and giving away a penalty the opposition missed before losing the 
subsequent shootout, still sticks in the craw. Yet such are Suárez's 
footballing gifts that he did not need to paw the ball down at Mansfield in 
order to score, which is surely a point in his favour.

This incident, moreover, was hardly as blatant as the sight of Thierry Henry 
handling the ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/nov/19/ireland-thierry-henry-france-hand>
 not once but twice before setting up a chance for William Gallas to score the 
decisive goal for France against the Republic of Ireland in a World Cup 
play-off in 2009. Henry's outstanding career with Arsenal did not spare him a 
mauling in the media.

A variation on the theme allegedly occurred when Scotland played Wales at 
Anfield in a qualifier for the 1978 World Cup. As Joe Jordan and David Jones 
challenged for a high ball in the Welsh penalty area, the French referee ruled 
that the latter had handled. Don Masson scored with the resulting penalty and 
the Scots won 2-0 to reach the tournament proper.

However, the suspicion that it was in fact Jordan who had touched the ball 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/ex-wales-keeper-dai-davies-im-1371802>
 remained, although he has always denied this. Either way the subsequent 
Scottish shambles under Ally MacLeod in Argentina suggested the Almighty had 
decided to even the score.

Meanwhile the Argentinians were keeping the Hand of God up their sleeve.
 