
There is no magic bullet for anxiety. We know this, and yet if we have 
a propensity for the bowel-shaking kind of anxiety that fits within 
the “disordered” bracket, a cure is exactly what we pray for. At the peaks of 
our discomfort, we are desperate for something, anything, to take the feeling 
away.

There are, however, many ways of treating anxiety by developing strategies for 
managing it as part of a highly functional, productive life. But there cannot 
be an absolute cure. Why? Because it is something every single human being 
experiences.

In people with disordered anxiety – that is, anxiety that significantly 
impacts day-to-day life – the expected fear response becomes overactive. We 
react not just to immediate perceived “normal” dangers, but to thoughts and 
memories. It can feel like we are anxious about nothing and everything at the 
same time and that the feelings will never go away. That helplessness can be 
assuaged by gaining knowledge of and examining the changing states of the brain.

With help, an anxious person can understand what is happening and begin to see 
their ability to adapt to and challenge their thinking. It’s important for them 
to understand that the brain is capable of adapting all the time from the 
moment we are born and that no mental state is fixed.

Our primitive fight-or-flight response holds an evolutionary function for us 
to stay alive, and it springs into action the minute we leave our mother’s 
body. The British psychoanalystWilfred Bion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilfred_Bion> suggested that we all suffer 
trauma by virtue of being born. We experience the physical and psychic 
separation from our mother. In the womb, a baby can feel the edge of its world. 
When it reaches out, there is a membrane. Being born takes that away and we are 
thrust into a cold, edgeless, unknown abyss.

To be anxious is to feel stuck, as if science and evidence don’t apply to our 
flavour of suffering

The Moro reflex <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moro_reflex> is a remarkable 
illustration of that adjustment. When we are infants our minds respond to 
physical “states” before proper thinking comes into being, but we stop doing it 
after about six months. Our brains learn, quickly, that a change in position 
doesn’t mean we are going to fall and die. We can see that change happening in 
real time.

When we are children, new neural pathways are formed and strengthened every 
day as we learn to keep ourselves out of danger by avoiding heights, sharp 
things or flames. We develop coping mechanisms and resilience. Our individual 
fear responses are adapting. When we are adults, our resilience against the 
infinite stressors of the world is the product of our genes and our 
experiences. But it’s the same brain we are carrying around.

No one knows exactly why one person develops disordered anxiety over another – 
only that many factors are at play, genetic and environmental. We can, however, 
not only teach the brain to react differently, but also change its physical 
structure – and neuroscientific research confirms this empirically.

Practising mindfulness <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mindfulness> 
and regular exercise do both of these things. Thousands of studies and 
brain-imaging techniques tell us that as fact. To be anxious a lot of the time, 
though, is to feel stuck, as if science and evidence don’t apply to our flavour 
of suffering. So we must also recognise that it is a process – it never happens 
overnight. The brain learns to behave in certain ways, which means it can 
relearn different ways. The biggest obstacle is believing that it applies to 
you, the individual.


Anxiety for Beginners: a Personal Investigation  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407490/s/anxiety-for-beginners/>
by Eleanor Morgan (published by Pan Macmillan at £16.99) is out now. To order a 
copy for £12.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407490/s/anxiety-for-beginners/>
 