
When Victor Nilsson Lindelof made his first team debut for Vasteras as a 
16-year-old in a 3-0 win over BK Forward in 2010, the Swedish third-tier club 
immediately knew they had a gem on their hands. The defender played a big part 
in their promotion that season but, inevitably, it did not take long for some 
of Europe’s superpowers to circle around the small city 90 minutes north-west 
of Stockholm.

In 2012 Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>, the world’s 
26th richest club, signed the teenager for a nominal fee – understood to be 
around €60,000 – with numerous add-on clauses factored in. Lindelof settled 
well, impressing in their reserve side, and eventually broke through to 
Benfica’s first team last year. “This is a dream,” he said on moving. Yet for 
his former club it has become something of a nightmare.

Now the criteria for one of those add-ons have been met Benfica have reneged 
on their financial agreement, namely declining to pay an additional €250,000 
after Lindelof made 10 first-team starts in the Primeira Liga andChampions 
League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/champions-league-roundup-bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-psg>
. He made his 10th appearance in April.

Vasteras have made a formal complaint, which is pending, to Fifa’s players’ 
status committee. The Portuguese champions’ argument is that the agreement 
expired when Lindelof signed an updated contract in 2015 after breaking into 
the first team but Vasteras are adamant they are owed the money and are willing 
to go to court if the issue is not resolved by Fifa.

Champions League roundup: Bayern, Atlético and PSG progress to last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/champions-league-roundup-bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-psg>
There is also a wider issue at play – if a ruling is made in Benfica’s favour 
it could see numerous other similar agreements between big clubs and minnows 
fall through.

As Lars Nilsson, the lawyer acting on behalf of Vasteras, told the Guardian: 
“This is not just a legal issue, it is also a moral and ethical issue. It is 
sad for a small club that are dependent on this money for their future but 
that’s the way it is when small clubs come up against big European clubs.”

Nilsson expects Fifa to rule in Vasteras’s favour even if he is dismayed by 
the Players’ Status Committee taking its time over the complaint. He had sent 
documentation to the governing body four weeks ago but as of the end of last 
week it had not been forwarded to Benfica.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70069297ddbf18b89176b2985895dea79f06464b%2F0_112_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Benfica%20refusing%20to%20pay%20a%20small%20Swedish%20club%20%E2%82%AC250%2C000%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Benfica%20refusing%20to%20pay%20a%20small%20Swedish%20club%20%E2%82%AC250%2C000%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70069297ddbf18b89176b2985895dea79f06464b%2F0_112_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Vasteras, who play Swedbank Park, are unable to move up the Swedish pyramid 
because of their debt. Photograph: Getty Images/Bongarts/Getty Images 
“I’m rather disappointed,” Nilsson said. “Fifa have still not sent our 
submission to Benfica for a response. They promised to do it within a short 
time – but what that means exactly is up to each person to decide. Normally 
they ask to respond within 20 days but that would be prolonged if Benfica have 
a legitimate reason to hold it up.”

However Benfica, who have not been in contact with Vasteras since rejecting an 
invoice for the €250,000, have reaffirmed their reluctance to pay the fee. 
“Vasteras expressly and irrevocably assigned to Benfica the entirety of the 
player’s registration and economic rights as of 18 July 2012,” a spokesperson 
said, adding that “clause six of the agreement signed between the two clubs 
mentions that ‘as a consequence of this definitive assignment of rights’ the 
player Victor Nilsson and his legal representative undertake to enter into a 
sport labour contract with SL Benfica to be in force from 18 July 2012 up to 30 
June 2015.”

Benfica are basically saying that because Lindelof has signed a new contract 
the initial agreement between the two clubs is void.

Vasteras’ vice-president, Christina Liffner, said they have received support 
from the Swedish Football Association, who had signed off on the transfer when 
it was made five years ago, but is keen for the matter to be resolved quickly. 
“I’m afraid it could take one or two years for a decision to be made,” she 
said. “That’s very bad for us because we are a small club and we need this 
money.

“In reality they should have paid up without us asking for it. But when we 
sent them the invoice they simply said they declined to pay us. They say the 
contract is no longer valid but after speaking to many lawyers and experts we 
are convinced it is.”

The money would clear Vasteras’ debts, which currently make it impossible for 
them to be promoted. Rules in Sweden stipulate any club unable to show a profit 
in their most recent accounts cannot be elevated in the pyramid. They finished 
sixth in the Division One Norra this season having been relegated after one 
season in the Superettan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b4cdd63918fa35d606daa3d5dec7ba375dbecf%2F0_0_1768_2416%2F1768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Benfica%20refusing%20to%20pay%20a%20small%20Swedish%20club%20%E2%82%AC250%2C000%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Benfica%20refusing%20to%20pay%20a%20small%20Swedish%20club%20%E2%82%AC250%2C000%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbenfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b4cdd63918fa35d606daa3d5dec7ba375dbecf%2F0_0_1768_2416%2F1768.jpg>
 Victor Nilsson Lindelof celebrates with after winning the Portuguese League 
Cup in May 2016. Photograph: Gualter Fatia/Getty Images 
Benfica’s most recent published accounts show a turnover of €126m, making them 
the world’s 26th richest club according to Deloitte. The 35-times Portuguese 
champions have almost half a billion in assets and several members of their 
current squad earn more in a month than Vasteras’s annual turnover of €660,000.

“We are a small club,” Liffner added. “Clearing our debts is essential because 
to go up the ladder in Sweden we need to have positive equity. The money would 
not be to buy players; it would be to balance our accounts.”

Further complications could also arise if Benfica decide to offload Lindelof 
in the future because the initial contract included another clause entitling 
Vasteras to a percentage of any sell-on fee. In January of this year he was 
close to joining Middlesbrough but the move was held up despite all parties 
agreeing a transfer in principle. It is not clear whether there is a link to 
the Vasteras dispute.

He is contracted to the Lisbon club until the end of the 2019-20 season and 
his market value has risen considerably since consolidating his place in Rui 
Vitória’s defence. The 22-year-old has also become a mainstay of Janne 
Andersson’s Sweden team in 2016.

Lindelof’s representatives did not respond when asked for a comment.
 