
The most delightful things do not always have auspicious beginnings. Truffles, 
for example, need help from a hog to go from forest floor to haute cuisine. 
Diamonds lurk in the rough.I uncovered one such gem a couple of years ago 
<https://twitter.com/bimadew/status/544856140895764480>: a TV series by the 
name ofScrotal Recall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fjIB1E8nH7w>, with the 
head-scratching premise of a visit to a sexual health clinic. It was a terrible 
thing to call a TV show, I thought. How could I have known it would turn out to 
be a goddamned delight?

First things first: they changed the name. Phew. Scrotal Recall became Lovesick
 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4051832/> in time for its second season, now on 
Netflix. It’s about a man named Dylan (Johnny Flynn 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1926865/>) who, upon being diagnosed with 
chlamydia, has to do the responsible thing and call all his previous partners. 
Each episode is a walk down memory lane: how they met, how they parted, with 
high jinks and hilarity thrown in. The result is one of the finest British 
romantic comedies in years. The cast is eminently watchable: supporting players 
Evie (a luminousAntonia Thomas <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3687902/>) and Luke 
(hilariousDaniel Ings <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3958526/>) are superb, and 
all the guest stars are charming, and generate natural and warm chemistry. The 
script is stellar. The slow-burn central love story is my catnip. (Ah, the 
angst! The missed connections!)

But perhaps my biggest joy, and greatest surprise, is the way it shows male 
friendship as genuine and nourishing. It never plays it for laughs, and it is a 
better show for it.

So hop to it. Fourteen episodes of perfect romantic comedy, with hopefully 
a third season in the works. If you’re not a walking “heart-eyes” emoji by the 
end of it, I’ll eat my hat.
 