
Do you remember that TV channel, Trouble 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trouble_(TV_channel)>? In the late 90s/early 
00s, it was a colourful graveyard for American teen and young adult shows of 
the recent past, repackaged for young British eyes. It brought me TV shows no 
other channels would have thought to – and is how I came to watchThe Parkers 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0200353/>, and fall for the comedian and actor 
Mo’Nique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/monique-im-difficult-tacky-and-was-blackballed-after-oscar-win>
.

The Parkers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, a sitcom about a mother and 
daughter attending college together, was a nice break for Mo’Nique, now 48, but 
it was hardly her first outing in the business. She was doing stand-up before 
the siren call of TV, and if you haven’t watched her (filthy, hilarious, repeat:
filthy) sets, particularly her turn on The Queens Of Comedy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1XO10Nx6eE>, I urge you to. Her jokes can be 
uncomfortable, but then they come from uncomfortable situations, and 
I appreciate that edge; her riff on “skinny bitches” will always make me laugh. 
Her raspy voice is like a shot of something strong and oaky, and her laugh is 
contagious, even when you’re semi-scandalised at the joke.

Why I love... actor Andrew Lincoln
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/why-i-love-actor-andrew-lincoln>
She has branched out from straight comedy, too: her stunning portrayal of Ma 
Rainey in the TV filmBessie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P-tynW1jqzk> shook 
me up; before that, she won an Oscar for her astounding performance in the 2009 
drama Precious <https://www.theguardian.com/film/precious>. She’s an agile 
dancer, too <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=567178rf2X0> (her Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/therealmoworldwide/> is a delight) and her little 
inspirational quotes about love and life give off the vibe of a woman who is 
happy with her lot.

But comedy’s still her main thing: earlier this year, she released a special, 
Mo’Nique’s Something Different 
<https://www.amazon.com/MoNiques-Something-Different-Monique-Hicks/dp/B01LZV7JG0/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1474992145&sr=8-1&keywords=Mo%27nique+Something+Different>
, and her new family comedy,Almost Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mw-Rhm8OIw>, just came out. With that 
infectious laugh, she’s the best thing in it. Of course.
 