
On the evening of 23 June, I happened to be in a theatre in New York, watching 
a musical about a man who exhorted his country first to revolution and then 
into a federal union. While King George III was singing, “Oceans rise, empires 
fall / We have seen each other through it all”, across the ocean, Britain was 
voting to leave the European Union. WhenHamilton: The Musical brings its story 
of the American revolution to London next year, its certain triumph is going to 
create all kinds of historical ironies.

Sixteen ways Hamilton transformed theater – and the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/03/hamilton-tony-awards-broadway-lin-manuel-miranda>
Hamilton is the kind of transformative theatrical experience that has only 
happened a few times in the history of American musicals. It joins the likes of
Show Boat, Oklahoma! and West Side Story as game changers, innovative 
productions that forever redefined what came after them. Unlike most of its 
predecessors, however,Hamilton was created by one man, Lin‑Manuel Miranda, who 
wrote the music, lyrics, and book about the musical (only Stephen Sondheim can 
claim as much, and none of his shows were such blockbusters).Hamilton fuses 
American history with current politics, using a soundtrack of American popular 
music and one of the most inventive librettos ever written. The result is that 
nearly every song in the show works as a complex historical concert, layering 
musical pasts with the musical present, just as the historical past mingles 
with the political present. In less than two years, it has exploded all box 
office records – it has sold $1bn worth of tickets – and won every theatrical 
prize (including the Pulitzer prize for drama), garnering the kind of 
hyperbolic praise that no production can possibly live up to. ButHamilton 
exceeds its own acclaim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4aa0c75db7075e2e9ca87e5de3976536b1dc347%2F0_179_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4aa0c75db7075e2e9ca87e5de3976536b1dc347%2F0_179_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 Phillipa Soo as Eliza and Lin-Manuel Miranda as Hamilton. Photograph: Joan 
Marcus 
Miranda had already created a successful musical (In the Heights) when he 
impulsively decided to read Ron Chernow’s prize-winning biographyAlexander 
Hamilton on holiday (Miranda’s whim has made Chernow, who reportedly gets 1% of 
Hamilton’s profit, a very wealthy man). Hamilton represents something of an 
anomaly in American history, a founding father who never transferred from 
official histories into popular mythology. There are many reasons for this, not 
least that Hamilton’s positions were incompatible with many of our myths – he 
was avowedly elitist, for example, and supported the idea of a president for 
life – while his expansion of the federal government prompted the Whiskey 
Rebellion of 1794, which he brutally suppressed. Neither of these facts makes 
it into Miranda’s musical, which is the story of a “young, scrappy and hungry” 
immigrant from the West Indies who became the quintessential American success 
story through a combination of brains, hard work and audacity. Miranda creates 
a myth forHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> by celebrating 
him as a symbol of immigrant inclusiveness, egalitarianism and meritocracy: 
historically it’s a stretch, but theatrically it’s genius.

Eventually Hamilton became a hero of the American revolution, George 
Washington’s right-hand man, the nation’s first secretary of the treasury, the 
co-author (with James Madison) ofThe Federalist Papers, and the primary 
proponent for federal government over state government. He argued for a 
national bank, created the national reserve as well as the national debt, and 
laid the foundations for the US’s economic success. His dramatic life came to a 
melodramatic end when he was killed in a duel by the sitting vice president, 
Aaron Burr. And yet, despite all these achievements and dramas, Hamilton has 
been marginalised by most popular accounts of American history.Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/sep/28/culture.peterbradshaw3>, 
Jefferson,John Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/jul/26/john-adams-next-box-set> 
have been the subject of countless books, films, miniseries and even their own 
popular musical,1776. But 1776, which tells the story of the battle over 
writing the Declaration of Independence, does not even mention Hamilton.

That sidelining resonated with Miranda, himself the son of Puerto Rican 
immigrants, as an emblematic instance of the nation’s treatment of immigrants, 
both as individuals and as a collective part of the nation’s history. Those 
twin intuitions sparked a musical about historical, cultural and political 
inclusion, in which an almost entirely non-white cast plays the founding 
fathers (and a few of the mothers, although the cast is also overwhelmingly 
male). The result is the most unexpected of phenomena: aBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> hit that is about political, 
economic and racial history while also offering an implicit but acidic running 
commentary on the racial and cultural politics of the US today. Everything 
about the show is “meta”, as layered references compound meaning like interest: 
Hamilton is metatheatrical, metahistorical, metamusical, metamorphic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e9aa1e66aede05e449114fd59064b430ff5893%2F0_281_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e9aa1e66aede05e449114fd59064b430ff5893%2F0_281_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Jonathan Groff as George III. Photograph: Joan Marcus 
Much has been written about Miranda’s wide-ranging but acute musical 
references, from a Britpop-inflected George III (“When you’re gone, I’ll go mad 
/ So don’t throw away this thing we had / Cause when push comes to shove / I 
will kill your friends and family to remind you of my love”) to the three 
Schuyler sisters singing about New York in the manner of Destiny’s Child; from 
theNotorious BIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/dec/16/the-notorious-big-biggie-smalls-10-of-the-best>
 to Kander and Ebb. Miranda is conducting a magisterial conversation with 
musical theatre, which is a kind of microcosm of American popular history, 
marked in important ways by the mainstream’s appropriation of minority cultures 
(Show Boat, West Side Story). Hamilton reverses that process, exploring 
mainstream history through the music of subcultures. Lines about racism from 
Rodgers and Hammerstein’sSouth Pacific (“you’ve got to be carefully taught”) 
rub shoulders with Busta Rhymes; Sondheim’s experiments in perspective from
Pacific Overtures meet Snoop Dogg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/snoopdogg>
. There is a running gag about Adams, in which Miranda riffs on1776; its 
opening number is the resounding “Sit Down, John!” in which the Continental 
Congress tells him to shut up. Miranda is doing the same, telling Adams and the 
Anglocentric American history he embodies to step aside. He sidelines Adams, 
waiting until the second act to mention him, and then has Hamilton sing, “Sit 
down, John, you fat motherfucker!” Less explicit (in every sense) is Miranda’s 
decision to give Hamilton a signature refrain – “I will never be satisfied” — 
that echoes Adams’s line from1776, “I have always been dissatisfied, I know 
that.”

Miranda’s lyrics are dizzying: he rhymes Socrates with mediocrities, before 
linking manumission, abolition and ammunition. Gilbert and Sullivan are not 
only sampled, they are schooled; Miranda gleefully told a journalist he felt 
he’d improved the rhyme in Gilbert’s famous patter, which becomes George 
Washington’s rap: “Now I’m the model of a modern major general / The venerated 
Virginian veteran whose men are all / Lining up, to put me up on a pedestal.” 
Puns abound with the exuberant energy of a word-drunk writer: “Local merchants 
deny us equipment, assistance / They only take British money, so sing a song of 
sixpence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfb128f674fa697bd73e7e40995c69e4f624ad27%2F0_74_5009_3005%2F5009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfb128f674fa697bd73e7e40995c69e4f624ad27%2F0_74_5009_3005%2F5009.jpg>
 Daveed Diggs in Hamilton. Photograph: Joan Marcus 
Almost all of Hamilton is sung through, as opera: there is very little spoken 
dialogue, and much less rap than some accounts might suggest. When rap comes 
in, it is with “practical tactical brilliance”, as when Miranda turns cabinet 
debates into rap battles, in which Jefferson and Hamilton face off and drop the 
mic, in reference to Eminem’s8 Mile <https://www.theguardian.com/film/8-mile>. 
Hamilton and Burr’s fatal duel is likened to gang violence by sampling the 
legendary “Ten Crack Commandments” by Notorious BIG, himself notoriously the 
victim of gang violence. “It must be nice to have Washington on your side,” 
sung by Burr, Jefferson and Madison, is ostensibly about President Washington’s 
patronage of Hamilton, but it also becomes about modern disenfranchisement, 
alienated citizens who feel that Washington DC is not on their side. A song 
called “Wait for It” is about Burr’s character, but it is also about – wait for 
it – how destructive it has been for communities of colour to be told to wait 
their turn.

As with the lyrics, the music is used to make historical points, rather than 
simply to score points. Jefferson and Burr each have a standout solo in the 
second act. (Miranda is markedly generous, giving his co-stars most of the best 
songs.) Returning from Paris, Jefferson sings “What’d I Miss? 
<http://genius.com/Lin-manuel-miranda-whatd-i-miss-lyrics>” over boogie-woogie 
piano with riffs on other Dixieland jazz sounds, including stride and ragtime. 
Its invocations of the origins of jazz as the kind of grandfather of rap are at 
once facetious – as performed by Daveed Diggs, Jefferson even uses “jazz hands” 
– and serious. Because Jefferson was considerably older than Hamilton and his 
contemporaries, Miranda gives the younger characters hip-hop influences, while 
Jefferson sings old-school jazz, which also lets Miranda tip his hat to classic 
performers such as Cab Calloway, whose vocals pointed the way to rap. As the 
act progresses, Jefferson’s influence on Burr deepens. By the time Burr breaks 
out into his great second act number, “The Room Where It Happens”, his musical 
style has subtly shifted, as he picks up Jefferson’s Dixieland jazz. Burr’s 
song is the kind of gospel-inspired, choir-backed showstopper that composers 
have used for more than a century in American musical theatre to get audiences 
on their feet, from Cole Porter’s “Blow, Gabriel, Blow” to Frank Loesser’s “Sit 
Down, You’re Rockin’ the Boat”. But unlike those songs, which are great fun but 
almost entirely meaningless, “The Room Where It Happens” is a foot-stomping, 
barnstorming, surge-to-your feet instant classic about – the historical record.

It’s a turning point in the show in many senses: Burr stops waiting for it, 
and the gaps in the historical record become a metaphor for political 
exclusion. “The Room Where It Happens” is about the way in which historiography 
constructs mythologies of power, and it’s about realpolitik, how politics gets 
done. Burr sings, “No one really knows how the / Parties get to yes / The 
pieces that are sacrificed in / Ev’ry game of chess / We just assume that it 
happens / But no one else is in / The room where it happens”, before launching 
into his power verse: “I wanna be in / The room where it happens / The room 
where it happens.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f5aa95396844c173910604794e714588c028a77%2F0_343_5044_3026%2F5044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Hamilton%20is%20making%20musical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwhy-hamilton-is-making-musical-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f5aa95396844c173910604794e714588c028a77%2F0_343_5044_3026%2F5044.jpg>
 Christopher Jackson as George Washington. Photograph: Joan Marcus 
Miranda is putting immigrants and the descendants of slaves, black people, 
Latinos and Asians, low-income kids with little hope for the future, in the 
room where it happens. The ambitious individual left out of the “smoke-filled 
room” becomes the emblem of entire groups excluded from power. “We want our 
leaders to save the day – / But we don’t get a say in what they trade away / We 
dream of a brand new start – / But we dream in the dark for the most part.” The 
song encapsulates the entire musical, which continually raises questions of 
historiography and the power to shape a national narrative. Hamilton’s wife, 
Eliza, initially wants to take her place in history – “Oh, let me be a part of 
the narrative / In the story they will write someday” – but when Hamilton 
betrays her, she burns their letters, to control the narrative. And then in the 
end, when Hamilton has died far too young, Eliza sings, “I put myself back in 
the narrative”. Miranda returns in closing to the question of competing 
historical versions in a song in which Washington, Jefferson, Madison and Eliza 
all admit that what matters is, “Who lives, who dies, who tells your story? 
Will they tell your story? … Who tells your story?”

Hamilton's teenage superfans: 'This is, like, crazy cool'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/22/hamilton-teenage-superfans-this-is-like-crazy-cool>
The question of what gets left out of the narrative is one that can also be 
asked ofHamilton’s own mythmaking, however. Although Miranda invokes popular 
histories to accuse them of colour blindness, the fact is that even1776 
confronted the question of slavery far more directly back in 1969 thanHamilton 
does today. To be sure,1776 features an all-white cast arguing about whether 
slavery is bad; Jefferson terribly misses his terribly blond wife and can’t 
write the Declaration of Independence until she joins him, while his slave 
Sally Hemings, who probably mothered six of his children, is never mentioned. 
But1776 also ends on “Molasses to Rum”, a startlingly frank and brutal account 
of the triangle trade, and an indictment of the north’s hypocrisy about slavery.
Hamilton does mention Hemings – once – and has some other references to 
slavery, but strongly implies that only Jefferson owned slaves, while 
suggesting that Hamilton was a far more dedicated abolitionist than the record 
shows. In fact, Washington and Madison also owned slaves, while Hamilton bought 
and sold slaves for his wife’s family, and was inconsistent in regards to 
manumission.

Hamilton features black and brown actors, but its story never depicts a slave. 
That said, it’s also true that minstrelsy is crucial to Miranda’s project: he 
takes the long American minstrelsy tradition of white people in blackface on 
stage and reverses it. He appropriates its music, rewrites its lyrics, turns 
its politics on its head, and fashions the whole thing into a show that is 
simultaneously an excoriation of current American political realities, an 
encomium to American revolutionary energies, and a celebration of American 
musical theatre history. If you live in Britain, you will have to wait until 
next November for it, but when it comes, believe me, you’ve gotta be in the 
room where it happens.

• Hamilton opens at the Victoria Palace theatre, London SW1E, in November 
2017. Tickets go on sale in January.hamiltonthemusical.co.uk 
<http://www.hamiltonthemusical.co.uk/>
 