
Although male grooming is going through a boom time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/22/can-you-cut-it-what-your-hairstyle-says-about-you>
, the new stats from online beauty siteTreatwell <https://www.treatwell.co.uk/> 
will raise an eyebrow. An eyebrow that has been perfectly plucked, of course.

Male Brazilian blow-dries for men are up by 200%, waxing up by 85% and – 
according to data from the Treatwell app – 25% of men have regular manicure 
appointments.

PB (post-Beckham) and PI (post-Instagram), male beauty ideals have become 
specific and attainable. The growth in genderless treatments is indicative of a 
reality where it’s not enough to have the right haircut (the “Mr Robot” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/13/mr-robot-undercut-2016-most-ubiquitous-hairdo>
 fade, FYI) but you have to have the correct nails and beard too. “‘Body 
beautiful’ for men is absolutely huge, and they’re beginning to experience the 
same kind of social pressure as women,” says Lloyd Hughes, creative director of 
the grooming brandmen-ü <http://www.men-u.co.uk/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhy-male-beauty-treatments-are-growing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef4a0233c0c6d5b70c7d66574ea8e512bf5e2a1f%2F0_188_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20male%20beauty%20treatments%20are%20growing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhy-male-beauty-treatments-are-growing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20male%20beauty%20treatments%20are%20growing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwhy-male-beauty-treatments-are-growing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef4a0233c0c6d5b70c7d66574ea8e512bf5e2a1f%2F0_188_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 The Mr Robot fade. Photograph: USA Network/Getty Images 
For some, these ideals are both problematic and set in stone. Despite the rise 
being inextricably linked to metrosexuality andspornosexuality  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/15/from-poldark-to-bieber-theres-a-male-body-ideal-and-its-problematic>
, it’s also vaguely reminiscent of the post-war era of “something for the 
weekend” barber shops, where haircuts were a weekly event. But with some key 
differences.

“About 20 years ago, a man brought in a picture of a haircut he liked into my 
salon and, from the way he was holding it, you’d have thought he was hiding 
pornography,” says Hughes. “Now, it couldn’t be more different. Guys come in 
with their phones and scroll through pictures of how they want their hair to 
look, discussing with friends what they think looks good.”

According to Hughes, the next big treatment will be clean shaves. “Men have 
already passed having a beard. Now it is more about shorter stubble. And next 
year will be the clean shave.”
 