
The world started to pay serious attention to the Chinese Super League during 
last January’s transfer window. Chinese clubs spent huge amounts of money as 
they tried to lure world-class footballers to the country, with the most 
notable spending coming fromGuangzhou Evergrande, who signed Jackson Martínez  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/jackson-martinez-guangzhou-evergrande-atletico-madrid>
from Atlético Madrid for £32m, andJiangsu Suning, who paid Chelsea £20m for 
Ramires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/ramires-joins-jiangsu-suning-chelsea>
. The deals hit the headlines across the globe, andShanghai SIPG’s £52m 
acquisition of Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/oscar-move-shanghai-worrying-chelsea-china>
 from Chelsea andCarlos Tevez’s £71m move to Shanghai Shenhua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/carlos-tevez-shanghai-shenhua-chinese-super-league>
, suggest the big spending will continue this year.

Although many people, including Chelsea boss Antonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/antonio-conte-chinese-super-league-danger-oscar-move-chelsea>
, claim that Chinese wealth is a danger to clubs around the world, the large 
figures are partially caused by market imperfections that have arisen due to 
the rule that Chinese clubs mustlimit the number of international players 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Super_League#International_players_policy>
 in their squads. This, coupled with the lack of world-class Chinese players, 
drives up the price of the best homegrown players; for instanceZhang Lu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhang_Lu_(goalkeeper)>, a 29-year-old goalkeeper 
with just two caps for China,moved clubs for £8m last year 
<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/sports/soccer/Zhang-transfer-shatters-domestic-record/shdaily.shtml>
. The high cost of top Chinese talent means it makes economic sense for clubs 
to spend large sums on top foreign players such as Oscar and Tevez. Indeed, 
given the inflated prices of Chinese players, Oscar’s price tag may be closer 
to his real value.

Carlos Tevez signs for Shanghai Shenhua in deal worth £615,000 a week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/carlos-tevez-shanghai-shenhua-chinese-super-league>
The Chinese government’s ambition to become a footballing superpower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/08/china-focus-football-global-game>
 is another reason why clubs are so keen to splash the cash. The companies who 
own the 16 clubs in the Chinese Super League see investment as a way to gain 
favour with the government. Although China’s plan to become the world’s best 
footballing nation has many flaws, it is attracting a large number of fans to 
the game and, while the country may not produce the “Chinese Messi” the 
government wants, the large-scale investment in academies will improve the base 
level of Chinese football in the future, as well as the nation’s interest in 
the game.

The chance to make lucrative connections with the government, along with the 
restricted Chinese transfer market explain why clubs are willing to pursue 
foreign superstars. However, many people outside of Asia, especially in the 
English press, do not understand why top players are willing to move to China 
in their prime, often still seeing leagues outside of Europe as essentially 
retirement leagues. These players are deemed greedy and unambitious, 
descriptions they seldom deserve.

Footballers may dream of winning the Champions League with a storied European 
club but, essentially, football is football. Oscar will still be doing his 
dream job: he is still training through the week and then playing for 90 
minutes, albeit on the other side of the world. I doubt there are many people 
who, if offered four times their current salary to do the same job wouldn’t be 
tempted to move to China for a few years, especially if their careers are as 
short and fragile as that of a professional footballer.

As for a lack of ambition, Oscar has the chance to go from benchwarmer at 
Chelsea to potentially the biggest star on an entire continent. If anything, 
staying at Chelsea and sitting on the touchlines would be showing a lack of 
aspiration and adventure.

Critics also claim that moving away from Europe damages a player’s career 
prospects. The quality of football in China is still a long way behind the top 
European leagues but moving to the Far East is not quite the career-destroying 
move many people make it out to be. First of all, there are plenty of players 
who have moved to a “retirement league” before returning to Europe and continue 
their careers successfully. People assumed Jermain Defoe would finish his 
career in Major League Soccer when he moved to Toronto FC in 2014. They thought 
the lower quality of football across the Atlantic would lead to Defoe losing 
his edge but his goals effectively kept Sunderland in the Premier League last 
season and a return to the England squad has been suggested.

Even Nicolas Anelka and Didier Drogba, whose spells at Shanghai Shenhua were 
reported in the English media as being disastrous, both returned to the Premier 
League after playing in China, with Drogba returning to Chelsea and Anelka 
joining West Brom.

With scouting systems and media now global businesses, it is possible to keep 
track of players’ careers from the other side of the world, so a move to China 
doesn’t mean players will drop off the radar. In fact, the influx of expensive 
imports and big-name managers have given theChinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chinese-super-league> more international 
attention than ever before.

Moving to Asia can put players in the shop window. Hulk, who will play 
alongside his Brazil team-mate Oscar at Shanghai SIPG, made his big break in 
Japan, where he played for Kawazaki Frontale, Tokyo Verdy and Consadole 
Sapporo. He scored 70 goals in 104 appearances in the J League and his 
goalscoring attracted the interest of FC Porto, where his impressive form led 
to a call-up for Brazil.

Edu had a reasonably prolific spell for German club Vfl Bochum towards the 
start of his career, but when he moved from Mainz 05 to South Korean side Suwon 
Bluewings in 2007, it may have looked like his time in Europe was over. 
However, after a successful spell at Suwon – where he helped them become Korean 
champions – he returned to Germany and ended up playing for Schalke 04 in the 
Champions League, scoring twice against Inter in the quarter-finals and playing 
against Manchester United in the semi-finals. He is now back in South Korea 
with Jeonbuk Motors, the current Asian champions.

Oscar will get to count Chinese cash but he will pay a heavy price | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> 
Often players move from Brazil to Asia not due to footballing ambition (or 
greed for that matter; wages in Korea and Japan are similar to what a player 
would earn back in Brazil and are far lower than what players earn in the 
Premier League) but because of third-party ownership agreements, or deals with 
players’ agents. However, if players perform well in Asia, they will attract 
interest from other parts of the world.

Playing outside of Europe might dent English players’ chances of representing 
their national team – although David Beckham did earn international caps while 
at LA Galaxy, even before his loan spells in Italy – but Brazil are perfectly 
willing to call up their stars who play in China. Paulinho, who swapped 
Tottenham Hotspur for Guangzhou Evergrande in 2015, and Renato Augusto, who 
moved to Beijing Guoan last year, both played in Brazil’s 2-0 win over Peru in 
November.

Asian football still has a long way to go before it can match Europe’s top 
leagues for quality – the rule limiting foreigners prevents the leagues from 
just buying their way to the top – but standards are steadily improving every 
year. Asia’s leagues are slowly becoming more attractive for sponsors, viewing 
figures are slowly increasing and scouting networks are becoming truly 
international. China may not become the footballing superpower that its 
government craves, but Asian countries are not a graveyard for footballers’ 
careers.

• This article is from These Football Times <http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Steve 
Price <https://twitter.com/kleaguefootball> on Twitter
 