
On most reality shows the stakes aren’t very high. Yes, you might have to eat 
the odd koala anus, but that’s about as bad as the jeopardy gets. There is 
nothing that will do lasting damage. Reality shows simply aren’t real enough. 
The competitors on The Apprentice, for instance, aren’t real businessmen and 
women. Likewise, the contestants on The Great British Bake Off are just cuddly 
amateurs and the only thing they really have to lose is the will to live after 
the eighth take of a clunky innuendo. But on MasterChef: The Professionals the 
drama is real and terrifying because the contestants aren’t just being judged 
on their cooking, but their entire livelihood.


The horrible reality of this becomes wonderfully apparent in the very first 
challenge they have to face – the skills test. This is where the chefs, without 
prior warning, have to cook anything from ceviche to banoffee cheesecake while 
Marcus Wareing, Monica Galetti and Gregg Wallace scrutinise their every knife 
flick. It’s a setup that induces a state of shaking nervousness – and it’s 
quite tricky to chop a shallot when your hands are trembling. Because of this, 
almost everyone does terribly and chefs with decades of experience forget that 
a hollandaise sauce isn’t supposed to look like scrambled egg.

It’s not that what they say is particularly rude – although Marcus did once 
describe someone’s wild garlic velouté as “probably the most tasteless plate of 
food I’ve tasted”.It’s that they really mean it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t_rFWTwdtpk>. There are no ridiculous zingers, 
just serious criticism. So when Monica tells a head chef from Northern Ireland 
that “you clearly didn’t know what you were doing”, you can see on the poor 
man’s face how much it hurts. To tell someone who cooks for a living that they 
can’t cook is probably enough to make them not want to go on living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwhy-masterchef-the-professionals-is-the-cruellest-reality-tv-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b23ef4bb78532446171163ea2537920f9b764b0%2F0_214_3612_2167%2F3612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20MasterChef%3A%20The%20Professionals%20is%20the%20cruellest%20reality%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwhy-masterchef-the-professionals-is-the-cruellest-reality-tv-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20MasterChef%3A%20The%20Professionals%20is%20the%20cruellest%20reality%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwhy-masterchef-the-professionals-is-the-cruellest-reality-tv-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b23ef4bb78532446171163ea2537920f9b764b0%2F0_214_3612_2167%2F3612.jpg>
 A setup that induces a state of shaking nervousness … Marcus Wareing, Gregg 
Wallace and Monica Galetti scrutinise every knife flick of the contestants. 
Photograph: BBC/Shine TV 
It’s almost sociopathic and if you can stand to watch it, you won’t be able to 
tear your eyes away. There’s nothing else like it on television. That forensic 
analysis of skill and the uncompromising standards the contestants invariably 
fail to attain make it the perfect antidote to those infantilised reality shows 
where you get feted for sitting on a sofa beside Lionel Blair for two weeks.

That sharp edge might be too much to bear if it weren’t for the unique 
presence of Gregg Wallace. Now, let me say right now that I love Gregg but, 
with all respect to him, he doesn’t seem a particularly complex man. You don’t 
get the impression that there’s much of an inner voice and, if there is, it’s 
just the Only Fools and Horses theme tune on loop. Because of this,all of his 
emotions find immediate expression on his face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ij9Vvc-8-co> or escape out of his mouth. A 
chef forgets to hammer the meat for a steak diane and Gregg instantly looks as 
if he might vomit. Another chef describes his hazelnut, chocolate and caramel 
pudding and Gregg emits the excited squeak of a climaxing rodent. No one is 
quite sure how Gregg came to be on the show, but without him it would be 
missing a key ingredient.

MasterChef: The Professionals is incredibly difficult to win, there is no 
prize at the end and your entire identity is likely to be shattered by your 
heroes. To be a contestant, you have to be prepared to lose a lot, and that’s 
what makes the show so good. That, and the wondrous sight of Gregg Wallace 
unshackled from self-control and John Torode.
 