
Wigan Athletic take on Fleetwood Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> on Saturday in a 
deceptively routine-looking fixture that highlights the mobility now possible 
within the English football pyramid.

As recently as the 1970s, when the teams were at opposite ends of the Northern 
Premier League, Wigan were so poorly served by the Football League’s 
re-election system that after a series of rebuffs they attempted to publicise 
their plight by applying for admission to the Scottish League Second Division. 
Because a previous incarnation of the club, Wigan Borough, had been wound up 
mid-season in 1931, there was strong resistance to readmitting a Wigan side to 
the league and an incredible 34 applications met with failure before they were 
voted in to replace Southport in 1978.

Around the same time Fleetwood were re-forming as Fleetwood Town FC in 
Division One of the Cheshire League (geography is a flexible construct in 
non-league football) after the Northern Premier League club went out of 
business in 1976. Fleetwood would fold and re-form again in the 90s before the 
present owner, Andy Pilley, became involved in 2003, though once the club was 
properly on their feet there were no obstacles in the way of a remarkable climb 
through the divisions. With Pilley providing financial stability, Fleetwood 
have achieved an astonishing six promotions in the past 10 years.

Because automatic promotion to the Football League was introduced in 1987 the 
club did not have to go through Wigan’s experience of waiting for a League club 
to be voted out while simultaneously hoping to be voted in. When Fleetwood won 
the Football Conference in 2012, with futureEngland international Jamie Vardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/06/leicester-jamie-vardy-non-league-england>
 in their ranks, they were straight into League Two. Promotion to League One 
via the play-offs in 2014, coupled withWigan’s two relegations in three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/29/wigan-athletic-fa-cup-to-league-one>
 since winning the FA Cup in 2013, means the sides face each other for the 
first time in a competitive fixture for 40 years, with a gap of eight divisions 
having been bridged within the past decade.

When Paul Jewell’s Wigan gained promotion to the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/may/09/match.wiganathletic> in 2005, 
completing a notable climb of their own in the 10 years since the local 
businessman and rugby fan Dave Whelan took over an ailing fourth division club, 
Fleetwood were winning the North West Counties League to gain admission to the 
Northern Premier League first division. At that point Wigan were on the top 
rung of the League ladder, and would not only retain their Premier League 
status that season butreach the Carling Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/feb/27/match.wiganathletic>, while 
Fleetwood reached a lowly eighth.

Wigan’s fall from FA Cup winners to League One: where did it all go wrong? | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/29/wigan-athletic-fa-cup-to-league-one>
Yet by the time Wigan finally dropped out of the Premier League in 2013, 
Fleetwood had made it into the Football League having gained promotion from the 
NPL first division in 2006, won the NPL in 2008, escaped the Conference North 
through the play-offs in 2010, turned professional a year later and claimed the 
Conference title in 2012. Wigan lasted only two years in the Championship, the 
same length of time as Fleetwood were in League Two, so the sides meet as 
mid-tableLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
opponents with Wigan a point and a couple of league places ahead.

As recent FA Cup winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/11/manchester-city-wigan-athletic-fa-cup>
 and Premier League competitors Wigan are arguably ahead of Sheffield United as 
the biggest scalp to be claimed in League One, though inevitably Fleetwood will 
regard their two games against Blackpool as the major derby. There is every 
chance that Fleetwood will finish ahead of Blackpool too, as the Seasiders are 
in turmoil off the pitch and on it have managed only four points from their 
first seven games.

Wigan supporters will enjoy renewing an old rivalry in a division with several 
north-west derbies but mostly they are looking forward to the away game, late 
in December. “Being in Division One isn’t all bad,” one season-ticket holder 
explained. “Fleetwood joins Bury, Oldham and Rochdale as games that you can get 
to by tram. We couldn’t do that quite so often in the Premier League.”
 