
Unsurprisingly, the British fans who thronged the grandstands at Silverstone 
were offering support for Lewis Hamilton that was both visual, in the shape of 
flags, and vocal – but there was also a notable upsurge in those sporting the 
new Martini-sponsoredWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> 
garb, albeit under umbrellas for most of the day.

The team are much-loved by the knowledgeable racing fans here, who are 
enjoying their long-overdue return to form – as are the team, who will take to 
the track on Sunday exactly 35 years after scoring their first grand prix win 
here at Silverstone.

However, having enjoyed the highs of the team’s resurgence at the last race, 
in Austria – where Felipe Massa, celebrating his 200th race start here, took 
pole and his team-mate, Valtteri Bottas, joined him in locking out the front 
row, which they converted into fourth and third place respectively in the race 
– fans at their home race had to endure the lows as well. A poor qualifying 
session left Bottas 16th and Massa 17th on the grid, before they were promoted 
two places after penalties for Esteban Gutiérrez and Pastor Maldonado.

The Williams pair were caught by a shower as the track dried late in Q3, 
having headed out on slicks, but, crucially, after slower cars had already 
taken advantage of the conditions. Unable to push in the damp sector, they will 
start near the back, albeit in eminent company as both Ferraris paid the same 
price for going out moments too late.

It was Clay Regazzoni who took the chequered flag at Silverstone in 1979, 
Williams’ first, and the final victory the Swiss driver would score before he 
was paralysed from the waist down during the 1980 US GP. But for Williams, it 
was just the beginning: the glory days of the 80s and 90s followed, when they 
won nine constructors’ and seven drivers’ titles – a period that seems a long 
time ago now.

A win for Maldonado in the 2012 Spanish GP has been their only victory since 
Ralf Schumacher took the flag, again at theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>, in 2003, and recent 
years have been barren, until now. The team are currently in fifth place in the 
constructors’ championship, with 85 points, just two behind Force India. By 
contrast, the entire season last year yielded only five points.

The turnaround in fortunes – and reacquainting themselves with the habit of 
racing at the front – is something to which the team are having to adapt, and 
head of vehicle performance, Rob Smedley, has since admitted they were 
conservative in going for points in Austria instead of the outright win.

“We have to look inwardly at ourselves and understand how we improve in every 
single tiny detail, because it’s in the details – there’s no big magic bullet,” 
Smedley told Autosport earlier this week, noting that competing with Mercedes 
at the front was a learning process. “We were racing against a very 
professional outfit, with a quicker car, but very well organised. And why are 
they so well organised? Because they’ve got such a depth of experience racing 
at that end of the field.

“From racing last year – as Williams were – in 13th, 14th, 15th position, to 
racing in first, second, third, fourth position is a completely different 
thing. Believe me, because I’ve done both ends.

“We have to learn. That’s what I’m here for; so, yes, end of school report: 
must do better.”

Here at Silverstone, they really have piled on the extra homework, however. 
The team have endured a torrid weekend. Before qualifying in the first practice 
session on Friday, Susie Wolff,who became the first female driver to take part 
in an F1 weekend for 22 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/susie-wolff-debut-british-grand-prix-silverstone-wiliiams>
, ground to a halt with an engine failure after only four laps and, shortly 
afterwards, Massa went wide at Stowe, lost grip on the artificial grass and 
crashed.

The team did a mighty job to bring out his car for second practice, but not in 
time for the entire session, while Bottas – who had no data to work from after 
Wolff’s misfortune – also suffered damage to an engine cover late on in FP2.

On Saturday, Smedley was honest after the qualifying session. “We didn’t see 
the rain coming as quickly as it did, but that’s not an excuse,” he said. “It’s 
an error, which we can’t make again.”

The team have not lasted this long without being fighters and will move on 
expecting more from the race on Sunday “How we recover is important now, and 
getting into the points is still our goal,” said Smedley. “We have the car for 
it, and need to try to get as many points as we can over our closest 
championship rivals.”

The blunt end of the grid is clearly not where Williams, or the fans at 
Silverstone, want them to be – but attempting to gain triumph from adversity 
may all be part of regaining that winning habit.
 