
I’m very interested to discover how badly Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> wants a fourth world 
championship. As long as I’ve known him he’s wanted to prove he’s the best, the 
fastest driver on the track. And he’s pretty well done that. Look how he has 
dominated the last few races.

Lewis is confident he will win this race – and he probably will do. But that 
may not be good enough because allNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> has to do is follow him around 
and finish in the top three.

So is there going to be a twist in the tail? Will Hamilton be crafty and back 
Nico’s Mercedes into the Red Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one>
, as Christian Horner, the Red Bull principal, has alluded to? Drivers in the 
past would have done it.

Nigel Mansell probably would have done it and Michael Schumacher certainly so. 
Ayrton Senna would have done it, and Nelson Piquet, and Niki Lauda. A lot of 
those champions had that dark ability to win at every cost.

Lewis Hamilton takes pole at F1 Abu Dhabi GP with Nico Rosberg second
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/lewis-hamilton-pole-abu-dhabi-f1-grand-prix-qualifying-nico-rosberg>
So it’s going to be interesting to see if Lewis plays that card, or not. 
Talking to him this week, it doesn’t appear to be the case. Is he cunning 
enough to do it? I think he is. It’s a risky move to do but he’s got nothing to 
lose.

I want to see if Lewis has this shrewd determination to win at all costs. Is 
it part of racing to push someone into the competitors behind?

Yes. That’s the game. Some people say that’s not racing, but it’s how you win 
the championship.

I would rather have won a Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world championship as an awful 
driver who took out my team-mate or competitor for the title, and even got 
sacked at the end of the season, than not have won one.

I don’t think Red Bull have got the raw pace to beat Mercedes. They have got 
closer but they’ve not beaten them. That’s why Lewis may have to do something. 
I don’t think he can expect much rain to mix things up.

Day in, day out, Lewis is a faster driver than Nico. But the fastest driver 
doesn’t always win the title. Lewis has been unlucky but that’s life. It wasn’t 
fair when I injured my feet. I was never, ever the same driver again. But life 
can be unfair.

Lewis has had these engine failures. But he’s also had some issues with his 
starts, and that’s down to him to work out with his engineer.

Nico’s test will be the mental side. There is a danger he might over think 
things. But this year he seems a bit sharper and has done just enough. I was 
pleased with his attitude in Barcelona and again in Austria.

Since last year he seems to have become mentally stronger. Maybe it’s been 
that way sinceAustin, where Lewis won the title last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 and upset Nico with some aggressive – but fair – driving.

As we saw here in 2010, when Sebastian Vettel won the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/14/sebastian-vettel-champion> even 
though Fernando Alonso went into the race ahead on points, it’s not over yet.

Johnny Herbert is an analyst for Sky Sports F1, whose live coverage on Sunday 
starts at 11.30am
 