
As Isco squeezed the ball through a helpless Tom Heaton’s legs, Spain did the 
unthinkable and completed a stupendous comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
 to steal a draw against England after being 2-0 down in the 89th minute. 
Though this was a friendly, tackles were late and tempers were fraying. Both 
teams wanted to win. With the England managerial post still officially vacant, 
Gareth Southgate was desperate to beat the country that has dominated world 
football for the past decade. He was a few seconds and a few bad decisions away 
from doing so.

The grief on Southgate’s face was clear to see as he questioned the fourth 
official about the amount of stoppage time allocated. Even after so many 
changes to personnel in the second half, the leading candidate for the job was 
devastated that his team couldn’t hold on to the two-goal cushion with seconds 
to go – but it wasn’t for a lack of opportunities to do so.

In Martí Perarnau’s newest book, Pep Guardiola: The Evolution 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Pep-Guardiola-Evolution-Mart%C3%AD-Perarnau/dp/1909715492>
, the Manchester City coach explains how a team should react after conceding a 
goal: “What’s really needed in moments like these is the midfielder’s 
mentality: ‘Win the ball, move the ball around 50 times.’ With that, you lower 
the heat of the match, the team which has scored against you loses a bit of 
heat and energy and you can then work out how to tip the game back your way. 
But if you take the ball and bomb forward you’ll lose it and then have to keep 
chasing back. If that’s happening when your rival’s buzzing from just having 
scored then there’s every chance they’ll catch you again. No, that’s not the 
way. Win the ball, pass it 20 times and lower the temperature.”

England had possession a total of eight times between Spain’s two late goals. 
Four of those resulted in hurried clearances, three were anxious attempts at 
playing the ball out from deep areas, all of which were quickly thwarted by the 
pressing Spaniards; and one was a driving individual run from Andros Townsend 
that resulted in an ill-timed central pass. None of the eight resulted in 
England having the ball for longer than six seconds. Spain punished a wasteful 
English team for these sins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f96a793fb43b57a5ba8cf4156df5a8f90fee191%2F0_52_3667_2201%2F3667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f96a793fb43b57a5ba8cf4156df5a8f90fee191%2F0_52_3667_2201%2F3667.jpg>
 Iago Aspas scored Spain’s first goal as they came back from 2-0 down to draw 
at Wembley. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
After growing up playing in the north of England and completing my first few 
coaching licences through the FA, I decided to see how things were done 
elsewhere. Over the past eight years I have worked with coaches from Germany, 
Italy, France, Argentina, Brazil and Peru. Despite their different mindsets, 
methods and coaching philosophies, they all share one main focus: to win.

In 2014 I was lucky enough to land an assistant coaching role at the youth 
team of a club on the outskirts ofBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>. I was astonished by the 
ideology and settings I encountered from day one. As I was under contract 
elsewhere until September, I missed pre-season and first met the players, staff 
and coaches in the dressing room before the third game of the season.

My first session was 24 hours later. Before the players took to the training 
pitch, they gathered to watch a 20-minute video prepared by the head coach to 
show them critical tactical moments from the match and key areas where they 
could improve in future. The boys were just 13 and 14 years old.

The youngsters were then led out to the centre-circle, where the Mister 
debriefed them further on the 1-1 draw the previous evening. The learning 
points from the short tape were emphasised and individuals were singled out, 
both to be questioned on their mistakes and also praised if their work was 
deemed sufficient. After a quick mention of next week’s opponents and areas in 
which they could beat them, the players were sent off to do laps of the half 
before completing their routine passing drills in squares. Eleven minutes into 
my first session in Spain and the “no lines, no laps and no lectures” rule had 
been breached by a man who went on to coach for FC Barcelona.

As the week continued I learned that my mentality would have to be altered if 
I was to learn in the home of the then-European champions. Sessions were played 
out in game situations with the pitch segmented into thirds and wide channels, 
where they would attack the upcoming opponent’s preferred 3-5-2 formation.

It’s not uncommon for coaches to discuss techniques and gameplay issues with 
their students. I can hand-on-heart say that I’ve never once witnessed 
play-acting being condoned or encouraged but, while studying on coaching 
courses and for Uefa licences in Spain, I have seen tutors advising aspiring 
coaches to speak with referees about decisions – and this mindset is eventually 
sieved down to impressionable players. I’ve noticed juniors as young as eight 
speaking to officials and crowding them in the hope of swinging the next 50/50 
decision their way. If an opposing full-back is on a yellow card then 
youngsters are prompted to run at that defender and drag him into the penalty 
area as soon as possible as he’ll be reluctant to tackle and will make a 
mistake.

If English football is short of coaches, why are badges cheaper in Germany?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/sep/07/england-grassroots-football-iceland-germany-coaching>
Sport strips us all the way back to our most natural animal instincts. Wanting 
to win and be successful is the most instinctive impulse a person can feel and, 
if somebody is in between you and your goal, then you must find their 
weaknesses and leap upon them immediately. This is sport. This is life.

By the third training session, the players had watched five scouting videos 
and each individual was prepped on how to help his team win the next game. I 
spoke with coaches of younger groups from various clubs and ultimately realised 
that winning is the top priority for juveniles from as young as seven. Was this 
short-sighted? Was this really the best way to improve young players? Was this 
an old-fashioned, uneducated approach? Was it just a cultural contrast?

The FA’s talent identification manager, Nick Levett 
<https://twitter.com/nlevett?lang=en>, recently gathered results from a survey 
given to more than 55 groups of English children of both sexes, aged 8-12, who 
play for professional and grassroots clubs. The top three statements given from 
the youngsters were: “Trying my hardest is more important than winning” (this 
statement was in first place by a significant distance), “I like playing 
because it’s fun” and “I like playing with my friends”. In another piece of 
research based on a poll of 10,000 children aged between 10 and 14, Levett 
revealed that over 80% of them would prefer to play in a team that loses than 
be a substitute for a winning team.

I found conflicting attitudes when working in Spain. Last season I worked with 
an Under-14s outfit. They were at the elite professional level, with their 
senior team playing in the top flight, and my group was fixed in a title race 
against the likes of FC Barcelona. During an eight-hour bus journey to play in 
the Copa España in Guadalajara, the club psychologist handed out questionnaires 
to the players, asking their main purposes and aspirations from the games that 
followed. The results, in order, were: “win the tournament”, “execute gameplans 
well” and “give the image of a united group”.

When I think back to my days as a young child playing in England more than 15 
years ago – when most techniques were not particularly broken down or taught 
correctly – I remember that coaches wanted us to enjoy success and improve as 
individuals. When playing, I wanted to win.

My opponents also wanted to win and the players who wanted it more would often 
earn the victory as they had trained harder, practised in their own time and 
prepared themselves to be better than their counterparts. Playing for your 
club, where results mattered, was the real deal and fun football was played 
with your friends at lunch-time and in the streets after school – and, even 
then, school trousers and dress shoes were ripped and left in tatters from 
last-ditch slide tackles that tried to save you from defeat.

I never once remember walking into school on a Monday and asking a friend “did 
you try your best this weekend?” or “did you have fun with your friends?” The 
only inquiries were “did you win?” and “how many did you score?” Nothing more, 
nothing less.

Fast forward a few years and I was playing in a regional semi-final for my 
college team as a 17-year-old. After going down to two early strikes, we 
managed to claw our way back into the game and I scored (a rarity for me) our 
scrappy third with a few minutes remaining. A moment after scoring, we had 
another chance on the counter-attack; this time I chose to carry the ball to 
the corner flag and waste time, much to the fury of my usually placid coach. In 
an enraged fit, he subbed me off and screamed at me on the touchline.

I assumed he was angry that I had wasted a four-against-two breakaway but 
later realised he was upset due to my gamesmanship and “bad sportsmanship that 
represented our college’s fine reputation in an ugly manner”. The game ended 
3-2 and I’m still proud of my actions.

I didn’t understand his reaction. We had spent training sessions working 
tactically and even went as far as practising penalties before cup games. Was 
he really so disgusted in my actions? Was he the first of the new breed of 
coaches that I witnessed who put winning in second or third place in their 
priorities behind the performance and image of the team?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e92281b42c3569b97b1ebc6846cb4869290b42%2F212_191_2944_1766%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e92281b42c3569b97b1ebc6846cb4869290b42%2F212_191_2944_1766%2F2944.jpg>
 Spain players celebrating their victory at Euro 2012, their third 
international trophy in a row. Photograph: Pablo Blazquez Dominguez/Getty Images
Back to Guadalajara and the Copa España, where we went all the way to the 
final to face our old sparring partners Barcelona in front of the television 
cameras that were broadcasting the game to the nation. With a thrilling first 
half drawing to a close, one of the senior members of the group – in Spanish 
youth football teams are put into age groups containing players within two 
years of each other as it gives each individual an experience of being both one 
of the oldest and one of the youngest in a team – hit a speculative effort from 
distance that caught the Barça keeper off-guard but agonisingly bounced out 
from the underside of the bar. Having been dragged from his knees and into the 
dressing room, the 14-year-old was distraught. He had made a mistake earlier 
that had given Barcelona the chance to score and he was determined to make up 
for it.

The day before, in the semi-final, our striker scored an injury-time winner to 
give us a 4-3 win that sparked wild celebrations. Among the celebratory pile-on 
was a 12-year-old boy who didn’t play a single second but had yelled 
encouragement from the bench throughout. Winning is a monumental part of a 
Spaniard’s make-up. It is bred into them daily from the age of seven and the 
results are there for all to see. At the end of last season, Sevilla – who 
finished seventh inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>
 – won the Europa League and made it seven European trophies in a row for 
Spanish clubs. By winning the Champions League in May and the Uefa Super Cup in 
August, Real Madrid pushed that run to nine successive titles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c07804f63f7df070e2889e62278eb5e4a89a300%2F50_128_2535_1521%2F2535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20English%20football%20coaches%20produce%20losers%20by%20focusing%20on%20fun%20over%20results%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fenglish-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c07804f63f7df070e2889e62278eb5e4a89a300%2F50_128_2535_1521%2F2535.jpg>
 Kévin Gameiro scored for Sevilla as they beat Liverpool and won the Europa 
League for the third year in a row. Photograph: Lars Baron/Getty Images 
People argue that focusing on winning too much has harmed the English 
grassroots game. Nick Levett assures me that the majority of professional 
academies in England won’t commence opponent scouting or enhance victory as a 
priority until the players are aged 16 or older.

Have kids changed? The shredded trousers and split trainers have been 
substituted for iPhones. A National Trust survey found that British children 
between the ages of four and 14 spend, on average, just over four hours a week 
playing outdoors, compared to the 8.2 hours a week their parents spent outside.

Receiving bumps and bruises while unshackled by the guardianship of parents or 
teachers is how youngsters learn to avoid obstacles that may obstruct their 
path, whether that be the biggest kid in the neighbourhood closing in with a 
crunching tackle or a car passing through the middle of the street/pitch that 
is floodlit by lamp posts. Characters are shaped and great memories are made in 
these environments. However, the best flashbacks of all are moments when you 
won your three-a-side street match.

Former Celtic and Scotland international John Collins was recently on the 
radio discussing winning. He described it as a barrier to the development of 
young players. Of course we should have a gameplan and methods of coaching, but 
should these not eventually lead to wanting to win? I have seen clubs and 
parents go as far as requesting that youth football results are not published 
to save the embarrassment and pain of the losing players.

Is Barcelona's famed La Masia academy in decline?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/jul/16/barcelona-la-masia-academy-decline-neymar-pedro>
This mentality would harm our young players in the long run. Losing is part of 
the game and plays a huge factor of building our spirit. The most successful 
individuals and teams in all walks of life are so good because they once tasted 
the putrid, sickly pit of defeat and sacrificed everything to find a way of 
never tasting it again.

Sport teaches us to be self-disciplined, motivated and organised, and when 
more than 99% of the young players we coach won’t ever play professionally, the 
least we can do is give them attributes to find abilities and strengths within 
their inner selves to adapt and evolve in order to be successful in the real 
world away from football that becomes more dog-eat-dog by the day.

As football changes, one thing should never go away, and that is the 
competitive nature of the game that supplies upsets such as the plucky 
Leicester City winning the Premier League title or extra-time winners from 
Portugal’s Éder in the Euro 2016 final. By not developing winners, are we 
subconsciously encouraging losers?

• This article is from These Football Times <http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Alex 
Clapham <https://twitter.com/alexclapham> on Twitter
 