
We have a wilful blindness when it comes to meat farming. The less we know, 
the easier it is to enjoy that really cheap chicken burger.

Up until now I have been living in a blissful world, where organically farmed 
chickens actually walked around on the farm, rolled in the sun, and spent time 
with their families. I don’t know what I thought would happen when their time 
came to die. Maybe they would be put to sleep? Maybe they got old and fell over?

As for cheaper, battery-farmed chickens – well, it was a little bit darker and 
a little more cramped but essentially OK, right?

Wrong.

Screen bites: is Kurt Coleman, professional selfie-taker, really worth looking 
at?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/05/screen-bites-is-kurt-coleman-professional-selfie-taker-really-worth-looking-at>
For the Love of Meat <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/meat>, a new 
Australian documentary series, pulls back the curtain on how animal products 
get from the farm to our plates.

The show is created by the Tasmanian foodie and former Fairfax restaurant 
critic Matthew Evans, and the co-writer, director, and producer Stephen Oliver. 
This is the second time the duo have taken a deep dive into Australia’s 
meat-eating habits, and it ain’t always pretty.

Their first documentary, What’s the Catch 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/343710275808/whats-the-catch-with-matthew-evans>
, screened on SBS in 2014 and examined issues in the fishing industry, 
including overfishing and disruption to the marine supply chain. It was a 
powerful series that inspired me to change my consumption habits: never again 
did I order prawns on pizza.

So it was with some trepidation that I sat down to watch the next instalment. 
I love chicken. So do many other Australians. Is Evans going to ruin the Sunday 
roast and the Zinger burger in one fell swoop?

“Worldwide, we consume on average 34 kilos of meat per year,” says Evans. “But 
in Australia the shocking statistic is that we eat a whopping 90 kilos per 
person per year.”

This is actually kind of gross when you think about it. 

And the meat we love the most? Chicken. We each eat 42kg of chicken a year – 
10 times more than we did 50 years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fscreen-bites-how-much-does-it-matter-where-our-meat-comes-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F110a433e1807275b13efe255c1e22cfdce91ca00%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20food%20critic%20Matthew%20Evans%20give%20carnivores%20something%20to%20chew%20on%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fscreen-bites-how-much-does-it-matter-where-our-meat-comes-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20food%20critic%20Matthew%20Evans%20give%20carnivores%20something%20to%20chew%20on%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fscreen-bites-how-much-does-it-matter-where-our-meat-comes-from%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F110a433e1807275b13efe255c1e22cfdce91ca00%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 Matthew Evans, who owns his own pig farm, isn’t trying to convince people to 
stop eating meat, but to understand where it comes from 
Raised conventionally, chicken’s lives are – to paraphrase Hobbes – poor, 
nasty, brutish and short. Most broiler chooks aren’t even kept in cages. 
They’re fattened up in huge sheds where they go from egg to slaughter in a mere 
35 days.

Only 1% of chickens sold in Australia are organic. Evans explains what 
labelling such as “organic”, “RSPCA approved” and “free range” actually means. 
How much room do the chickens get? Do they get to sleep or go outside? What are 
they eating? How long do they live?

He takes us to an organic farm and a free range farm. In an organic farm, 
chickens are given higher quality feed and more room to roam around. In the 
free range farm, the chickens are allowed outside and given space to move for a 
certain amount of hours each day. At an RSPCA-approved farm, the conditions for 
chickens look quite cramped, but they are still given more room than usual to 
roam; they’re also kept warm, and are allowed to sleep each night.


Farm footage can be confronting, even when they’re operating with more humane 
standards. For instance, we learn how chickens are killed in an organic farm: 
they are placed upside down, which is apparently calming, then immersed in a 
bath of electrified water before their throats are slit.

We don’t get to see how battery or broiler hens are farmed; Evans repeatedly 
sought access but was denied. The obvious question is: what do these farms have 
to hide?

The Bachelor: why do we care so much about this stupid fake show?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/16/the-bachelor-why-do-we-care-so-much-about-this-stupid-fake-show>
It’s confronting subject matter, but I like Evans as a presenter: he’s 
knowledgeable, low-key and gets his message across without hyperbole. And once 
again, this important series has me thinking seriously about my consumption 
habits.

I won’t be giving up meat (Evans, who owns his own pig farm, isn’t trying to 
convince us to), but when he finally takes us to a commercial, free-range farm 
– one where chickens are allowed outside – it’s easy to decide what kind of 
chicken I’ll be buying the next time I go to the supermarket.

Parts two and three of the series focus on pork and beef, and are sure to be 
just as bracing.

• For the Love of Meat with Matthew Evans continues on Thursday 27 October at 
7.30pm on SBS
 