
Now that the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> can officially boast 
THE TIGHTEST TITLE-RACE IN EUROPE’S BIG FIVE LEAGUES™, scores of football fans 
worldwide will no longer be deprived of the joys of German club football by 
insisting on a real competition between first and second in the table. No 
boring procession by Juventus, PSG, Barcelona and Leicester City to the 
championship here: this season, unlike others, is guaranteed to go on all the 
way into May!

So welcome, dear millions. It’s good to have you, finally. But please be 
advised: all is not as initially advertised. The team who were widely tipped to 
make life difficult for Bayern Munich and exciting for everyone else as the 
new, coming force in the German top flight, for example, have not lived up to 
their billing. Far from pushing on after winning the German Cup anddestroying 
Pep Guardiola’s side 4-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/30/wolfsburg-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
 in January last year, VfL Wolfsburg have gone six steps backwards. A 3-0 away 
defeat by Bayer Leverkusen on Friday night – so poor that Süddeutsche Zeitung 
felt “it could amount to a new Volkswagen scandal” – left Dieter Hecking’s men 
in eighth spot in the table and “in the basement, mood-wise” (NDR), just in 
time for the biggest game in the club’s history, against Real Madrid in the 
Champions League. “With that sort of performance, it won’t be very titillating 
on Wednesday night,” predicted Hecking grimly. Unless Cristiano Ronaldo piques 
interest on the post-game changing room photo, possibly.

Borussia Dortmund’s Adrián Ramos strikes to keep pressure on Bayern
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/borussia-dortmund-werder-bremen-bundesliga-match-report>
For die Königlichen (the Royals), it will be a case of going from el clásico 
to (one half of) “el plástico”, as Kicker had cruelly dubbed Wolves’ 
appointment with Leverkusen, the other corporate-owned club in the league. The 
temptation is strong to call this one “el mismátchico”.Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> have been inconsistent 
throughout the campaign but never quite as awful as at the weekend. “We played 
grotesquely badly,” said the Germany international Julian Draxler, “we didn’t 
challenge for any balls and lacked everything.” The sporting director, Klaus 
Allofs, tried hard to sound outraged about the latest capitulation – “We 
haven’t shown that we belong in the Champions League next season” – but seemed 
rather resigned to his team’s ineptitude. The Lower Saxons’ season could well 
be over in 10 days.

Truth be told, Wolfsburg’s form in Europe has offered some consolation. “I’m 
not afraid that we’ll be playing as badly as today [against Madrid],” Allofs 
said. “We’ll witness a different team then. But on the other hand it makes me 
incredibly angry that there is such a difference [in attitude].” The inability 
to keep the focus between soul-stirring floodlit outingsagainst Manchester 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/wolfsburg-manchester-united-champions-league-match-report>
 (and Gent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/wolfsburg-gent-champions-league-match-report>
) has only been part of the malaise, however. “We won’t be finished by the 
morning if I start listing all our issues,” Hecking said in Leverkusen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fwolfsburg-hope-to-rouse-themselves-for-real-madrid-after-season-of-freefall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f92f6eef93dbdcebb34b396fc4b402a4687b98e%2F18_114_2386_1432%2F2386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wolfsburg%20hope%20to%20rouse%20themselves%20for%20Real%20Madrid%20after%20season%20of%20freefall%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fwolfsburg-hope-to-rouse-themselves-for-real-madrid-after-season-of-freefall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wolfsburg%20hope%20to%20rouse%20themselves%20for%20Real%20Madrid%20after%20season%20of%20freefall%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fwolfsburg-hope-to-rouse-themselves-for-real-madrid-after-season-of-freefall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f92f6eef93dbdcebb34b396fc4b402a4687b98e%2F18_114_2386_1432%2F2386.jpg>
 Andre Schürrle celebrates scoring against Gent in the Champions League, the 
competition for which Wolfsburg have reserved their best performances. 
Photograph: Lars Baron/Bongarts/Getty Images 
The biggest singular problem can be surmised in three words: Kevin De Bruyne. 
The Belgian attacking midfielder was the best player in the Bundesliga last 
season, a one-man tornado tearing through opposition defences and providing 
goals and assists by the bucket-load. The 24-year-old brought in €75m but 
Draxler, the man signed for nearly half that sum, is only half the player in 
terms of direct impact, a much more discreet influence on proceedings who 
cannot, by himself, lift the rest of the team to another level. His more 
intricate game does not naturally lend itself to the counterattacking football 
that made Hecking’s team so hard to play against in 2014-15 either.

The striker Bas Dost breaking his metatarsal three months ago and the 
hard-working winger Daniel Caligiuri losing form have exacerbated the decrease 
in firepower. Wolfsburg have scored 23 fewer league goals than at the same 
stage last season to date. Off the pitch there have been too many distractions 
as well. Nicklas Bendtner was at lasttold to pack his bags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/31/nicklas-bendtner-wolfsburg-terminate-contract>
 last week after sleeping through a training session – his contract will be 
rescinded one year before its expiration. “We had to do it, he had become a 
danger to society,” said Allofs, by which he meant that the striker’s famously 
relaxed lifestyle had begun to prove corrosive for team morale. Similar 
accusations have been levelled at his fellow forward Max Kruse. The Germany 
international was publicly rebuked for a series of misdemeanours that verge 
from the rather trivial (he deleted a photo of himself on a Bild reporter’s 
mobile phone) to the bizarre (he lost €75,000 in a Berlin taxi) and do not seem 
all that grave by themselves. The club and the national team manager, Joachim 
Löw, believed they were indicative of an underlying lack of professionalism 
that Kruse had been warned about before. “We trust him to sort himself out,” 
Allofs said on Friday. Kruse had played for an hour at the BayArena without 
once threatening to do something meaningful.

While Wolfsburg’s plight will garner little sympathy in Germany, due to their 
heavy spending and perceived status as an artificial power, it is objectively a 
shame that the third-best club side the league has seen over the past five 
years have unravelled this quickly. Wednesday will offer a last chance of 
redemption. Hecking will have the centre-back Naldo available again to 
stabilise the defence and must hope that the maddeningly inconsistent André 
Schürrle will have a good night. But you wouldn’t be too surprised if Madrid 
inflicted so much pain that the last remnants of a functioning team at the 
Volkswagen-Arena will be blown away altogether.

Talking Points

• Thomas Schaaf had never been relegated as a Bundesliga manager before taking 
on theHannover <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> 96 job, and he 
won’t be relegated this season either: the Lower Saxons pulled the plug on the 
54-year-old after an atrocious run of 10 defeats in11 games. “We didn’t want to 
end the season this way and will try to get a positive effect from changing the 
manager,” said the sporting director Martin Bader, who is also on borrowed time 
now. “But it’s only theoretically possible to stay up now that we’re 10 points 
adrift of the play-off spot”. The under-19 coach Daniel Stendel has been cast 
as the fall-guy to oversee 96’s first relegation from the top flight in 30 
years.

Champions League quarter-final previews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/apr/05/champions-league-quarter-final-previews>
• “We are burying fair play this weekend,” the 1.FC Köln sporting director, 
Jörg Schmadtke, mournfully announced after the 1-1 draw away at much-improved 
Hoffenheim on Sunday. The visitors had scored a late equaliser after playing on 
when Köln’s Lukas Klünter was lying on the floor injured. A similar thing had 
happened in the Leverkusen game two days before. In both instances, however, 
the players were right to play on as the referees had deemed the injuries not 
serious enough to warrant an interruption. Schmadtke, who had recently called 
officials “eggheads”, might have made more of an impression with his fair play 
if he hadn’tthrown his chewing gum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/cologne-jorg-schmadtke-hoffenheim>
 in the direction of the Hoffenheim bench in protest. TSG have accepted his 
apology but the German FA might not be so lenient.


• Dortmund warmed up for what promises to a very awkward family reunion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league>
 on Thursday night with a dramatic 3-2 win over Werder. The BVB chief 
executive, Hans-Joachim Watzke, is very worried that the fans’ love for Jürgen 
Klopp could create a“feeling as if it’s a friendly game” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league>
 and urged his players to change “from hugging mode into competitive mode”. 
Privately, the Black and Yellows were very pleased that the first leg is at the 
Westfalenstadion: the scenario of the crowd cheering their formerÜbertrainer 
after their own club’s elimination from the competition was – however unlikely 
– the stuff of nightmares for Thomas Tuchel and the board.


Results: <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball/results> 
Leverkusen 3-0 Wolfsburg, Bayern 1-0 Eintracht, Hannover 0-3 HSV, Mainz 4-2 
Augsburg, Ingolstadt 3-0 Schalke, Darmstadt 2-2 Stuttgart, Dortmund 3-2 Bremen 
3-2, Gladbach 5-0 Hertha, Hoffenheim 1-1 Köln.

 