
“Kevin De Bruyne, du sohn einer hure.” It wasn’t in keeping with the universal 
praise that he tends to garner these days but this wasn’t a regular day for the 
Wolfsburg midfielder. The team’s creative muse was hooked by the coach, Dieter 
Hecking, after 75 minutes of their Bundesliga opener withEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> on Sunday afternoon; 
not the most premature of withdrawals, perhaps, but the earliest that he’s been 
substituted since arriving in Lower Saxony and indicative of an 
uncharacteristically flat performance.

Wolfsburg’s Dieter Hecking on Kevin De Bruyne: ‘next few days will be 
difficult’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/17/kevin-de-bruyne-manchester-city-wolfsburg-dieter-hecking>
Those near 3,000 travelling Eintracht fans who chanted their opprobrium well 
remembered one of the few bumps in Wolfsburg’s – and De Bruyne’s – road in a 
2015 that has largely soared past any reasonable expectations. It was back on 3 
February, a freezing cold Tuesday nightat Eintracht’s Commerzbank-Arena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/03/bundesliga-bayern-munich-schalke-wolfsburg-frankfurt>
, that the Belgian midfielder momentarily snapped,calling a ballboy a 
“motherfucker” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/kevin-de-bruyne-ballboy-foul-mouthed-tirade>
 for apparently not returning the ball to him quickly enough with the Wolves 
trailing in the second half.

Normal service resumed before long – it was De Bruyne’s late goal that enabled 
Hecking’s team to prise a point from an unpromising situation that night – but 
the home fans haven’t forgotten or, it seems, forgiven.

De Bruyne, for his part, reacted with a sarcastic wave as his took his place 
on the bench on Sunday but some frustration was evident later on. “They can 
shout ‘son of a bitch’ at me,” he complained after the match, “and I have to 
pay €20,000,” referring to the heavy fine imposed by the Deutscher 
Fussball-Bund (DFB) for the incident with the ballboy.

All this might have added up to a minor footnote in any other context, 
especially given that Wolfsburg won 2-1, but withManchester City’s keen 
interest in De Bruyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/10/kevin-de-bruyne-manchester-city-wolfsburg-47m>
 hanging over their nascent season like a dark cloud, it all added to a tense 
atmosphere around him. Wolfsburg’s sporting director, Klaus Allofs, told Sky 
that there were still no official bids on the table for De Bruyne but “in the 
next few days” he is expecting one to arrive. “Our plan is that he’ll stay 
here,” Allofs said – but it sounded like a declaration more of hope than 
expectation and a definite move away from the “not for sale” message of a few 
weeks ago.

This is an unusual, if not entirely unprecedented, scenario for Wolfsburg. The 
anticipated completion of Baba Rahman’s move from Augsburg to Chelsea – 
announced minutes after the final whistle had gone onJosé Mourinho’s men 
capitulating at City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/16/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 – took Premier League spending on Bundesliga players this summer over the 
€100m mark in transfer fees alone – but Wolfsburg are supposed to be less 
vulnerable to the predators.

The club has what Allofs refers to as “a unique ownership situation” under 
Volkswagen, having originally started as a works team for this town built for 
factory workers and thus being excepted from the 50+1 model. In the past, this 
has given rise to some monumentally reckless spending, although since the 
arrivals of Allofs and Hecking in late 2012, transfer movement has declined to 
fairly sane levels.

The pair’s style is stability but Volkswagen’s money does a) help them pick up 
choice recruits one by one when they do want to buy;examples being André 
Schürrle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/juan-cuadrado-chelsea-fiorentina-signs-andre-schurrle-wolfsburg>
 and Max Kruse, the latter snatched from last season’s rivals Borussia 
Mönchengladbach and b) keep the squad happy with generous salaries, leaving 
them in a position to rebuff offers for feted players such as Ricardo Rodríguez.

It should have been enough to keep De Bruyne. Currently paid about €4.5m per 
year on a contract that runs to 2019,Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> were reported to be willing to 
up that sum to eight figures to extend that commitment. A new deal, while still 
hoped for, remains unsigned, though, and while De Bruyne is not actively 
agitating for a move, it is clear his head has been turned. There is an 
acceptance within the club that there are some elite suitors a player – and 
club – struggle to say no to and that City are one of those.

As well as being a setback to Wolfsburg’s lofty ambitions, with a first 
Champions League campaign in six years on the horizon, it is a short-term 
pickle for Hecking. This team has been fashioned around De Bruyne. When the 
Brazilian playmaker Diego, with six months to go on his deal, told Wolfsburg 
that he wanted to leave the club in the transfer window of January 2014, Allofs 
convinced the coach that it could be a positive.

Diego slowed down the game with the time he took on the ball, Allofs thought. 
A new, fleet-footed replacement could make Wolfsburg’s play more dynamic and 
flowing. That replacement was De Bruyne – and he really has turned the way the 
team have played upside down. The numbers are impressive, of course, with 20 
assists made in the Bundesliga last season – it is 15 goals and 25 assists 
overall in the 18 months he has been at the Volkswagen Arena. He already set up 
Nicklas Bendtner’s crucial goal in theDFL-Supercup win over Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/wolfsburg-nicklas-bendtner-bayern-munich-german-supercup>
.

Yet to quantify De Bruyne’s influence only in figures seems reductive. He is 
worth so much more than that to Wolfsburg. His speed, decision-making, constant 
appreciation of space and his sheer leadership totally dictates the way that 
his team plays. It is very difficult to imagine how Hecking, and Allofs, could 
replace him, especially in the space of the two weeks before the transfer 
deadline.

One also wonders whether De Bruyne would be doing the right thing in going. 
Having been the main man on loan at Werder Bremen in 2012-13, he struggled to 
adapt to being only on rotation at Chelsea, with José Mourinho quickly losing 
patience with what he saw as selfishness. There is little prospect of De Bruyne 
being given the extent of freedom and influence at City that he enjoys at 
Wolfsburg, which could be problematic for Belgium’s Euro 2016 hopes.

Those chants from Sunday’s visitors to the Volkswagen Arena would be a poor 
epitaph for De Bruyne’s glorious spell with Wolfsburg. Few of the summer’s
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> departures 
for England will be lamented so much by Germany as a whole.

Talking points

• “The foundation that Jürgen Klopp left for me is outstanding.” Thomas Tuchel 
was in magnanimous mood after his dream Bundesliga debut as Dortmund coach, as 
BVB hammered Champions League-bound Mönchengladbach 4-0 in the battle of the 
Borussias. Yet none of the 81,359 in attendance at Signal Iduna Park could have 
been in any doubt; this was a very different Dortmund to the tired facsimile of 
their best self in the final months of his predecessor’s tenure.

Tuchel’s arrival has clearly been a huge shot in the arm. Henrikh Mkhitaryan, 
who scored twice – and has six in all competitions, factoring in Europa League 
qualifiers and DFB Pokal – is unrecognisable from the serial chance-fluffer of 
last season and the team overall seems to have moved on from being a one-trick 
pony. A much-needed tactical versatility was clear as Dortmund counterattacked 
at speed but also knew how to sit and slow the pace of the game when needed. It 
was mightily impressive, but …

• Bayern Munich’s own opening gala performance on Friday night in a 5-0 
demolition of Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/bayern-munich-hamburg-bundesliga-match-report>
 underlined already that Pep Guardiola’s men are still in a class of their own. 
The most chilling aspect of all was that Bayern only really turned it on for 
20-25 minutes but, even in that context, Hamburg got off lightly.

Douglas Costa was the standout for most; the 24-year-old Brazilian, newly 
arrived from Shakhtar Donetsk, brilliantly created one for Thomas Müller before 
scoring the final goal himself, with his speed and directness adding something 
that Guardiola’s team lacked in the final straight last season. As for Hamburg? 
Following last week’s Pokal exit to fourth-tier Carl-Zeiss Jena, at least it 
cannot get much worse. And hey, theylost 8-0 at the Allianz Arena last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/14/bayern-munich-hamburg-bundesliga-match-report>
, so it’s an improvement of a kind.

Bayern Munich 5-0 Hamburg | Bundesliga match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/bayern-munich-hamburg-bundesliga-match-report>
• Dortmund’s local rivals Schalke are also embarking on a new era of sorts, 
with André Breitenreiter having left Paderborn to replace the unpopularRoberto 
Di Matteo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/26/roberto-di-matteo-resigns-schalke-coach-disagreement-club>
. It’s been a great start for the new coach, with Saturday’s 3-0 win at Werder 
Bremen making it eight goals scored and none conceded in two competitive games 
to date, even if it did take a jaw-dropping own goal from Werder’s Theodor 
Gebre Selassie to open the floodgates at Weserstadion.

• It was a less comfortable afternoon for Schalke’s new centre-forward Franco 
Di Santo, who was booed mercilessly by his former fans after activating a 
release clause in his contract to make the move to Gelsenkirchen. The 
Argentinian looked pleased to receive a collage of his Werder days from club 
staff pre-kick-off – probably because the presentation was indoors, away from 
the irate crowd displaying a large banner reading: Di Santo: Ich liebe geld (I 
love money). Still, it was a better day for him than for his team-mate Matija 
Nastasic. The formerManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> defender ruptured an 
achilles tendon and will be out for six months.

Results Bayern Munich 5-0 Hamburg, Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 4-0 Borussia 
Mönchengladbach, Bremen 0-3 Schalke, Darmstadt 2-2 Hannover, Augsberg 0-1 
Hertha, Bayer Leverkusen 2-1 Hoffenheim, Mainz 0-1 Ingolstadt, Stuttgart 1-3 
Köln, Wolfsburg 2-1 Frankfurt.
 