
The Wolves manager, Kenny Jackett, insisted after his side had taken a point 
from their visit to Loftus Road that they can still reach the play-offs, as 
long as he can make some signings in the transfer window.

Sebastian Polter put QPR ahead with a second-minute header, but the visitors 
equalised with a fortuitous goal two minutes into the second half. James 
Henry’s shot was deflected in off bothQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> centre-backs, hitting first Grant 
Hall and then Nedum Onuoha.

Wolves dominated much of the second period but were unable to pick up the two 
extra points that would have moved them closer to the top six.

Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink believes education will be key to success at QPR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-education-key-qpr>
“We need a hell of a run to get there, we know that, but it is still open,” 
said Jackett. “The top sides don’t look like dropping points at the moment, but 
that can change. We don’t need much in terms of players. We don’t need to 
reconstruct a spirited squad. With the right additions we certainly feel we can 
climb the table.

“We’d prefer to sign our own players but if the right loan players are there 
we would be interested – and sometimes loan players can become permanent.”

Wolves recovered well after conceding a sloppy early goal and Jackett was 
pleased with their performance. “It was a poor start, but we came back very 
well and in the second half we certainly worked their keeper,” he said.

The QPR manager Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, who is still waiting for his first 
home win since taking over in early December, bemoaned a late miss by Tjaronn 
Chery. After coming on off the bench for his debut, thenew signing Conor 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/qpr-sign-conor-washington-peterborough>
 found space on the left and teed up his fellow substitute only for Chery to 
fire against the post.

“In the first half I think we needed to score again and make it 2-0,” 
Hasselbaink said. “Yes, they were on top of us in the second half, but in the 
first half we caused them a lot of trouble. We also had a really good chance in 
the last minute to score and make it 2-1.

“I would have backed Chery every day of the week to score. Nine times out of 
10 he would score that, but this time he didn’t.”
 