
Women at the Guardian are nothing new. An album of staff photographs from 1921 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/centenary-album-resource-gnm-archive>
 shows women on almost every other page, forming part of the circulation, 
advertising, cleaning, catering and pictures teams amongst others. By this 
time, their work had already been appearing in the paper too, from Flora Shaw’s 
1898 reports on the Anti-Slavery Conference in Brussels to suffragist Helena 
Swanwick’s gardening and Country Diary columns and Madeline Linford’s reports 
from war-torn Europe in 1919.

With only byline initials to go on it’s difficult to say how many more female 
journalists may have contributed to the Manchester Guardian in its first 
century and almost impossible to comment on their experience of doing so. We 
know more aboutMadeline Linford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/14/women-women?CMP=twt_gu>
, and her successors aseditor of the Guardian women’s page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-s-page-resource-gnm-archive>
, and later onJean Stead <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/jean-stead> 
gave acollection of her papers 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=JLS> 
to theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>, but it’s a series 
oforal history interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/oral-history-collection> that perhaps 
give us our best insight into the experiences of women writing for the 
newspaper in the 1940s, 50s and 60s. The careers of just a few of these: Nesta 
Roberts, Clare Hollingworth, Betty Jerman, Ann Shearer and Veronica Horwell 
cover this period and more, and all of them left an interview in the archive.

Their stories are diverse and fascinating. Clare Hollingworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/10/clare-hollingworth-war-reporter-100>
 talks about breaking the first news of the second world war,Nesta Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/19/the-guardian-press-and-publishing>
 tells of standing shoulder-to-shoulder with protesting Parisian1968ers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1968-the-year-of-revolt> and Betty Jerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/25/betty-jerman-columnist-obituary> 
remembers sneaking a glimpse of the Queen from the top deck of a London bus. 
One thing they all touch upon though is what it felt like to be a female 
journalist in an era when newspapers were still a predominantly male enterprise.

Nesta Roberts 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f71>
 nearly missed out on a career in journalism completely because of her gender. 
Having been denied the chance to attend university in Cardiff (because her 
mother found that it was “full of young men who lent against doors and didn’t 
open them for her”), she tried for a job with a local paper. The response was: 
“You could be a schoolmistress, couldn’t you?” and after some protest on her 
part: “Well, you can’t come here: we’ve got two young men and only one 
lavatory!”

You can’t come here: we’ve got two young men and only one lavatory!

Nevertheless, by 1947 she had written her way onto the Manchester Guardian via 
back page freelance work. She was the first female reporter in the office and 
remembers feeling that “among some of the older members of the reporters’ room, 
the arrival of a young woman was very upsetting – or alarming.” It wasn’t all 
bad though: she even recalls being “rather spoiled” at first, saying: “People 
were very nice to me and I was given, on the whole, the sort of jobs I could 
do.” She also made a good friend inMary Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2008/feb/01/mainsection.obituaries>, the only 
other female journalist on staff at the time, who was already established on 
the editors’ corridor and “certainly didn’t talk about being made to feel wrong 
because she was a woman.” In fact, Mary recalls inher own interview 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f51>
 that a male colleague, uncertain of Nesta’s reception in the reporters’ room (“
the room”), came to Mary in advance “hoping we’d be friends.”

Nesta’s determination, and the support of her colleagues, paid off and she 
went on to become Guardian news editor in 1961. She was the first woman to hold 
that role at a national newspaper and stayed in it for two years, later moving 
on to become the Guardian’s Paris correspondent.

Betty Jerman 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f40>
’s route into journalism was less direct. She had always dreamed of being a 
journalist, but was brought in as a secretary. Working in the London city 
office between 1951 and 1956, her time at the Manchester Guardian fell in the 
18-year window in which there was no women’s page and no women’s editor 
(1939-1957). Under a “curious arrangement” with financial editor Richard Fry, 
she was commissioned to report on social events and write freelance features on 
“light” topics like fashion and cosmetics, in addition to her secretarial work. 
She may have felt her subjects “frivolous” compared to others’, but remembers 
enjoying a friendly working atmosphere and being pleased to be chosen over 
other women in the office - perhaps, she thinks, because she already had a hat!

Guardian women's page: teaching resource from the GNM Archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-s-page-resource-gnm-archive>
The informality of the arrangement meant that she could take her pick of the 
invitations sent into the office and choose her reporting angle (it was her 
idea to write about fashion, rather than horses, at Ascot). On the other hand, 
recognition was hard to come by. She remembers (“imagine the embarrassment!”) 
learning second-hand that the editor, apparently unaware that anyone at the 
Manchester Guardian was already doing so, had employedAlison Adburgham 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f1989>
 to write about fashion. Betty had to give up covering couture altogether, and 
Alison went on to be fashion editor at the the Guardian for 20 years.


Betty was never given an editorial contract at the Guardian, and did not 
return to her secretarial job after the birth of her first child. Instead she 
became a fully freelance journalist. She recalls with satisfaction howMary Stott
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/sep/18/pressandpublishing.genderissues>
, who was appointed women’s editor in the interim, had “changed women’s 
journalism” for the better, so that her freelance pieces could move on to 
“amazing” new topics, like child safety and how “intellectually dreary” it 
could be to live in suburbia.

Clare Hollingworth 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f34>
’s interview gives no mention of the type of “women’s journalism” described by 
Betty Jerman. Both women started working for the Manchester Guardian around the 
same time, but Clare already had over a decade of journalistic work behind her, 
much of it spent working as a foreign correspondent for the Daily Telegraph. 
She covered the Algerian War for the Guardian in the 1950s and went on to be 
its first female defence correspondent in the 1960s.

I can do anything a man can do.

 In her Daily Telegraph years she had taken care to avoid her gender 
interfering with her journalism in any way. She married only after confirming 
that she could keep her maiden name and, despite the breakdown of her first 
marriage while she was away working as a war correspondent, maintains that her 
work needed to take priority over “rushing back home” to her husband. When 
asked whether she regretted not having children, she replies “my career was so 
much more important.”

Her attitude to working in the field was “I can do anything a man can do.” She 
may occasionally have turned her gender to her advantage (she remembers 
avoiding arrest by the Iron Guard in Romania by stripping naked inside her 
hotel room and calling through the door: “You can’t arrest a naked woman!”) but 
generally preferred to let it go unnoticed, sharing uniforms, toilets and 
sleeping quarters with the men around her and behaving “absolutely neutral” 
towards them romantically. She does admit that she may have had to work harder 
than the men to achieve the same success, saying: “I suppose I did, but I 
didn’t notice it at the time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fwomen-guardian-teaching-resource-gnm-archive-june-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432900700642%2Ff15eae52-e8d0-489f-a42d-fe9d70ee9f1f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women%20at%20the%20Guardian%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20June%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fwomen-guardian-teaching-resource-gnm-archive-june-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%20at%20the%20Guardian%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20June%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fwomen-guardian-teaching-resource-gnm-archive-june-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432900700642%2Ff15eae52-e8d0-489f-a42d-fe9d70ee9f1f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ann Shearer in 1970. Photograph: the Guardian 
Ann Shearer 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f81>
also does not remember feeling the “strain” of being a lone woman reporter 
until after the event. By the time she came to work as a graduate trainee in 
the Guardian’s Manchester office in 1964, Nesta Roberts had left for Paris and 
there was once again only one female reporter in the building, although Mary 
Stott was still there as women’s editor. The “tide had turned against Manchester
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-working-reports-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
” and it was no easy task to begin a career (straight out of Cambridge and from 
“the most protected possible background”) among those who had chosen, or been 
chosen, to stay behind when the editor’s office moved to London. Only 
retrospectively does Ann conclude: “it was even more nerve-wracking because I 
was the only woman.”


As a trainee, she had the kind of thorough journalistic training that Nesta 
remembers being rare for women. Equal training might have been expected to 
result in an “anything you can do” attitude to rival Clare Hollingworth’s, but 
when asked by the news editor to interview the mother of a missing child, Ann 
recalls feeling terrified and refusing. The reply was a curt: “if you want 
equal pay, you must do equal jobs.” The child was found and the story passed, 
but the incident stuck in Ann’s mind: “That was the only time I remember 
someone saying anything about my sex.”


It didn’t hold her back and after a few years elsewhere in the 1970s, she went 
on to become editor of the Guardian’s society supplement in the 1980s, before 
leaving the paper to become a Jungian analyst.

Veronica Horwell 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f36>
remembers looking up to Ann Shearer in her “marvellously fashionable black 
boots.” As a “desperately broke teenager” herself, who had lied about her age 
at interview (you had to be 24 to work for a national newspaper at that time), 
everyone seemed older to Veronica, but here was a female journalist who had her 
own office in an otherwise “totally masculine world.”

Everything, from the “services mess” atmosphere created by journalists of the 
National Service generation to the splintered wood furnishings that cost her a 
fortune in laddered tights, madeCross Street 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre/cross-street-journal-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 a “very masculine office” in Veronica’s eyes. She could see a “very clearly 
defined access route for men” into journalism, but remembers arriving as a 
junior reporter still feeling like “an idiot baby who knew nothing.”

Nevertheless, she felt supported in her time at the Guardian. Ann Shearer 
became a friend, and even gave her a place to stay for a while when she first 
came to Manchester. Veronica recalls that her male colleagues helped to train 
her up as a reporter and then helped her into the BBC when she felt it was time 
to move on in 1967. She enjoyed a career at Press Association, the Sunday Times 
and the Observer after that, and has beencontributing to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/veronicahorwell> again as a freelancer 
since 1988.


Her female colleagues on the Guardian editorial staff now make up 40% of the 
journalists employed by the newspaper.

Further Reading


 * Guardian and Observer oral history project  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/oral-history-collection> 
 * Guardian women’s page
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-s-page-resource-gnm-archive>
 * Cross Street Journal and life at the Guardian in the 1950s and 60s
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/cross-street-journal-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 * Nora Beloff
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-march>
 * Jean Stead <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/jean-stead> 
 * Vita Sackville-West
 <> 
 * Jane Bown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-jane-bown>


 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/emily-davison-derby-coverage-teaching-resource-gnm-archive?CMP=share_btn_tw>



 