
Electronic publication is causing a problem for us poor crossword editors. In 
the olden days we could insist that a word, or a spelling, or a meaning was not 
acceptable unless it was endorsed by one of a limited number of 'authoritative' 
printed dictionaries (say, Chambers or Collins). These had (and have) thorough 
editorial processes for deciding whether or not a particular word or usage has 
become sufficiently established to justify their seal of approval. And, because 
of the time lags involved in bring out a new edition, that filtering process 
took time. But today we have online and virtual dictionaries that search the 
internet for words and meanings in regular usage. As more and more 
communication and publication is electronic, what grounds are there for 
refusing to accept what is out there (rather than on a printed page or written 
letter) as having become valid. Two little examples from this summer show what 
I mean.

_____

First, was a clue where the definition for VEGETARIAN was 'a person who does 
not eat animal products'. Several veggies wrote to say that they eat eggs and 
drink milk and that the setter was muddling VEGETARIAN with VEGAN (a view 
supported by Collins, for example). But if you look for a definition of 
VEGETARIAN on the web you will find something like: 'In British usage, someone 
who eats no meat or fish or (often) any animal products.' If that usage 
continues, then presumably in due course even the OED will accept it as 
legitimate. Second, the required solution to 'a what's-its-name' was DOOBRY. 
This provoked the protest: 'What is your justification for that spelling, when 
Chambers only gives DOOBREY and DOOBRIE and Collins does not even have the 
word?' The answer is that online dictionaries also have the spelling we used 
(and, in this case, as luck would have it, DOOBRY is also in the 1-volume 
Oxford Dictionary of English). But the general point remains: when should 
words, spellings and meanings that are to be found generally on the web be 
accepted as 'modern usage' and when should they be rejected as 'mistakes' 
caused by falling standards of literacy? The question, I know, is rhetorical, 
for there is no clear answer. But it is a question of greater relevance with 
each passing year.
_____

As you might expect, I regularly get questions from people asking how a 
particular clue is supposed to work, so many in fact that I cannot answer them 
all. My hope always is that solvers in difficulty will 'phone a friend', or 
better still, ask a fellow solver face to face, as crosswords should and can be 
a form of positive social interaction. But, as the blogosphere continues to 
expand and increasingly to include crosswords, I recognise that more and more 
people want to communicate via (and find answers on) their PCs, laptops or 
other devices. For a long time now we have providedannotated solution notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/prize-crossword-annotated-solutions?INTCMP=SRCH>
 for each Saturday prize puzzle and for themonthly online Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/genius-crossword-annotated-solutions?INTCMP=SRCH>
 puzzle, which I hope are intelligible. In addition each puzzle has its comment 
section attached, where you can ask questions, and Alan Connor's regular blog 
is also stimulating further exchanges about crosswords in general and the 
Guardian puzzles in particular.

_____

Beyond that there are several good crossword forums out there. The most 
helpful for UK 'broadsheet' cryptic puzzles remainsfifteensquared.net <> (often 
referred to in shorthand as 225, being 15 x 15). Two other places where 
interesting threads of debate about crosswords can often be found are:
crosswordsolver.org <> and theanswerbank.co.uk <>. 
_____ 
In their spare time our setters indulge in a wide range of activities. 
Arachne, for example, runs marathons. Having just done the Berlin marathon on 
25 September she is at it again for charity on 9 October at Chester. Her aim 
this time is to break the Guinness world record time for the fastest marathon 
by a woman dressed as a bottle, which stands at 4 hours 54 minutes. As her 
personal best marathon time (running dressed as herself) is 4 hours 11 minutes 
she thinks that she is in with a chance. Her charity isPageant <>, which 
supports education in Gambia. (The bottle involved, incidentally, is Loweswater 
Gold, a beer brewed byCumbrian Legendary Ales 
<http://www.cumbrianlegendaryales.com/>.)

_____ 

You clearly found September's Genius puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-27332,00.html> (No 99 by 
Enigmatist) harder than average, presumably because its theme, the TV quiz show 
'The Eggheads', was definitely esoteric and the form of the puzzle was unusual 
(six of the solutions were the names of those who have appeared regularly on 
the programme over the years.) As a result the total number of correct entries 
was down to 249, with only 14 on the first day. Tony of London W5 (02:07) and 
Ian of London N14 (02:40) were once again the first in, followed considerably 
later in the day by Alan of Cromford in Derbyshire. The first overseas entry 
came from Brian of Paderborn in Germany at 15:27.

Congratulations to Bill Knott from London, who is September's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 