
The launch of the world’s first large-scale tidal energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wave-tidal-hydropower> farm in 
Scotland has been hailed as a significant moment for the renewable energy 
sector.

A turbine for the MeyGen tidal stream project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/16/tidal-energy-scheme-northern-scotland>
 in the Pentland Firth was unveiled outside Inverness in the Scottish Highlands.

After the ceremony, attended by Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, the turbine, measuring 
about 15 metres tall (49ft), with blades 16 metres in diameter, and weighing in 
at almost 200 tonnes, will begin its journey to the project’s site in the 
waters off the north coast of Scotland between Caithness and Orkney.

The turbine will be the first of four to be installed underwater, each with a 
capacity of 1.5 megawatts (MW), in the initial phase of the project.

But the Edinburgh-based developer Atlantis Resources hopes the project which 
has received £23m in Scottish government funding will eventually have 269 
turbines, bringing its capacity to 398MW, which is enough electricity to power 
175,000 homes.

Maf Smith, the deputy chief executive of the lobby group RenewableUK, said: 
“New technology like this will be powering our nation for decades to come.”

The first minister called on the UK government to end the uncertainty around 
subsidies for similar schemes, warning that a failure to do so risks causing 
irreparable damage to the marine power industry.

Sturgeon said: “I am incredibly proud of Scotland’s role in leading the way in 
tackling climate change and investment in marine renewables is a hugely 
important part of this.

“MeyGen is set to invigorate the marine renewables industry in Scotland and 
provide vital jobs for a skilled workforce, retaining valuable offshore 
expertise here inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> that would 
otherwise be lost overseas.”

Tim Cornelius, the chief executive of Atlantis Resources, said: “Today marks a 
historic milestone not just for Atlantis and our project partners, but for the 
entire global tidal power industry.

“It gives me enormous pride to have reached this juncture after 10 years of 
tireless work, preparation and planning by everyone associated with this 
project. This is the day the tidal power industry announced itself as the most 
exciting new asset class of renewable, sustainable generation in the UK’s 
future energy mix.

“This is an industry that is creating jobs and Scotland is the undisputed 
world leader of this high growth sector.”

Smith said the MeyGen project is a “major step forward in terms of scale” and 
provides “a great boost in maintaining Britain’s pole position” in the 
renewables sector.

World first for Shetlands in tidal power breakthrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/world-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough>
“The fact that the first turbine was assembled at what was an oil and gas 
fabrication yard illustrates the opportunities offered by renewables,” he said.

“The official launch of the largest tidal stream energy project in the world 
marks a significant moment in the commercial development of marine power.”

Jenny Hogan, the policy director for the trade body Scottish Renewables, also 
highlighted the “potential of tidal generation to make a significant 
contribution to the UK’s growing need for clean electricity, and to deliver 
further investment and jobs to the UK”.

She added: “However, this is still an incredibly young technology, and future 
development is absolutely dependent on continued support from Holyrood, 
Westminster and Brussels, who have all played a vitally important part in the 
growth of the sector to date.”

Meanwhile Fabrice Leveque, the climate and energy policy officer at the 
environmental body WWF Scotland, said: “It’s great that Scotland is now home to 
the world’s first large-scale tidal stream farm. It comes hot on the heels of
Shetland tidal devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/world-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough>
 exporting power to the National Grid for the first time and the testing of the 
world’s most powerful tidal turbine off Orkney.

“This underlines what we already know, that Scotland has 25% of the EU’s 
offshore wind and tidal power potential.”
 