
France produced a scintillating show as they put memories of one of the most 
painful moments in their football history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 to one side by crushingBulgaria 4-1 in a World Cup Group A qualifier.

Les Bleus had not hosted Bulgaria since the infamous qualifier in November 
1993 when they conceded a late goal to lose 2-1, a defeat that meant theymissed 
out on a place at the 1994 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/nov/16/from-vault-ginola-houllier-france-feud>
 in the United States.

Cristiano Ronaldo hits four in Portugal’s 6-0 rout of nine-man Andorra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/portugal-andorra-world-cup-2018-qualifier-cristiano-ronaldo>
The home side trailed again at the Stade de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> on Friday after conceding an 
early penalty but bounced back by taking control of the midfield and breaching 
a porous defence almost at will.

Goals from Kévin Gameiro, Dimitri Payet and Antoine Griezmann put them 3-1 up 
at the break. Gameiro, stylishly celebrating his first international for five 
years, then completed the scoring with his second goal of the night in the 59th 
minute.

France, with four points from two games, are joint top of the group alongside 
Holland and Sweden.Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bulgaria> 
occupy fourth position on three points.

Quincy Promes scored two early goals to set Holland on their way to a 4-1 
victory overBelarus and end a miserable run of home form. Davy Klaassen and 
Vincent Janssen added two more in the second half as the Dutch, who finished 
third at the lastWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> in Brazil but failed 
to qualify for Euro 2016, ended an unprecedented run of five successive home 
defeats stretching back 16 months.

Promes’ opener in the 14th minute marked his first international goal as he 
hit the ball through the legs of three defenders. He added a second 15 minutes 
later with a strong finish from the edge of the penalty area.Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belarus> threatened with two good chances 
before the break and then scored straight after it with Sergei Kornilenko’s 
strong run setting up Aleksey Rios for a close-range finish.

But the Dutch quickly restored their two-goal advantage in the 54th minute as 
Klaassen tapped home the rebound after Belarus had lost possession on the edge 
of their own area. Janssen struck the woodwork but found the net with a 
thunderous left-foot shot as the Dutch moved to four points from their opening 
two qualifiers after a draw inSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> last month. They host France in 
Amsterdam on Monday.

Gareth Southgate tells England to play with style to excite Wembley fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/gareth-southgate-england-style-wembley-malta>
Sweden remain unbeaten after their first two matches thanks to Mikael Lustig’s 
second-half winner inLuxembourg. The Celtic defender’s half-volley from Marcus 
Berg’s corner was the only goal of the game.

Belgium hammered Bosnia-Herzegovina  4-0 for their second straight World Cup 
qualifying win under Roberto Martínez, brushing off injuries to lead Europe’s 
Group H. The European Championship quarter-finalists exposed weaknesses in a 
Bosnian defence that buckled in the 26th minute when Emir Spahic scored an 
own-goal.

Two minutes later a gifted touch from Dries Mertens found Eden Hazard, who ran 
by defenders and chipped the ball past the goalkeeper, Asmir Begovic.

The normally well-composed Bosnians were forced into spells of panic defending 
and Toby Alderweireld made it 3-0 on the hour. Besieged by five Bosnian 
players, Romelu Lukaku swung in the fourth.

Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> are level on points with
Greece, who defeated a hard-working Cyprus 2-0 to continue their recovery under 
their new coach, Michael Skibbe.

Valentin Stocker came off the bench to score in the last minute and give 
Switzerland a 3-2 win away to Hungary after Adam Szalai had twice equalised for 
the hosts. Switzerland struggled to get going in the first half without the 
suspended Arsenal midfielder Granit Xhaka, who usually dictates the rhythm in 
midfield. But Haris Seferovic, the striker widely criticised for his 
performances at Euro 2016 when he failed to score a goal, put the Swiss in 
front six minutes after half-time, scoring from a rebound after Xherdan 
Shaqiri’s shot was saved by Peter Gulacsi.

Szalai equalised two minutes later, also from a rebound after his own shot hit 
the post. Ricardo Rodríguez put Switzerland back in front in the 67th minute, 
volleying home from Valon Behrami’s lofted cross for his first international 
goal, only for Szalai to equalise again four minutes later. Switzerland were 
not to be denied, however, and snatched the points when a long thrown-in was 
twice headed on and Stocker scored at the far post.

The Swiss went top of Group B with six points from two matches following a 
game in which all five goals were scored after half-time, while Hungary were 
left with one point and already look unlikely to make a first World Cup 
appearance since 1986.

The Faroe Islands are second with four points after their shock 2-0 win in 
Latvia. Portugal and Latvia have three and Andorra none.
 