
The European champions, Portugal, suffered a 2-0 defeat away to Switzerland in 
their opening 2018World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> Group B qualifier. 
Breel Embolo headed the Swiss in front at St Jakob-Park on 22 minutes, before 
Admir Mehmedi fired in a second on the half-hour.

Fernando Santos’ side, missing Cristiano Ronaldo who has just returned to 
training with Real Madrid afterlimping out of the Euro 2016 final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 because of a knee injury, failed to mount a recovery and are next in action at 
home to Andorra in October.

Portugal lose to Switzerland, France draw in Belarus: World Cup qualifiers 
– as they happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/06/sweden-v-holland-belarus-v-france-world-cup-qualifiers-live>
France, meanwhile, were left frustrated following a goalless draw from their 
opening Group A match inBelarus. Les Bleus, beaten finalists as hosts of Euro 
2016, had plenty of possession but even Manchester United’s £89m man Paul Pogba 
could not find a way past the home defence.

In Group H a brace of goals from the Everton forward Romelu Lukaku helped 
secure a 3-0 win inCyprus for the new Belgium manager Roberto Martínez. The 
former Everton manager saw his side beaten by Spain in Brussels last week but 
they delivered the required performance in Nicosia.

Lukaku, who played for Martínez at Goodison Park, put the visitors in front on 
14 minutes with a diving header and produced another close-range finish to nod 
in a second on the hour. Yannick Carrasco slotted in a third with nine minutes 
left, converting a pass from Chelsea’s Eden Hazard.

Sweden started life after Zlatan Ibrahimovic with a 1-1 draw against Holland 
in their Group A match at the Friends Arena.Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> had dominated large spells of 
the first half but found themselves behind on 43 minutes when Marcus Berg 
chipped the ball over the goalkeeper from the edge of the penalty area.

The Dutch levelled on 67 minutes when their captain, Wesley Sneijder, slotted 
in after Daryl Janmaat’s shot was saved - and thought they had won it in 
stoppage time with a header from the substitute Bas Dost, which was ruled out 
for what looked minimal contact with the defender.

Elsewhere in Group A Bulgaria snatched a dramatic 4-3 win over Luxembourg in 
Sofia, where there were two goals in stoppage time. Florian Bohnert looked to 
have earned the minnows a shock draw after Aurélien Joachim had earlier scored 
twice.

Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bulgaria> went ahead through 
Dimitar Rangelov on 16 minutes but found themselves fighting back with a goal 
from Marcelinho (66) and a free-kick by Ivelin Popov (80) before Bohnert’s late 
strike and then Aleksandar Tonev sparked wild celebrations from the home 
supporters.

Bosnia-Herzegovina got their Group H campaign off to a winning start with a 
comfortable 5-0 win overEstonia in Zenica. Emir Spahic (7) headed the hosts in 
front with the Roma striker Edin Dzeko (22) adding a second from the penalty 
spot. Further goals from Haris Medunjanin (71), Vedad Ibisevic (83) and a 
second by Spahic in stoppage time completed the rout.

Barcelona’s Andrés Iniesta: ‘I was a victim of something that terrified me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/barcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it>
Gibraltar scored an historic first goal in a World Cup qualifier but were well 
beaten 4-1 byGreece at Estadio Algarve.

Kostas Mitroglou (10) put Greece ahead before Liam Walker, once of Portsmouth, 
equalised in the 25th minute. However, it was not long before the Greeks 
regained control, as the Scunthorpe defender Scott Wiseman (43) put through his 
own net.

Greece extended their lead with two more quick goals before half-time through 
Kostas Fortounis and Vassilis Torosidis.

In Tuesday night’s other Group B fixtures, Latvia won 1-0 in Andorra with a 
header from Valerijs Sabala at the start of the second half while theFaroe 
Islands held Hungary to a goalless draw in Torshavn

Albania snatched a late 2-1 win over Macedonia as they resumed the Group G 
qualifier which was abandoned due to torrential rain in Shkoder on Monday. As 
the teams played out the final quarter of an hour, with the scores level at 
1-1, Bekim Balaj netted with a minute left when he glanced in from a free-kick 
to secure all three points forAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania>.
 