
On a vast manmade lake on the outskirts of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, work is nearing completion on what 
will soon be Europe’s largest floating solar power farm – and will briefly be 
the world’s biggest.

But few are likely to see the 23,000 solar panels on the Queen Elizabeth II 
reservoir at Walton-on-Thames, which is invisible to all but Heathrow 
passengers and a few flats in neighbouring estates.

“This will be the biggest floating solar farm in the world for a time - others 
are under construction,” said Angus Berry, energy manager for ThamesWater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water>, which owns the site. “We are 
leading the way, but we hope that others will follow, in the UK and abroad.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ad945a2c940912d7fb1a1ac8b6280743a3e3d92%2F0_258_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20biggest%20floating%20solar%20farm%20powers%20up%20outside%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20biggest%20floating%20solar%20farm%20powers%20up%20outside%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ad945a2c940912d7fb1a1ac8b6280743a3e3d92%2F0_258_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Divers fix anchors onto the bed of the reservoir. The panels are fixed to 
floats at the water’s edge, and then fed down onto the water. Photograph: 
Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Five years in planning and due to be finished in early March, the £6m project 
will generate enough electricity to power the utility’s local water treatment 
plants for decades. The energy will help provide clean drinking water to a 
populace of close to 10 million people in greater London and the south-east of 
England, a huge and often unrecognised drain on electricity, rather than nearby 
homes.

Why put solar panels on water? The answer, according to Berry, is that the 
water is there, and might as well be used for this purpose. Floating panels, 
covering only about 6% of the reservoir, will have no impact on the ecosystem, 
he says.

Though waterbirds, including moorhens and gulls, live on the margins, and a 
thin scum of litter is visible at the shore, the reservoir is not intended as a 
home to wildlife, and any fish living here are accidental visitors. Eighteen 
metres deep, it provides water for Londoners in a constantly churning stream. 
Although most of the population growth in London tends to be towards the east, 
most of the water still comes from reservoirs to the west of the city.

But future projects to make use of water companies’ reservoirs in order to 
provide solar power might be in doubt, Berry said.

The current government has slashed subsidies for solar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/uk-solar-panel-subsidies-slashed-paris-climate-change>
 andwind power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/18/tories-end-onshore-windfarm-subsidies-2016>
. Berry said that this would not affect the QEII project, but might have an 
effect on whether follow-up projects could go ahead. “We have had to look very 
closely at the economics of this, at all stages,” he said. “It is not clear 
what the future economics would be [for other potential projects].”

A similar floating solar farm with around half the capacity of the Thames 
Water projectis being built by water company United Utilities on a reservoir 
near Manchester <http://corporate.unitedutilities.com/4053.aspx>. Construction 
of an even bigger farm - at 13.7MW more than twice the QEII farm -is underway 
on a reservoir in land-scarce Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/27/japan-begins-work-on-worlds-largest-floating-solar-farm>
 and due to finish in 2018.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9b44eae2aa1b6d8c5a23ce0e7dbb84eccd92767%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20biggest%20floating%20solar%20farm%20powers%20up%20outside%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20biggest%20floating%20solar%20farm%20powers%20up%20outside%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fworlds-biggest-floating-solar-farm-power-up-outside-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9b44eae2aa1b6d8c5a23ce0e7dbb84eccd92767%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The system will cover around one-tenth of the reservoir. Photograph: Martin 
Godwin for the Guardian 
Putting solar panels on the water for the QEII scheme has not required 
planning permission, though big arrays of similar panels on land require 
official sanction. The governmenthas decided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/17/ministers-claims-that-solar-panels-harm-uk-food-security-are-false>
 to ban farmers who put solar arrays on agricultural land from receiving EU 
subsidies for the land.

More than 23,000 solar panels will be floated by developer Lightsource 
RenewableEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> at the 
reservoir near Walton-on-Thames, representing 6.3MW of capacity, or enough to 
generate the equivalent electricity consumption of about 1,800 homes.

The reservoir was commissioned in 1962, and remains one of the biggest serving 
London. Thames Water said that plans for a “super-sewer” under London would not 
affect the solar power project.
 