
A power company in Shetland has claimed a breakthrough in the race to develop 
viable offshore tidal stations after successfully feeding electricity to local 
homes.

Nova Innovation <http://www.novainnovation.co.uk/> said it had deployed the 
world’s first fully operational array of tidal power turbines in the Bluemull 
Sound between the islands of Unst and Yell in the north of Shetland, where the 
North Sea meets the Atlantic.

It switched on the second of five 100kW turbines due to be installed in the 
sound this month, sending electricity on a commercial basis into Shetland’s 
local grid.

Existing tidal schemes use single power plants or installations rather than a 
chain of separate turbines. A French company,OpenHydro 
<http://www.openhydro.com/news/2016-05-30.html>, says it too is very close to 
linking two tidal machines, off Brittany, to build a more powerful 1MW array.

After a series of commercial failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/09/scottish-government-accused-abandoning-wave-power>
 in Scotland’s nascent marine power industry, including the collapse of two 
wave power firms, Pelarmis and Aquamarine, Nova Innovation’s announcement was 
applauded by environmental groups.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0685e2146132e7d9baa639c162f79e07e524032%2F223_0_1963_1178%2F1963.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20first%20for%20Shetlands%20in%20tidal%20power%20breakthrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20first%20for%20Shetlands%20in%20tidal%20power%20breakthrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0685e2146132e7d9baa639c162f79e07e524032%2F223_0_1963_1178%2F1963.jpg>
 One of the turbines before being lowered beneath the sea. Photograph: Nova 
innovation 
Lang Banks, director of WWF Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>
, said: “News that power has been exported to grid for the first time by a pair 
of tidal devices marks yet another major milestone on Scotland’s journey to 
becoming a fully renewable nation.

“With some of the most powerful tides in Europe, Scotland is well placed to 
lead in developing this promising technology, which will help to cut climate 
emissions and create green jobs right across the country.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225750097d05d80a9f34750e65ba121194a23f6e%2F0_1_1894_1136%2F1894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20first%20for%20Shetlands%20in%20tidal%20power%20breakthrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20first%20for%20Shetlands%20in%20tidal%20power%20breakthrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fworld-first-for-shetlands-in-tidal-power-breakthrough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225750097d05d80a9f34750e65ba121194a23f6e%2F0_1_1894_1136%2F1894.jpg>
 A turbine in the Bluemull Sound. Photograph: Nova innovation 
The islands, which are not connected yet to the UK grid, get most of their 
electricity from a diesel-fuelled power station which is supplied by tankers, 
despite having some of the world’s strongest and most reliable wind, wave and 
tidal resources.

Shetland has also been the site of one of the UK’s most bitter disputes over 
renewable power. Thousands of islanders campaigned against an ambitious scheme 
backed by the local council to build the 370MW Viking windfarm, involving 103 
turbines erected on the main island.

That scheme finally won legal approval in 2015 but construction has yet to 
begin; it is waiting for aUK government announcement on new energy supply deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/09/shetlands-viking-windfarm-cleared-by-supreme-court>
 and the installation of a national grid connection to mainland Scotland.

Nova Innovation said the two turbines installed so far were operating at 40% 
of their installed capacity. The company hopes its turbines, which were 
cofunded by the Belgian renewables company ELSA, will be sold worldwide now 
they have been commercially proven.

“We are absolutely delighted to be the first company in the world to deploy a 
fully operational tidal array,” said Simon Forrest, the firm’s managing 
director.
 