
Everything was calm at the Switzerland training base in Montpellier. The team 
could draw confidence fromthe 1-0 win over Albania in their opening Euro 2016 
Group A tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and, with a tough test looming against Romania in Paris on Wednesday evening, 
there was a cautious optimism that at the fourth time of asking they could 
finally advance into the knockout stages of this competition.

Then Xherdan Shaqiri dropped what can only be described as a bombshell. “What 
if the coach of Kosovo wants me as the captain? Of course, I am thinking about 
it then,” theSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> 
winger said.

Arsenal’s new midfielder Granit Xhaka impresses in Switzerland win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/arsenal-midfielder-granit-xhaka-switzerland>
The context to the soundbite is that Kosovo have been recognised as an 
independent football nation.They were admitted by Uefa on 3 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/kosovo-uefa-membership-2018-world-cup>
 and Fifa on 13 May, and they will contest qualification to the 2018 World Cup 
in Russia; they have been placed in a group that contains Croatia, Iceland, 
Ukraine, Turkey and Finland.

Shaqiri was born in 1991 in Kosovo. His family emigrated to Switzerland when 
he was a baby and he declared for the country in which he was raised. TheStoke 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> player was given his 
senior international debut in 2010 by Ottmar Hitzfeld, the manager at the time, 
and he was a surprise inclusion in his squad for that year’s World Cup. He has 
since played at the 2014 World Cup. He is one of the glamour names in Vladimir 
Petkovic’s squad.

The possibility exists, however, that Shaqiri could be allowed to switch his 
allegiance, despite having played competitive matches for Switzerland, because 
Kosovo is a new nation. The suggestion he was open to the possibility has 
coloured the news agenda before theRomania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania> game.

Petkovic has other players in his squad who were born in Kosovo or have 
Kosovo-Albanian heritage and, as such, would be eligible to switch – the 
midfielders Granit Xhaka, Valon Behrami, Admir Mehmedi and Blerim Dzemaili and 
the forward Shani Tarashaj. All of them bar Tarashaj,a 21-year-old prospect who 
has signed for Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/everton-shani-tarashaj-switzerland>
, started against Albania.

There is nervousness in Albania, too, that some of their players who are 
eligible to switch to Kosovo might choose to do so while some in the same 
situation with other countries, including Belgium’s Adnan Januzaj – the 
Manchester United winger – have indicated that they will think about it.
Shaqiri 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Xherdan%20Shaqiri&team=Switzerland&isSimple=true>
Xhaka and Behrami, Petkovic’s central midfield pair, said before the start of 
the championship that they would remain true to Switzerland, and the issue was 
supposed to have been parked until after the finals. Shaqiri has brought it 
back to the fore.

His timing has been criticised in Switzerland. Why now, as the team prepare 
for a crucial game? There have been the inevitable and understandable questions 
about the impact on team harmony.

Shaqiri is not backward in coming forwards. He is a player who craves the 
spotlight, who wants to be the top dog, and there are those in Switzerland who 
have interpreted his comment about Kosovo as a bit of self-promotion, an 
attempt to offer a reminder of his worth.

Shaqiri’s line about the captaincy could also be significant. When Petkovic 
took the difficult decision to drop the long-time captain, Gokhan Inler, after 
the midfielder had endured a frustrating season at Leicester City, he gave the 
armband to Stephan Lichtsteiner, the Juventus full-back, and named Xhaka and 
Behrami as vice-captains. Shaqiri was not happy and he said so. How could he 
have been excluded from the inner circle?

It is other Switzerland players who are currently in the spotlight, 
particularly Xhaka, who hascompleted a move to Arsenal from Borussia 
Mönchengladbach for around £30m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 and Breel Embolo, the 19-year-old forward who is expected to leave Basel this 
summer for the highest fee ever paid to a Swiss club.

It has been reported that Manchester United have had talks with his agent – 
who is Shaqiri’s brother, Erdin – while other clubs in England and Germany have 
been credited with an interest. Embolo can play anywhere in the attacking line 
and there has been a clamour for him to start against Romania, most likely in 
place of Mehmedi. Embolo came on for him in the 62nd minute against Albania.

Lichtsteiner has been feted and then there is Yann Sommer, the goalkeeper. He 
made some vital interventions against Albania, including a decisive, late, 
one-on-one block from a substitute, Shkelzen Gashi.

Shaqiri is determined to regain centre stage.

Switzerland v Romania, Stade Vélodrome, 8pm BST Wednesday 15 June

Switzerland (probable): Sommer; Lichsteiner, Schar, Djourou, Rodriguez; 
Behrami, Dzemaili, Xhaka; Shaqiri, Seferovic, Mehmedi.

Romania (probable): Tatarusanu; Sapunaru, Grigore, Chiriches, Rat; Hoban, 
Pintilii; Stanciu, Popa, Stancu; Andone.

Referee S Karasev (Rus)
 