
The largest protest staged against Britain’s most notorious detention centre 
has taken place, as up to 2,000 demonstrators gathered outside Yarl’s Wood to 
denounce “immigrant bashing” in the wake of the Brexit vote.

Campaigners from across the UK protested at the Bedfordshire immigration 
removal centre on Saturday, demanding that the facility, which mainly houses 
women, is closed immediately.

They said Yarl’s Wood had become an even more toxic symbol when viewed against 
the rising hate crime, xenophobia and anti-immigrant sentiment that had 
gathered momentum in the wake of the EU referendum.

Yarl’s Wood is symptomatic of Britain’s paranoia about migrants | Ellie Mae 
O’Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/yarls-wood-detention-women-asylum-seekers-demos>
On Saturday afternoon hundreds marched around the centre’s perimeter, many 
waving placards demanding an end to immigration detention. One said “you are 
not forgotten” in reference to the estimated 400 women held inside.

Antonia Bright of campaign group Movement for Justice 
<https://www.facebook.com/movementforjustice/>, which helped organise the 
demonstration, said: “In total there looks to be 2,000 here. We had 24 coaches 
fully booked from across the country and many came by train – a great turnout.”

Yarl’s Wood has been embroiled in a series of scandals including allegations 
of sexual abuse, racism and mistreatment. Last year an unannounced inspection 
by the HM inspector of prisons said Yarl’s Wood “is rightly a place of national 
concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/uk-prisons-inspector-time-limits-detention-migrants-without-trial>
”.

The Shaw report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-into-the-welfare-in-detention-of-vulnerable-persons>
, published in January this year and commissioned by the then home secretary, 
Theresa May, made dozens of recommendations including the call for ministers to 
reduce “boldly and without delay” the 30,000 people detained each year.

The report by Stephen Shaw, the former prisons and probation ombudsman, called 
for a complete ban on the detention of pregnant women in immigration centres 
such as Yarl’s Wood. He said there should also be a “presumption against 
detention” of victims of rape and sexual violence, people with learning 
difficulties, and those with post-traumatic stress disorder.

A statement released by Movement for Justice before Saturday’s demonstration 
said: “Since then we have witnessed the Brexit phenomenon that saw leave 
campaigners place immigration at the centre of their campaign, spewing 
anti-immigrant and xenophobic rhetoric. The result has been massively increased 
racist and xenophobic physical assaults and verbal attacks.”

Saturday’s demonstration, led by former detainees and asylum seekers, was the 
tenth at Yarl’s Wood organised by Movement for Justice and supported by many 
other organisations.
 