
We’re supposed to drink water – that’s the point. “Plain water” is, as Prof 
Carlos Monteiro of São Paulo University puts it, “the desirable source of 
hydration for everyone”. It sounds like a fizzy-drink slogan translated from 
the Japanese. But it isn’t. It very much isn’t. Because it’s water that, in 
fact, is it and the real thing and, it is to be hoped, the taste of a new 
generation. Water, the very first drink mankind discovered, remains unbettered. 
What a damning illustration of the futility of commerce.

These are the findings of a new thing 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002195>
. I’m calling it a thing to be on the safe side because I’m having trouble 
nailing down specifically what sort of thing the thing is. In the parlance of 
headlines it’s a “say scientists” or a “say researchers”. It’s maybe a report 
or a paper or a study? It’s been created by academics from three universities – 
one in the UK and two in Brazil – and I think it’s the product of analysis of 
lots of previous … things that have been written about fizzy drinks and, 
specifically “diet drinks”, over the last 30 things (years). It’s been 
published in a thing calledPLOS Medicine 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/>, making it a thing within a thing, but 
the thing it’s within is a peer-reviewed medical journal, rather than a tabloid 
newspaper, a conspiracy theorists’ message board or a thinktank’s website, 
which bodes relatively well for the credibility of the inner thing.

It’s right up there with my report which argued that holding a pitbull on a 
straining leash may be a cause of tattoos

The thing’s key conclusion is that there’s no evidence the consumption of diet 
fizzy drinks (in preference to their non-diet, colloquially “full fat”, 
chemically “full sugar”, precursors) helps people lose weight. The authors 
reckon diet-drink consumers just make up the calories elsewhere because of 
mistaken feelings of dessert desert from having consumed something low calorie 
and because their palates’ cravings for sweetness are intensified as 
effectively by heavily artificially sweetened drinks as they are by high-sugar 
ones.

This is not what fizzy-drink manufacturers want to hear. Their whole strategy 
for dealing with the accusation that their products are turning us all into 
obese diabetics has been to push the diet versions. It’s the course they’ve 
chosen to tread between ignoring critics and ceasing to trade. So, being told 
that it’s all been for nothing is pretty galling, particularly when they’ve 
taken the trouble to commission so many reports of their own that come to the 
opposite conclusion. As co-thing-writer Maria Carolina Borges of the Federal 
University of Pelotas said: “The lack of solid evidence on the health effects 
of ASBs [artificially sweetened beverages] and the potential influence of bias 
from industry-funded studies should be taken seriously when discussing whether 
ASBs are adequate alternatives to SSBs [sugar‑sweetened beverages].”

So, basically the thing reckons the previous studies that showed diet drinks 
help weight loss have tended to be commissioned and funded by drinks 
manufacturers and so are likely to be biased. The ones that show ASBs don’t do 
any good are the more legit. But this finding has not gone unchallenged, even 
if we discount the pearly toothed stick-thin spokescreatures of the 
fizz-pushers.

Tom Sanders, professor emeritus of nutrition and dietetics at King’s College 
London, said: “The conclusion that reduced sugar or sugar-free drinks should 
not be promoted or seen as part of a healthy diet seems unwarranted and likely 
to add to public confusion.” While Prof Susan Jebb, the government’s adviser on 
obesity, criticised the thing-researchers for dismissing evidence that didn’t 
suit them and concluded: “Artificially sweetened drinks are a step in the right 
direction to cut calories.”

So, are the thing’s authors hypocrites? Just like those reports they so 
despise commissioned by the fizzy sector, have they decided in advance the 
conclusions they want to draw? It all starts sounding like an attempt by some 
people whose opinion is that diet drinks don’t ameliorate public health to 
upgrade that opinion to “data” or “findings”.

I’m sympathetic because their opinion is correct. I’m convinced of it. Imagine 
a Diet Coke can. Picture it in your mind’s eye. Someone’s holding it. Picture 
the can in the hand. Now widen the shot so you can see the can’s holder. It’s a 
fat person, isn’t it? There you go. It’s one of my best findings, right up 
there with my report that argued that holding a pitbull terrier on a straining 
leash may be a cause of tattoos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdare-doubt-health-claims-for-diet-coke-sugar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b4f009025cbeecf6676ffe7b193037d57ca4e43%2F0_0_1946_1946%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20mean%20you%20doubt%20Diet%20Coke%E2%80%99s%20health%20claims%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdare-doubt-health-claims-for-diet-coke-sugar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20mean%20you%20doubt%20Diet%20Coke%E2%80%99s%20health%20claims%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdare-doubt-health-claims-for-diet-coke-sugar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b4f009025cbeecf6676ffe7b193037d57ca4e43%2F0_0_1946_1946%2F1946.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Nevertheless, correct though these academics’ view certainly is, another thing 
that is correct is that a diet cola contains massively less sugar than a normal 
one. So if you have a Diet Coke instead of a Coke you will have consumed much 
less sugar and many fewer calories. That’s copper-bottomed fact. Maybe the 
chances of that low-cal version being consumed “as part of a balanced diet” are 
about the same as of a six-pack of Special Brew being “enjoyed responsibly”, 
but that’s speculation, not scientific analysis.

Friends of the Earth was deemed guilty of similar speculative straying last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/friends-of-earth-ticked-off-claims-anti-fracking-leaflet>
. In response to complaints about an anti-fracking leaflet, the Advertising 
Standards Authority told the group it mustn’t “make claims about the likely 
effects of fracking on the health of local populations, drinking water, or 
property prices in the absence of adequate evidence”. Cue nauseating crowing on 
the part of fracking firm Cuadrilla, whose chief executive accused Friends of 
the Earth of “scaremongering” in order to “frighten the public into giving it 
money” and of being “the unacceptable face of the charity sector”.

It’s heartbreaking to see honourable people give the representatives of 
corporate greed such a rhetorical open goal. Cuadrilla and its investors don’t 
know what the consequences of fracking will be, other than their own 
enrichment. They stake their money, we stake the soundness of the very land on 
which we live, and then we split the profits 100-0. We mustn’t cede any moral 
high ground to such people or they’ll drill the shit out of it.

So they’ve really got to watch it, these well-meaning environmentalists trying 
to save the planet from unfettered commerce, these scientists who despair as 
millions are duped into dependence on corrosive liquids of no nutritional 
value. These people are good and right, but the truths they have to convey are 
bad news. I would be thrilled if fracking did no environmental damage and 
provided cheap and clean power, or if I could gorge on sugar and sweeteners 
with impunity. It isn’t true, but most people wish it were. If there’s even a 
whisper of falsehood appended to the real, important, dispiriting truth, it 
will give millions all the excuse they need to believe comforting lies.
 