
I have spent many all-day sessions in theatres but none quite as powerful as 
Young Chekhov, which has moved triumphantly from Chichester to the National’s 
Olivier stage. Its only rival in my experience is the original RSC 1963 
production ofThe Wars of the Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/09/great-performances-peggy-ashcroft-the-wars-of-the-roses>
, recently released on DVD. But while Shakespeare’s trilogy, with its bloodshed 
and civil war, left one exhausted, this combination of Platonov, Ivanov and The 
Seagull sends one out exhilarated. That is a tribute toJonathan Kent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/29/anton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre>
’s production, David Hare’s version, Tom Pye’s design and a great company. But 
it is also because one learns so much about Chekhov in the course of a single 
day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe41bfb4a346db33bfc55158c3e17f5c05b694a%2F0_0_5494_3663%2F5494.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe41bfb4a346db33bfc55158c3e17f5c05b694a%2F0_0_5494_3663%2F5494.jpg>
 ‘Great company’ … Beverley Klein, Emma Amos, Peter Egan and Debra Gillett in 
Ivanov. Photograph: Johan Persson 
On a first viewing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/18/young-chekhov-birth-genius-review-evolution-new-kind-drama>
, I made the obvious point: that you see Chekhov move from farce (Platonov) and 
melodrama (Ivanov) to the creation of a symphonic realism (The Seagull). But I 
was struck by something else at the Olivier: that Chekhov, for all his 
comprehensive compassion, was also a social satirist who saw that the 
characteristic Russian vice was a demented egotism. Thornton Wilder once wrote 
of Chekhov’s plays that: “No one hears what anyone else says. Everybody walks 
in a self-centred dream.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a6ecc8de31b30df5c839a0a4754f09e1e7e84d%2F186_576_2372_3236%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a6ecc8de31b30df5c839a0a4754f09e1e7e84d%2F186_576_2372_3236%2F2372.jpg>
 ‘Desperate neediness’ … Anna Chancellor in The Seagull. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
But an abstract idea is made tangible in Young Chekhov. Platonov, superbly 
played by James McArdle, is a feckless teacher who sees himself as a helpless 
victim of everyone else’s desire. Ivanov, now played by Geoffrey Streatfeild, 
who fits perfectly into the picture, is a ruined landowner obsessed by an 
overpowering sense of shame. And, when we get to The Seagull, Joshua James’s 
Konstantin exactly analyses the flaw in his mother (an unforgettableAnna 
Chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/26/anna-chancellor-young-chekhov-the-seagull-national-theatre-q-and-a>
) when he says: “It’s not happening if it’s not about her.”

Chekhov may sympathise with his protagonists; but they are all figures who 
view the world through the prism, and even the prison, of their own ego.

I discovered another salient fact at the Olivier: that, while Chekhov’s plays 
seem bound by the demands of realism, they offer unexpected interpretative 
freedom to the director, designer and actor. Platonov is hardly a typical case 
since any version of the prolix original is bound to be an adaptation. Michael 
Frayn produced one version in Wild Honey: Helena Kaut-Howson a radically 
different one in Sons Without Fathers which set the action in modern Russia.
David Hare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-hare> says he has stuck 
closer to Chekhov’s original plan.

Anna Chancellor: ‘I’m a bit “light ent” for those monumental classic parts’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/26/anna-chancellor-young-chekhov-the-seagull-national-theatre-q-and-a>
What is fascinating is how each version yields totally different performances. 
My chief memory ofIan McKellen in Wild Honey 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/00084b.htm> is of his manic exuberance. Jack 
Laskey in the Kaut-Howson version was a figure of volatile despair. McArdle, 
partly because of his Scottish accent, reminded me ofDavid Tennant as Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/aug/06/theatre.rsc> in his mischievous 
wit and eye for social hypocrisy. But what McArdle added was an air of 
little-boy-lost innocence as if in denial that he was the architect of the 
surrounding chaos.

Ivanov has a more settled text and a longer stage history. In recent years the 
title role has been played by a wide variety of actors including Derek Jacobi, 
John Wood, Alan Bates, Ralph Fiennes andKenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/sep/18/theatre>. Each has brought his 
own particular qualities to the role but one key moment illustrates the 
creative latitude Chekhov provides. When Ivanov’s neighbour dipped into his own 
pocket to help Ivanov pay off the interest on his debts, Branagh stared 
silently at the proffered money and fell to the floor in a dishevelled heap: 
Streatfeild at the same point sits with his back to us and goes rigid with 
guilt as if his humiliation could go no further. Both approaches are equally 
valid: they simply confirm that Chekhov’s plays, like Shakespeare’s, are 
coloured by the temperament of the individual performer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65cb5a453455580798daffb24682c5cb8a549d6d%2F0_217_4237_2693%2F4237.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65cb5a453455580798daffb24682c5cb8a549d6d%2F0_217_4237_2693%2F4237.jpg>
 Harsh world … Olivia Vinall as Nina in The Seagull. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
David Hare on Young Chekhov: 'thrilling sunbursts of anger and romanticism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/05/david-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov>
Chekhov’s women offer exactly the same freedom. I must have seen a score of 
great actors play Arkadina in The Seagull including Peggy Ashcroft, Vanessa 
Redgrave, Judi Dench, Joan Plowright and Susan Fleetwood. What Chancellor 
brings to the role is not just the character’s untrammelled egotism but also 
her desperate neediness: you feel her very being is threatened by Trigorin’s 
possible desertion, which is why she uses every weapon in her sexual armoury to 
persuade him to quit the country estate. Olivia Vinall’s Nina, the third in a 
remarkable trio of performances the actor gives in a single day, also differs 
from previous Ninas in suggesting the character is a water-nymph who, like the 
Ondine of legend, cannot survive in the harsh world of reality. We tend to 
think of Chekhov’s characters as fixed in their historical moment. What this 
brilliant trilogy proves is that, while born solipsists, they also possess the 
endless susceptibility to reinterpretation that is the hallmark of great drama.

 * The Young Chekhov season 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/your-visit/current-season/young-chekhov-season-page>
 – presenting three plays singly and as anall-day experience 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/young-chekhov-three-play-day> on 
selected dates – isat the National Theatre, London, until 8 October 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/your-visit/current-season/young-chekhov-season-page>
.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc413026ba0111732816e7a394022844533b25d51%2F0_204_4518_2712%2F4518.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Chekhov%20is%20the%20greatest%20of%20theatrical%20marathons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fyoung-chekhov-trilogy-platonov-ivanov-the-seagull-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc413026ba0111732816e7a394022844533b25d51%2F0_204_4518_2712%2F4518.jpg>
 ‘Coloured by temperament’ … a scene from Platonov by Anton Chekhov at 
Chichester. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian  