
Two quite remarkable ballerinas emerged from France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in the 20th century. The latter 
years were dominated by Sylvie Guillem; Yvette Chauviré, who has died aged 99, 
was important in the years following the second world war. Fine-boned and 
dark-haired, she had a brilliant classical technique that she used not for 
showy effect but as a language for interpreting character and expressing 
poetry. She was perceived as the perfect example of the Franco-Italian school 
of ballet.

Chauviré had the good fortune to make her debut at a time when ballet in 
France was emerging from a long decline. Under the direction ofSerge Lifar 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/17/obituaries/serge-lifar-81-is-dead-shaper-of-french-ballet.html>
, Sergei Diaghilev’s last male star, the ballet of the Paris Opéra was becoming 
fashionable again. Her talent and promise were quickly spotted and she rose 
rapidly through the ranks of that hierarchical company. Even when she was in 
her 50s and had ceased to appear regularly with the Opéra she commanded great 
respect in the company. When the programmes began listing dancers 
alphabetically rather than in order of seniority, Claire Motte, one of the 
company’s leading dancers, remarked: “Happily, Madame Chauviré’s name still 
comes first.” Indeed, she was widely known as La Chauviré Nationale.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbNDQxGNt7g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbNDQxGNt7g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbNDQxGNt7g&media=>
 Yvette Chauviré dancing the Dying Swan 
Her relationship with the Opéra was not always untroubled. She quit the troupe 
twice, first in 1946 when Lifar was accused of collaboration with the Nazi 
regime and was forced to step down from his post. Although not a hint of the 
scandal touched Chauviré herself, out of loyalty to Lifar she followed him to 
Monaco, where he was involved in setting up the NouveauBallet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> de Monte Carlo.

When Lifar returned to the Opéra in 1947, Chauviré resumed her role as étoile 
(“star dancer”), but in 1949, after a dispute with the director, Georges 
Hirsch, she left again to dance as guest star with companies around the world. 
She returned to the Opéra in 1953, and although regulations obliged her to 
retire on reaching the age of 40 in 1957, she continued to appear with the 
company as a guest until 1972, when she made her farewell to the stage in a 
performance of Giselle.

Yvette Chauviré, French prima ballerina, dies aged 99 at home in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/20/yvette-chauvire-french-prima-ballerina-dies-aged-99-at-home-in-paris>
Born in Paris, daughter of Berthe (nee Pinchard) and Henri Chauviré, she 
entered the school of theParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> Opéra 
at the age of 10. Her teacher was Laetitia Couat. She later studied with the 
Russian dancer and choreographer Boris Kniaseff. At the age of 13, Yvette 
joined the ballet of the Opéra with the rank of second quadrille. Lifar brought 
a new spirit to the troupe and was determined that the younger members of the 
company should have the opportunity to develop. It took just four years for 
Chauviré to rise to the level ofpremière danseuse, which was then the highest 
level of the company, and she was soon given leading roles in several of 
Lifar’s own ballets. His first major creation for her came on 31 December 1941 
with Istar, in which she created the leading role. That evening she was 
promoted to the recently created rank ofétoile.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwJbnSYbbAa4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwJbnSYbbAa4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwJbnSYbbAa4&media=>
 Yvetette Chauviré performing Giselle 
During the occupation of France, she danced in a number of Lifar’s creations, 
but it was not until 1944 that she first assumed the title role in Giselle, the 
part for which she was most famous and which she performed with many companies 
andmany partners <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wJbnSYbbAa4>. In her memoir 
Je Suis Ballerine (1961), she reckoned there had been 33 partners and there 
were to be several more, not least Erik Bruhn andRudolf Nureyev 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-rudolf-nureyev-1477015.html>
, before she made her formal farewell to the stage in the role in 1972.

Chauviré starred in Lifar’s David Triomphant, Suite en Blanc, Les Mirages and 
La Péri. But she worked with other choreographers includingJohn Cranko 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/john-cranko> (who revealed her hitherto 
unexpected gift for comedy in La Belle Hélène), Harald Lander and Tatjana 
Gsovsky. She also created the female role in Grand Pas Classique, a brilliant 
display piece choreographed by Tatjana’s husband, Victor Gsovsky, still popular 
today.

Chauviré appeared in London on several occasions, with small groups and also 
with London Festival Ballet. In 1958 she was invited to appear with the Royal 
Ballet at Covent Garden. Naturally her repertory included Giselle, for which 
she received considerable praise. She also danced the second act ofSwan Lake 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NrKoTiMoOMY> – she had been the first 
ballerina to perform that role at the Opéra – and Les Sylphides. But what was 
truly remarkable was that at the age of 41 she danced the leading role in The 
Sleeping Beauty – one of the most testing in the classical repertoire – for the 
first time. The criticClive Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/21/obituary-clive-barnes-theatre-critic>
 described her performance as a triumph.

When in 1983 Nureyev became the director of the Ballet de l’Opéra, his first 
production was a sumptuous revival of the Marius Petipa classic Raymonda. The 
cast included almost every one of the company’s leading dancers, some of them, 
quite contrary to custom, in secondary roles, and as a crowning gesture he 
persuaded Chauviré out of retirement to play the important mimed role of the 
Countess de Doris.

This brought her firmly back into the Opéra as a teacher and coach. She was 
the subject of a 1988 documentary by Dominique Delouche in which, touchingly, 
she coaches the young Guillem in Grand Pas Classique.

Chauviré received many honours, including, in 1998, the grand cross of the 
Ordre National du Mérite and was made a commandeur of the Légion d’Honneur in 
1988, promoted to grand officier in 2010.

Her husband, the painter Constantin Nepo, died in 1976.

• Yvette Chauviré, ballerina, born 22 April 1917; died 19 October 2016

• Judith Cruickshank died in July 2016
 