
Zaha walked into our lives in the late 60s when my brother Hussein and I were 
five and six. She had come to Beirut to study mathematics at the American 
University there. Our parents had just divorced, which was a relatively rare 
occurrence back then. From the minute Zaha appeared, we felt loved and 
protected. She brought Zaha magic with her: love, laughter, fun, music, dance 
and close friends who remain her friends to this day. She would spend hours 
teaching us how to draw, how to use the colouring pencils – tilt them to colour 
in, how you could blunt the tip to shade in or sharpen it to have a bold, 
razor-sharp edge. That was long before she became an architect.

She taught us that life is best when you build bridges between people, and not 
walls

With Zaha, everything started with a drawing. I am an architect myself now – 
though with none of Zaha’s genius – and I often could not understand her 
architectural drawings. I’d think: how is she going to do this curved facade? 
But the first time I walked into a Zaha building –the Maxxi in Rome 
<http://www.fondazionemaxxi.it/en/progetto-architettonico/> – I saw that her 
buildings are peaceful: nothing upsets the eye, there are no edges. The flow of 
energy goes on for ever.

Whenever my father, Haytham, my uncle Foulath and Zaha – who was the youngest 
of the three – got together and had done their hugging and kissing, their 
exchanges quickly became charged. Voices were raised, the Iraqi dialect 
prevailed. All three of them were highly opinionated, very bright and 
passionate. We younger Hadids would watch quietly, baffled, not allowed to 
participate, let alone take sides. It was years later that my best friend, who 
had often been present, explained it to me: “Rana, they are so passionate, this 
is how they express and communicate their love to one another.” Hadids have a 
special way of showing love. Zaha’s way often took the form of criticism and 
outbursts, pushing and pushing even more those she loved and cared for. She 
simply wanted us to be the best she thought we could be, something she applied 
to herself relentlessly. She had a brutal honesty. But she saw in us much more 
than we saw in ourselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c827fcc55e549af561b240c0e7364ce660e6ad%2F0_29_658_395%2F658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%20remembered%20by%20Rana%20Hadid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%20remembered%20by%20Rana%20Hadid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c827fcc55e549af561b240c0e7364ce660e6ad%2F0_29_658_395%2F658.jpg>
 Zaha and Rana Hadid together. 
Zaha loved life and was a master at bringing together people across all 
nations, cultures and religions, bridging differences and forging solid bonds. 
A bit like her spaces. The minute you stepped into a Zaha space, whether it was 
her home, her bedroom, her gallery, Studio 9, or her public buildings, you 
instantly felt a harmony with your surroundings. I think this was because of 
her deep understanding of people. She taught us that life is best when you 
build bridges between people, and not walls.

There are many sides to Zaha I shall miss terribly. The Zaha who made us laugh 
until we cried. Zaha the brilliant mimic who did the best impressions. Zaha who 
came up with the best nicknames (Sinkapoo, Yes But No But, Melo, Happy Ending, 
Kermit), Zaha who rooted for the underdog, Zaha who set standards, Zaha who 
believed in the power of education. Zaha who loved her Sunday lunches at the 
River Cafe, Zaha who challenged us to think differently and do what was not 
always easy, Zaha who would call me at 5pm Beirut time from China or Miami to 
tell me off for not having visited my father (yet) that day, Zaha who made 
every minute matter, Zaha who would text out of the blue at that right moment 
when you were feeling sad or vulnerable, Zaha who you could talk to about 
anything: architecture, the latest nail polish, your love life. But mostly, the 
incredibly warm and generous Zaha who showed us we could do anything we wanted 
if we worked at it hard enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92026e445dd5a8f073b071fdb01aa58eb1025cb1%2F0_5_4920_2952%2F4920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%20remembered%20by%20Rana%20Hadid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%20remembered%20by%20Rana%20Hadid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-remembered-by-rana-hadid-niece-architecture-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92026e445dd5a8f073b071fdb01aa58eb1025cb1%2F0_5_4920_2952%2F4920.jpg>
 ‘The flow of energy goes on for ever’: the new mathematics gallery at the 
Science Museum, designed by Zaha Hadid, which opened on 7 December 2016. 
Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex/Shutterstock 
I was at the Royal Institute of British Architects award dinner when she 
received her gold medal 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/RGM/RGM2016/ZahaHadid.aspx>. I had not 
been going to come. I had rung from Lebanon and told her: “I can’t keep coming 
to all your openings and awards.” She said: “You have to come, you’re family.” 
I told her my father was not well and she said, “OK.” The night before the 
award, she called again: “Are you here yet, in London?” I said, “I told you I 
wasn’t coming.” She said “You’d better be on that plane.” I am so glad now that 
I came. She had her back to me at an adjoining table during dinner and I 
thought: thank God she cannot see if I’m misbehaving. But then, only 10 minutes 
before Zaha was due to do a television interview, Jane Duncan, president of 
Riba, tapped me on the shoulder and said: “Zaha is asking about you. She sent 
me over to see if you were all right.” That is how she was. And that was the 
last time I saw her.

Main photograph by Steve Double/Camera Press
 