
Zenit St Petersburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg> 
maintained their perfect record in the Champions League this season and reached 
the knockout phase of the competition with victory at Lyon.

Neymar and Luis Suárez fire Barcelona past Bate Borisov as fans revolt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/barcelona-bate-borisov-champions-league-match-report>
Artem Dzyuba scored both goals from a couple of Hulk assists as the Russian 
side produced a fourth win in as many matches, their best start ever in the 
competition.

Zenit qualified for the last 16 with two games to spare and lead second-placed 
Valencia by six points after theSpanish side lost 1-0 to Gent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/gent-valencia-champions-league-match-report>
 in the other Group H match. Gent are third with four points, while Lyon are 
last on one.

Dzyuba has recently broken into the Russia team, scoring four goals in a 7-0 
win away to Liechtenstein in a European Championship qualifier in September. 
Since then, he has netted 12 goals in 13 games for Zenit and also scored in the 
3-1 win over Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/zenit-st-petersburg-lyon-champions-league-match-report>
in Russia last month.

He put the visitors in front in the 25th minute after a long spell of 
domination from the Russian side. Dzyuba made the most of excellent work from 
Hulk, who outpaced Samuel Umtiti and Henri Bedimo, then drew the goalkeeper 
Anthony Lopes out before cutting the ball back to the striker to score in an 
empty net.

Roma leave it late to beat Bayer Leverkusen and go second in Group E
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/roma-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
Dzyuba’s goal galvanised the hosts, who applied more pressure on the Zenit box 
but lacked a cutting edge.Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> 
missed two good chances to level before the interval, the first one when Mapou 
Yanga-Mbiwa missed the target from the rebound after the goalkeeper Yuri 
Lodygin parried away a shot from Maxime Gonalons. Bedimo then smashed a 
powerful shot against the angle of the crossbar and the post as Lodygin looked 
well beaten.

Dzyuba extended Zenit’s lead in the 57th minute after Hulk again accelerated 
down the right and poked the ball to the striker, who beat Lopes with a cool 
finish.

Lyon’s hopes of staging a comeback were dashed in the 72nd minute when the 
captain, Gonalons, was sent off for a second yellow card.
 