
Enzo Zidane made his dad proud by scoring a goal on his Real Madrid debut in a 
crushingCopa del Rey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-del-rey> 
victory.

Zinedine Zidane <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zinedine-zidane> gave 
his 21-year-old son a chance against third-division Cultural Leonesa and he 
took full advantage, finding the net with a nice right-foot shot from the edge 
of the area to help Madrid to a 6-1 win. Using mostly second-string teams in 
both matches, Real advanced to the last 16 of the competition 13-2 on aggregate 
after a 7-1 win in the first leg.

Zinedine Zidane's son chooses to play for France rather than Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/24/zinedine-zidane-son-play-france-spain>
Enzo Zidane had played for Real during a pre-season tour, but this was the 
first time that Zinedine had given one of his four sons a chance in a 
competitive match. Enzo was thrown on at half-time and scored his goal in the 
63rd minute. Another of Zidane’s sons is a goalkeeper in the club’s youth 
squads.

Mariano Díaz also made the most of his time with the senior squad by scoring a 
hat-trick at the Santiago Bernabéu, with one of the goals coming only 22 
seconds into the match. “This is a dream,” Díaz said. “It’s incredible to score 
one goal. To get three, it’s indescribable, really. I’m very happy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fzinedine-zidane-son-enzo-scores-real-madrid-debut-copa-del-rey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5524dd24fc0c67f6f42133b40577a16b9ef9e7%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zinedine%20Zidane%E2%80%99s%20son%20Enzo%20scores%20on%20Real%20Madrid%20debut%20in%20Copa%20del%20Rey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fzinedine-zidane-son-enzo-scores-real-madrid-debut-copa-del-rey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zinedine%20Zidane%E2%80%99s%20son%20Enzo%20scores%20on%20Real%20Madrid%20debut%20in%20Copa%20del%20Rey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fzinedine-zidane-son-enzo-scores-real-madrid-debut-copa-del-rey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5524dd24fc0c67f6f42133b40577a16b9ef9e7%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Zinedine ZIdane gives his eldest son some last-minute instructions before his 
debut for the team the France legend graced with such elegance. Photograph: 
Helios de la Rubia/Real Madrid via Getty Images 
James Rodríguez capitalised on a rare chance in the starting lineup to score, 
while Real also benefited from a Cesar Morgado own goal. Cultural Leonesa’s 
lone strike came with a powerful long-range shot by Yeray González.

“I never expected to score a goal here at the Bernabéu, with all my family 
watching,” González said.

Zidane also used the game to give some playing time to Casemiro and Pepe, who 
had been nursing injuries. Also among the starters was the 17-year-old 
Norwegian midfielder Martin Odegaard.

Before the game, a minute’s silence was held in honour of the victims of 
Monday’s plane crash involving the Brazilian club Chapecoense. Real had their 
last-32 games played early to open up dates for their participation in Fifa’s 
Club World Cup later in December.
 