
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
has been forced to apologise after sparking a political row by attacking a 
referee and calling France a “shit country”.

Politicians waded into the Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> player with Marine Le Pen 
of the far-right Front National telling the Swedish striker that if he did not 
like France he could leave. Ibrahimovic will face a Professional Football 
League disciplinary hearing on Thursday.

In the corridor after the match, which PSG lost to Bordeaux 3-2 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/2015/mar/15/zlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-bordeaux-ligue-1>
, a furious Ibrahimovic was caught on film swearing and railing against the 
referee.

He can be clearly heard shouting in English: “Wake up, wake up … we’re not 
amateurs. Fucking asshole. I’ve never seen this in my 15 years playing 
football. I’ve been playing for 15 years and I’ve never seen [good] refereeing 
in this shit country. They don’t even deserve PSG in this country.”

Le Pen, whose party is expected to make important gains in local elections, 
told radio listeners on Monday: “Those who consider that France is a shit 
country can leave it. There. It’s as simple as that.”

Asked if the football authorities should discipline Ibrahimovic, Le Pen 
replied: “That’s the least they could do”.

The striker’s outburst brought opprobrium across the political spectrum. The 
French sports minister, Patrick Kanner, tweeted: “Ibrahimovic’s disappointment 
doesn’t justify his insults towards the referee and the country that has 
welcomed him. He should apologise.”

Jérôme Guedj, an MP with the governing Socialist Party, said: “Let him play 
football and shut up, or at least show some respect towards this country and 
football supporters who were also insulted.”

Ibrahimovic said his remarks were directed at the referee Lionel Jaffredo and 
insisted he was not targeting “France or the French”.

“I spoke about football. I lost the game, I accept that, but I can’t accept 
when the referee doesn’t follow the rules. It’s not the first time and I’m sick 
of it. My sincere apologies if anyone was offended, or took it the wrong way,” 
he wrote.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-apologises-france-rant-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426585463689%2Fcrop_KP_123657_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20apologises%20for%20insulting%20France%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-apologises-france-rant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20apologises%20for%20insulting%20France%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-apologises-france-rant-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426585463689%2Fcrop_KP_123657_640x360.jpeg>
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic apologises 
In his defence, Ibrahimovic said he had lost his temper. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/16/zlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-france-apology>
 “I was angry. Everyone knows in that situation they often say things without 
thinking. I apologise if people felt offended.”

In a front-page headline, Le Parisian newspaper described Ibrahimovic’s 
behaviour as “unacceptable”.

Ibrahimovic scored twice but PSG’s defeat mean they trail Lyon by two points 
at the top of Ligue 1. The striker was angered when Jaffredo failed to award 
PSG a free-kick after theBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> goalkeeper Cédric Carrasso 
picked up a back pass from the defender Ludovic Sané.

His outburst came less than a week after he accused Chelsea players of acting 
“like babies” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/12/zlatan-ibrahimovic-chelsea-babies-red-card>
 after he was sent off during PSG’s Champions League victory on away goals.

On France-Info radio, Le Pen refused to comment further except to suggest 
Ibrahimovic could leave France, saying there were “more important things to 
discuss”.

In the past, the FN leader has said “football’s not really my thing”, but that 
has not stopped her making remarks about the players in the national “black, 
blanc, beur” (black, white, Arab) team, that have caused outrage.

In 2010, Le Pen told BFMTV that she did not “identify with” the French 
national football team because certain players had “another nationality at 
heart”.

“If they behave correctly … if we hear, even occasionally, from the mouths of 
these players talk of [their] patriotism, if a few stop refusing to sing the 
Marseillaise, if we don’t see them wrapped in the flags of other countries than 
our own, maybe things will change, but I have to say that I don’t identify 
particularly with this team,” she said.
 