
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
was in the spotlight for the wrong reasons again on Sunday after the Swedish 
striker lost his temper following Paris Saint-Germain’s surprise 3-2 defeat at 
Bordeaux.

Ibrahimovic, sent off in Wednesday’s Champions League thriller with Chelsea at 
Stamford Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/11/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
, scored twice in the game but could not prevent PSG from losing, and he then 
launched into a foul-mouthed rant after the final whistle.

“In 15 years I’ve never seen a [good] referee in this shit country ... [they] 
don’t even deserve PSG,” he was heard to say in Canal Plus TV footage.

Ibrahimovic later issued an apology, saying in a statement: “My remarks were 
not aimed at France or the French people. I was talking about football and not 
something else. I was speaking in anger. I wish to apologise if people felt 
offended.“

Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> took the lead in the 
18th minute through Ludovic Sané before Ibrahimovic equalised from close range 
in the 50th minute for the Champions League quarter-finalists.

Wahbi Khazri nodded the home side back in front only to see Ibrahimovic score 
an 85th-minute penalty after Ezequiel Lavezzi was brought down. Diego Rolan 
then grabbed the winner for Bordeaux with two minutes to go, latching on to a 
near-post cross. To make matters worse for the visitors, their Brazilian 
defender David Luiz went off in the first half with a thigh injury.

As a result of PSG’s slip Lyon extended their lead at the top to two points 
after drawing 0-0 atMarseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> 
in another match that ended in stormy fashion on Sunday.

Third-placed Marseille went desperately close to breaking the deadlock in the 
83rd minute when Lucas Ocampos’ effort was cleared off the line even though 
television replays suggested it had gone in.

The match then boiled over two minutes later when Marseille’s Jérémy Morel was 
sent off for a reckless tackle. Players from both sides started pushing and 
shoving while the home goalkeeper Steve Mandanda rushed half the length of the 
field to get involved in the fracas.

Earlier, André-Pierre Gignac came closest to scoring in the first half when he 
struck the post for Marseille in the 17th minute.Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> have 58 points with nine games left 
while PSG are second on 56, and Marseille third with 54.
 