
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
has been suspended for four matches by the French league’s disciplinary 
commission following his criticism of a referee last month.

The Paris Saint-Germain striker lost his temper and vented his anger on 
television at decisions which went against his side aftertheir 3-2 loss at 
Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/15/zlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-bordeaux-ligue-1>
 in the league last month. Ibrahimovic, whose comments were caught on camera, 
insulted the referee Lionel Jaffredo and one of his assistants, then used an 
expletive to describe France.

Ibrahimovic, who later said he was sorry after the French sports minister 
asked him to apologise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/16/zlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-france-apology>
, is available for Saturday’s League Cup final against Bastia as his suspension 
starts next week. He will miss league games against Nice, Lille, Metz and 
Nantes and should return for the last three matches of the season.
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic, left, was banned for four matches for his very public 
criticism of the referee Lionel Jaffredo, right, after PSG lost at Bordeaux. 
Photograph: Nicolas Tucat/AFP/Getty Images 
Although PSG’s sporting director Olivier Létang argued that Ibrahimovic should 
not be suspended because he did not address his comments directly to the 
referee, the disciplinary commission activated a suspended one-match ban 
imposed following an altercation with a Saint-Etienne player in January to add 
to the three games he received for the latest incident.

“He has been sanctioned because of the offensive nature and rudeness of his 
words,” said the commission’s president Sébastien Deneux, adding that 
Ibrahimovic’s absence at the hearing did not affect the outcome.

Ibrahimovic, who took his tally with PSG to 102 goals in less than three years 
followinghis hat-trick in a 4-1 win over Saint-Etienne in the French Cup in 
midweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/psg-saint-etienne-french-cup-match-report>
, will alsomiss the first leg of his club’s Champions League quarter-final 
against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/07/champions-league-psg-barcelona-luiz-verratti>
 after he was sent off against Chelsea in the previous round and suspended for 
one match.

Ibrahimovic’s comments in Bordeaux caused an outcry in France, with the 
National Front leader, Marine Le Pen, suggesting that he should leave the 
country if he was not happy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/16/zlatan-ibrahimovic-comments-investigated-french-league-psg-marine-le-pen>
.
 