
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
scored twice asParis St Germain defeated Lyon 5-1 at Parc des Princes on Sunday 
to move 17 points clear at the top of Ligue 1, while second-placedAngers could 
manage only a 1-1 draw againstBordeaux.

The best goals of the week: Lionel Messi, Adel Taarabt, Iago Aspas and David 
Silva
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/14/best-goals-week-lionel-messi-taarabt-nani-rakitic-silva>
PSG, who are in Monday’s draw for the last 16 of the Champions League as one 
of the second seeds, dominated from the start againstLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> and were 2-0 up inside the first 20 
minutes. Ibrahimovic scored from close range in the 11th minute and soon 
afterwards Serge Aurier met Ángel Di María’s free-kick to head the second.

Jordan Ferri pulled a goal back when his deflected shot from 25 yards 
wrong-footed the PSG goalkeeper, Kevin Trapp, but the leaders maintained the 
pressure in the second half.

Edinson Cavani converted a long pass from Di María, Ibrahimovic scored a 
penalty after being fouled and a late breakaway goal by the substitute Lucas 
Moura completed PSG’s 15thLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> win of the season.

Angers had looked set for defeat against Lyon as they trailed to a 40th-minute 
goal by Diego Rolan. However, their persistence eventually paid off with seven 
minutes left when Romain Thomas equalised following a corner to stretch their 
unbeaten run to five games.

Only goal difference separates them from Monaco, who beat 10-man St Étienne 
1-0 at the Stade Louis II thanks to an 82nd-minute penalty by Fabinho after 
Pierre-Yves Polomat had handled. The St Étienne defender Kévin Malcuit was sent 
off for a second yellow card just after the hour.

In Sunday’s other Ligue 1 match, Ajaccio extended their unbeaten run to eight 
games with a 1-1 draw atMarseille, who had Abdelaziz Barrada sent off for a 
foul on John Tshibumbu. The visitors took the lead midway through the first 
half with a Jacques Zoua penalty butMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> were level before the break 
through Michy Batshuayi.
 