
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
scored for the first time in five Ligue 1 games to keep Paris St Germain in 
pursuit of the leaders Lyon.

But the Sweden international needed a penalty awarded in the 60th minute to 
break the deadlock againstSt Etienne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> at the Stade Geoffroy-Guichard.

The St Etienne midfielder Jérémy Clément was adjudged to have handled the ball 
and Ibrahimovic coolly dispatched the spot kick past Stéphane Ruffier after 
first removing debris that had been thrown on to the pitch.

Moments earlier Ibrahimovic, who had been kept quiet in the first half, was 
denied by the legs of Ruffier after he had latched on to a fine pass from the 
midfielder Marco Verratti.

Ibrahimovic, who had scored the winning goal against St Etienne on the same 
ground in the League Cup quarter-finals two weeks ago, missed another chance in 
the 70th minute when he rushed his shot. Five minutes later Edinson Cavani hit 
the crossbar with a neat lob.

The win kept PSG within four points of the leaders Lyon, who beat 10-man Metz 
2-0 although Alexandre Lacazette, Ligue 1’s top scorer with 21 goals, limped 
off shortly after scoring in the 31st minute.

His goal came from a penalty awarded when the Argentinian defender Guidi Milan 
fouled Rachid Ghezzal and was sent off because he was deemed the last defender. 
It was Lacazette’s 13th goal in the past nine games but two minutes later he 
injured his right hamstring stretching for a high ball.

The Lyon coach, Hubert Fournier, expects him to miss at least the trip to 
fifth-placed Monaco on Sunday and will hope he is fit to face PSG at home the 
following weekend. “Alex has probably pulled a muscle,” Fournier said. “It’s 
the only negative point of the afternoon.”

Corentin Tolisso, one of eight homegrown players in the side, added the other 
goal with a fine dipping shot in the 84th minute.
 