
I had no intention of commenting upon a highly sensational account of a 
“Lady’s Thrill” which appeared in one of the papers, but when it was copied 
into several others I felt that it was time to protest. The account stated that 
a lady, when bathing at Bull Bay, in Anglesey, was chased by a ferocious “sea 
lion.” The sea lion, which we may see diving, swimming, and catching fish which 
are thrown to it in the fine tank at Belle Vue, is commercially the most 
important of the fur-bearing seals; it inhabits the Pacific – and the Pacific 
only. Seal hunters do not care much about bathing in icy seas, but even if they 
did I doubt if the sea lion would attack a man in the water.

What apparently did happen at Bull Bay was that a grey seal reared its head 
out of the water and looked at the lady when she was bathing. Perhaps it yawned 
and showed its teeth, for they do not, as a rule, “project over the sides.” 
Possibly, too, seeing something with which it was unfamiliar in the water, and 
not suspecting the presence of a human being so far from the shore, it swam 
nearer for closer inspection. At any rate, there is no recorded instance that I 
know of, of the timid grey seal swimming after and attacking any bather.

The grey seal, not the common seal, inhabits and breeds on the rocks of the 
Anglesey and NorthWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> coast, but it is 
not very common: it is a very large animal, as anyone will agree who visits the 
Warrington Museum and sees the huge animal which foolishly ascended the Mersey 
and was done to death in a closed canal lock in that town, but it is far more 
afraid of men than men are of it. Would-be bathers on the Anglesey coast need 
not fear that they will be attacked by seals, and certainly they will not see a 
sea lion. There is far more danger, in some years, that they will suffer front 
the stings of jellyfish, but if they get promptly to shore when stung there is 
little danger of serious consequences, though the sting is far from pleasant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fcountry-diary-swimming-with-seals-anglesey-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda9c395c258ec84f86c58b33e96ce3e1f16317b6%2F0_0_1291_1055%2F1291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swimming%20with%20seals%20in%20Anglesey%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fcountry-diary-swimming-with-seals-anglesey-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swimming%20with%20seals%20in%20Anglesey%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fcountry-diary-swimming-with-seals-anglesey-1916-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda9c395c258ec84f86c58b33e96ce3e1f16317b6%2F0_0_1291_1055%2F1291.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 21 July 1916.  