
The serpentine stones which form the shingle on the Lizard peninsula are very 
tempting to collect, and we have had the happy idea of using them in bowls this 
winter, to grow narcissi in and Roman hyacinths. A child is the pure artist in 
collection. He needs no apology. The mere contemplating of his hoards, laying 
them out in array, counting and sorting, is amply enough joy for him. But we 
grown-ups are compelled to seek a plea of use, and, having found it, we may 
indulge our childishness. It is fortunate that the use we have hit upon allows, 
since we cannot learn to polish the stones, of the next best way of bringing 
out the colours â€“ by wetting them.

They are very varied, these pebbles; veined or mottled, or netted, or broadly 
banded; colours laid one over the other or side by side. The greys sometimes 
get very near blue, mostly lilac or indigo blue. The greens are mostly 
yellowish or mossy, but there is a very handsome laurel green, not often found. 
The reds are mostly a rich and deep Indian red, but there are found occasional 
delicate pink shades. I have in my hand one pebble made up of broad bands of 
Indian red alternating with iron grey, a sombre combination; another dark one 
has a background of lavender with a fine network of the same red; more 
beautiful is the same lavender veined with purple.

There is a fine piece whose principal colour is golden bronze with sparkles of 
spar in it; through this run fine threads of indigo blue. Beside all this 
gorgeousness the cool grey, veined with white, looks like a Quaker lady. My 
favourite piece, so far, is almost jade green washed over a dark ground and 
with veins of indigo edged with straw colour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fcountry-diary-pebbles-beach-gorgeous-colours-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5063eb9ab586b147f7f53284c1abb5c0d6b67b86%2F0_0_1290_859%2F1290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20colours%20on%20the%20pebble%20beach%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fcountry-diary-pebbles-beach-gorgeous-colours-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20colours%20on%20the%20pebble%20beach%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fcountry-diary-pebbles-beach-gorgeous-colours-1916%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5063eb9ab586b147f7f53284c1abb5c0d6b67b86%2F0_0_1290_859%2F1290.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 25 September 1916.  