
A dragon-fly of our largest species visited the “Manchester Guardian” office 
about a week ago, entering through an open window. I have seen a 
Manchester-captured dragon-fly before, but the occurrence of the insect is 
worth recording; it is a powerful aeronaut and carnivorous, but why it should 
attempt to hunt flies in the city when the supply is so much greater outside is 
hard to understand.

A Wilmslow correspondent has sent me the remains of a crimson geranium, for 
from each petal a neat semicircular portion has been removed. He watched a bee 
snipping the petals and bearing them away to a hole in the mortar on his house 
wall; he asks what the bee is and why it wanted the bits of flower. It is one 
of the leaf-cutter bees, a pollen-lover like our hive bee, and the cut bits 
were to build the cells in which its young would spend their early stages, as 
egg, grub, and nymph or pupa; they take the place of the wax cells in the hive 
bee’s comb. In the selected crack or tunnel the cells are placed in a long row, 
fitting neatly into one another; each oblong cell is formed of folds of cut 
leaves or petals, the insect cutely taking advantage of the inward curl of the 
drying vegetable tissues in the construction. The base of each cell is convex; 
in it an egg is placed and a supply of food, and then a concave door, usually 
formed of several layers of leaf, wonderfully rounded and out to size, closes 
the cell until the perfect bee is ready to push its way out. The convex base of 
the next cell fits into the concave door. The grub, when it leaves the egg, 
converts its well-filled storeroom into living-room to suit its growth, eating 
room for its enlarging body. Some leaf-cutters show aesthetic taste, selecting 
red or yellow petals, but the majority cut their cell material from the leaves 
of our garden roses. If my correspondent will excavate one or two of the cells 
I am sure he will be amazed at their beauty.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcountry-diary-leafcutter-bee-archive-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5f8009a91a50bb9030593f9ce089a696f5274fd%2F0_0_1272_1036%2F1272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20leafcutter%20bee%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcountry-diary-leafcutter-bee-archive-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20leafcutter%20bee%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcountry-diary-leafcutter-bee-archive-1916%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5f8009a91a50bb9030593f9ce089a696f5274fd%2F0_0_1272_1036%2F1272.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 15 August 1916.  