
The ragwort is out on the sandhills, masses of handsome flowers above dense, 
dark green leaves, except where a colony of black and orange cinnabar 
caterpillars is defoliating the strong plants. Brighter even than the ragwort 
is the yellow-wort, each flower facing the sun above its stem-pierced leaves. 
Acres are plentifully sprinkled with yellow-worts, pink centauries, marsh 
helleborines with nodding mauve or purple white-lipped flowers, and grass of 
Parnassus with elegant white flowers delicately veined with grey. On the level 
stretches are considerable areas of solid pink, paler but more dainty than that 
of the centaury, for the small, short-stalked flowers of the bog pimpernel grow 
so close together as to hide their creeping leaves.

Over this floral wilderness a few terns still call harshly, for belated pairs, 
their earlier efforts having failed, yet hope to hatch their two or three 
mottled eggs. When, one day this week, we left the sandhills, we found scores 
of adult birds resting on the sands, and others offering small shining fish to 
the young they had tempted towards the sea; over the water beyond were many 
more beating up and down, hovering and diving. Suddenly, from the dunes behind, 
came a wild, angry clamour, and an Arctic skua, big and brown beside the dainty 
terns, came skimming towards the beach. Two or three irate terns followed it, 
and the resting birds on the shore got up in a flurried cloud. Heedless of this 
noisy multitude and their mobbing cries it singled out one with food in its 
coral bill and, twisting and dodging from side to side, chased it until the 
quarry was dropped. Had we been near enough we might have seen the skua stoop 
try catch the dropped fish before it reached the water, for that is the 
constant habit of this fierce aerial highway robber.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcountry-diary-arctic-skua-highway-robber-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c625c35303bcd8d682f27a96c90c788c3e74f5%2F0_0_1282_978%2F1282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Arctic%20skua%2C%20an%20aerial%20highway%20robber%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcountry-diary-arctic-skua-highway-robber-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Arctic%20skua%2C%20an%20aerial%20highway%20robber%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcountry-diary-arctic-skua-highway-robber-1916%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c625c35303bcd8d682f27a96c90c788c3e74f5%2F0_0_1282_978%2F1282.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 28 July 1916.  