
Surrey, January 18 
Inland some miles from the river a mere extends over several acres. When the 
north-east wind is fringing its western shore with thin flakes a few seagulls 
play high and low, coming often to the face of the water as if to search for 
something which in this out-of-the-way place they cannot find. A mallard, tired 
by his long journey from the North Sea, floats like a toy-bird, almost 
stationary, in the middle of the lake. He is quite alone, but seems content, 
and gives no heed to the moorhens who fly or dabble down from the brooks which 
feed the mere. The fish are very still. A jack lies like a piece of sunken 
material alongside the reeds and flags which bend backward and forward; stirred 
with a long hazel rod, he moves but lazily away; except for the white and grey 
gulls, whose wings are always opening and closing as they rise or dive in the 
wind, everything is numb.

Young store cattle on the other side of the hedge stand close up to where the 
thorns are thickest, their coats “staring” and their heads hanging down; the 
one ploughman on the upland stops and breathes upon his fingers, while both 
horses sheer away from the blast; rooks, and very few of them, fly first to one 
corner of the field, then with a single cry and no more make off to another; 
the bramble bushes are a shelter for the small birds. But across in the oak and 
beech plantation the tree-tops are alive with pigeons. They fly in companies, 
twenty or so to the left, twenty to the right, pale grey under an almost black 
sky. If by scheming you get under a few upon a branch and point your stick, in 
a moment they are yards away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcountry-diary-winters-day-mere-surrey-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff025426143b8cd5ec6c066446a07c6eaadd71fa4%2F0_0_1339_843%2F1339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20winter's%20day%20at%20the%20mere%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcountry-diary-winters-day-mere-surrey-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20winter%27s%20day%20at%20the%20mere%3A%20Country%20diary%20100%20years%20ago&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcountry-diary-winters-day-mere-surrey-1917%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff025426143b8cd5ec6c066446a07c6eaadd71fa4%2F0_0_1339_843%2F1339.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 20 January 1917.  