
It’s by no means unusual for words to change their meaning over time. But 
thanks to the twists and turns of language – and the convoluted history of 
English, in particular – some words end up quite a distance from where they 
began, as the following bizarre etymological stories illustrate.

1. A blockbuster was originally a bomb

In some instances, the original meaning of a word might be hiding in plain 
sight, and this is one of them: a blockbuster is literally a bomb large enough 
to destroy an entire block of buildings. In this sense, the first blockbusters 
were produced by the RAF during the second word war, the very earliest of which 
– weighing an impressive 4,000lb – was dropped on the German city of Emden 
during an air raid in March 1941. The wartime press was quick to pounce on the 
nickname “blockbuster”, and soon it was being used figuratively to describe 
anything and everything that had an impressive or devastating effect. The 
military connotations gradually disappeared after the war, leaving us with the 
word we use today.

2. Girl was originally a girl or boy

When Geoffrey Chaucer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoffreychaucer> 
wrote of the “young girls of the diocese” in the prologue to the Canterbury 
Tales in the late 1300s, he wasn’t just talking about young women. Back when 
the word “girl” first appeared in the language, in the Middle English period, 
it was used to mean “child”, regardless of the gender of the child in question. 
That didn’t begin to change until the early 15th century, when the word “boy” – 
thought to have been borrowed into English from French around a century earlier 
as another name for a slave, or a man of lowly birth – began to be used more 
generally for any young man. As boy encroached on its meaning, girl was forced 
to change or else risk disappearing from the language altogether.

The oddest classical etymologies ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2009/mar/23/classics> 
3. A bimbo was originally a man

Bizarrely, bimbo is another word to have changed its sex. Derived from an 
Italian word for a baby boy, when it first emerged in American slang around the 
turn of the 20th century, it referred to a menacing, brutish bully (perhaps a 
reference to a baby’s equally stocky, thickset physique) or a dolt. It didn’t 
take too long for things to change, however, as in 1920 a song was written for 
a Broadway revue entitled My Little Bimbo Down On The Bamboo Isle, which 
referred not to a brutish man, but to a beautiful, voluptuous woman. Precisely 
what instigated the change is unclear, although one theory suggests that both 
muscle-bound heavies and voluptuous women both risk being admired more for 
their appearance than anything else. No matter what inspired it, the term bimbo 
came to be all but exclusively attached to women, to the extent that an 
exclusively male equivalent, himbo, had to be invented in the late 80s to 
redress the balance.

4. Alcohol was originally eyeshadow

The ancient Egyptians made their distinctive jet-black eyeshadow out of the 
mineral stibnite, which was crushed and heated to produce a fine dust that 
could then be mixed with animal grease to make a cosmetic paste. The name of 
this paste wasal-kohl, a term derived from an ancient Arabic name meaning “the 
stain” or “the paint”. Alchemists and scientists of the European middle ages 
then picked up this term from their Arabic-origin textbooks, and began applying 
it to all kinds of other substances that could be produced through similar 
means – which included the distillation of wine to form its purest essence, 
ultimately given the name “alcohol”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fblockbuster-meerkat-10-words-bizarre-change-meaning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3401d0a486e80cc0e5a73673cc1f3dab8e0aa531%2F0_0_4800_5661%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20words%20that%20don't%20mean%20what%20they%20used%20to%3A%20when%20meerkats%20were%20monkeys%20and%20bimbos%20were%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fblockbuster-meerkat-10-words-bizarre-change-meaning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20words%20that%20don%27t%20mean%20what%20they%20used%20to%3A%20when%20meerkats%20were%20monkeys%20and%20bimbos%20were%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fblockbuster-meerkat-10-words-bizarre-change-meaning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3401d0a486e80cc0e5a73673cc1f3dab8e0aa531%2F0_0_4800_5661%2F4800.jpg>
 Kohl-eyed: Elizabeth Taylor as Cleopatra in the 1963 film. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
5. A cloud was originally a rock

The Old English word from which our modern word “cloud” derives, clud, didn’t 
mean “cloud” at all but rather “rock” or “mountain”; through it, cloud is 
actually a distant relative of words like clot and clod. But because enormous 
grey rainclouds can appear (albeit with a little imagination) like enormous 
grey masses of stone, it’s thought that these two meanings became confused, and 
eventually the meteorological sense of the word won out to give us the word we 
use today.

6. A cupboard was originally a table

A cupboard, quite literally, was originally just a board on which to place 
your cups. Or put another way, a cupboard was originally a table – as was a 
sideboard, incidentally (albeit one placed specifically at the side of a room). 
No one is entirely sure why, but by the early 16th century that meaning had 
begun to disappear from the language, and a cupboard was no longer a tabletop 
on which to use or display one’s crockery, but a covered recess in which to 
store it. By the 17th century, people were beginning to store food in cupboards 
(to cry “cupboard” meant “to crave food” in the late 1600s), while the author 
Wilkie Collins was the first to find a “skeleton in his cupboard” (an 
expression later changed to closet) in 1859.

7. A handicap was originally a fair exchange

There’s a pernicious old myth that claims the word handicap refers to beggars, 
wounded by war and so unable to work, relying on begging with their upturned 
caps in their hands just to make ends meet. The true origin of the word 
handicap is much more bizarre: originally, it referred to a means of securing a 
fair deal once popular among medieval traders, in which two parties offering 
goods for exchange would call upon a neutral third party, or umpire, to oversee 
the deal. The umpire would assess the value of the goods involved, and give the 
owner of the less valuable goods a cash figure that they would have to add to 
the deal to make it fair.

Both traders would then take a small gratuity or a token amount of cash in 
their hands, and go to place their hand inside the umpire’s cap. If both agreed 
to the deal, they would drop the cash into the cap (which the umpire would get 
to keep, as his fee for securing a fair deal) and the deal would be done; if 
neither (or just one) trader agreed, the umpire would get nothing and no deal 
would go ahead. It was from this image of the value of individual items being 
assessed and compared that the first handicap horse races were introduced. The 
notion of the better horses in a handicap race being intentionally weighted 
down meant the word handicap eventually came to mean a hindrance or disability.

8. A meerkat was originally a monkey

The name “meerkat” probably has its origins in markata, a Sanskrit word 
meaning “ape”. This word was then picked up from central Asia by European 
explorers and traders in the early middle ages who altered it to meerkat, a 
Dutch-inspired word essentially meaning “sea-cat”. In this sense, the word 
probably became little more than a placeholder for any four-legged animal that 
originated overseas, and was ultimately first used in print in 1598 by a Dutch 
merchant sailor to refer to a South American monkey, rather than an endearing 
African mongoose.

9. A moment was once precisely 90 seconds

“Moment” has its origins in the Latin word for movement, momentum, and as a 
general word for a short period of time probably refers to the slightest 
movement of the hands of a clock. But, oddly, the word “moment” wasn’t always 
so general: in the medieval period, the 24 hours of the day were each divided 
into four 15-minute segments known as points, each of which in turn was divided 
into 10 shorter segments known as moments. So next time someone says they’re 
going to be a moment, remind them that by definition they’re going to be 
precisely one fortieth of an hour – or exactly 90 seconds.

Waiting with bated breath to learn how idioms took flight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2015/sep/18/waiting-with-bated-breath-to-learn-how-idioms-took-flight>
10. A treadmill was originally a prison punishment

It might come as little surprise to learn there’s a connection between gym 
equipment and hard labour punishments doled out in Victorian prisons, but the 
fact is that the original treadmill was an enormous man-powered mill used for 
tasks such as crushing rocks and grinding grain.

Invented by a 19th-century engineer named Sir William Cubitt, the original 
treadmill was essentially a never-ending staircase – a wheel of steps 
encircling a vast cylinder attached to a millstone, on which convicts could be 
gainfully employed for many hours a day; famously, Oscar Wilde was made to toil 
away on the treadmill during his imprisonment in Reading jail in 1895. Prison 
reform after the turn of last century made Cubitt’s treadmill a thing of the 
past, but the term was resurrected in the 50s during the post-war vogue for 
health and fitness, and was applied to an item of gym equipment likewise 
comprised of a (seemingly endless) foot-powered belt.

Paul Anthony Jones’s The Accidental Dictionary 
<http://www.paulanthonyjones.com/books> is published by Elliott & Thompson, 
£12.99
 