
I asked my Mum recently what she hopes old age will be like. She described 
someone who has memories to look back on, grandchildren to treasure and who is 
content with their life. I asked: “So, will you just be waiting to die?”

Working in the care sector for the past year, I’ve spent my time with a 
variety of older people, in terms of ability, mental capacity, optimism, 
conventionalism, stubbornness and sociability. My narrow perspective has 
widened. I can walk into a new client’s home with a completely open mind, 
revelling in the unexpected.

There is a stigma associated with old age. We may think of senior citizens as 
people who have had their time and now just cause us inconvenience. But older 
people are the fastest growing demographic. The age we now consider as old has 
increased with time, but perceptions of what old people are capable of and 
their value to society have not changed.

We associate senior citizens with illness and disease: dementia, strokes, 
heart problems, memory deficiencies, arthritis and incontinence. Some of these 
are a natural part of ageing but most are not. We have a tendency to patronise 
older people. Their interests are generalised: TV, knitting, crosswords, 
Scrabble and gardening. Their routines are generalised: awake at sunrise, brown 
cereal for breakfast, dinner of meat and two veg at 5pm. Such presumptions rob 
older people of the unique identities they spend decades forming. They should 
be acknowledged, not disregarded.

Related: Why are there no care workers in Coronation Street? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2017/jan/11/why-are-there-no-care-workers-in-coronation-street>

Now, I feel more at home with older people than with people my own age. I feel 
more comfortable around a grandfather living with Alzheimer’s who talks about 
the ways things were in his youth, than I do around fellow teenagers recalling 
tales of wild nights out. Is it because my job has meant that I’ve missed out 
on some of that this past year? Possibly. Is it because of the genuine and 
honest character of the older generation that isn’t clouded by influences from 
social media and celebrity trends? More likely.

I like how unaffected they are by things many young people consider as 
paramount: gadgets, fashion, hashtags and the number of “likes” on their 
Instagram posts. It’s a refreshing relief to see that these new social norms 
have no natural place in this older generation. It does provoke one disturbing 
question, though: how will society evolve due to these pressures?

When I visit clients, I prefer to listen rather than do the talking. This is 
partly because I’m ashamed to bring up trivial events that have happened in my 
short life. The people I talk to every day offer stories from a different era. 
I listen intently out of intrigue, like a child sat cross-legged at story time.

I’ve heard a nurse’s account of caring for tuberculosis patients, about a 
boy’s endurance of polio, the recent wedding of a grandson, a man’s orthodontic 
career, a soldier’s memories of flight lessons.

What has become glaringly obvious is that the hardest part of ageing is losing 
independence. My grandma said: “It’s hard watching my children do things for me 
that I could once do.” I could completely understand. My grandma has taught 
four children how to live and fend for themselves and now that process is being 
reversed. I wish the compassion needed for these changes could be better 
understood by everyone.

Related: Aged 73 and a care worker: 'My family think I'm mad' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/apr/13/aged-73-care-worker-family-think-im-mad>

I’d like to work in geriatric psychiatry when I’m older. My enthusiasm to 
pursue this career has blossomed in part from a prolonged passion for medicine 
and meetings with healthcare professionals, but predominantly from my time 
spent as a care worker; spending time with people four times my age to carry 
out intimate personal care and have a personal involvement in their lives.

I have become much more aware of what is available in my community to engage 
older people: coffee mornings, choir, church groups and book clubs. Such small 
activities can transform someone’s mood, self-esteem and health. I am more 
sympathetic towards my grandparents and make more time and effort to see or 
talk to them. I believe that I understand now what it’s like to be old – a 
direct consequence of what I see every day in my job.

I hope that perceptions of older people, and of growing old, will change. 
Turning 80 should be embraced as much as turning 18. That first grey hair 
should be a strand of joy – not a warning, but an opportunity. The older person 
we will inevitably become doesn’t have to be an embodiment of stereotypes. We 
should make the future versions of ourselves someone we’ll be proud and happy 
to be. Think of old people not as a thing of the past, but of your future.

Would you like write for the Social Life Blog? Email socialcare@theguardian.com
 <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 