
Imagine a world where pandas are no longer endangered and an area of the 
Pacific twice the size of Texas has been turned into a marine protected area. 
Picture a Scotland where protected beavers roam, and an England where more 
large blue butterflies dance than at any time since the 1930s. Or dream of a 
Wales where the majestic crane breeds for the first time in 400 years.

This isn’t a fantasy. This is the planet in 2016. Stuck inside, plugged into 
the miserable echo chamber of social media, we can miss the rays of sunshine. 
The air is still free. Sunsets remain beautiful. Trees continue to soothe our 
restless lives.

We have to be careful not to be Panglossian. We know that, as a species, our 
relationship with the world isn’t so wonderful. This was also the year in which 
it was revealed that the number of wild animals on Earthhas halved in the past 
40 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/29/earth-lost-50-wildlife-in-40-years-wwf>
. Following almost every piece of happy environmental news is a “but”. For 
instance, the giant panda wastaken off the most-endangered list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2016/sep/05/giant-panda-animals-removal-endangered-list>
 after a 17% rise in its wild population to 1,864 over a decade. But the
International Union for Conservation of Nature <https://www.iucn.org> also 
announced that poaching is driving the eastern gorilla – nowlisted as 
critically endangered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/04/eastern-gorilla-critically-endangered-illegal-hunting-iucn-red-list>
 – towards extinction.

One of the most endangered things in our dysfunctional relationship with the 
Earth is hope. We may be wreaking more destruction on our planet than ever 
before, but we are also proving more proactive, scientific and enlightened in 
the ways we live alongside other forms of life. So there is hope.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0192384d5d3fc7082d9ccfd15df51cf9ba78b566%2F0_236_3138_1882%2F3138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20wonderful%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20wonderful%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0192384d5d3fc7082d9ccfd15df51cf9ba78b566%2F0_236_3138_1882%2F3138.jpg>
 Giant panda cubs in Chengdu, China. Photograph: Imaginechina/Rex/Shutterstock 
Collectively, 182 nations in the Convention on the International Trade in 
Endangered Species (Cites) this year agreed atotal ban on trading pangolins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/pangolins-thrown-a-lifeline-at-global-wildlife-summit-with-total-trade-ban>
, gave the African grey parrot thehighest level of protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/02/african-grey-parrot-has-cites-global-summit-thank-protected-status>
 and ordered theclosure of domestic ivory markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/02/worlds-nations-agree-elephant-ivory-markets-must-close>
.

Enjoying the sunshine in Britain were record numbers of the large blue 
butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/27/large-blue-butterfly-thriving-in-uk-since-reintroduction>
, an insect that became extinct in 1979 but was revived via caterpillars 
brought from Sweden in a camper van. It was also a record summer for the rare 
shrill carder bee, found in two new locations in south Wales, and numerous 
birds. There were just 11 male bitterns in Britain in 1997, but this summer 47 
males made their booming callin Somerset alone 
<http://www.somersetlive.co.uk/rare-bird-booming-in-somerset-say-rspb/story-29521551-detail/story.html>
. Common cranes were also extinct in Britain for four centuries, but a
record-breaking 48 pairs 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/our-work/rspb-news/news/432824-record-number-of-common-cranes-in-uk>
 bred this year. In Scotland, beavers have become the first mammal to be 
officially reintroducedand protected as a native animal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/beavers-native-protected-species-status-reintroduction-scotland>
 after 400 years of extinction. In England,beavers are back on the river Otter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/14/beavers-new-weapon-britains-fight-against-flooding>
, and otters on the river Trent.
Goodnews list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
Left alone, nature has spectacular powers of recovery, but none of these 
revivals has happened by chance. Other rare birds, fromchough 
<http://www.cornishchoughs.org/> to stone curlew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/how-much-britain-pay-protect-wildlife-stone-curlew-farmers-eu-funding-threat>
 tocirl bunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/17/british-farmland-bird-bounces-back-from-brink-of-extinction>
, have done better than ever this year, because farmers collaborated with 
wildlife charities from the RSPB to the National Trust. This isn’t staid old 
“conservation”: it is restoration, and it has made 2016 a thrilling year. 
Dozens of exciting new spaces for nature have been created:wetlands at 
Fingringhoe Wick, Essex <http://www.essexwt.org.uk/reserves/fingringhoe-wick>; 
the conversion of a fish farm near Driffield, Yorkshire, intoSkerne Wetlands 
nature reserve <http://www.ywt.org.uk/news/2016/04/22/skerne-wetlands>; RAF 
Woodhall Spa Airfield (former home of the Dambusters squadron) has becomea new 
nature reserve <http://www.lincstrust.org.uk/woodhall-airfield>. In October, a 
scrapyard was saved for the nation:Shropshire Wildlife Trust 
<https://www.shropshirewildlifetrust.org.uk/> is removing 100,000 used tyres 
from the site, which will be restored (thanks to the last of our EU wildlife 
funds) to createone of the country’s largest lowland peat bogs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-shropshire-37076994>.

Most unexpectedly, perhaps, we are learning to live with urban wildlife. More 
than 13,000 sq m of reedbed have been created atWoodberry Wetlands reserve 
<http://www.woodberrywetlands.org.uk/>, London, where more than 100 moth and 
101 bird species have been counted in its first year. Milton Keynes this year 
opened itsFloodplain Forest reserve 
<http://www.theparkstrust.com/parks/floodplain-forest>: as the name suggests, 
such rewilded spaces also provide practical flood defence for urban areas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a975745daeaf42647558715b3c41f3b9435054%2F1644_849_3281_1968%2F3281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20wonderful%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20wonderful%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-made-2016-thrilling-year-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a975745daeaf42647558715b3c41f3b9435054%2F1644_849_3281_1968%2F3281.jpg>
 Record numbers of the large blue butterfly enjoyed the sunshine in Britain 
this summer. Photograph: Alamy 
On British beaches, the number of plastic bags found this year has almost 
halved, thanks to England’s new 5p levy,which cut the number taken from big 
retailers by 85% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/30/england-plastic-bag-usage-drops-85-per-cent-since-5p-charged-introduced>
. Plastic microbeads, so harmful to sea creatures,will be banned from next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/02/uk-government-to-ban-microbeads-from-cosmetics-by-end-of-2017>
. Below the waves, the governmentcreated 23 new marine conservation zones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/17/englands-23-new-marine-conservation-zones-branded-useless-by-expert>
 around England, whilethe State of Nature report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/one-in-10-uk-wildlife-species-faces-extinction-major-report-shows>
 revealed that better fishing practices have helped 62% of marine species 
increase since 1970. Most of these were fish, and some from a perilously low 
number: it helps grey seals thrive, too.

We are realising that the best cure for doom and gloom is to do something: 
people have dedicated1.5 million voluntary hours 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/stateofnature16> over the past year to helping 
British wildlife, from counting bats to joiningRed Squirrels United 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/redsquirrelsunited>, a new mission to save red 
squirrels. We can even do it ourselves, much like Adrian Cooper, whoused 
Facebook to establish a community nature reserve in Felixstowe 
<https://www.facebook.com/FelixstoweNews/posts/10207431339634965>.

So raise a glass of Somerset cider – sweeter after the golden harvest of 2016 
than it has been for a decade – to toast hope, and action. Next year can be 
better.

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 