
The last 12 months have been the worst in the history of the NHS. Our health 
system is under pressure like never before. The moment of crisis many warned of 
has arrived, and it is not clear that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> can be retrieved from this state of 
affairs.

We used to say that flailing A&Es represented an early warning sign that the 
health service was under pressure. And so that has proven to be. England’s 
major A&Es areunder record strain 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/06/Monthly-AE-Timeseries-October-16-glfrm.xlsx>
 with black alerts being regularly sounded, and in some instances wardsturning 
patients away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/sharp-rise-in-number-of-patients-turned-away-from-ae>
. Last year the A&E crisis spread to other sectors.

What does 2017 hold for public services?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/society-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care>
Ambulance response times have reached critically low levels 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-38130054>, with one third of ambulances 
failing to meet their targets for life threatening callouts. The acute care 
sector is bulging withunnecessary admissions 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-news/hospital-beds-crisis-patients-left-12054835>
 particularly from over-75s who are presenting themselves at A&Es when they 
should be cared for by the social care sector that has suffered £5bn of cuts.

In the community, general practice is on life support; as more is demanded of 
it,the proportion of the NHS budget that goes to primary care has effectively 
shrunk 
<http://www.rcgp.org.uk/news/2014/april/funding-for-general-practice-set-to-plummet-by-fifth-by-2017.aspx>
. Primary care provides 90% of the consultations in the NHS yet only gets 8% of 
the budget.GPs are leaving 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/doctors-leave-country-work-abroad-leaving-nhs-jeremy-hunt-contract-1000-per-cent-a6878776.html>
, and new entrants aredeclining to enter general practice 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/your-practice/practice-topics/employment/gp-vacancy-rates-at-highest-recorded-with-one-in-eight-positions-unfilled/20031836.article>
.

We once bickered with the Treasury for clawing back millions in Department of 
Health underspend under Labour. Under the Tories, that is a distant memory as 
NHS trustsrecorded a deficit in excess of £2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 last year.

A government elected to fix near-bankrupted banks has replaced that by 
bankrupting our hospitals. Idiotic spending decisions in the NHS have been rife.

The most worrying aspect of the government delivering the lowest additional 
funding increase to the NHS in its history has been the knock-on effect on 
patients, in terms of treatment and facilities available.More than 13,000 beds 
have been closed 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2013/04/Beds-Timeseries-2010-11-onwards-Q2-2016-17-63516.xls>
, cutting the capacity of the NHS by 5 million a year.

So bad was 2016, that nine former health secretaries condemned the government 
for failing to live up to its promises on mental health 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38025401>. 

Commissioners and providers alike have had to resort to rationing care to try 
to balance their books 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/news/commissioning-news/royal-college-criticises-ccgs-for-rationing-services/20031557.article>
. Unfortunately, this is not always to the benefit of customers or patients.

As the health service’s budget faces greater pressure than before, it is 
difficult to ignore the toll the intrusion of the free market has taken. Last 
year,£13bn of healthcare was purchased from non NHS providers 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/539602/DH_Annual_Report_Web.pdf>
 (pdf), a 76% increase since 2010. Given that the private sector has a stated 
goal to make 8%-14% profits from the NHS, can taxpayers really afford this 
choice?

While the NHS has increased the cash it takes from the private sector by 30% 
to £558m last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/539602/DH_Annual_Report_Web.pdf>
 (pdf),waiting lists have soared to an eight-year high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/one-in-14-people-waiting-operations-demand-nhs-soars>
. Now, 4 million patients are on waiting lists. This in effect means NHS 
patients are being delayed in their treatment to make way for wealthy private 
patients who can afford to skip the queue.

The pressure on our staff has also reached unprecedented levels. Nurses have 
seen real-term pay cuts since 2010 of over £2,000. Moreover, aspiring nurses 
will also bedenied a bursary to train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/21/nhs-bursaries-for-student-nurses-will-end-in-2017-government-confirms>
 and this at a time when unfilled nursing vacancieshave climbed 600% since 2010 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35667939>. It will not surprise you to learn 
that applicants for trainee nursing courseshave fallen 20% this year 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/nursing-degree-applications-fall-by-a-fifth-mbn6cpc5q>
.

Likewise, the pressure on junior doctors remains intense. They too have seen 
real-term pay cuts, as well as an enforced contract.

The social care crisis is pulling NHS trusts further underwater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/16/social-care-crisis-nhs-trusts>
It remains impossible to meet the demands of the ill-described seven-day NHS 
until serious funding issues have been resolved, otherwise we are asking our 
doctors to shoulder the blame for unsafe care.

The continuing media war Jeremy Hunt has waged against doctors has so depleted 
workforce morale that there are more doctors wanting to leave the NHS than are 
in training.

It will take a political will only witnessed twice in the last 70 years, 1948 
and 1997, to alter the current trajectory on which the NHS is set. The £22bn of 
efficiencies (a euphemism for cuts), dressed up as sustainability and 
transformation plans smacks of what was tried with theNicholson challenge 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicholson_challenge>. The National Audit Office 
has warned thatthese efficiencies are not possible without causing lasting 
damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/nhs-financial-problems-endemic-and-no-longer-sustainable-national-audit-office-deficit>
 to the NHS’s ability to provide safe care.

We are at a cliff edge. Do we carry on into the unknown with broken funding 
promises and more cuts or do we cry foul now, and demand a rethink before it is 
too late?

Let’s pledge in 2017 to fight for its survival. The NHS belongs to us, not the 
politicians and not the privateers. We cannot trust the government to be its 
safe custodian. It’s up to each and every one of us to fight for the NHS, 
otherwise it won’t be there to look after us, never mind the next generation.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 