
Finding the good news stories in a year in which the grim reaper more than 
overstayed his welcome in arts circles might seem like an unenviable task: 2016 
did, after all, rob us ofVictoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>, 
Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary>, Alan 
Rickman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary>, 
Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne>, Ronnie 
Corbett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/31/ronnie-corbett-obituary>, 
Harper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/harper-lee>, Gene 
Wilder <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/29/gene-wilder-obituary>, 
Terry Wogan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan>, Zaha 
Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/01/zaha-hadid-obituary>
,George Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/09/george-martin-obituary>, and 
many more. There were also various puzzling new cultural dilemmas: how, for 
instance, could we appreciate a Solange Knowles album (A Seat At The Table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/30/solange-a-seat-at-the-table-a-stately-sprawling-celebration-of-black-identity>
) interspersed with her father’s recollections of the Ku Klux Klan, when a
KKK-backed candidate 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/11/01/the-kkks-official-newspaper-has-endorsed-donald-trump-for-president/?utm_term=.4d03a2e8ba1e>
was soon to be installed in the White House? Was it possible to enjoya baby 
ibex prancing up and down a mountain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vTSVzeOdj8A>, as we witnessed in Planet Earth 
II <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td>, without fretting over the 
forecasts of impending ecological doom?

But culture is never more vital than during times of turbulence, whether 
acting as a shoulder to cry on, a rallying voice of dissent, or simply a form 
of blissful escapism.

So while the Tories heaped misery on society’s poorest, artists spoke up: Ken 
Loach’s I, Daniel Blake becamethe surprise winner of the Palme d’Or at Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/ken-loach-cannes-2016-palme-dor-win-i-daniel-blake>
, thanks to its revealing portrait of a man trapped in Britain’s Kafka-esque 
benefits system. Likewise the Brexit vote and its terrifying fallout informed
Ali Smith’s swiftly written novel Autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/12/autumn-ali-smith-review>, which 
portrayed a country divided and opened with the cheery line: “It was the worst 
of times, it was the worst of times.” Tunbridge Wells punk duo Slaves surely 
cast a knowing glance at the Leave mantra with theirTake Control album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/29/slaves-take-control-review-tunbridge-wells-ironic-punks-lose-their-appeal>
, and the short, snotty blasts of noise calledLies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NaMEqcVEcU8>, or Rich Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2gOUmdsWkQ>, contained within. Brexit trod 
the boards, too:James Graham’s play A Strong Exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/18/a-strong-exit-a-new-play-by-james-graham-brexit>
 was written exclusively for the Guardian, while performance artist Scottee’s
Putting Words In Your Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/27/putting-words-in-your-mouth-review>
 involved actors lip-synching to real interviews with LGBT people: just how 
tolerant would Brexit Britain be, it asked.

Fears over climate change produced thoughtful and moving responses: Nottingham 
artistWolfgang Buttress <http://www.wolfgangbuttress.com/> created a meditative 
drone symphony using the collective buzz from 40,000 bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/bee-band-the-hive-kev-bales-martin-bencsik-wolfgang-buttress-nottingham-arts-theatre-be-one>
; he would later perform it live from within a giant metal beehive he erected 
in Kew Gardens. Elsewhere, statements in the art world were notable beyond the 
art itself: Helen Martenwon the Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/05/helen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month>
 andthe Hepworth prize for sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/17/helen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture>
 this year, and announced she would be sharing the prize money for both with 
her fellow nominees. Human rights lawyer Philippe Sands and author ofEast West 
Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/06/east-west-street-philippe-sands-a-passing-fury-at-williams-review>
 also displayed generosity of spirit,giving his £30,000 Baillie Gifford prize 
money to charity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/08/philippe-sands-uses-book-prize-to-raise-60000-for-charity>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c673bfa65a824f583cd76582f250ba75a19399%2F23_222_5559_3335%2F5559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20why%20culture%20was%20crucial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20why%20culture%20was%20crucial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c673bfa65a824f583cd76582f250ba75a19399%2F23_222_5559_3335%2F5559.jpg>
 Beyoncé’s chart-topping Lemonade 
As identity politics became the new battleground for culture wars across the 
Atlantic, that, too, spawned bold artistic statements: Paul Beatty became the 
first US winner of the Man Booker prize withThe Sellout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/the-sellout-by-paul-beatty-review>
, which managed to somehow find humour in the notion of reinstating slavery, 
and got the acclaim it deserved after battling multiple rejection letters.Barry 
Jenkins’ Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
, released in the US last year and out in the UK in February, shone a moving 
light on the joy and sadness within gay black lives. AndTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/11/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-9-transparent>
, the hit HBO comedy, continued to clean up at the Emmys: its creator Jill 
Soloway usedher winner’s speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_lPFUUtBv4> 
to thank the trans community who inspired the show, before declaring: “Topple 
the patriarchy!”

In pop, movements such as Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> were swept up 
into the US mainstream:Beyoncé’s chart-topping Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
 was unafraid to sample Malcolm X, or feature the mothers of Trayvon Martin and 
Michael Brown in her visual album concept. She was just one of several major 
black pop artists in the midst of a creative renaissance, each one pushing the 
boundaries of genre and ripping up expectations:Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>, Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna>, Blood Orange 
<http://bloodorange.nyc/> and Frank Ocean  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean>all made dazzling musical 
statements,the latter’s stunning Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/25/frank-ocean-blonde-review-a-baffling-and-brilliant-five-star-triumph>
 a fuzzy meditation on youth, drugs and relationships that eschewed explicit 
slogans yet seemed political just in its existence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fae1f78c721c38b7f3098784317f875f9608f00%2F0_192_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20why%20culture%20was%20crucial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20why%20culture%20was%20crucial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fadele-beyonce-culture-vital-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fae1f78c721c38b7f3098784317f875f9608f00%2F0_192_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Planet Earth II: flamingos perform a courtship dance in a salt lake in the 
High Andes. Photograph: Justin Anderson/BBC NHU 
Elsewhere, British TV thrived thanks to serious drama such as War And Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/13/clive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up>
,The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
,The Night Manager <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager> 
andNational Treasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/national-treasure-review-robbie-coltrane>
, which dared to examine the sexual abuse scandals that rocked the nation in 
the wake of Savile. Even if 2016 didn’t feel like a year in which there was 
much to joke about, there was plenty to make you laugh: UK comedy found humour 
in the bleakness of the everyday, with sadcoms such as Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s
Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
, or stresscoms such asMotherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/motherland-review-a-terrifying-no-holds-barred-glimpse-into-parenthood>
, which starred Anna Maxwell Martin as a not-quite-coping mum drinking Jacob’s 
Creek for breakfast.

So there was plenty of good news, even if much of it was good news arising 
from bad news. You only needed to look atthis year’s Glastonbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury-2016> to see how the two could 
interact: on paper, a bill featuring headline slots for Coldplay and Adele was 
not one to get the pulse racing. Yet staged in the immediate aftermath of the 
Brexit vote, both sets felt oddly fitting: Adele’s nervous, chatterbox routine 
mirrored many people’s own anxieties, and was as reassuring as a daft pub chat 
with your best mate. Nor was 2016 the year cynically to bemoan Chris Martin et 
al’s comfort-blanket tendencies: how could you, when a comfort blanket was what 
people were crying out for?

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html> 