
With $12.50 – half a month’s salary – in his pocket, Harold Mainer 
<http://www.pulaskinews.net/news/20161206/pearl-harbor-survivor-recounts-attack-navy-experience>
 was about to go ashore to celebrate his friend’s birthday. Then, just before 
8am, came the angry buzz of hundreds of Japanese warplanes, swarming the sky 
and raining destruction. The surprise attack on the US naval base at Pearl 
Harbor had begun.

“I couldn’t believe it was happening but it did happen,” recalls Mainer, 95, 
who had been standing on the deck of theUSS Helena <http://www.usshelena.org/>, 
a light cruiser, when the serenity was shattered. “The first three bombs I saw. 
One hit the waterway, the other one hit the runway, the other one hit the 
hangar deck. You didn’t have time to think. You just did what you were trying 
to do.”


President Franklin Roosevelt declared it “a date which will live in infamy” 
<https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/day-of-infamy>, and soon the US 
would be embroiled in the second world war. But Mainer, who survived the Helena 
being torpedoed and used a water hose to wash away the remains of a fallen 
comrade, reflects: “We knew war had started before he declared war. We knew 
they weren’t going to get away with it.”

Seventy-five years after the raid that left 2,403 Americans dead and 19 
vessels sunk or crippled, American and Japanese heads of state are to stand 
together at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii for the first time. Barack Obama andShinzo 
Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, the Japanese prime minister,
will visit the USS Arizona memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-to-visit-pearl-harbor-with-barack-obama>
 on 27 December to honour those killed and, says the White House, “showcase the 
power of reconciliation”, though Abe is not likely to offer an apology.

The event comes seven months after Obama became the first American president 
to travel to Hiroshima, where the USdropped an atomic bomb in 1945 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jul/24/secondworldwar.japan> – the 
other bookend of the war in the Pacific. Among the dwindling band of veterans, 
not all have been disposed to endorse such gestures but Mainer, for one, is 
content for Abe to set foot in Pearl Harbor.

“If that’s what he wants to do, that’s all right with me,” he said, attending 
a commemoration in Washington on the recent 75th anniversary of the attack. “I 
don’t know what to say. I have no anger.

“I was talking to a school one time and there was a little eight-year-old boy. 
He says, ‘Can I ask you something?’ I said, ‘Yeah, sure.’ He asked me my 
feelings about the Japanese people. It threw me. I thought to myself and said: 
‘I tell you what, them Japanese sailors felt they were right, the same as I 
felt I was right, but I said in the end it proved that I was right. He was 
satisfied with it and everybody else was satisfied with it, and I thought that 
was about as a good an answer as I could give.”

Symbolism has been a key part of the Obama presidency – for example, his visit 
to Cuba earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/obamas-touch-down-in-havana-but-cuban-concern-is-whether-business-takes-off>
. He promised a “pivot to Asia” during his eights years in office with mixed 
results. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, once declared by Abe a crucial “pillar” 
of future US influence,has been doomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
 by the election of Donald Trump as his successor.

But the US-Japan relationship could be more important than ever as Trump spars 
with the region’s biggest power, China.His phone conversation with the leader 
of Taiwan threatened to upend relations with Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
, whereashis first face-to-face meeting with a foreign leader following his 
election was with Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
.

Abe will not, as had been initially reported, be the first Japanese leader to 
go to Pearl Harbor. In 1951 the then prime minister, Shigeru Yoshida, visited 
the US national cemetery in Honolulu and the US military command centre facing 
Pearl Harbor. Abe, though, will be the first Japanese leader to pay tribute at 
the memorial to the sunken USS Arizona and to be accompanied by the American 
president.

There is overwhelming support among the Japanese public for Abe’s visit: 
according to a Kyodo News poll at the weekend, 85.3% agreed that he should go 
to the site, while 10.9% disagreed.

Koichi Nakano, professor of Japanese politics at Sophia University in Tokyo, 
believes the visit is an attempt by Abe to underscore the strength of the 
US-Japan alliance “before Trump, who is a potentially destabilising factor, 
assumes office”.

Nakano added: “The fact that he is visiting Pearl Harbor without offering an 
apology makes it look like he is merely using the historic site for political 
purposes.”

Abe’s critics say he appears willing to make conciliatory gestures to US 
audiences, while resisting demands to do the same from Japan’s former enemies 
in Asia. South Korea and China have long insisted thatJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has yet to properly apologise for its 
wartime conduct, and have accused Abe of attempting to rewrite the darker 
episodes of his country’s wartime history.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fpearl-harbor-anniversary-obama-japan-shinzo-abe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ddee073fe92ce0a905dc30f2c457f442f2e635%2F0_212_2884_1730%2F2884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Alliance%20of%20hope'%3A%20US%20and%20Japan%20leaders%20meet%20for%20historic%20Pearl%20Harbor%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fpearl-harbor-anniversary-obama-japan-shinzo-abe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Alliance%20of%20hope%27%3A%20US%20and%20Japan%20leaders%20meet%20for%20historic%20Pearl%20Harbor%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fpearl-harbor-anniversary-obama-japan-shinzo-abe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ddee073fe92ce0a905dc30f2c457f442f2e635%2F0_212_2884_1730%2F2884.jpg>
 Barack Obama and Shinzo Abe walk after laying wreaths in front of a cenotaph 
to offer prayers for victims of the atomic bombing in 1945 at Hiroshima Peace 
Memorial park. Photograph: Kimimasa Mayama/EPA 
Anger of wartime sex slaves haunts Japan and South Korea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/18/forced-prostitution-wartime-japan-korea>
He has, for example, denied that tens of thousands of “comfort women”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/18/forced-prostitution-wartime-japan-korea>
 mainly from the Korean peninsula, were coerced by the Japanese imperial army 
into working as sex slaves in frontline military brothels. At a joint session 
of the US Congress in April last year,he offered “eternal condolences” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/japans-pm-shinzo-abe-apologises-us-war-dead-congress-comfort-women>
 for the loss of American lives during the war and acknowledged that Japan had 
caused “suffering to the peoples of Asian countries”, but did not mention 
specific wartime atrocities.

In August that year, he marked the 70th anniversary of the end of the Pacific 
war withan expression of “deep remorse” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/shinzo-abe-japan-no-new-apology-second-world-war-anniversary-speech>
, but stopped short of issuing a fresh apology, adding that future generations 
of Japanese should not be “predestined” to apologise for the actions of 
militarist governments during the first half of the 20th century.

“The Japanese people have long since accepted the notion that Japan was 
defeated by the US – but not by China,” Nakano said.

“Even the conservatives have largely come to accommodate the fact that they 
were given a second chance in the postwar period by the US victors. So, for the 
prime minister to visit Pearl Harbor is a non-issue in Japan. On the other 
hand, apologising to China and Korea, visiting Nanjing or meeting former 
‘comfort women’ would be infinitely harder for him to do.”

Jeff Kingston, director of Asian Studies at Temple University, agreed that Abe 
hoped to put the past behind both countries and “create positive momentum as he 
enters an unpredictable relationship with Trump”.

“It is mostly about the photo op, but given Abe’s revisionist views on history 
that glorify imperial Japan and exonerate it from wartime misdeed, he is not 
the most credible messenger on reconciliation.”

Obama’s visit to Hiroshima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/barack-obama-first-us-president-to-visit-hiroshima-japan>
 in May “conveyed remorse because of his public stance against nuclear weapons, 
while Abe’s record of rehabilitating the wartime past means that his presence 
does not convey a similar sincerity and contrition,” he added.


At the time, Trump, then a presidential candidate, tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/736672123012427776> “Does President 
Obama ever discuss the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor while he’s in Japan? 
Thousands of American lives lost.”

A Japanese government official, who did not wish to be named, said Abe’s visit 
reflected his desire for reconciliation and to reiterate his belief that the US 
and Japan must continue to build an “alliance of hope” in the face of new 
regional threats from China and North Korea.

At a recent briefing in Washington, the White House press secretary, Josh 
Earnest struck a similar note. Asked if some veterans might be angered if Abe 
did not apologise, he replied: “Yes, there may be some who feel personally 
embittered. But I’m confident that many will set aside their own personal 
bitterness, not because they’re personally satisfied by the words of the prime 
minister, but because they recognise how important this moment is for the 
United States. And that’s certainly why they qualify to be described as the 
greatest generation.”


The man who survived Hiroshima: 'I had entered a living hell on earth'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/31/japan-atomic-bomb-survivors-nuclear-weapons-hiroshima-70th-anniversary>
It was a comment that could comfortably be applied to Mainer, the 95-year-old 
veteran from Charleston, Arkansas. He said of Abe: “I don’t criticise him. I 
don’t think he needs to apologise. I wouldn’t want Harry Truman to apologise 
for what he did. If it hadn’t been for Pearl Harbor, there wouldn’t have been 
an atomic bomb.”

Mainer lost many shipmates that day – it was the deadliest attack on US 
territory until 11 September 2001 – and was on the Helena when it was torpedoed 
again by the Japanese in July 1943, watching it sink from a life raft and 
waiting four hours for rescue. But he holds no rancour as Abe and Obama seek to 
bury the last ghosts.

“I don’t feel hard at them; I don’t want them to feel hard at me,” he said 
philosophically. “It was a long time ago. You learn to live with it and forget 
about it. I think time has the forgiveness part of it. I stayed over there 49 
months and I had a lot of time to think. Holding grudges doesn’t help it; it 
hurts you more than them, and I’ve learned to live with that.”
 