
Angelina Jolie’s revelation that she underwent a double mastectomy to reduce 
her chances of developing breast cancer boosted rates of genetic testing among 
women, but might have failed to reach those most at risk, new research suggests.

In a 2013 article for the New York Times, Jolie explained her decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/29/2013-eyewitness-accounts-angelina-jolie-breast-cancer>
 to undergo a double mastectomy after finding that she had a mutation in a gene 
known as BRCA1 that greatly increased her risk of breast and ovarian cancers.
. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=a5052fe3-fd4e-4584-b381-b09220a29d20>
“I am writing about it now because I hope that other women can benefit from my 
experience,”she wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/14/opinion/my-medical-choice.html?_r=0>. 
“Cancer is still a word that strikes fear into people’s hearts, producing a 
deep sense of powerlessness. But today it is possible to find out through a 
blood test whether you are highly susceptible to breast and ovarian cancer, and 
then take action.” After surgery her risk of developing breast cancer in later 
life fell from 87% to 5%.

The actor’s decision to tell her story was welcomed by medical experts and 
campaigners worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/24/angelina-jolie-surgery-heralded-ovarian-cancer-doctors>
. But did women heed Jolie’s call?

Writing in the British Medical Journal 
<http://www.bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/bmj.i6357>, Sunita Desai and Anupam Jena of 
Harvard Medical School describe how they sought to answer the question by 
scrutinising data on US health insurance claims from more than nine million 
women aged between 18 and 64 .

Angelina Jolie reveals she had ovaries removed after cancer scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/24/angelina-jolie-ovaries-removed-cancer-scare>
These revealed that in the 15 working days following Jolie’s article, daily 
rates of testing for harmful mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes rose by 64%, 
compared with the 15 working days before. After six months, average monthly 
testing rates were still 37% higher than in the four months before the 
article’s publication.

But the study also reveals that while genetic testing rates increased, there 
was no change in average, overall mastectomy rates in the six months following 
the article’s publication – and showed a slight drop in mastectomy rates among 
those who had BRCA tests.

“The fact that mastectomy rates dropped after Angelina Jolie’s editorial 
suggests that that denominator of women who started getting the BRCA test 
became less appropriate for the BRCA test because they had a lower pre-test 
probability of having the mutation in the first place,” said Desai.

However, Douglas Easton, professor of genetic epidemiology at the University 
of Cambridge, noted that the study did not offer insights into the BRCA test 
results – meaning it was not possible to say whether women taking the test 
received negative results, or whether they had tested positive, but decided not 
to undergo surgery.

'Jade Goody effect' boosts cervical cancer screening rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/oct/22/jade-goody-cervical-cancer-screening>
But Jennifer Litton, associate professor in the department of breast medical 
oncology at the University of Texas MD AndersonCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Center, said the results reflected 
what had been seen in clinics.

“The ‘Jolie effect’ was real, and we did have many more breast cancer patients 
ask about the test,” she said. “As only a small proportion of breast cancer 
patients harbour an abnormal gene, those that met national guidelines for 
testing had already had testing, so it did not change that group with the 
highest risk of a positive test.”

The research is not the first to explore the impact of Angelina Jolie’s 
declarations, although previous UK-based studies found that both testing among 
women at risk, and subsequent preventative surgery,increased 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/19/angelina-jolie-breast-cancer-study>
.

A co-author of the UK-based research, Tony Howell, professor of medical 
oncology and director of scientific research atPrevent Breast Cancer 
<https://preventbreastcancer.org.uk/>, says the new US study looked at too 
short a period after publication of Jolie’s article to truly reflect its 
impact. “It takes weeks or months to get through the testing process in proper 
centres,” he said. “Same applies to risk-reducing breast surgery. This takes 
one to three years to filter through to surgery if all the checks and 
counselling are performed properly.”

Overall, says Howell, the 2013 article was valuable in raising awareness. 
“Jolie did a terrific job,” he said.



 