
Perhaps it was #HurricaneBawbag 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Bawbag> that clinched it, or perhaps 
it wasthe welcome given to Donald Trump when he visited Scotland in June 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/donald-trump-greeted-protesters-touches-8282100>
, but the Scottish word “bawbag” has finally been given the recognition it 
deserves after being added to Macmillan’s Open Dictionary.

Macmillan made the announcement on Wednesday, describing the slang word as 
“very informal”.Its dictionary definition 
<http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/bawbag> is “a Scots word 
meaning scrotum, in Scots vernacular a term of endearment but in English could 
be taken as an insult”.

The dictionary publisher’s crowdsourced reference collects new words and 
expressions from the general public. It launched in 2009, and has since added 
more than 4,000 new entries, half of which have gone on to enter the official 
Macmillan Dictionary. The publisher specifies that it will not feature “words 
that you or your friends have invented; obscenities; the names of people you 
dislike and what you would like to do them; or words and phrases that are 
already in the dictionary”. Submissions on these topics, it says, generally 
outnumber genuine submissions by around three to one.

Bawbag, which was submitted for the dictionary by the user tooz last month, 
was one of several new entries to the open dictionary, along with the “informal 
verb” to pother, defined as “to make an unnecessary fuss”, and the expression 
“curiouser and curiouser”.

Once a word is submitted, the dictionary’s editors will check to see if there 
is independent evidence showing it is in use. Bawbag made the headlines five 
years ago when hurricane force winds hit Scotland in a storm dubbed Hurricane 
Bawbag by Twitter users – a name which quickly went viral. It was also one of 
the many insults levelled at the US Republican party’s presidential candidate 
when he arrived in Scotland earlier this summer – the Daily Record reporting 
that anti-Trump protestors held up signs reading “Trump is a bawbag”. The Ukip 
leader Nigel Farage was met with cries of “Nigel, you’re a bawbag, Nigel you’re 
a bawbag, na, na, na, hey!”in Edinburgh three years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/16/nigel-farage-edinburgh-protesters-van>
.

The Scotsman’s Patrick McPartlin tweeted that the inclusion of the slang term 
in the dictionary was “a great day for Scotland”, while Macmillan retweeted the 
reaction of one user to the news: “I’ve been known to use it as an affectionate 
greeting eg ‘Awright bawbag?’(Although I prefer ‘Awright scrote?’).”
Patrick McPartlin (@p_mcpartlin) 
Bawbag has been added the Macmillan Dictionary (@MacDictionary 
<https://twitter.com/MacDictionary>). A great day for Scotland: 
https://t.co/ksjookKR9M <https://t.co/ksjookKR9M> pic.twitter.com/HeScSnCNF4 
<https://t.co/HeScSnCNF4>
 <https://twitter.com/p_mcpartlin/status/763391011976540160> August 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/p_mcpartlin/status/763391011976540160>  