
Amid the chaos and uncertainty caused by the Brexit vote, it’s perhaps not 
surprising that other pressing issues have been pushed to the back of the 
collective consciousness. Yet with the perspective of a man approaching his 
80th birthday, Satish Kumar is convinced that the fallout from the UK’s 
decision to leave the EU is only a temporary distraction from what should be 
humanity’s overriding preoccupation – its vital but strained relationship with 
nature.

“Brexit is a distraction. We are all ultimately one earth, and one humanity, 
and one destiny. All our divisions are kind of illusory,” he says, each point 
articulated forcefully. “Whether you are English or German, it’s a secondary 
identity. We are all members of one community. With this Brexit, this 
referendum, they are all getting excited to create all these divisions, [but] 
it’s a distraction, a waste of time.”

Kumar speaks with the conviction of a true believer, but also with 43 years’ 
experience as editor of Resurgence, a constant voice at the core of the 
environmental movement that has just celebrated its own 50th birthday. The 
bi-monthly magazine, which features everything from advice about living off the 
land to weighty analyses of global economics, has a small print run of 14,000 
copies, about 1,400 of which are distributed outside the UK. Since 2012 Kumar 
has also been able to reach an audience 10 times larger via the Ecologist 
website, which was taken over by the trust which owns Resurgence and became 
part of the magazine renamed as Resurgence & Ecologist.

The Ecologist was founded a couple of years after Resurgence in 1969 by Teddy 
Goldsmith (brother of James), and until 2012 was run by his nephew, Zac, who in 
May lost his bid to become mayor of London. As the younger Goldsmith became 
more and more involved in politics, first as an MP and then as the Conservative 
mayoral candidate, the magazine suffered, going online only in 2009.

“It was losing money, and then Zac said ‘How can we do something? I don’t want 
to close the Ecologist – it’s a legacy of Teddy Goldsmith, it’s a big beautiful 
name. Why don’t we keep something, why don’t we merge together?’,” remembers 
Kumar. “Resurgence was a bit more philosophical, more artistic, and more, you 
could even say spiritual. The Ecologist was more scientific, more political. 
These two things together are a very strong brand now.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsatish-kumar-interview-resurgence-ecologist&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Satish%20Kumar%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20Resurgence%20and%20Ecologist%20magazines%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsatish-kumar-interview-resurgence-ecologist>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Satish%20Kumar%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20Resurgence%20and%20Ecologist%20magazines%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsatish-kumar-interview-resurgence-ecologist&media=>
Satish Kumar in 2012 on the future of the Resurgence and Ecologist magazines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2012/jun/15/satish-kumar-interview-resurgence-ecologist>
Goldmith’s personal brand has taken a battering after his campaign was accused 
of trying to exploit prejudice against Sadiq Khan, the Muslim Labour candidate 
who won convincingly. Kumar insists the campaign didn’t reflect Goldsmith’s 
true character: “In my view he was badly advised, he is not racist,” he says. 
“He is a very, very compassionate person, a unifying, compassionate person. 
Maybe there were some mistakes made [but] he at heart is a very broad-minded 
person and not in any way racist.”

Whatever the failings of the campaign, Kumar thinks that merely having a 
prominent green voice run for mayor helped the environmental cause, something 
he says Goldsmith should focus on if he returns to life in the public eye. “Zac 
should devote more time to environmental concerns, and be more like a statesman 
to address the issues where people and plants are affected rather than any 
petty politics.”

Unlike Goldsmith, who was born into wealth, politics, publishing and 
environmentalism, Kumar practically stumbled into the role that would make him 
a torchbearer for the movement and its counterculture roots for more than four 
decades. Back in the early 70s he was visiting the UK as something of a 
celebrity. A follower of Gandhi’s teachings living in India, at the age of 26 
he had embarked on a walk for peace over 8,000 miles across four continents 
between Moscow and Washington, capturing the imagination of anti-war 
campaigners around the globe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbrexit-resurgence-satish-kumar-ecologist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe64e506263cd1aaa9dcbf808d29b28f06a09f26e%2F44_0_1073_644%2F1073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Brexit%20is%20a%20distraction%20%E2%80%A6%20creating%20all%20these%20divisions%20is%20a%20waste%20of%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbrexit-resurgence-satish-kumar-ecologist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Brexit%20is%20a%20distraction%20%E2%80%A6%20creating%20all%20these%20divisions%20is%20a%20waste%20of%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbrexit-resurgence-satish-kumar-ecologist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe64e506263cd1aaa9dcbf808d29b28f06a09f26e%2F44_0_1073_644%2F1073.jpg>
 EP Menon and fellow walker Satish Kumar in 1963 on their 8,000-mile pilgrimage 
for world peace. Photograph: Peace News 
EF Schumacher, the influential economist and author of Small is Beautiful, who 
was then associate editor of Resurgence, asked him to take over the magazine, 
which was based in Kentish Town, north London, and had just 500 subscribers. 
Initially, Kumar says, he had no intention of relocating to the UK and becoming 
an editor. “I said ‘Mr Schumacher I am only visiting England. I am here only 
for a month or so, and I am going back to India.’ And he said, ‘Why are you 
going back to India?’ I said, ‘I am Gandhian, and I work for a Gandhian 
movement.’

“He said, ‘Satish, there are many Gandhians in India, we need one in England. 
So stay here and make Resurgence a Gandhian magazine.’” Kumar eventually agreed 
to take over the editorship on condition that Schumacher would contribute to 
every issue. He then embarked on a surprisingly clear-eyed strategy for 
bringing some rigour to the publication process. “The magazine was coming out 
not on time, not regular, because the volunteers were not doing it very 
properly, and the number of readers was going down. When I took over, I made 
one pledge, that never would the magazine be late for even a day, and for 43 
years I have kept that pledge.

“And second thing, I said we would not borrow or go into an overdraft or go 
into the red. We would always have money before we put out the magazine. While 
I have been editor we have managed to keep in the black.”

He also managed to steadily expand its circulation, leveraging his minor 
celebrity in “the right circles”, along with the names he got to contribute 
alongside Schumacher, such as “back to the land” guru John Seymour and 
economist and journalist Barbara Ward. “I wrote to everybody saying that now I 
had become the new editor thanks to Schmacher and other people, if you renew 
your subscription even if it’s not due – it was only £3 or £4 back then – then 
the next issue I will make sure you will get it and then regularly after that. 
Out of 500, 300 people sent their renewals ... within a year it was up to 1,000 
subscribers.”

Kumar ran the magazine with his wife June Mitchell, who he had met in London. 
Kumar commissioned and wrote, while Mitchell handled production and subediting. 
“She was an equal partner, 50/50,” he says. “Without her the magazine would not 
have been possible.” To get closer to the life they were espousing, the couple 
and the magazine relocated to Devon in 1979 (“when the sun is shining we can go 
out, and it’s raining we can be in the office”) where it is still produced.

Resurgence is small circulation, but its writers represent a much broader 
aspect of society
John Sauven, Greenpeace 
Though Resurgence has never had a mass audience, by sheer dint of its 
longevity it has helped guide the environmental movement as it evolved from its 
60s roots. “One of the things about Resurgence is it’s never gone away,” says 
Greenpeace UK executive director John Sauven. “I think one of the interesting 
things about it is that it has kept alive the flame of many ideas that were 
part of the counterculture movement of the early 70s and late 60s.

“They went out of fashion during the 80s, we had ‘small is beautiful’, then we 
got ‘big is beautiful’. But in a certain way it is becoming fashionable again. 
We have been going into a series of crises, what Reagan and Thatcher started in 
the late 70s and early 80s, that has almost reached a peak.”

Its influence goes far beyond its readership, he adds: “Resurgence is small 
circulation, but when you look at the writers that write for it – such as the 
former Archbishop of Canterbury – they represent a much broader, bigger aspect 
of society. Where it becomes influential, it’s not that there are millions of 
people reading it, but that these people are contributing to it and 
contributing these ideas.”

On his 80th birthday later this month, Kumar is standing down as 
editor-in-chief, but he isn’t settling for an easy retirement. He will stay on 
at the Resurgence Trust and advise his replacement, Greg Neale, who for two 
years has overseen the print magazine. He is also preparing another walk in 
September, this time along the 50 miles from the source of the Thames to 
Oxford, followed by a sustainability festival at Oxford University’s Worcester 
College.

He remains absolutely confident that the ideas he has been championing will 
come to the fore once again, and as he points out, nature itself has a way of 
getting the public’s attention. “There may be some more crises to come. Some 
kind of environmental crisis, global warming, climate change – people dying of 
heat, in India people are dying of heat, in China people are dying of heat, 
also the flooding, flooding in Britain, flooding in India, New York was flooded.

“These kinds of natural disasters will make people even more aware how much 
technology, economic growth, recession [are] all temporary. The future is green 
without any doubt.”
 