
The actor Michael Sheen, best known for playing Tony Blair in a series of TV 
dramas and the award-winning film The Queen,has delivered a passionate defence 
of the NHS <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jikATY0HOxs> against “bland” 
politicians in thrall to the market from both Conservative and Labour parties.

Speaking at a St David’s Day march to celebrate the NHS and its founder, 
Aneurin Bevan, on Sunday 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/whats-on/whats-on-news/stars-marchers-unite-tredegar-celebration-8703361>
, Sheen approvingly noted Bevan’s “burning hatred for the Tory party” and 
attacked Margaret Thatcher’s infamous claim there is no such thing as society.

But his anger was also aimed at the timidity of Labour politicians and the 
party’s record in office.

Sheen, who played Blair in The Queen, The Deal and The Special Relationship, 
said British political leaders had a hidden agenda to privatise theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, despite what they claimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425304391889%2Fdd7ca3cc-1869-43d6-9088-bff39689f830-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='By%20God%2C%20believe%20in%20something%2C'%20Michael%20Sheen%20tells%20politicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27By%20God%2C%20believe%20in%20something%2C%27%20Michael%20Sheen%20tells%20politicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425304391889%2Fdd7ca3cc-1869-43d6-9088-bff39689f830-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michael Sheen at the march for the NHS in Tredegar, Wales. Photograph: Tracey 
Paddison/Rex 
He said: “No one says they want to get rid of the NHS, everyone praises it ... 
But for decades now there has been a systematic undermining of it [the NHS’s] 
core values. This is beyond party politics. The Labour government arguably did 
as much damage to the NHS as any Tory or coalition-led one.”

Full text of Michael Sheen's speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/full-text-of-michael-sheens-speech>
Sheen, in a stirring speech delivered from a bandstand in a blustery, 
rainswept park in the Welsh town of Tredegar, Bevan’s birthplace, attacked the 
caution of Labour’s leaders and their lack of conviction.

He said: “In today’s political climate, where politicians are careful, 
tentative, scared of saying what they feel for fear ... all political parties 
drift into a morass of bland neutrality and the real values we suspect are kept 
behind closed doors. Is it any wonder that people feel there is little to 
choose between?”

He quoted Bevan saying that those who stayed in the middle of the road get run 
over.

Sheen appeared to plead directly to the Labour leadership. “You must stand up 
for what you believe, but first of all, by God, believe in something,” he said.


Sheen also attacked austerity and the political consensus about the 
effectiveness of market solutions. He asked: “Do we want to be a society that 
is exploitative, that sees people as commodities, as numbers, and mere 
instruments of profit? Or do we want to be a society where each person is 
recognised, where all are equal in worth and value – where that value is not 
purely a monetary one?”

He went on to stand up for those on benefits. “Do we want to be a society that 
is supportive, that is inclusive and compassionate, where it is acknowledged 
that not all can prosper, where those who are most vulnerable, most in need of 
help, are not seen as lazy or scrounging or robbing the rest of us for whatever 
they can get? Where we do not turn our backs on those facing hard times, we do 
not abandon them or exploit their weakness, because they are us.

“We leave no one behind, we only say we have crossed the finished line when 
the last of us does, because no one is alone and there is such a thing as 
society.”

 