
Tributes for Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
 have been pouring in since her death aged 60 in Los Angeles on Tuesday. Our 
readers have been among those sending messages and sharing stories about what 
the Star Wars actor means to them.


Fisher was known for many things: unflinching honesty, acting talent, writing 
skill and beauty. She’salso been a mental health advocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia>
. Here are a selection of readers’ tributes, stories and comments.


‘She was delighted to see us dressed up at Comic Con’

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019051> 
Comic Con photo 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019051>

My husband and I had a quick photo with Carrie Fisher at New York Comic Con 
this past October. She was delighted to see us dressed as characters from The 
Force Awakens. "Finally someone my own age!" she said. That's me, Susan Moskop, 
as General Organa, my husband, RJ Moskop as Luke Skywalker, andCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> with her dog Gary.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By susanmoskop <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/susanmoskop> 

28 December 2016, 4:03 

‘She was a champion of her own flaws and helping others’


Love and perspective 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019032>

Beautiful actress and brought sass and originality to her Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> role. Then a champion of her own 
flaws and helping others with mental health though fun and inspiration.

Class. Total class

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Andrew Jamieson <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser11448571>

27 December 2016, 22:51 

‘She was a beacon of light to Star Wars fans in the 1970s’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16435522> worcesterwoman10  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16435522> 28 December 2016 9:08am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/90126995> 
As a long time fan of the original Star Wars films, I can say that Carrie 
Fisher came across as a beacon of light In the 1970's to film fans like myself. 
In the past tradition of Bette Davis, Barbara Stanwick, Lauren Bacall and 
Ingrid Bergman she was a strong female lead in the role of Princess Leia 
attributed with guts and determination. She fired a gun, told men they were 
idiots and commanded a whole star fleet. To me as I was living then in the male 
dominated, un-enlightened period of early feminism- her film portrayal stood 
out as a beacon. She wasn't tall and beautiful- she was pretty to look at but 
she was clever and feisty with a girl next door kind of persona. The fact that 
as a person she came across as so down to earth despite the Hollywood 
upbringing, was a triumph for her. She kept herself "real" despite all the 
hype. She will be missed - I suspect - by all that knew her. I am sorry that we 
have lost her too soon.

‘She was a brilliant wordsmith’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15008259> PlasticChicken  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15008259> 28 December 2016 6:03am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/90123907> 
I loved her books, I could read her words all day and night. She was a 
brilliant wordsmith.

‘She treated everyone warmly, like you were a close friend’


She treated everyone like a friend 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5018998>

I had the privilege of meeting Carrie Fisher for the second time in 2015. I 
told her how amazing she looked and thanked her for her time. We took our 
picture together (which I do not have a digital copy of, it's on my wall) and 
as I started to walk away she grabbed me and pulled me back to her. She 
whispered in my ear "I know I lost all the weight but I'm slowly gaining it 
back." If you were able to observe her with fans you know that she treated 
everyone so warmly like you were her friend for years. I feel like a member of 
my family has passed. I am terribly heartbroken, I cannot imagine the pain her 
family is going through. She will always be remembered and I hope I'll get to 
say hello to her again someday among the stars.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Laura Liebl <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Laura Liebl> 

27 December 2016, 20:12 

‘She was everything that a princess should be’

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019059> 
Fax Expo Toronto 2015 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019059>

Me.friend and I dressed as our two favourite characters. She will always be 
the embodiment of everything a princess should be. A galaxy worth of love to 
her family, friends and fans

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Melissa Berberich <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Melissa Berberich> 

28 December 2016, 5:33 

‘Life will be empty without our princess’

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019026> 
A Lifetime Inspiration 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019026>

She was always there to inspire. As an older woman her memoirs and shows 
encouraged me to do my own "older" Princess shows in Japan. Life will be very 
empty without our Princess.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Lynne Hobday <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Lynne Hobday> 

27 December 2016, 22:28 

‘Princess Leia was smart, quick and didn’t suffer fools’


Thank you Carrie Fisher. 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5018987>

Carrie Fisher was the only princess I ever cared about. Princess Leia didn't 
wait to be saved by someone else. She saved them. She was smart, quick, drôle, 
and didn't suffer fools. She could be a commander of the universe but never 
thought she was above the people (or creatures). Much like Carrie Fisher. Leia 
was a princess who looked like me, in the age of the 70s blue-eyed blondes, and 
in my family. Fisher made Leia. She thought many of the lines were so over the 
top, that she injected wit and humor into their delivery. And while Princess 
Leia was my first idol/hero, Carrie Fisher become one that followed. She 
unapologetically and compassionately wrote and spoke about her own struggles 
with depression and mental health. Her writing was/is sharp as a tack, and she 
looked out for the women, and men, who followed in her footsteps. My 
five-year-old just asked why I was crying. I told him that my first hero died. 
He said, "that means it's time to be your own hero". Just like Leia and Fisher, 
themselves.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Randi Buckley <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Randi Buckley> 

27 December 2016, 19:12 

‘Return of the Jedi was the first film that I ever saw’


Devin Keast 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5018991>

Return of the Jedi opened eight days after my birth in the U.S. My mother and 
father refused to miss it. So, they brought me, an infant, with them to the 
theatre. That was my first movie-going experience.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Devin Keast <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Devin Keast> 

27 December 2016, 19:42 

‘My portrait of Carrie Fisher’

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019017> 
RIP, Carrie Fisher, 1958-2016 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019017>

Portrait by Daniel Morgenstern, 27.12.16

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Daniel Morgenstern <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Daniel 
Morgenstern> 

27 December 2016, 21:50 

‘Carrie Fisher’s legacy will continue - she’ll be in my heart’


Leia, my childhood hero and Carrie, my role model 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5862b13be4b0f9c73fa72b5b/5019006>

I was devastated to learn my first ever childhood hero passed away. Growing up 
I've learned the cultural significance of Leia's character and I've got to know 
the amazing person playing her a lot more. Carrie went from portraying one of 
my all time favorites to being my role model by being herself unapologetically 
and being so open about her struggles and raising mental health awareness. She 
is so much more than Princess Leia and despite never meeting her I feel like we 
had a lot in common. She had wit, a one of a kind sense of humor and so much 
talent, this world will be so much worse without her in it.

Her legacy will continue to live on and she'll be in my heart.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Bence Ságodi <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Bence Ságodi> 

27 December 2016, 20:51 
 