
A lifelong Western Bulldogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs> supporter who suffered a 
near-fatal heart attack in the aisles of the MCG in the final minutes of his 
side’s AFL grand final win is recovering in hospital.

Having spent the tense final stages of the game talking away happily with a 
stranger beside him, 64-year-old Rob McCarthy had to be administered CPR by 
nearby fans until the arrival of official paramedics at the MCG.According to an 
ABC report 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-10/bulldogs-fan-recovering-after-grand-final-heart-attack/7919820>
, McCarthy’s first words upon his resuscitation were, “Did the Doggies win?”

The episode has been chronicled in remarkable detail on The Footy Almanac 
website 
<http://www.footyalmanac.com.au/the-spirit-of-the-dog-as-observed-by-jim-ingram/>
 by Essendon supporter Jim Ingram, who was sitting next to McCarthy when 
near-disaster struck.

Bulldogs' AFL premiership a win for people power and community | Craig Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/bulldogs-afl-premiership-a-win-for-people-power-and-community>
At three-quarter time of the game, Ingram said, McCarthy “looked at me and, 
pumping his chest with his fist, he joked, ‘they’d wanna have an ambo parked 
out the front if we get up’. I laughed, pointed at him and openly joked, ‘don’t 
you go dying on me mate’.”

But the warning proved prophetic. With 10 minutes to play in the game and the 
Bulldogs firming as favourites to complete their fairytale premiership after a 
62-year wait, McCarthy “stiffened in his seat” and suffered a heart attack, 
before off-duty paramedic and Richmond fan Liam Moore arrived from a nearby 
seat and started administering CPR.

“He had a weak pulse at that stage but that quickly disappeared so we got 
someone to get him down on the ground and we started CPR,”Moore told Ambulance 
Victoria <http://ambulance.vic.gov.au/grand-final-bystanders-help-rob-play-on/>
. “When I got there he still had a pulse so I knew we had a chance.”

As the siren sounded and the Bulldogs’ team song started playing, according to 
Ingram, there was an eerie sight: “If I hadn’t watched it with my own eyes, I’d 
call it too perfect to be true,” Ingram said, “but I noticed the rhythm of the 
man administering CPR was in perfect timing to the beat of the Bulldog’s song.”

With the arrival of the ground’s official paramedics, McCarthy was soon 
revived, sitting upright and gingerly joining in celebrations for his 
long-suffering team, but if it wasn’t for the presence of a defibrillator 
nearby and live-saving surgery in the aftermath, the story might been far worse 
for the Dogs fan.
Ambulance Victoria (@AmbulanceVic) 
Paramedics & MCG first aiders catch up with Rob McCarthy. Rob was revived 
after a cardiac arrest at the#AFLGF <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AFLGF?src=hash>
https://t.co/qmAlQqkJHr <https://t.co/qmAlQqkJHr> pic.twitter.com/Qx1FL5K0yr 
<https://t.co/Qx1FL5K0yr>
 <https://twitter.com/AmbulanceVic/status/785696032516517888> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AmbulanceVic/status/785696032516517888> 
McCarthy has since received treatment at the Epworth Hospital, where he was 
reunited with the men and women who helped save his life. “I wanted to see Liam 
and they all saved my life. It’s emotional, I can’t describe it. It’s 
phenomenal,” he told Ambulance Victoria. “I am a very lucky guy and I love them 
all.”

At the very least, both McCarthy and the man sitting next to him have a truly 
unique story to tell of being there on the Dogs’ momentous day. “When Rob 
finally sat up from the concrete, blinked and looked around, the almighty roar 
that erupted from within our small group was something to behold. If the ‘G had 
a roof, it would’ve been blown clean off,” Ingram said.

“As the song goes, ‘you can’t beat the boys of the Bulldogs breed,’ and Rob is 
living proof.”

A Facebook post by McCarthy’s daughter Bec Ross, sent to the official 
Melbourne Cricket Ground page 
<https://www.facebook.com/MelbourneCricketGround/posts/10153871067896570>, has 
since gone viral, attracting over 8,100 likes. “Want to thank the staff at the 
MCG in particular the AFL doctor who saved my father’s life today and travelled 
in the ambulance with him,” it said. “Thanks to the patrons and staff’s quick 
thinking he was brought back to life and is going to be okay. Thank you so 
much. Go doggies!”
 