
The social services minister has admitted it is unrealistic to expect 
parliament will pass a bill banning access to so-called paid parental leave 
“double-dipping” by 1 July, but confirmed it remains the government’s intention 
to do so.

Ending double dipping on parental leave unlikely to save money – business group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/10/ending-double-dipping-on-parental-leave-unlikely-to-save-money-business-group>
Christian Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christian-porter> 
also promised to address potential confusion created by a government website, 
which warns the changes will take effect from 1 July.

At the moment, parents are able to access 18 weeks’ of paid leave at the 
minimum wage from the federal government, worth about $11,500, and also access 
separate paid leave provided by their employer.

In the 2015-16 budget the government announced plans to ban the practice of 
“double-dipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/10/ending-double-dipping-on-parental-leave-unlikely-to-save-money-business-group>
” from 1 July, 2016. But legislation which would prevent accessing both 
schemes, or limit federal government payments to a top-up of the employer’s 
scheme to the value of $11,500, failed to pass the Senate

Porter told ABC Radio National: “the reality is the legislative change is not 
going to be successful in this term of parliament”.

“[For] People who are or will be pregnant, the status quo is clearly going to 
be maintained for a period of time. However, that does not mean this government 
is not trying to change that, or if re-elected, it wouldn’t be looking to 
modify the existing system.”

The shadow minister for families and payments, Jenny Macklin, said the Liberal 
party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> is going to 
the election promising to cut paid parental leave for thousands of Australian 
parents.

“The Coalition’s cuts to paid parental will leave about 80,000 new mums worse 
off every year. Some families will lose as much as $11,800 in support,” she 
said.

Paid parental schemes worldwide: how does Australia compare?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/20/best-place-have-baby-parental-leave>
“Because of these cuts, thousands of new mums will be forced to choose between 
returning to work early and missing out on time with their new babies, or 
staying at home and having their living standards drastically reduced.”

The Department of Human Services website still warns: “for children born or 
adopted on or after 1 July 2016, [commonwealth parental leave] entitlements ... 
will be reduced where a claimant is also entitled to employer-provided primary 
carer payment [paid maternity leave].

“This budget measure is subject to the passage of legislation,” it notes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fdouble-dipping-on-paid-parental-leave-wont-be-gone-by-july-says-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a6221bc66a27af9529c98508085cbd0ff6326fa%2F20_8_1614_969%2F1614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Double%20dipping'%20on%20paid%20parental%20leave%20won't%20be%20gone%20by%20July%2C%20says%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fdouble-dipping-on-paid-parental-leave-wont-be-gone-by-july-says-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Double%20dipping%27%20on%20paid%20parental%20leave%20won%27t%20be%20gone%20by%20July%2C%20says%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fdouble-dipping-on-paid-parental-leave-wont-be-gone-by-july-says-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a6221bc66a27af9529c98508085cbd0ff6326fa%2F20_8_1614_969%2F1614.jpg>
 Department of Human Services website warning paid parental leave entitlements 
will be reduced from 1 July, 2016, if recipients are entitled to an 
employer-provided scheme. Photograph: Department of Human Services 
Porter said the website warning payments would reduce on or after 1 July was 
“probably a technical truth but a profound practical unreality”.


“I accept [it’s a confusion] and I’ll look into that.”

Porter said paid parental leave was “generous to those at the lower end, as it 
should be” but was “inequitably generous” to the top 20% of income earners who 
can access both the federal and their employer’s very generous paid parental 
leave scheme.

He said he had negotiated with the crossbench to attempt a “modest softening” 
to the policy.

Macklin said Porter’s claim that Labor’s paid parental leave scheme is 
“inequitably generous” shows he is not across the detail of the policy and is 
out of touch.

“The minister’s own department has confirmed that many women who will be worse 
off under his cuts are on a median income of $43,000. Only a Liberal could 
think the minimum wage is ‘inequitably generous’,” Macklin said.
 