
The first thing that struck Steven Caulker was the desperate poverty. That and 
the stench. The slum area sweated in the steamy heat at the foot of a hill in 
Freetown’s densely crammed East End, with the raw sewage from the hovels 
further up the slope flowing down into the alleyways and streets where children 
played and families gathered to work or eat. The stink in which they lived was 
overpowering, the level of destitution utterly unfathomable. Yet, when he 
recalls his week-long visit toSierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone>, the overriding memories are 
not of misery.

Instead, Caulker recalls the spirit. The generosity, strength and heartfelt 
gratitude flung his way from the capital up to Kambia in the rural and remote 
north of a West African state scarred by years of civil war and, more recently, 
ravaged by the Ebola epidemic. “Most of all, what stays with you is the joy, 
seeing the kids’ faces creasing up in broad smiles,” he says. “The whole trip 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/blog/voices/2016/07/07/footballer-steven-caulkers-inspirational-trip-to-sierra-leone>
 was emotionally draining, completely humbling, but unbelievably inspiring. 
It’s offered me perspective, but has also motivated me to work harder. I will 
dig deeper knowing whatever I achieve now is for the good of other people, not 
just me. It makes all those bleep tests in pre-season worth it. I’ve had a 
life-changing summer.”

Football League 2016-17 season: 16 things to watch out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/30/football-league-16-things-to-watch>
It has been one far removed from a footballer’s usual close season, more 
normally spent lazing on a Caribbean beach or preoccupying the paparazzi in Las 
Vegas, and has fascinated his club-mates back at Queens Park Rangers. Caulker 
had always wanted to visit the country where his grandfather William grew up. 
The centre-half has no idea how or why Caulker Sr, at 30, departed the town of 
Bonthe near the Liberian border for London, where he met his future wife, 
Jessie, recently arrived from Dollar in Clackmannanshire, Scotland.

Steven was a teenager when William passed away, but the older man clearly made 
an impression on him. Retreat three years and in the wake of a summer move from 
Tottenham Hotspur to Cardiff City and a conversation with Craig Bellamy,who 
funds his own academy outside Freetown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/sep/27/craig-bellamy-manchester-city>
, the footballer found himself Googling charities in Sierra Leone, eager to 
offer something back.

He struck upon ActionAid <https://www.actionaid.org.uk/>, which has been 
established in the region for 28 years fighting poverty and furthering 
education and women’s rights, and discussed a scheme toraise £76,000 for the 
construction of a school <https://www.instagram.com/p/BGxIPbwo2-v/?hl=en> in 
the village of Lal Gberay in the north. These days he laughs, recalling how 
naive he had been about the project, believing “if I could ask everyone in an 
average home gate of around 25,000 to give £2 each I’d almost be there”. It 
took a year of auctions, with items such as signed Gareth Bale shirts and Wales 
rugby jerseys, to raise £26,000. Caulker dipped into his own pocket for the 
rest, tapping into the privileges of life as a top-flight footballer, only for 
the sudden and devastating spread of Ebola in 2014 to rule out a first trip to 
Africa that summer.

He raised an additional £40,000 with QPR over his first year at Loftus Road, 
money to be spent educating communities to check the virus across westAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, but it was not until he stepped out 
of a car in eastern Freetown in June that he realised the true level of 
suffering left behind by the illness. Official figures suggest more than 11,000 
people died from the Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone, a desperately poor country 
of 5.7m people with an average life expectancy of 49 years. Another 17,000 
contracted the disease and continue to be affected, mentally and physically, by 
the consequences.

Children have been orphaned, families robbed of their breadwinners. Caulker 
met Elizabeth Tholley, a 21-year-old who lost her mother, father, brother, aunt 
and four other family members. “They still carry a stigma with them even now,” 
he says. “People think they have been touched by Ebola so don’t want to go near 
them. It’s purely down to education, but who is supposed to explain? There is 
no one, apart from the charities. When they first came back home after losing 
all those close to them, there was only one family across the road who welcomed 
them. Elizabeth is suddenly the head of the house and she’s surviving as best 
she can in those slums on the equivalent of less than a dollar a day. There are 
days when they have nothing to eat. Others when they make do with a pan of 
rice. It’s frightening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620a5afb1658bade44eaaf895c2063801ddb5c7a%2F0_236_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620a5afb1658bade44eaaf895c2063801ddb5c7a%2F0_236_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
 Steven Caulker: ‘The £50,000 I spent on that school is worth so much more than 
anything else I’ve ever bought.’ Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
“She now looks after two brothers and two sisters, as well as being a 
surrogate mother to her extended family. Before the outbreak she’d been 
studying to be a nurse, but her life is now on hold. Her mother had been a 
qualified nurse and ended up catching Ebola from treating people.

“It is all so cruel. Elizabeth is so strong but her brothers struggle to see 
the light. But they have benefited from ActionAid’s input: the workers are 
local, command the respect of the kids and get them motivated and living again. 
What you quickly realise is there is no quick fix here. This country has been 
through it all.”

An 11-year civil war that ended in 2002 and during which more than 70,000 died 
had already scarred a generation. Now Sierra Leone, declared Ebola-free in 
January, is having to cope with the after-effects of the epidemic. With 
institutions closed, teenage pregnancy rates soared almost overnight. Society’s 
basic pillars had crumbled. Each day brings new problems which must be tackled.

It was in the Kambia district, an area where the literacy rate is 15%, that 
Caulker, three years on from that impulsive internet search, witnessed the 
community project he had helped fund from afar. He had spent the four‑hour 
journey north blissfully unaware of what awaited, with only a few photographs 
from the intervening years as evidence of the progress made in Lal Gberay. 
“It’s not real unless you see it properly,” he says. “We pulled up in the 
village and there were maybe 100 people there, singing and parading around 
waving ‘welcome’ banners. By the time we got to the school those numbers had 
grown to 400. It was too much to take in. The minister from the village said, 
for them, it was the best day of their lives: not just because we’d supported 
them to give them a future but that I’d taken the time to come out and see them 
first-hand. For them, that meant so much.

“We’re talking a remote village, a 40-minute drive from anywhere, with no 
phones or any type of communication with the outside world. It’s like stepping 
back in time 200 years. They have nothing apart from what they make or grow and 
yet here they were handing me fruit bowls and the clothes they’d made. They 
wanted to give it to me. It was too much.

“That sense of togetherness, their community … there was so much hope in that 
village. The school gave them light. The kids get up at 6am every day, ready 
and eager to go in. I spent my childhood running the other way from school. The 
whole thing was inspiring.” The building is now home to 306 pupils in six 
classes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1faee6691f82c511c7c155fa430d2d09a87781%2F487_440_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1faee6691f82c511c7c155fa430d2d09a87781%2F487_440_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
 Caulker on a rare appearance on loan at Liverpool last season. ‘There were 
positives’ he says. ‘I was reminded first-hand about the professionalism that 
it takes to reach that level.’ Photograph: Clive Brunskill/Getty Images 
Everything about life in Lal Gberay touched Caulker. There was the night spent 
with a local family in the “best house in the village”, a five-room but basic 
dwelling where the footballer delighted in taking selfies with the “15 or 16 
children who’d never seen their own reflection and just spent the whole evening 
laughing their heads off”. He slept, eventually, from about 3.30am, on a mat 
“while the cockroaches and huge spiders circled me on the floor” and found 
relief with the early-morning cold shower (laced with Dettol) “the likes of 
which you don’t get anywhere else, other than maybe after training at 
Harlington with QPR”.

In Freetown, a population obsessed with football, which they watch in open-air 
cinemas for 25p a ticket, knew everything about him, from his various transfers 
tohis solitary England cap, against Sweden in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/14/steve-caulker-england-debutants>
. Out in the sticks he was more of a curiosity, overseeing frantic games of 
football with the children or stealing away for a few hours to go on runs and 
maintain his own fitness before pre-season.

“I’d watch the women leave the village early with their baskets to collect 
food and water or even sell the soap they’d learned to make via the Livelihood 
project we’d help set up. They’d make 20 or 30 bars every day, and then walk to 
the nearest town to sell them at market. We’re talking miles away and they’d 
maybe earn 3p for every bar. You just wonder … the cost of living is very low, 
but that low?

“But it’s not just about the money. It’s about confidence and creating an 
entrepreneurial spirit. ActionAid are educating women in Sierra Leone to 
impress upon them their rights. In Kambia you could see how much work the women 
do. They’d prepared us a huge meal upon our arrival and they were the ones 
collecting the logs, preparing the food, cooking and cleaning, feeding the 
children. Their lives are insanely tough. In their culture, the men work during 
the day and then come home, where things are done for them. The women are 
expected to do both. They put on a show for us, showing us how their daily 
lives work, and there was this weird scenario where the men were sitting round 
watching and while they weren’t necessarily clapping, they weren’t objecting 
either. It’s just ingrained into their society.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197c266954d239894f972d6f36a0583a9b9948ca%2F0_172_1200_1428%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Draining%2C%20humbling%2C%20inspiring%E2%80%99%3A%20Steven%20Caulker%E2%80%99s%20life-changing%20Sierra%20Leone%20trip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fsteven-caulker-sierra-leone-charity-trip-qpr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197c266954d239894f972d6f36a0583a9b9948ca%2F0_172_1200_1428%2F1200.jpg>
 Steven Caulker takes a selfie in the remote village of Lal Gberay, where the 
school he has funded has opened. ‘I was with 15 or 16 children who’d never seen 
their own reflection before, and just spent the whole evening laughing their 
heads off.’ Photograph: Steven Caulker 
These are ongoing issues, with Caulker due to meet ActionAid to discuss future 
projects. “The school is a drop in the ocean. We have to address everything 
from a lack of basic toilets and sanitation to proper education and you do find 
yourself asking where to start. Building more will probably cost up to £90,000, 
but I’m in a fortunate position where it wouldn’t change my life to earmark 
that kind of money, whereas it would change theirs unimaginably. It could help 
an entire generation.

“It has changed me already. I recognise better my wants and needs: I ask 
myself now whether I need something, say a £200 shirt, or if I just want it. I 
know it sounds simplistic, but I’ve been living in a bubble all these years. 
The £50,000 I spent on that school is worth so much more than anything else 
I’ve ever bought. I’d rather put money into that now.”

In the context of his summer, the forthcoming Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> campaign, which opens for 
QPR with a game at home against Leeds United on Sunday, might normally seem 
rather mundane. Yet football provides the centre-half with a platform from 
which to contribute. His career has been on hold since relegation with QPR in 
2015. Last season was spent on loan at Southampton and Liverpool, spells that 
yielded one Premier League start and having disappeared off the scene under 
Jürgen Klopp at Anfield, no first-team appearances since the end of January.

There had been talk of another start. Crystal Palace considered a bid and 
there was interest from Brendan Rodgers at Celtic. But Caulker has a young 
family, is settled, and after last season’s spluttering opportunities is 
anxious to play regularly, even in the second tier. Jimmy-Floyd Hasselbaink, his
QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> squad shorn of the major earners 
as they prepare for a second year outside the elite, considers the 24-year-old 
a natural-born leader. “It’s a young changing room, which means I’m one of the 
senior players,” Caulker says. “Jimmy wants me, along with Karl Henry and Nedum 
Onuoha, to lead by example because the younger players, while hungry, need 
guidance. I like that responsibility.

“I came back a different player. When I left Tottenham I wanted to play games, 
and I did that for two years [at Cardiff and QPR] but was relegated each time 
and that stung me. It hurt. It created a bit of fear in me and the move to 
Southampton was more about a safety net, knowing they would not go down. But I 
struggled for game-time, the same at Liverpool. There are still positives to 
take. I worked under Ronald Koeman and Jürgen Klopp, two very different but 
great managers, and was reminded first-hand about the professionalism that it 
takes to reach that level. It was a refreshing year. I know you have to give it 
your all every single day. There is no respite. And there won’t be in the 
Championship, either. Jimmy will have us robust and ready.”

Caulker can relish what awaits once more, not least because now he can see the 
bigger picture. “I came back more rounded and mature,” he says. “The summer 
added to that. I’d hope William would be proud of everything we’ve done so far. 
He’d be shocked as well, but he’d be proud.”

To help make a difference to support some of the world’s poorest women and 
children in countries like Sierra Leone you can sponsor a child with ActionAid. 
For more information visitwww.actionaid.org.uk/sponsor 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/sponsor-a-child>
 