
A call from a private debt collector was the first 21-year-old Jack Rogerson 
learned of his $3,000 debt toCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink>.

Rogerson, who is autistic, was confused and unsure of how to explain himself. 
He began preparing to pay the debt recovery firm Dun & Bradstreet, which hasa 
$10.8m contract with Centrelink 
<https://www.tenders.gov.au/?event=public.cn.view&CNUUID=DA6AC40E-B85C-6D40-1AC88EA31B064963>
 to chase down welfare recipients for years-old debts.

Centrelink's debt mistake: 'There's no way I could explain to them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
But before doing so he mentioned the call to his mother, who intervened.

Nicole Rogerson, who is the head of Autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> Awareness Australia, said finding 
out that her son was being “heavied” by debt collectors was a huge wake-up 
call. She fears others with an intellectual disability are at risk of paying 
money they may not owe.

“I’m so concerned for families who are a lot more vulnerable than we are,” she 
said. “Jack’s at least got two parents and we can work this out for him. It 
will be horrible having to deal with Centrelink but at least we can do it, and 
we will because it’s the right thing to do.

“This hard line of the government is just heartless to the core.”


Her son’s debt related to three months when he was on a disability benefit, 
just before he began working as a chef’s apprentice.

He was not working while claiming from Centrelink during those three months, 
and his mother said the debt was false, but she and her son were lucky enough 
to be in a position to fight it.

The family’s circumstances appear consistent with others who have complained 
about Centrelink’s new automated compliance system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, which relies on data-matching reported income with information held by the 
Australian Taxation Office.

Minister defends Centrelink over welfare debt compliance system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/minister-defends-centrelink-over-welfare-debt-compliance-system>
The system, in some cases, is averaging a person’s yearly income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
 across the 26 Centrelink fortnightly reporting periods, making them ineligible 
to receive benefits at any point.

Centrelink staff appear to be aware of the problem. In an operational webpage 
providing guidance on what documents 
<http://operational.humanservices.gov.au/public/Pages/debts/107-02040020-01.html>
 are acceptable to verify income, Centrelink says:

If employment is for a part of a year only, averaging over 12 months will not 
result in a correct result if the customer should have received a full rate at 
other times of the year.

Dun & Bradstreet is one of three debt collection firms being used by 
Centrelink. The other two appear to beProbe Group 
<https://www.tenders.gov.au/?event=public.cn.view&CNUUID=DA6AE759-94B2-ECE1-DC6B0DDCCDA73E56>
 andAustralian Receivables 
<https://www.tenders.gov.au/?event=public.son.view&SONUUID=0161D373-B63F-12C9-8D933DCC1AB1A50E>
, which are both on $2.5m contracts.

The government continues to defend the system. The social services minister, 
Christian Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christian-porter>, 
said on Tuesday it was working “incredibly well” and gave individuals a fair 
chance to respond when discrepancies were detected.

“What you’re saying to me is that if people over-respond, or if people find it 
inconvenient, then the response to that from a government should be to not do 
it,” Porter said.

“Now, if we don’t do it, that is $4bn worth of taxpayers’ money that got 
wrongfully paid that can never be recouped.

“I think that this is about as reasonable a process as you could possibly 
derive.”

Other advocates fear that the new system may be particularly difficult for 
those with a disability.

Advocacy for Inclusion’s chief executive, Christina Ryan, said some people 
with a disability may not be able to read the letters sent by Centrelink.

“It’s particularly concerning for people who have no real resources on many 
levels to actually respond,” she said. “And the part that worries me is that 
this is how people can be bullied into paying a debt that they don’t actually 
have and causing themselves significant financial hardship.”
 