
It is a Tuesday afternoon and I am sitting in the hairdressers, having both my 
usuals: a short back and sides and a mild attack of awkwardness. Apart from the 
snip of scissors, a silence has descended. It’s not the barber’s fault; he’s 
covered all the regular bases (my hair, my weekend plans, where I’m going on 
holiday). Now the conversational onus is on me. I’ve long used up my quota of 
“Really?” and the sanctuary of the hairdryer is some way off.

Charisma: it is not something I have ever been accused of having. But how much 
does a person need? This ethereal quality (or lack of it) has been credited 
both with the rise ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the fall of Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ed-miliband>. For better or worse, it is 
the reasonBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> is foreign 
secretary andTim Farron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tim-farron> is 
still “Who?” When, in those distant summer months,Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> announced he was running for 
the Conservative leadership, he brought it up in hisfirst speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/01/michael-gove-launches-tory-leadership-bid-video>
: “Whatever charisma is, I don’t have it.” And it was true: his political 
career soon came to a grinding halt.

Can you learn charisma? The man sitting next to me in the hairdressers thinks 
so. His name isDanish Sheikh  <http://www.danishsheikh.com/>and he is a 
charisma coach. He has worked with executives from Yahoo and the BBC, training 
them in “confidence acquisition” and personal magnetism. Sheikh reckons he can 
turn your average anyone into aClooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> or a Bardot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brigitte-bardot>. And for two days I will be 
his student.

I sit in the hairdresser’s chair pondering possible small talk. It shouldn’t 
be that hard: I’m intelligent enough, I like sport and music, and keep up with 
current affairs. There are endless, countless ways to connect. “What about 
you?” I ask the barber, eventually. “Going anywhere nice on holiday?”

In the mirror, I see Sheikh wince.

One old chap told me straight: the spark that was there in print didn’t exist 
in person

At its most basic, according to Sheikh, charisma is an ability to connect with 
people through sheer force of personality. “You can’t put a price on a skill 
like that,” he says, although he does: £150 an hour, to be precise. And plenty 
of people are paying. The Ministry of Defence,Bupa 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bupa>, Morgan Stanley, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morganstanley> Merrill Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/merrill-lynch> and Sony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> have all hired coaches who 
specialise in the area.Olivia Fox Cabane <http://foxcabane.com/>, author of the 
2013 bestsellerThe Charisma Myth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charisma-myth.html>, says business leaders 
are willing to pay more than $100,000 a year for her advice. TheUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> once invited her to lecture 
about improving leadership skills using behavioural science.

Why is this “it” factor so important right now? I ask Richard Reid 
<http://pinnacletherapy.co.uk/media-about-pinnacle-therapy/>, a British 
cognitive behavioural psychotherapist who, clearly a man not shy of his own 
charm,calls himself “Mr Charisma” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-v65fDC9j9A>
. Reid specialises in a range of areas – addiction, depression, crisis 
management – but in 2009 developed one of the UK’s first charisma courses. 
Since then, his clients have included Transport for London, theNational Crime 
Agency <http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/> and Google. “These 
organisations don’t want managers any more,” he says. “They want leaders. And 
leadership means emotional intelligence. To all intents and purposes, that’s 
charisma.” Those without this so-called emotional intelligence, or EQ, lead by 
instruction, Reid says. Those with it, lead by influence, which is more 
effective. “They attract people to their vision through rapport,” he explains. 
“In business terms, if you look at the brightest companies today, staff believe 
in the ethos and culture of what they are doing. That doesn’t happen by 
accident. It is an atmosphere created through charismatic leadership.”

Increasingly, he says, his clients include young professionals, mid-earners 
and creatives. He recently coached one young man who wanted help before a best 
man’s speech. “It’s a competitive world,” Reid says. “If you can learn how to 
connect with people, you find more opportunities come your way. Plus it makes 
everything, from job interviews to parties, more enjoyable.”

It sounds too good to be true and, for me, that may be the issue. Can this 
stuff truly be taught?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb5720833bc039d4d8a3e22fc6b62b359d13be3%2F229_2253_4917_6146%2F4917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20am%20not%20naturally%20magnetic'%3A%20can%20you%20learn%20how%20to%20be%20charismatic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20am%20not%20naturally%20magnetic%27%3A%20can%20you%20learn%20how%20to%20be%20charismatic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb5720833bc039d4d8a3e22fc6b62b359d13be3%2F229_2253_4917_6146%2F4917.jpg>
 Colin Drury: ‘I feel I walk a line between awkwardness and arrogance.’ 
Photograph: Jay Brooks for the Guardian 
I am not naturally magnetic. I feel I walk a line between awkwardness and 
arrogance. One, I suspect, is an affectation designed to disguise the other, 
but I am 33 and no longer sure which is which.

Being charming – likable, even – does not come easily, and I am sure there are 
opportunities and friendships I have missed out on as a result. For some time, 
I wrote a column in a local newspaper, which was popular enough; but when 
readers met me, I felt their disappointment. One old chap told me straight: the 
spark that was there in print didn’t exist in person. I told him I knew. But 
how do you change what’s inherent in you?

Dr Erik Matser 
<http://www.gncdubai.com/doctor/dr-erik-matser-psychologist-in-dubai/> is a 
neuropsychologist who has worked with Chelsea football club and the Dutch 
Olympic swimming team, and who specialises in talent optimisation. “Only a 
minority of people are truly comfortable in their own skin,” he tells me. “For 
everyone else, some coaching – whether or not you call that charisma coaching – 
would help. Perhaps once there was a stigma attached, but no longer. It’s right 
to want to be the best version of yourself, and that requires help. Human 
development is too complex to do on our own. More people are recognising that.”

He suggests this should be taken even further. “I think there is an argument 
for emotional intelligence – empathy and interpersonal skills, in particular – 
being taught in schools,” he says. “This is one way to both help people reach 
their full potential, and to create a better world.”

Meanwhile, Sheikh, my coach, is self-taught. Originally from India, he was a 
nerdy teenager turned Yahoo product manager who, frustrated by his inability to 
make friends, spent a decade studying the psychology and neurology of social 
interaction. When he realised that, by his late 20s, he had transformed 
himself, he went full-time guru.

My own first impression is that I like him but, well, he doesn’t seem very 
charismatic. “But you like me,” he counters. “So we’re already in a positive 
relationship – this is charisma.” Checkmate.

His first impressions of me are more brutal. It is the morning after my 
haircut. Yesterday, he followed me everywhere, watching my interactions, and 
now he has written his observations on a whiteboard. It doesn’t make easy 
reading. Yet it is only in recognising our weaknesses, I am told, that we can 
address them.

So here goes: I struggle with small talk, lack confidence entering a room, 
have closed body language and, because I feel too much eye contact is an 
invasion of personal space, I don’t do it enough. Unless you’re engaging me 
about certain trigger subjects (football, literature, the 19th-century history 
of Britain’s railways), I appear to lack enthusiasm.

Essentially, the unspoken message you’re going for is: genuine, dependable, 
useful in a sabre-toothed tiger attack

“But don’t worry,” Sheikh concludes, cheerfully, “we’re going to fix all this.”

Over 48 hours, I learn a lot, including how to stand like a gorilla (feet 
apart, arms wide: this subliminally says high status). But the overriding 
principle Sheikh imparts, the one that informs everything else, is that 
charismatic people project their own value while simultaneously making others 
feel valued. Their magnetism comes from combining authority and empathy.

Sheikh’s sessions are based on the idea that we can develop, practise and 
perfect various subliminal techniques and interpersonal skills that will create 
this outward effect of importance and warmth. I think of the most charismatic 
people I know and wonder if that’s simply what they have done; worked hard to 
perfect these skills. I think of Martin, a journalist 30 years my senior. The 
room doesn’t stop when he enters, but he never looks out of place, anywhere. He 
carries himself with both gravitas and levity and, crucially, he’s not the sort 
of person who changes his manner to fit in.

I ask Martin if he’s aware of this: did he consciously work on it? “I think I 
just listen more than most people,” he shrugs. “But that’s not a studied thing. 
It’s just because, if I’m talking, I don’t learn anything new.”

I tell him about my charisma lessons, and he nods along, asking questions. 
What does he think, I ask after a while. “Load of bollocks,” he says. “Fancy 
another pint?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7805f05a0fb82fdd356145c500e0eeb85ee04d91%2F107_688_5317_7845%2F5317.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20am%20not%20naturally%20magnetic'%3A%20can%20you%20learn%20how%20to%20be%20charismatic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20am%20not%20naturally%20magnetic%27%3A%20can%20you%20learn%20how%20to%20be%20charismatic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcan-you-learn-how-to-be-charismatic-charisma-shy-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7805f05a0fb82fdd356145c500e0eeb85ee04d91%2F107_688_5317_7845%2F5317.jpg>
 When it comes to acquiring empathy, Sheikh says listening actively and 
intently is key. Photograph: Jay Brooks for the Guardian 
Until recently, charisma wasn’t something I gave much thought to. If I ever 
considered it, it would be in the same way I considereda Cruyff turn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U1k7DGqRF5g>: a nice skill to have, for sure, 
but not something I thought I needed. Without charisma, I have achieved the 
traditional fundamentals: partner, house, a job I enjoy well enough. When I 
first called Sheikh, it was out of pure journalistic intrigue. I wanted to know 
why a quality first identified by the ancient Greeks had become such a 
21st-century must-have; I wanted to understand how something generally regarded 
as innate could possibly be taught.

But now, when I start to reflect on the situations where I wish I’d had more 
magnetism – a greater ability to connect – the list seems pretty endless: 
making friends, making professional contacts; ultimately, making more of 
myself. With it, perhaps I would have got that job, or bonded better with that 
person. Perhaps I wouldn’t be the guy who struggles with small talk at parties. 
Perhaps interacting with the world wouldn’t often feel so unfeasibly difficult.

When it comes to acquiring empathy, one of those twin facets of charisma, 
Sheikh says listening actively and intently is key. Showing interest in people 
makes them feel good: they then associate that feeling with you. “If you’re 
even momentarily distracted, people pick up on this, because humans detect 
micro-expressions in about a 50th of a second,” he explains. “If you learn to 
stop your mind wandering – to be entirely present – the person you’re with 
feels special.” Reid has a lovely way of phrasing the same advice: “It doesn’t 
matter if you’re backstage with the Rolling Stones,” he declares. “If you’re 
talking to the guy cleaning up, he should be the only person with your 
attention.”

Projecting your own value is more difficult to learn. No one likes the guy who 
has rattled through his achievements by the first canape, but, equally, no one 
remembers the person offering nothing. The solution is ambiguous. Don’t boast, 
but don’t underplay yourself; don’t be po-faced but don’t self-deprecate; 
ultimately, Sheikh says, “don’t blatantly sell yourself but, well, be aware you
do need to sell yourself”. So that clears that up.

We should remember, too, Sheikh says, that our immediate feelings towards 
someone are dominated by evolutionary instinct. Good posture and deepened voice 
signals strength, wide stance suggests authority, and an open body indicates 
trust. Essentially, the unspoken message you’re going for is: genuine, 
dependable, useful in a sabre-toothed tiger attack.

Sheikh and I drill other basics. Entering a room (chin up, shoulders back), 
holding eye contact (“Don’t stare – that’s staring – four seconds max, then 
break,” he says), and hand gestures (“sparingly”): done right, all will 
establish your presence and value. The same goes with voice tone: don’t speak 
too fast or too slow; vary your pace to keep your listener’s attention.

It is classroom-style work, but not as you know it. I am lectured in the 
theory – making notes as we go – and then we run practice routines. For 
instance, small talk: I’m told by Sheikh to keep things breezy, speak 
expressively and make questions open. He pretends to be first my hairdresser, 
then a commissioning editor, then a stranger at a party. Not once, I can 
confirm, do I ask him where he’s going on holiday.

He takes me through a mindfulness exercise, teaching me to be in the moment 
with the person I am talking to. Sheikh shares his personal trick: if he finds 
his attention momentarily wandering, he takes off his glasses and cleans them. 
This action, he says, jolts him back into the present and nudges him to return 
his focus. When he tells me this, I admire its simplicity. Later, over a drink, 
while in full-flow with one of my better anecdotes, I notice him cleaning his 
glasses.

We’re in a bar to make chitchat with strangers. Remembering all my objectives 
is a monumental, sweat-inducing effort

I should also be confident. But how? By employing some biological chemistry 
and remembering a past triumph. This fills your brain withoxytocin 
<http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/275795.php>, a hormone that blasts 
away fear and anxiety. “Do it before you enter a room,” Sheikh tells me, “and 
you’re on a natural buzz, ready to conquer the world.”

That night, I do exactly that before walking into a bar. Not as good as a 
quick livener, perhaps, but it’s early days. I’m meeting Sheikh for the climax 
of the course – our practical exam, if you will. We’re here to make chitchat 
with strangers. We spark some conversations and they go OK. I am not convinced 
people in bars, English bars especially, really like that moment when a 
stranger starts speaking to them – I swear I see terror in some eyes – but in 
the haze of the night there is laughter and topics I could never have 
predicted. A physics graduate explains black holes, and a long-distance lorry 
driver reveals how this time tomorrow he’ll be inArbroath 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/arbroath-p241591>.

“Beautiful town,” I say, going too far with my flow of positive affirmation. 
Have you been, he asks, surprised. I pause and consider my options. “No,” I 
tell him after a moment. “But one day, fingers crossed.”

At intervals, Sheikh offers gentle feedback. Don’t cross your arms; when 
speaking, make eye contact with everyone in the circle, that kind of thing. 
Don’t go overboard on empathising with people, is another one. I’m pretty sure 
he’s referring to Arbroath.

Remembering all my objectives – hands, eyes, vocal expressions, presence, 
active listening, projecting, oxytocin, serotonin – is a monumental, 
sweat-inducing effort. Realising I’m struggling, I tell a couple we’re speaking 
to about my charisma coaching. It starts a debate. “Not having it,” is the 
opinion of the guy. “Being charismatic is just about being yourself – no 
tricks.”

This contradicts much of what I’ve learned over the past two days, but I sort 
of agree. Fine-tuning social niceties is one thing, but methodically changing 
your entire behaviour to appeal to others strikes me as the exact opposite of 
gaining an “it” factor. Isn’t an absence of authenticity even less appealing 
than an absence of magnetism? I think of this, and then of all the 
opportunities and friendships I worry I’ve missed. Maybe my authentic self just 
never wanted them that badly.

I share this with Sheikh, who is ready with a contradiction. That guy who 
thinks charisma is “just being yourself” is, it turns out, a photographer, and 
we end up swapping numbers with a view to working together. “That’s a 
connection built on rapport,” Sheikh says, “which is exactly what charisma is. 
This has worked for you.”

Do I feel changed? Not as such. I know for a fact I’m never again going to 
stand like a gorilla or enthuse about Scottish towns I couldn’t find on a map. 
But perhaps charisma, at its core, is simpler than that anyway; it’s about 
understanding better who you are, and deploying the best version of yourself.

As we leave the pub, Sheikh and I shake hands and go our separate ways. Then 
he calls down the street to me: “Hey, let me know how the next haircut goes?” 
He gives a thumbs up. He’s deliberately giving me a last blast, I think, of his 
charisma. And I like him for it.
 