
A disabled actor has told the Guardian she was left “really upset” and fearful 
for her health after a train company failed to provide easy access to her 
reserved space and an accessible toilet during a two-and-a-half-hour train 
journey.

Samantha Renke, who recently starred in high-profile adverts for Maltesers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/maltesers-advertisments-disability-disabled-actors>
, has brittle bone disease, which means she is susceptible to injury and has to 
use a wheelchair. She was travelling from Preston to London on Virgin Trains on 
27 December and was unable to take her seat because the disabled area she had 
reserved was filled with bags.

The Lancashire-born actor, who lives in Shoreditch in east London, said she 
was travelling alone after visiting family and struggled to get on the train at 
Preston. When she went to take up the area she had reserved it was blocked with 
luggage. She told the Guardian she was then asked to move to the next carriage, 
where the disabled area was also filled with bags so she was asked to return to 
her original place.

“There was no consensus at all between the staff what should be done, whether 
people should have to move their bags or not, it was me who had to step in and 
point to the sign that says there has to be disabled access in that area by 
law,” she said.

The bags were eventually moved to enable Renke to take her place, but being 
surrounded by baggage there was “absolutely no way” of her getting to the 
toilet on the train, she said. “I couldn’t have a sip of water or a coffee. To 
be honest, it was so stressful I would have liked a glass of wine, but there 
was no way.”

It comes after the Guardian revealed that the Paralympic athlete Anne Wafula 
Strike was left to urinate on herself because CrossCountry trainsfailed to 
provide an accessible toilet on a three-hour journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
.

Renke, who is a supporter of the disabled charity Scope, said the story came 
as no surprise. “It’s appalling, but to me it is all too familiar, it’s just 
our lives,” she said. “People don’t think about what those with impairments 
have to go through.”

Paralympian forced to wet herself on train without accessible toilet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
Renke said that, following the journey, she was left waiting on the train for 
20 minutes for an accessible ramp to enable her to get off. “I ended up going 
to the door of the train and literally just shouting for someone to come, even 
the cleaners had left by that stage. It was a horrific experience from start to 
finish.”

The journey had left her stressed and emotionally exhausted, partly due to the 
fact that the train was so overcrowded that she feared another passenger might 
fall on her and, because of her condition, cause serious harm.

“It felt very hazardous. I was worried the entire time that someone might fall 
on me because the disabled area is just next to the toilet. Disabled people are 
expected to compromise, and not travel at crowded times, but I had to get back 
to work,” she said.

She called for a fine to be imposed on people who make disabled areas 
inaccessible. “People aren’t scared to flout theDisability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Act – there are no 
consequences,” she said. “We don’t have a lift? Oh well. There’s no toilet? So 
what?”

She also called on train companies to be fined if they did not meet the 
requirements to meet facilities for disabled people. “Don’t put a disabled area 
and say disabled people have priority by law if there are no consequences if 
you do not. It’s just an empty promise,” she said.

Renke contacted Virgin Trains <https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginrail>
 via Twitter, writing:
SAMANTHA RENKE (@samrenke) 
@VirginTrains <https://twitter.com/VirginTrains> 3.5 hour journey my 
wheelchair surrounded by luggage in disabled space! Couldn't move to use 
toilet! Very disappointedpic.twitter.com/GGFihHyGqs <https://t.co/GGFihHyGqs>
 <https://twitter.com/samrenke/status/814082310735822848> December 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/samrenke/status/814082310735822848> 
The company replied: “Not good to see Samantha. It’s worth making the train 
manager aware who can assist you further.”

When Renke pointed out that “all staff were aware of it but seemed to be 
difference of opinion among them as to whether or not they should move 
luggage”, there was no further reply.

“I was really upset,” she said. “It wasn’t even an apology.”

It’s a disgrace that a Paralympian had to wet herself on a train – but not a 
surprise | Penny Pepper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/disability-accessible-toilets-paralympian-train>
The actor said she had faced online bullying since appearing in the Maltesers 
adverts, in which she tells friends about crushing a bride’s foot at a wedding, 
but boasts that she still managed to leave with the best man’s number. “Someone 
recently wrote: ‘Mutants like you shouldn’t be on TV,’” she said.
SAMANTHA RENKE (@samrenke) 
@VirginTrains <https://twitter.com/VirginTrains> all staff were aware of it 
but seemed to be difference of opinion among them as to whether or not they 
should move luggage
 <https://twitter.com/samrenke/status/814087541238415360> December 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/samrenke/status/814087541238415360> 
“These are soul-destroying times for people with impairments. Benefits are 
being cut and when stories like this come out it feels very regressive, like we 
are going one step forward and five steps back.”

The 11-times Paralympic champion Tanni Grey-Thompson said there was no 
consistent approach among train companies to disabled access. “Some companies 
only have two wheelchair spaces – one in first and one in standard. It’s 
variable where the toilets may be. Or if they work.”

Lady Grey-Thompson said she commuted from the north-east of England to London 
by train about 40 weeks a year and there was not always an accessible toilet. 
“The reality as a wheelchair user is that you’re always having to plan ahead 
for toilets,” she said. “You’re always looking to see where an accessible one 
is; having to control what you drink.”


At the very least passengers should be told if there was a working accessible 
toilet, for disabled and older people and children, said Grey-Thompson. But she 
feared train companies might try to insist that wheelchair users could only 
travel on trains with accessible toilets. “I could see some companies trying to 
do this. There has to be choice, but also some understanding from the 
companies,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fi-feared-for-my-health-disabled-actor-tells-of-nightmare-train-journey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2729cc0374be04bb9f16b05fa2db45db25fe702b%2F0_22_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20feared%20for%20my%20health'%3A%20disabled%20actor%20tells%20of%20nightmare%20train%20journey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fi-feared-for-my-health-disabled-actor-tells-of-nightmare-train-journey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20feared%20for%20my%20health%27%3A%20disabled%20actor%20tells%20of%20nightmare%20train%20journey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fi-feared-for-my-health-disabled-actor-tells-of-nightmare-train-journey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2729cc0374be04bb9f16b05fa2db45db25fe702b%2F0_22_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tanni Grey-Thompson said: ‘The reality as a wheelchair user is that you’re 
always having to plan ahead for toilets.’ Photograph: Tom Dulat/Getty Images 
Bert Massie <http://www.cecops.org.uk/about-us/chairman/>, the former chair of 
the Disability Rights Commission, which was replaced by the Equality and Human 
Rights Commission in 2007, said the women were brave to speak out about their 
experiences. “It takes courage to speak out in public about these things,” said 
Massie, who shared his own story about ScotAirwaysrefusing to take him on an 
airplane <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/oct/19/nicolahill> in 2000. “But 
I am sure that for every person who goes public, there is an undisclosed number 
of people who are suffering indignity in private.”


He added that things had got better, but there were still regular failings 
across train companies. “It is surely not an excessive request to make sure 
that when someone is on a long train journey, they are able to use the toilet,” 
he said.


Phil Friend <http://www.rica.org.uk/content/trustees>, a disability campaigner 
and chair of the board of trustees at theResearch Institute for Consumer Affairs
 <http://www.rica.org.uk/content/about-us>, which conducts research for older 
and disabled people, said it was difficult for people with disabilities to find 
out about toilet accessibility on specific trains. “The thing that is really 
disgraceful is that incidents like this mean that many people won’t travel, 
they just won’t go out,” he said.


Like many people with disabilities the Guardian spoke to he had also been 
forced to get off a train to use a toilet, before waiting an hour for the next 
one. Wheelchair users point out that this often has knock-on consequences as 
the next train has no prior warning that a disabled person will be travelling, 
and there will be nothing in place to help them get on or off the train.


“For Anne, a strong woman leading an active independent life, this must have 
had a devastating effect,” he said. “Back in the day when we travelled in the 
guard’s van maybe this was acceptable, but not any more.”

A Virgin Trains spokesperson said: “We’re extremely disappointed to hear of 
Samantha’s experience. We want everyone to have an enjoyable experience on our 
trains and will look into this specific incident to understand exactly what 
happened.”

 