
This is my mother holding me up as a toddler to get a closer look at Queen 
Mary, who was strolling through Kew Gardens in London with her lady-in-waiting. 
I find it extraordinary how casual they are, that there are no barriers or 
security. I’ve often wondered whether a press photographer got a tip-off, or 
just happened to be there. Either way, this picture was published somewhere 
under the headline: “Down to Kew in lilac time”. My mother,Brenda Landon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brenda_Pye>, and her friend curtsied as she 
walked past.

Queen Mary was married to George V; she would have experienced her husband’s 
death, followed by the abdication ofEdward VIII 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_VIII>, the year before. I have little 
memory of her beyond her wonderful dresses and hats. It looks like two 
different worlds: the Queen and her lady-in-waiting from one era, and my mother 
and her friend – slim, with their fashionable dresses and short hair – from 
another. My mother always looked good.

She was unconventional and a lot of fun, always pointing things out and 
questioning things. I was an only child, and we lived in Richmond. After the 
war, she was essentially a single mother. Although she was at home with me, she 
was a successful artist, and exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Salon in 
Paris (she was also known, after her second marriage, as Brenda Pye). She had a 
scholarship to study at Chelsea School of Art in the 1920s. She had always 
moved in artistic circles: I have a painting of her aged seven, in 1914, 
hanging at home in London, painted byHenry Strachey 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Strachey_%28artist%29>, a cousin of Lytton 
Strachey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/sep/10/great-dynasties-bloomsbury-group-ian-sansom>
. She would accept commissions, but only if she could bring me along. I loved 
watching her work, and was always encouraged to paint and draw.

‘I was never a big oat eater’: Jeremy Young poses with a bowl of Porage Oats, 
1967
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/18/scotts-porage-oats-advert-1967-jeremy-young>
The second world war started a few years later. We were living in Lewes, East 
Sussex, and I remember German planes flying over on their way to London and 
other cities. They would sometimes offload their bombs near us on the way back 
if they hadn’t dropped them. My mother would put me in the cupboard under the 
stairs while they passed. I remember making cheese straws and hiding there 
with sticky fingers – and probably the mixing bowl on my head instead of a hard 
hat.

She was part of an artists’ group in Lewes, and would sit as a model for life 
classes, including those of the Bloomsbury set painterDuncan Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jun/25/maevkennedy>. Later, my mother 
started a pottery atGlynde Place <http://www.visitsussex.org/page/glynde-place/>
, a historical house outside Lewes, and taught pottery in Hove.

There were a lot of wonderful women in our family. My great-aunt Bertha Capron 
was one of the very early women drivers. She always had a man in the passenger 
seat to change the many punctures she got. She also started a men’s football 
club in Mortimer, Berkshire.

I don’t feel this is me in the picture. It was so long ago, and it could be 
any little girl. If my mother hadn’t stopped to look, I’d never have known I 
was there.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 