
I’m told to hide my tattoos at work, while male colleagues are not

I read the employment regulations carefully when starting a new job to work 
out whether I would have to cover my tattoos up. None of mine are “offensive” 
in content or design yet I have been repeatedly asked to hide them – odd when 
my male colleagues do not have to follow suit. I am careful when attending an 
interview and wear a high neck or long sleeves. I don’t want to give any future 
employer a chance to not hire me based on their discriminatory ideals.

Ink-credible: share stories of tattoo discrimination at work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/29/ink-credible-share-stories-of-tattoo-discrimination-at-work>
Older employees tend to be shocked about my tattoos, and feel that I am making 
a mistake. I have been told that I will regret it when I am older many times. 
Being nearly 40 now I find this quite ridiculous and I get annoyed anyone would 
comment on another person and their life choices.Cat, Southampton

He said: ‘No wonder the education system is going down the pan if they let 
people like you teach’

As a teacher, opinion is divided about tattoos at work. This summer my HR 
department told me they had received a complaint about the tattoo on my leg and 
asked me to cover it up. It was a particularly hot day and I was wearing a 
skirt so they asked me to go and buy a pair of thick tights. My school isn’t 
near a shop and I don’t drive. When I told HR this, they asked another member 
of staff to lend me her tights for the day. It was then suggested that I 
reimburse her for them.

I was also told once by a man once that, because of my tattoos, it was “no 
wonder the education system was going down the pan if they let people like me 
teach”.

I tend to keep my tattoos covered in my present job, but if students catch a 
glimpse of them they don’t normally say anything at all.Tattoos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tattoos> are so normal now that it just 
isn’t a talking point for them.Anonymous

Members of the public are fascinated by my ink

I’ve been a firefighter for over 20 years and there was no tattoo policy at 
work until this year. Since then I have been told I need to look professional 
and my tattoos might look intimidating. I may be asked to cover them at medal 
ceremonies, or if a member of public is offended. I have found children and 
members of public are fascinated by my ink – it breaks down barriers, is a 
talking point and makes me more approachable.

Workforces, especially public services, are supposed to employ a cross section 
of society by law. I believe they will be missing out on individuals who would 
be perfect for the role if they choose not to recruit them because of visible 
tattoos.Anonymous 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fi-never-feel-comfortable-with-my-tattoos-on-show-your-work-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e95581bb8bd9a98a041a38b98a502f522bc790e%2F0_84_1131_1412%2F1131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20never%20feel%20comfortable%20with%20my%20tattoos%20on%20show'%3A%20your%20work%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fi-never-feel-comfortable-with-my-tattoos-on-show-your-work-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20never%20feel%20comfortable%20with%20my%20tattoos%20on%20show%27%3A%20your%20work%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fi-never-feel-comfortable-with-my-tattoos-on-show-your-work-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e95581bb8bd9a98a041a38b98a502f522bc790e%2F0_84_1131_1412%2F1131.jpg>
 ‘Not everyone in the company shares my boss’s views,’ says investment adviser 
Sadie. Photograph: Sadie 
I never feel comfortable at work with my tattoo uncovered

Before even finding and being offered my current job, I was advised on 
multiple occasions by recruiters to “cover up”. I followed their advice and 
ensured that I wore full sleeves to all interviews. When I was started my new 
role my boss assured me he was perfectly comfortable with my tattoo and was 
happy for me to wear the same clothes as anyone else in the office, provided I 
cover it up in client-facing areas, which I felt was completely fair. Not 
everyone else in the company shared my boss’s views. On one of the hottest days 
of the year I came into the office with a cardigan over the top of my formal, 
sleeveless dress though decided to take this off at my desk as I was 
uncomfortably hot. Someone from HR told me I would need to cover up.

I spent the next two hours sweating uncomfortably and feeling upset and 
embarrassed. When my boss caught wind of what happened he immediately marched 
over to HR and demanded an explanation. The damage had already been done and I 
now never feel comfortable at work with my tattoo uncovered.Sadie, investment 
adviser, London

My tattoos are seen as a quirk, but I’m aware female friends are perceived 
negatively for being inked

In the workplace, I haven’t been discriminated against because of my tattoos. 
I would question if I actually could be because of them; I made the choice to 
get them and any negative repercussions that come from that are consequences I 
took into consideration when getting tattooed.

I’m a white, middle-class, white-collar worker. My tattoos are perceived as a 
“quirk” generally. I am, however, well aware that a lot of my female friends 
are perceived negatively for being tattooed. While I do feel I have had to work 
slightly harder to win people over in some meetings where my tattoos have been 
visible, they become an irrelevance once people realise I am good at what I do.

At after work drinks, an old colleagues did try and remove my top one time. 
People appear to feel that because you have tattoos, they are entitled to touch 
them.James, platform analyst

I receive daily comments, questions and opinions from colleagues

I’ve experienced discrimination at work, both from colleagues and customers. 
When working in a customer-facing environment, I’ve been told I have to cover 
them, received judgment and questions from customers, asking “why would you 
want them?”.

Working in a non-customer facing environment doesn’t feel as bad but I still 
receive daily comments, questions and opinions from colleagues, which aren’t 
always welcome.

I genuinely believe the reason I’ve struggled to progress so much is because 
of my appearance. I’ve put this to a few colleagues who haven’t disputed this 
idea. Tattoos need to be seen as art, rather than a symbol of defiance. Having 
tattoos on your body doesn’t prevent you from doing anything a non-tattooed 
person could do.Megan, bank worker, Midlands

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 