
Dave Robertson says he seldom talks to his Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United team about what he 
did before coaching because “the last thing I want to do is turn into Uncle 
Albert and have the players going: ‘Oh, here he goes again, how many ships did 
you sink?’” But the players know, all the same, that the man who will try to 
lead them to promotion to the Championship this season is a 41-year-old former 
Royal Marines commando who has seen and done things that make whingeing about 
pre-season training unthinkable.

“Of all the theatres of war that I worked in, I didn’t like the desert because 
there was no cover, there was sand everywhere and I thought it was quite a 
tough environment to work in,” says Robertson when asked to single out his most 
gruelling experience in a green beret.

“That was in Kuwait, where we did a lot of training with Kuwaiti commandos 
near the airport just after it had been bombed. But I really thrived in Norway 
when we did our Arctic warfare training, I would say that’s the fittest, 
strongest and the best condition I’ve ever been in. Natural skiing with a 120lb 
(54kg) pack and four-man tent, Monday to Saturday, week in, week out. Going 
above the treeline and then coming back down. Unfortunately we lost a few guys 
on that exercise.” Lost? “They passed away because of the intensity of the 
training and the environment.”

Dagenham-born Robertson’s first passion was football – in particular West Ham, 
for whom as a six-year-old he was a pre-match mascot – but after not being 
offered a contract by any club by the age of 16, he shelved his dream of 
becoming a professional player and enlisted in the marines, like his father and 
grandfather. He loved the military life, completing his commando test at 17 
before embarking on active duty, including two tours of Northern Ireland.

He would have happily remained a commando until the mandatory retirement age 
of 40 if not for a virus contracted during jungle warfare training in Guyana in 
1995. He had gone to a doctor after emerging from the jungle expecting to be 
prescribed antibiotics, but tests showed the problem to be more serious than he 
suspected.

“I’ll never forget the day,” he says. “I was just about to go out for a 
15-mile yomp with one of my mates and I got a phone call off the medical 
officer from 4/5 commando. He said: ‘Marine Robertson, whatever you do, don’t 
do any physical exercise. You’re booked in to have a pacemaker fitted at Dundee 
Royal infirmary.’ I have no shame whatsoever in admitting that I was knocked 
for six. I didn’t even know what a pacemaker was, all I knew was that I was 
going to have heart surgery.”

Robertson returned to service after his operation – and even won an award as 
the marines’ footballer of the year in 1996 – but the pacemaker led him to 
leave the forces.

“It didn’t affect me physically but I couldn’t go on a warship and with all 
the electronic countermeasures they have now on every battlefield, my days of 
active service were unfortunately over. So I went to a medical board and got 
medically discharged. It was unfortunate but maybe now, from down the line, it 
was a blessing in disguise.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438553223619%2F79cc0bcc-e7de-4537-a079-7e996e08ea00-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20really%20thrived%20in%20Norway%20when%20we%20did%20our%20Arctic%20warfare%20training%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20really%20thrived%20in%20Norway%20when%20we%20did%20our%20Arctic%20warfare%20training%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438553223619%2F79cc0bcc-e7de-4537-a079-7e996e08ea00-680x1020.jpeg>
 Peterborough manager Dave Robertson when he served in the military. 
Photograph: Dave Robertson 
Robertson returned to his first love, completing a coaching course at 
Portsmouth before working with Crystal Palace and, eventually, Peterborough 
United, where he took charge of youth teams before graduating to the role of 
academy manager.

In 2013 he became one of 178 coaches in England with the Uefa Pro Licence. When
Darren Ferguson was sacked in February this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/21/peterborough-part-company-darren-ferguson-manager>
 with Peterborough 16th in League One and sliding towards relegation, Robertson 
was placed in charge of the first team on a caretaker basis and turned the side 
around, guiding them to a ninth-place finish. In May he was appointed manager 
permanently after presenting the chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, with a 35-point 
plan for uplifting the Posh.

“I’m very in-depth and thorough in what I do, and what I didn’t want to do was 
go into that interview process and leave any stone unturned. I knew the 
chairman was going to interview other people, some who would have more 
experience as a manager than me. But the chairman definitely understood my 
ambitions and what I wanted to achieve. But he also needed to understand the 
process we were going to use to get there so I went through it from top to 
bottom, covering every area of the club.”

He is unashamedly ambitious in what he wants to achieve in his first full 
season as manager: promotion to the Championship, with panache.

A lack of penetration was one of Peterborough’s main problems last term – they 
scored six fewer goals than relegated Leyton Orient – but Robertson has been 
working on revamping their approach.

“We want goals, we want players with footballing bravery, which is terminology 
I use a lot, we want players who are brave enough to deal with the ball in 
tight areas and have the physical capacity to run in behind and cause problems 
for defenders, so I want them to be risk-takers,” says Robertson, whose side 
scored 17 goals in their first five pre-season friendlies.

The club’s six summer recruits – all for little or no fee, as usual – are 
attackers. The formerWest Ham midfielder Jack Collison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/30/jack-collinson-west-ham-wales>
 has been brought in to revive his career after serious injury and there are 
high expectations around Joe Gormley, the striker signed from Cliftonville 
after scoring 41 goals in the Irish League last season.

“I believe he [Gormley] will score 25-plus goals in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> this season and to get 
him alongside Conor Washington in a strike partnership was a big aim of mine,” 
says Robertson, who also signed Lee Angol, the top scorer in the Conference 
South last season with Boreham Wood, and Souleymane Coulibaly, a former Spurs 
reserve who has scored 14 goals in nine appearances for Ivory Coast under-20s.

Robertson has spent the summer honing his team. “The players have worked 
harder physically and mentally than ever before,” he says. “The mental approach 
was a big thing that I took from my military background because we never ever 
went into anything without the mindset of wanting to be the best. Adding that 
to this group has been really important to me and there has been a big change 
in that side of things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438594450246%2Fb404eb0e-3d23-47ae-b448-ff98de25a46f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20really%20thrived%20in%20Norway%20when%20we%20did%20our%20Arctic%20warfare%20training%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20really%20thrived%20in%20Norway%20when%20we%20did%20our%20Arctic%20warfare%20training%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fpeterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438594450246%2Fb404eb0e-3d23-47ae-b448-ff98de25a46f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dave Robertson says he has pushed Peterborough’s players ‘beyond the limits 
that they felt they could go’. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
The physical work – all done with a ball – served similar ends. “The physical 
conditioning of the players has helped us to develop that strength of mind 
because by pushing them beyond the limits they felt they could go, they got 
that sense of achievement and euphoria that anyone who has been to the limits 
of physical exertion will understand you get at the end of it. So I’ve really 
linked both of those things into the training programme in a number of 
different ways.

“As a result we’ve got players who can maintain their emotional control while 
working at the peak of their physical capacity. If we do that, I firmly believe 
we’re going to win more games than we lose because the concentration levels 
will be better and we’ll be able to sense when the right time is to dominate 
our opponents and go one step further because they’re not trained to do it and 
not prepared to do it. That’s what’s going to give our team an edge.”

Ever meticulous, Robertson has broken the season down into cycles and set a 
points target from each one. Each player has also been given position-specific 
individual targets, anything from percentage of completed passes to their 
number of “positive intentions”. The regime is deliberately demanding but 
intended to be inspiring rather than intimidating. During a visit to the 
training ground it is interesting to see the players seem buoyant and address 
their manager as “Robbo” rather than “Mr Robertson”, “Gaffer” or “Sir”.

And how does “Robbo” address his chairman? MacAnthony is one of the most 
outspoken owners in the league, one who has been known to respond to poor 
results bytaking to Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/10/peterborough-chairman-darragh-macanthony-attack-players>
 to berate his staff. Is Robertson ready to deal with such outbursts?

“I am prepared for that. I actually enjoy the chairman’s passion. I phone him 
every day after training when he’s back in the States or I go straight up and 
see him after every game when he’s here. We have a good relationship. He will 
tell me bluntly how he feels and I will tell him my thoughts quite bluntly. But 
the good thing with the chairman is you know where you stand and I wouldn’t 
want it any other way.

“There are so many owners and boards out there that all have different agendas 
and I’d much rather be in a position where I can pick up the phone and have the 
conversation with the chairman as opposed to having to lobby seven or eight 
board members or have the same conversation seven or eight times.

“For me as a manager to have that relationship with the chairman is brilliant. 
We do have our rants and ravings with each other but it’s not personal. And he 
is a good leader. He is the decision-maker and I think the club is in great 
hands.”

Peterborough are rightly among the League One favourites for promotion and 
they are certainly not going to be boring.
 