
I was 19 and studying textile design at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camberwell_College_of_Arts> in south-east 
London. I wanted to earn some money during my summer break, so I could go on a 
trip to Italy with friends. I’d noticed a female road sweeper using an 
old-fashioned cart in Clapham, where I lived, and read that they earned good 
money. I applied to Lambeth council, but they didn’t have any vacancies, so I 
approached neighbouring Wandsworth. And that’s how I became their first female 
road sweeper.

I worked for six weeks, cleaning the pavements around Putney High Street. I’d 
push the cleaner (it’s behind me in the picture), and use the brush to get into 
corners. I was the first woman to use a vacuum sweeper. It was really quite 
pleasant; it was summer and the work kept me fit. I took real pride in the job, 
getting those pavements clean. I’d pick up the machine in the morning and work 
from around 7am to 4pm.

The Sex Discrimination Act 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_Discrimination_Act_1975> had come into force 
that year, so along with the fact that I probably stood out because I was a 
woman, the press soon got in touch. This photograph appeared in the London 
Evening Standard on 29 July under the slightly titillating headline: “Julia 
Gives ’Em The Brush-Off! Sweeping many a male off his feet in Wandsworth is 
council roadsweeper Julia Fieldwick.” It’s embarrassing to admit, but they also 
got me to pose in hotpants by my road sweeper: I was naive, and felt a bit 
manipulated, but these days it’s hard to believe I didn’t refuse. Radio 4 
picked up the story and interviewed me. I expect I was a great way to 
illustrate the new discrimination act, but really, I wasn’t political. I was a 
bit of a feminist, but that’s not why I was doing the job; I just wanted the 
money. I thought, “If I can push that heavy machine, I can do this job.”

Meet the women doing 'men's work'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/26/meet-women-doing-mens-work>
I got a few irritating comments. One man got out of his car and said, “You 
look like a nice girl – why is your boyfriend letting you do this job?” I 
replied, “Why do I care what he thinks?” But another time, a woman came out of 
her shop and gave me some fruit that was about to go off. It was very sweet; I 
think she thought I was impoverished. People often called out things like, 
“Have you seen any £10 notes?” The other cleaners, all of them men, were great, 
and really protective of me.

I went to Italy later that summer for five weeks. It was the first time I’d 
been on holiday without my parents. It was incredible: four friends (all art 
students) and I travelled all around, by train, coach and hitchhiking, visiting 
galleries and looking at frescoes in churches.

After college, I followed my dream and worked as an artist and designer, 
before becoming an art teacher later in life. I met my husband, the music 
writer, radio producer and broadcasterJohn Pidgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/21/john-pidgeon-obituary>, 
when I was 23. He died last summer from cancer. So 2016 was an interesting 
year, but it wasn’t all ghastly. We received a lot of love.

My daughter found this photograph after Googling my maiden name, and thought 
it was hilarious. But I think she was also rather proud of me. We discovered 
the newspaper cutting a few years later. It wasn’t my last cleaning job; I went 
back the following summer.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 