
Peter, 82, and Luis, 17

A retired black-cab driver with five grandchildren, including Luis, Peter sums 
up his personal style as “neat”. He likes blazers and tailored jackets in 
maroon or milk chocolate, and arrives at our shoot in a checked green Austin 
Reed jacket with slim-cut Farah trousers. He is not fond of an M&S cut: “Too 
much fabric, flapping about like a sailor. When I was a boy, it was the teddy 
boy era: we wore drainpipe trousers.”

Peter isn’t convinced by how teenagers dress today – “They sell trousers 
already split!” – but does like the tobacco overcoat his grandson arrives in. 
He also approves of the rollneck-under-the-shirt look he is asked to model: it 
ticks the neat box.

Is there anything Luis envies in his grandad’s wardrobe? “The one thing I 
would borrow is a pair of his cream suit trousers. I’d roll them up and wear 
them with a hoodie.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d0b336b8654cdd89118f586b6448460b89e7e8%2F0_11_5484_6850%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20a%20snappy%20dresser%20in%20my%20day'%3A%20models%20and%20grandads%20do%20cardigan%20chic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20a%20snappy%20dresser%20in%20my%20day%27%3A%20models%20and%20grandads%20do%20cardigan%20chic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d0b336b8654cdd89118f586b6448460b89e7e8%2F0_11_5484_6850%2F5484.jpg>
 Vic wears cardigan, norse projects.com. Gilet, prada.com.Shirt 
<http://several.co/collections/shirts/products/bd-shirt-white-oxford>, 
several.co. Miles wears cardigan and trousers, prada.com.Cardigan 
<https://www.margarethowell.co.uk/men-aw16/knitwear/mhl-pocket-cardigan-wool-dark-green-1>
 (worn underneath) andshirt 
<https://www.margarethowell.co.uk/men-aw16/shirts/classic-shirt-poplin-white>, 
margarethowell.co.uk. Photograph: Nik Hartley for the Guardian 
Vic, 78, and Miles, 26

Vic and Miles met through a carers’ scheme and became friends; they now see 
each other once a week for a day out. Vic has one grandchild and is a retired 
movie poster designer and artist: his CV includesThe Man Who Fell To Earth 
<http://www.towatchpile.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Man-Who-Fell-To-Earth-poster.jpg>
 and the now iconic collectors’ edition of A View To A Kill (the one with Roger 
Moore in a white tuxedo jacket 
<http://www.scifi-movies.com/images/contenu/data/0003910/affiche-dangereusement-votre-a-view-to-a-kill-1985-9.jpg>
).

Miles describes Vic’s personal style as “somewhere between George Clooney and 
Guy Fawkes”. “He has a great collection of hats, including a Russian sailor 
one. He wears his scarf that old-school 60s way, the way the Rolling Stones 
did. Vic comes from a generation when casual wasn’t a look. Guys always looked 
smart when they went out, not like me in my ripped jeans.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf66a362fe7336b31ea5e6b4c3129a4dfb3d64%2F156_56_5171_7063%2F5171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20a%20snappy%20dresser%20in%20my%20day'%3A%20models%20and%20grandads%20do%20cardigan%20chic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20a%20snappy%20dresser%20in%20my%20day%27%3A%20models%20and%20grandads%20do%20cardigan%20chic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fsnappy-dresser-cardigan-chic-models-grandads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf66a362fe7336b31ea5e6b4c3129a4dfb3d64%2F156_56_5171_7063%2F5171.jpg>
 Phil wearscardigan 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/products/Sunspel-V-neck-wool-cardigan-1069359> 
by Sunspel, from matchesfashion.com.T-shirt 
<https://oliverspencer.co.uk/envelope-tee-jersey-charcoal-marl-osk461a>, 
oliverspencer.co.uk. Trousers by Harmony, from fenwick.co.uk. Trainers, 
cosstores.com. Dudley wears cardigan by Editions MR, from fenwick.co.uk. 
Trousers, marksandspencer.com. Photograph: Nik Hartley for the Guardian 
Dudley, 86, and Phil, 39

Retired accountant Dudley is Phil’s father. Despite initial reservations – 
“This reminds me of going for a prostate exam” – he is soon showing his son, 
who works in the music industry, how to work it on set. Dudley wears his own 
loafers, bought on a day trip to France with his wife a few years ago (and worn 
to Phil’s wedding). “I was a snappy dresser in my day,” he says. “I used to 
wear a zoot suit.” And he takes a black and white photograph from his wallet to 
prove it – it’s of a 22-year-old Dudley in a double-breasted grey suit with 
lemon striped tie: a look, he says, that went down very well with his 
girlfriend of the time.

What does his son make of his style? “Dad has always been a smart dresser. It 
doesn’t matter about the destination or occasion. Smart black leather shoes, 
pressed shirt and trousers is his uniform. When I went out in jeans and 
trainers, he’d say, ‘Son, you’ve been brought up, not dragged up.’ For him, 
your style is a reflection on your upbringing. I can’t remember the last time I 
saw him in a T-shirt. I very much doubt I ever will.”

• Styling: Helen Seamons. Photographer’s assistant: Will Corry. Fashion 
assistant: Billie Brand. Hair: Ben Jones using Bumble and bumble and Sisley 
Paris Skincare. Model: Luis at Named Models.
 