
John Rumney says that just a year ago, this particular spot was once the most 
stunning coral garden on the entireGreat Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef>. If a film crew 
said it wanted to get a cliche shot of the reef with its mind-boggling richness 
of coral and fish species, this was where he took them.

Now he’s taking us there to see the destruction wrought by climate change. He 
says the fact this reef was used in so many films and magazines means it’s a 
perfect location to see the effects of the recent bleaching event.

He tells us he would regularly describe the location as having “more than 100% 
coral cover”. “It was growing on top of each other and underneath. It was just 
magnificent,” says Rumney, a veteran reef tourism operator, who helped pioneer 
ecotourism on the reef, and is now establishing a privately funded non-profit 
research enterprise, Great Barrier Reef Legacy 
<https://www.greatbarrierreeflegacy.org/>.

Leonardo DiCaprio given rival invitations to visit Great Barrier Reef
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/20/leonardo-dicaprio-given-rival-invitations-to-visit-great-barrier-reef>
“So we have a great baseline of what it was like. And it was absolutely 
fantastic,” says Rumney. “So anything that is damaged is directly proportional 
to this year’s bleaching. It’s not like it’s 50% dead and then you had 
bleaching so you don’t know what is old and new.”

Much has been written about the devastating global coral bleaching event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/nasa-scans-great-barrier-reef-to-find-answers-to-corals-poor-health>
 that has snaked its way around the world since 2014, and which touched 93% of 
reefs on the Great Barrier Reef this year.


Surveys of the full impact suggest the worst impacts were in the remote 
northern third of the reef, far from where tourists regularly go. While almost 
a quarter of coral has been killed on the Great Barrier Reef, it has been 
concentrated in the area north of Port Douglas.

Despite that, the effects on this reef just 50km north-east of Port Douglas – 
the most popular launching point for reef tourism – have been severe.

Guardian Australia is here with the Climate Council, which visited this reef 
at the peak of the bleaching, in May, and has come back now to see how much has 
recovered.

Snorkelling on the outer reef where the water is crystal clear, it’s obvious 
what a vibrant reef it would have been just a few months ago.

While the seafloor is almost completely covered by coral, much of it is dead, 
covered with algae and starting to lose its structure. There are few of the 
fish that use coral as cover, but plenty of parrot fish and others that feed on 
the algae that is starting to cover the reef.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fits-a-depressing-sight-climate-change-unleashes-ghostly-death-on-great-barrier-reef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed83032a45d13c4590a65dab3d0037be3daf2561%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20depressing%20sight%E2%80%99%3A%20climate%20change%20unleashes%20ghostly%20death%20on%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fits-a-depressing-sight-climate-change-unleashes-ghostly-death-on-great-barrier-reef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20depressing%20sight%E2%80%99%3A%20climate%20change%20unleashes%20ghostly%20death%20on%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fits-a-depressing-sight-climate-change-unleashes-ghostly-death-on-great-barrier-reef%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed83032a45d13c4590a65dab3d0037be3daf2561%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
 John and Linda Rumney on the Great Barrier Reef Photograph: John Rumney 
Tim Flannery <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tim-flannery>, a prominent 
conservationist and a Climate Council councillor, visited this reef in May. 
“The coral wasn’t dead but it was severely damaged,” he says.

Although a proper study would be needed to make a full estimate of how much 
was bleached back then, Rumney and Flannery say it was in the order of 80% to 
90%.

As would be expected in all but the most extreme marine heatwaves, most of the 
coral found bleached in May recovered.

Coral <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coral> bleaches when the water 
around it is too warm for too long. The coral polyps get stressed and spit out 
the algae that lives inside it. Without the colourful algae, the coral flesh 
becomes transparent, revealing the stark white skeleton beneath.

Because the algae provides the coral with 90% of its energy, it begins to 
starve. Unless the ocean temperature return to normal within a month or two, 
the coral dies and gets taken over by a blanket of seaweed.

Now, upon Flannery’s return, the state of this particular reef has advanced to 
the point where it appears about 30% of the coral has died.

Emerging from the water, Lesley Hughes, another of the Climate Council’s 
councillors and an ecologist from Macquarie University, says it’s distressing 
to see so much death on the reef.

The Great Barrier Reef: a catastrophe laid bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
Alongside the dead coral and algae, there appears to be an outbreak of the 
coral-eating crown-of-thorns starfish. Under dead, broken coral, groups of 
starfish congregate, munching on the remaining live coral.

“So all up it’s a pretty depressing site down there actually,” Hughes says.

The bleaching event was caused by unusually warm water. It was spurred on by 
El Niño, but the unprecedented level of heat was a clear sign the primary cause 
was global warming.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fgreat-barrier-reef-diving-in-the-stench-of-millions-of-rotting-animals-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20diving%20in%20the%20stench%20of%20millions%20of%20rotting%20animals%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fgreat-barrier-reef-diving-in-the-stench-of-millions-of-rotting-animals-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20diving%20in%20the%20stench%20of%20millions%20of%20rotting%20animals%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fgreat-barrier-reef-diving-in-the-stench-of-millions-of-rotting-animals-video&media=>
Great Barrier Reef: diving in the stench of millions of rotting animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/jun/07/great-barrier-reef-diving-in-the-stench-of-millions-of-rotting-animals-video>
“You’d be easily fooled into thinking this was some sort of natural event,” 
says Flannery. “But it has been caused by people. It’s the burden of greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere causing these unprecedented underwater heatwaves that 
these ecosystems have just never experienced before and just have no capacity 
to absorb. The coral just dies.”

For Flannery, the dead coral is a stark reminder of the well-known response 
that is needed to climate change.

“If it was up to me and I was the Australian government looking at the loss of 
this asset, I would be announcing a plan to close down all of our coal-fired 
power plants over a given period of time, shift to clean energy, and do 
whatever it takes in the transport sector and so forth to make that 
transition,” he says.

“And then go to the international community and say ‘look, this global asset 
is in real danger, here’s what we’ve done to try and secure it, please join us 
to do your bit as well’.”

To head back to Port Douglas from the outer reef, we weave through the ribbons 
of reef that link together for hundreds of kilometres along theQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> coast. As we approach 
the shore, a ship in the distance gets larger and larger and we slowly realise 
it’s a coal tanker.

Having collected its coal from one of the ports that dot the Great Barrier 
Reef, it’s delivering it to somewhere in the world – perhaps India or China – 
where it will be burned, create more greenhouse gases and further warm the 
atmosphere, making the next coral bleaching more likely.

• Michael Slezak and Josh Wall were guests of the Climate Council
 