
It’s more than six decades since Shirley Leach swapped her debutante’s dresses 
for a nun’s habit and changed her name to Sister Agatha. But the “wild fury” 
she felt as a 21-year-old on the threshold of life at what she saw as God’s 
command to enter a convent is easily recalled. “It was the end of all my 
dreams, they were taken away in a single moment,” she said.

Now, at the age of 85, Sister Agatha has no regrets about the course of her 
life. “To have been asked by God to be in that particular relationship with him 
is the most amazing thing. I never doubted where I was meant to be.”


The former socialite has shared her story in a ghostwritten autobiography, A 
Nun’s Story, published this week, which chronicles her transformation from 
Shirley to Agatha. Despite her vivid recollections, the text cannot convey her 
cut-glass accent which locates her origins firmly in the British upper class.


Leach grew up in a 23-bedroom, 43-acre mansion in the North Downs of Kent. The 
house was requisitioned during the war by the military, but she, her mother and 
three much older sisters – her father had died – were allowed to remain. She 
remembers watching the Battle of Britain from the roof as a child. “War was the 
most wonderful time. Everyone was very kind to me,” she said.

Her mother, Ximena, was “a most devout member of the Church of England. Every 
day I had to read to her from the scriptures. We certainly went to church every 
Sunday. As a family, we were very ’establishment’.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fit-was-the-end-of-my-dreams-and-my-life-but-i-never-considered-saying-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72309382cbdcb1775caedd1ebc129d642199fc2f%2F0_157_1212_727%2F1212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20end%20of%20my%20dreams%20and%20my%20life.%20But%20I%20never%20considered%20saying%20no%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fit-was-the-end-of-my-dreams-and-my-life-but-i-never-considered-saying-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20end%20of%20my%20dreams%20and%20my%20life.%20But%20I%20never%20considered%20saying%20no%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fit-was-the-end-of-my-dreams-and-my-life-but-i-never-considered-saying-no%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72309382cbdcb1775caedd1ebc129d642199fc2f%2F0_157_1212_727%2F1212.jpg>
 Shirley Leach as a young woman. 
Despite such religious devotion, life was far from ascetic. There were dances 
and parties, ponies and tennis, frocks and pearls, a governess, cook, nanny and 
butler – and boys. “I can’t remember a time when I wasn’t in love with someone, 
from the age of five when I fell for the stable boy,” she said.


Boarding school was followed by a 30-week cookery course at an establishment 
attached to a Catholic convent. Then Miss Shirley, as she was called, was 
prepared for presentation to court as debutante.


“My mother was determined to see at least one of her daughters presented to 
His Majesty … I was to be presented, packaged up, sold to the world of wealth 
and privilege and, even more importantly, to the cache of suitors seeking the 
hand of a rich young lady who was rapidly growing up,” her autobiography says.


After being presented to King George - “too much makeup on his face” - the 
debutantes “bubbled full of champagne and talked too loudly, with accents 
enough to cut the silk cushions to shreds.” Leach was one of the last 
debutantes to be presented; within a few years, the court ceremony would be 
abolished in a rapidly changing society.


At the same time, to her mother’s dismay, she was becoming ever more drawn to 
Catholicism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism>. At 19, she 
converted. The following year, she became engaged to a young man, Jeremy 
Chittenden.


The couple planned a wedding for October 1952. A few months before, Leach was 
writing to her fiance to tell him about some Chippendale dining chairs she had 
spotted at an auction house. She suggested making a bid, “but my hand went on 
writing: ‘But there seems no point now as I am to be a nun’.”


She was appalled at what she had written. “It was a terrible shock but I 
immediately knew it was true. I was wild with fury. It was the end of my life, 
my dreams, everything. I was going to have 10 children and a lovely life!” she 
said. But, she added: “I never considered saying no. I couldn’t have lived with 
myself.”


A few months later, Chittenden offered to accompany her to the convent of the 
Congregation of Jesus, founded in 1609. “I scrubbed off all my makeup and 
changed into the most ghastly garments, and Jeremy handed me in,” she said.


Sister Agatha, as she became, later taught home economics at the same Catholic 
convent establishment she had attended as a teenager. In 1976, she was sent to 
be mother superior of the Bar convent in York, the oldest in England, where she 
still lives in a wing reserved for elderly nuns.


During her time in charge of the convent, she brought it to the brink of 
bankruptcy following a decision to open a business – a museum, cafe and shop – 
on the ancient premises. “I had no idea; I was completely clueless,” she said.


Through a man she met on a train, she was introduced to the American 
multimillionaire philanthropist John Paul Getty Jr, who bailed out the convent 
and helped it to establish a charitable trust. “He rescued me,” she said.


Sister Agatha gave up wearing a habit in the late 1980s. “It was absolutely 
marvellous. Everyone was frightfully courteous to a nun in a habit, and you had 
iron control over everyone. But if you’re in ordinary clothes, you hear a 
different story if you’re sitting on a bus, for example.”


Now “moving towards what supermarkets would call my sell-by date”, she has 
time to reflect on her life. Her memories increasingly return to “that big day, 
the day when I knew I’d been chosen, despite my belief I was quite unsuitable”.


During her lifetime, the focus of women in religious orders has shifted from 
teaching in schools to urgent contemporary issues such as human trafficking and 
migration. She welcomed this. “It’s a great joy to me to know that our sisters 
are so involved in issues such as anti-trafficking. Anywhere that women are 
being abused, we want to be there.”


A Nun’s Story, by Sister Agatha with Richard Newman, is published by John 
Blake Publishing <https://johnblakebooks.com>.

 