
Seth Goodburn seemed fit and well until two weeks before he was diagnosed with 
pancreatic cancer. He died just 33 days after diagnosis, spending much of that 
short time in hospital. In the emotional whirlwind of coping with the poor 
prognosis his wife, Lesley, felt their hopes for Seth’s end-of-life care were 
sidelined by medical professionals trying to do their job.

“The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> focuses on the medicine and 
trying to fix people even when that’s not possible,” she says. “A lot of the 
conversations and decisions that we might have made were overshadowed by 
dealing with what was the next medical treatment and intervention.”

There is an ongoing conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/22/dying-patient-taught-me-doing-nothing-brave>
 in the medical profession about how to care for terminally ill patients, given 
that the profession’s instinct is to preserve life. The issue is just one of 
many being address by Brian Daniels, a playwright commissioned by the National 
Council for Palliative Care (NCPC) to tell stories such as Goodburn’s through 
plays, and help educate healthcare professionals about patients and families’ 
experiences of end-of-life care.

How can the NHS build better relationships with partners? Event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/26/nhs-build-better-relationships-partners-event>
Homeward Bound, a play based on a series of letters Lesley Goodburn wrote, in 
the months after her husband’s death, to medical professionals involved in his 
care, launched NCPC’s national conference this year to an audience of 300 
healthcare workers.

In addition, Daniels’ plays on early onset dementia and palliative care for 
those with disabilities, have been performed in hospitals, hospices, care homes 
and to general audiences across the country. Daniels says: “[They] take people 
out of their professional role for a minute to look at the family and human 
side of the people they’re dealing with.”

For Goodburn, that human aspect is key. She could not fault the 
professionalism of those involved in caring for her husband, but says poor 
communication could leave the couple feeling worse. “There were just so many 
things where people weren’t cruel or unkind or deliberately unthinking, but 
just didn’t really think about what it was like to be me and Seth. He went from 
being well and living a normal life to suddenly being told that he was dying.” 
She says, for example, a physiotherapist asked Seth to march on the spot as 
part of an assessment to see if he was able to go home, as he had previously 
wished, seemingly unaware that his condition had deteriorated and he was dying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdeath-plays-teach-healthcare-workers-about-end-of-life-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F641dd43deb56eb7d3799be4b89c850a47ce6fc3b%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Just%20say%20death!'%20Plays%20teach%20healthcare%20workers%20about%20end-of-life%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdeath-plays-teach-healthcare-workers-about-end-of-life-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Just%20say%20death%21%27%20Plays%20teach%20healthcare%20workers%20about%20end-of-life%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdeath-plays-teach-healthcare-workers-about-end-of-life-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F641dd43deb56eb7d3799be4b89c850a47ce6fc3b%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.png>
 An actor in Don’t Leave Me Now. Photograph: NCPC 
Claire Henry, chief executive of the NCPC, says plays such as Homeward Bound 
are designed to encourage medical professionals to reflect on the people going 
through this traumatic process. “We obviously work very closely with people who 
have experience and they tell us their stories. Some are good, some not so 
good. Healthcare professionals don’t go to work to do a bad job, but sometimes 
they don’t think of things that affect people in a broader sense.”

What impact does a play have that a lecture, for instance, cannot? Don’t Leave 
Me Now, another play by Daniels, about early onset dementia, was performed at 
St Gemma’s hospice in Leeds to an audience including nurses, housekeeping staff 
and workers from other local hospices. Dr Mike Stockton, its director of 
medicine and consultant in palliative medicine, says the play enabled them to 
see some of families’ and patients’ challenges through a different lens. “It’s 
sometimes hard to have a full understanding … of what people may be going 
through and the reasons behind their actions or the emotional challenges, 
adjustments or the resilience that people need.”

Lynn Cawley agrees. There was barely a dry eye at a performance at Morley Arts 
Festival in October of Bounce Back Boy, the powerful dramatisation of her 
adopted son, Josh’s, story. Josh was severely disabled following a serious head 
injury as a baby, and later adopted by Cawley. Despite pioneering medical 
treatment throughout Josh’s life, Cawley says he was denied admission as an 
inpatient to a local hospice because his needs were too complex, and died a 
difficult death at home. She is fighting to end what she describes as end of 
life discrimination against those with disabilities.

'Back on my feet': how artificial limbs can have a second life in Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/14/uk-charities-send-recycled-prosthetics-africa>
Cawley thinks a play is an effective way of communicating that message, and 
for getting people to think about palliative care more broadly. She says: “When 
it’s someone’s real life story, people put themselves in it [and] they might 
think of a patient that they know. We hope that it will change policy but also 
people’s attitudes.”

For Stockton, working in a hospice, the wider issue of how treatment is 
balanced with patient comfort is a daily consideration. He says the two can 
often be done together: “It is about having early, thorough, open, honest, 
transparent conversations with people about what they want.”

For Cawley, as a carer and mother who went through the palliative process, 
those open conversations about dying are key. “We even find it hard to say the 
word,” she says. “When we’re watching Casualty on a Saturday night and they’re 
trying to tell a relative that somebody is dying, but they won’t say the word 
dying or death, we’re just like – say death!”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 