 A walk-on part in the Beatles' rise to fame brought "Lord Woodbine", who has 
died in a house fire aged 72, to a wider public than his talents might 
ordinarily have warranted. There were fleeting mentions of him in biographies 
of the group, and, in 1995, Paul McCartney spoke of him with affection in the 
Anthology television series. The previous year, Woodbine had been represented 
in Backbeat, a biopic of the Beatles' Hamburg period, by actor Charlie Caine, 
resplendent in sharkskin suit and snap-brim hat.
As plain Harold Phillips, he arrived in Liverpool from Trinidad in 1948. 
Ennobling himself as "Lord Woodbine" - after the cheap cigarettes he 
chain-smoked - he quickly established himself as one of the city's characters. 
As a builder and decorator, and a calypso singer and barman in Toxteth's 
rougher shebeens (where he defused unrest by brandishing a cutlass), he formed 
the All-Steel Caribbean Band, who were resident in his own New Colony Club. He 
also booked the Beatles, then a scruffy bunch who often turned up with only 
half their equipment or a member short.

The All-Steel band also played evening sessions in the basement of the 
Jaca-randa, a coffee-bar venture run by Allan Williams. After Woodbine left, it 
remained there, as the Royal Caribbean Steel Band, until 1960, when they were 
noticed by a German sailor and poached by a Hamburg club agent.

The band reported the recreational delights of their new-found home to 
Woodbine back in Liverpool. Sniffing a business opportunity, he and Williams 
decamped to the Reeperbahn, where they were soon negotiating with local 
promoters to bring over more accomplished Liverpool groups. This new enterprise 
began with a season by Derry Wilkie and the Seniors at Bruno Koschmider's 
Kaiserkeller.

Back on Merseyside, the Beatles were, twice nightly, accompanying a Mancunian 
stripper at Williams's and Woodbine's New Cabaret Artists Club. Because they 
had so gamely gone through this tasteless assignment, their employers were 
convinced that the group was no longer, as George Harrison would say, 
"hopefully messing about."

When Koschmider requested a group for another of his Hamberg clubs, Woodbine 
drove the then five Beatles - drummer Pete Best, bass player Stuart Sutcliffe 
and guitarists Harrison, McCartney and John Lennon - to Germany in an 
overloaded minibus. Conditions were dire; the musicians' accommodation was in 
pokey rooms adjoining a cinema toilet, and, initially, there was an onstage 
mutiny by the band. But the necessity of keeping up the equivalent of an 
all-night party atmosphere for their audience began the transformation of the 
Beatles from clumsy provincials to a peerless live act and a potential chart 
proposition.

Woodbine, however, was all but lost to the archives of oblivion, though his 
daughter, Barbara, was to surface as a playwright whose work includes episodes 
for Brookside. Well placed to grow fat on Beatlemania, her father instead chose 
to continue living on his wits around Toxteth. He never guested at any of the 
Beatles conventions, and, unlike others less qualified, resisted the chance to 
cash in on the group's fame.

His wife, Helen, died with him in the fire. 

Â• Harold Phillips, 'Lord Woodbine', entrepreneur, born 1928; died July 5 2000
 