
1 Film school doesn’t have all the answers

The jury is still out on whether film school is the best way to break into the 
industry. Producer Michael Berliner never went to film school and had 
“basically zero knowledge” of the industry when he started out. Making a low 
budget film and finding a mentor can help you pick up the formal processes and 
technical skills that you might learn in film school. “Be prepared to face some 
hard work and a steep learning curve,” Berliner says.

Tips on breaking into film – live chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/oct/23/tips-on-breaking-into-film-live-chat>
Screenwriter Rob Sprackling also knew nothing about the technical aspects of 
film when he started his career. He says film school is “extremely helpful” for 
pursuing technical skills, like editing. But for more general skills, such as 
screenwriting, “it is probably less so”.

Rather than spending money on film school, move to Los Angeles, says former 
agent and film career mentor Paul Duddridge. He recommends students pursue 
academic courses at university if possible, while moonlighting in the creative 
arts to build a network.

Although film school is not for everyone, it does have certain advantages, 
such as introducing you to contacts and offering forums to showcase your work, 
says Brian Ward, head of screenwriting at theNational Film and Television School
 <https://nfts.co.uk/> (NFTS). He recommends initiatives such as the British 
Film Institute Academy 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/education-research/5-19-film-education-scheme-2013-2017/bfi-film-academy-scheme>
, a training scheme for 16- 19-year-olds. Carlos Ciudad, VFX production 
supervisor/senior production manager and NFTS graduate, agrees that film school 
helped his career off the ground. “I can assure you it’s worth the investment,” 
he says.

2 Consider different types of jobs in the industry

Research, research, research – find out about the different job roles out 
there.
Kay Verdon 
While roles such as writer, director and producer are the big draws, 
prospective film workers should understand the wide variety of roles in the 
industry, says Kay Verdon, careers manager at Creative Skillset. “Research, 
research, research – find out about the different job roles out there,” she 
says.

Exploring less obvious roles in film – such as in the art department, costume, 
sound, locations – is a good route into the industry, agrees Nicola Lees, agent 
and career mentor. This is how she built her career in film. “I love writing, 
but found my niche in writing proposals for TV programmes rather than 
screenwriting. That brought me a regular income, the opportunity to dip into 
lots of interesting worlds, and also sit at the table with commissioning 
editors in pitch sessions, which was an amazing experience.” She adds that 
there is a shortage of production accountants and location managers. Learning 
to drive should also be a priority for aspiring filmmakers, as roles often 
involve travelling across the country.

3 Build a portfolio of work

Eight tips on starting a career in film and TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/expert-advice-how-get-film-tv-screenwriting-careers>
“The easiest way to get into the industry is to make something. Anything,” 
says Duddridge. “Just start. Shoot anything at all, even on your phone. Even 
the edit software is included in your laptop.” Then enter your film into every 
film festival you can find, he adds. “I’m a huge fan of high-concept, 
low-budget as an attention getter.”

Berliner has a nifty tip for aspiring film-makers looking to produce 
high-quality work on a tight budget: shoot something at an off-peak time of 
year like January, when the equipment houses have spare cameras sitting around. 
But it is worth remembering that content will always trump production values, 
says Berliner.

4 Make connections and collaborate

Attending networking events, like those hosted by organisations such as 
Shooting People <https://shootingpeople.org/home> and Creative England 
<http://www.creativeengland.co.uk/>, is a good way to make industry 
connections. But this can also be done online. Duddridge suggests trawling 
through the film and TV listings siteIMDb <http://www.imdb.com/> to find 
contact details of producers and directors. “Offer your services as an 
assistant or a cheap pair of hands. You will get a bite,” he says.

Breaking into the TV industry, take one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/breaking-into-tv-industry-advice> 
Stay in touch with people your own age who have the same ambitions as you, 
says Niyi Akeju, PR and learning campaigns manager at theBritish Academy of 
Film and Television Arts <http://www.bafta.org/> (Bafta). “They could be your 
future collaborators. We often find that up-and-coming craftspeople have 
collaborated with those at the same experience level as themselves to get their 
first breaks,” she says.

Sites such as Hiive <https://app.hiive.co.uk/>, LinkedIn 
<https://www.linkedin.com/> and Twitter <https://twitter.com/> are also useful 
online networking tools for the film industry. When connecting with people, it 
is important to showcase what value you can add to a project. “Don’t ask for a 
job, ask for advice,” recommends Ciudad.

Finding a mentor who is experienced, but not necessarily a big name in the 
industry, is helpful, says Berliner. “That way, they’re not so distanced from 
the kind of work that you’re doing that they’re unable to advise you properly. 
But because they have been around the block before, they’ll have learned things 
through trial and error, and can hopefully help stop you from treading into the 
same rabbit holes.”

Making friends with third assistant directors is also a good tactic, he adds, 
because they are the ones who hire runners. Once you have credits for short 
films under your belt, the next step is to get junior positions on big 
productions.

Offer your services as an assistant or cheap pair of hands. You will get a 
bite.
Paul Duddridge 
5 Should I get an agent?

“Having an agent can’t hurt but speaking as a former agent, you really don’t 
need one,” says Duddridge. When you immerse yourself in creative projects, 
agents will appear “as if from nowhere”, he says.

The decision to work with an agent boils down to personal choice and your 
skillset. People who are good self-publicists and have a vision of where they 
are heading do not necessarily need an agent, says Berliner. But “fantastically 
creative people who do not have the skills or interest to self-promote 
themselves effectively” should probably get one. But before going down the 
agent route focus on getting a few projects under your belt.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 