
“My dad says women love playing with babies, but why should companies have to 
pay for them to do it?”

This is what one teenager asked me on a recent school visit, while we 
discussed the gender pay gap and maternity discrimination. The question was not 
malicious. It was simply an argument they had absorbed and accepted from their 
parents – and it’s a very common one.

The notion that maternity leave is a lovely holiday women selfishly choose to 
take (often multiple times) is much more common than you might think. It comes 
up in arguments about equal pay, when it is used tojustify the gender pay gap 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2015/07/the-gender-pay-gap-is-a-myth/> because 
women are making the “personal lifestyle decision” to have children and should 
be prepared to accept a loss of earnings. It arises when youdiscuss paid 
maternity leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/jul/20/europeanunion.eu>, and people 
suggest that it is unfair to expect smaller companies to bear the burden of 
financing women’s decisions to take time away from work. It comes up whenwomen 
are described as less valuable and efficient workers because they have babies 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/katie-hopkins-i-would-never-hire-a-woman-95698>. And it 
arose again last week, when the author Meghann Foyetalked to the New York Post 
about her new book 
<http://nypost.com/2016/04/28/i-want-all-the-perks-of-maternity-leave-without-having-any-kids/>
Meternity 
<http://www.amazon.com/Meternity-Meghann-Foye/dp/077831930X?tag=nypost-20?tag=nypost-20>
, proclaiming that women who don’t have children should be entitled to 
“me-ternity leave” – a period of time off work to give “time and space for 
self-reflection”.

As pretty much every parent on the internet has shrewdly pointed out, this 
sounds great, as long as Foye is prepared to spend her me-time being woken by 
screaming every hour and a half, showered indiscriminately with vomit and poo, 
feeling her body slowly recover from enormous physical trauma, dealing with a 
potential cocktail of depression, anxiety and raging hormones and other 
relaxing pastimes.

Nobody is taking issue with the idea that we live and work in a culture where 
people are over-stressed, over-tired and in desperate need of a break. Few 
people have a problem with the argument that employees need better protection, 
support and time off. But why on earth pick on new mothers as the straw man to 
make that argument?

Foye suggests that all women deserve extra time off because they may be 
experiencing higher stress and burnout at work thanks to their greater burden 
of unpaid domstic chores. But the answer to that problem is to redistribute 
household responsibilities and move towards equality in our personal 
relationships – not simply give women a few weeks off work to do all the unpaid 
labour at home.

The real problem with Foye’s argument, and the storm of debate it created, is 
that it plays straight into the hands of those who use the same tired arguments 
to justifydiscrimination against pregnant women and mothers in the workplace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/02/pregnant-women-new-mothers-face-rise-discrimination-at-work>
. It rests on the idea that childbearing is something women choose to do in a 
vacuum, with no involvement from, or benefit to, men.

Pregnant women and new mothers 'face rise in discrimination at work'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/02/pregnant-women-new-mothers-face-rise-discrimination-at-work>
In reality, of course, that idea is ridiculous. As a society we need to 
reproduce. Both biological parents gain a child when a woman becomes pregnant. 
These things are so obvious that it seems silly to write them down, yet if we 
accept these very simple ideas then we should also be able to see that 
maternity leave is a societal necessity and one that should be automatically 
built into our workplaces and institutions, not considered an extra “perk” for 
lucky women.

In reality, we haven’t got our heads around the concept yet. In the US, where 
Foye is writing, the picture for new parents is stark – withno statutory paid 
maternity leave at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/03/-sp-america-only-developed-country-paid-maternity-leave>
 (unlike every other developed country in the world). In the UK,Citizens Advice 
recently warned of a 25 per cent increase in people seeking advice on pregnancy 
and maternity discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/02/pregnant-women-new-mothers-face-rise-discrimination-at-work>
. And last month, astudy revealed that three quarters of pregnant women and new 
mothers experience discrimination at work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/fifth-of-women-harassed-at-work-over-pregnancy-or-flexible-hours-report-finds>
. Recent figures released by the Equality and Human Rights Commission reveal 
that54,000 new mothers lose their jobs across Britain each year 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/our-work/news/pregnancy-and-maternity-discrimination-forces-thousands-new-mothers-out-their-jobs>
 as a result of maternity discrimination. The picture is particularly bleak for 
those on low incomes or for single mothers,with zero-hours contracts playing a 
role in forcing women out of work 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/zero-hour-contracts-force-record-7877600>.

In light of these shocking figures, it is more important than ever that we 
bust the myths surrounding maternity once and for all. Far from a peaceful or 
exciting “sabbatical”, maternity leave is hard work at best, and devastating to 
women’s careers at worst. Flexible working hours, affordable childcare and 
shared parental leave will all help to alleviate the problem, but first we need 
to ditch the idea that pregnant women are “lucky”, “selfish” or a burden to 
society.
 