
On Christmas Day 1898, France’s most famous writer, if not the most famous 
writer in the world at the time, was living in a hotel in Upper Norwood, south 
London. Émile Zola was the author of a clutch of international bestsellers –
Thérèse Raquin <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/nov/25/theatre.stage>, 
Germinal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/19/emile-zola-germinal-ruth-scurr>, 
La Terre, Nana – but this Christmas he was holed up in a room he hated, unable 
to speak English, longing to get back to France.

How had it come to this? It was only two or three years ago that I pieced 
together what Zola enthusiasts have known all along: that he was on the run.

From the archive, 24 February 1898: M. Zola victim of show trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/feb/24/archive-zola-trial-dreyfus-affair-1898>
Early on the morning of 19 July 1898, Zola had stepped off the boat train from 
Calais, carrying nothing more than a nightshirt wrapped in a newspaper and the 
name of the Grosvenor Hotel on a bit of paper. The writer who, for me, had been 
forever fixed in Paris – I imagined him to bea little like Toulouse-Lautrec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/aug/17/toulouse-lautrec-moulin-rouge-paintings>
 but more anonymous, creeping around brothels and sewers, interviewing 
low-lifes and writing their answers in a black leather notebook – had actually 
spent months in the UK, in hiding from the French authorities. And there was 
one word that explained everything: Dreyfus.

Captain Alfred Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/26/alfred-dreyfus-affair-ruth-harris>
 was an army officer who had been found guilty of espionage on the basis of one 
document – in French, thebordereau – which supposedly proved that he had leaked 
information about a gun to the Prussians. He was sentenced to imprisonment on 
Devil’s Island. Was Dreyfus guilty? One view of this was that of course Dreyfus 
was guilty: he was Jewish. Another was that Dreyfus was innocent because the
bordereau was not written in Dreyfus’s handwriting but in the handwriting of 
someone else, Major Esterhazy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0988f72c67c2795a1d46e3641c9348b3af93bd8%2F0_80_2759_1654%2F2759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0988f72c67c2795a1d46e3641c9348b3af93bd8%2F0_80_2759_1654%2F2759.jpg>
 Alfred Dreyfus (far left) on his release from prison. Photograph: Hulton 
Archive/Getty Images 
By this time, the affair was dividing France down the middle: on one side a 
monarchist, nationalist, Catholic and antisemitic bloc, and on the other, an 
alliance of Republicans, Protestants, secularists and socialists.

There were probably several reasons why Zola got involved, but the reason 
Dreyfus’s supporters approached him was that Zola had, in May 1896, written a 
ground-breaking article “Pour les juifs” (“On behalf of the Jews”). This was an 
article written against the folly of antisemitism at the height of nation-wide 
hysteria against Jews. What’s more it was in a sense written against his former 
self, the author ofL’Argent (Money) a novel which had reproduced many 
antisemitic stereotypes.

Zola’s intervention on the pro-Dreyfus side was sensational, if not decisive. 
He and the editor of the newspaper L’Aurore, Georges Clemençeau, wrote a long 
article which was headlined “J’Accuse …!” – in truth an open letter to the 
president of France, Félix Faure, which accused the army top brass of 
conspiracy and trial-fixing. Zola’s libel was made in the full knowledge that 
it would be likely to bring down the power of the state on his head, because 
that was all part of the plan. Finally, the pro-Dreyfus camp thought, all the 
most recent discoveries proving Dreyfus’s innocence would be heard in court.

It was not to be so: the state restricted the evidence to nothing more than 
Zola’s words,par ordre (“by order of”) – an order that Esterhazy was found 
innocent only because the court martial had ordered it. Zola was sentenced to a 
year’s imprisonment and a fine of 3000 francs. Instead of serving time, he had 
fled and by Christmas had been in England for five months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2861876afc7356d6b347cd7053a1fa1b3052b5b%2F0_266_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2861876afc7356d6b347cd7053a1fa1b3052b5b%2F0_266_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
 The Queen’s Hotel in Upper Norwood, where Émile Zola spent Christmas. 
Photograph: Émile Zola/© Association du Musée Émile Zola 
Exile had made Zola’s web of relationships even more complicated. In all but 
name, Zola had two wives: Alexandrine and Jeanne. Alexandrine was Madame Zola; 
she and Zola, now 58, had been together for 28 years but had no children. Zola 
and Jeanne Rozerot had been together for 10 years. She was 27 years younger 
than Zola and they had two children, Denise and Jacques. In the sudden and 
dramatic turn of events that had led to Zola living in the Queen’s Hotel, Upper 
Norwood, he would find himself one moment frantically scanning the papers for 
news of the Dreyfus case, the next juggling Alexandrine, Jeanne and the 
children, the next trying to get on with what he hoped would be the first of a 
new kind of novel, one that offered solutions to the plight of France, rather 
than simply “dissected” it, as he put it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649faf60711cf93d2d6f0109c9458c589c8b5fe0%2F0_0_2339_3216%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F649faf60711cf93d2d6f0109c9458c589c8b5fe0%2F0_0_2339_3216%2F2339.jpg>
 Jeanne with Jacques and Denise at Summerfield, Addlestone, Surrey. Photograph: 
Émile Zola/© Association du Musée Émile Zola 
More than anything else, Zola would have liked to have been with his children 
and their mother for Christmas. Instead, he was with his wife, to whom he was 
always indebted, and especially so on this particular occasion, as it was she 
who, on his behalf, had bought toys for the children’s Christmas presents in 
France, before coming out to join him on 22 December. A sprig of mistletoe in 
the room – nothing else – marked the season.

Zola was born in Paris in 1840, with a French mother and Venetian father. The 
family moved to Aix-en-Provence where Zola père designed the town’s water 
supply and they would have prospered had he not died when Zola was seven. 
Instead, the boy and his mother later moved back to Paris and lived in poverty 
until Zola’s writing earned a fortune; his breakthrough novel wasL’Assommoir – 
sometimes loosely translated asThe Gin Palace.

Zola’s worldwide fame rested on the “Rougon-Macquart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview11>
” cycle of novels set in the era preceding the time in which they were written. 
Zola had pioneered naturalism, a new method of writing which aimed to go beyond 
realism to a point where no state of the human condition was too sordid for 
consideration. According to the methodology of naturalism, such scenes and 
dramas had to be based on scientific observation and documentation, and 
presented without a moralising commentary. Whether it was due to the upheaval 
of the Dreyfus affair or that the life cycle of naturalism had run its course, 
Zola in England was writing something very different. The proofs of the first 
chapters ofFécondité (Fruitfulness), a story which proposed a solution to 
France’s declining birth rate, were now sitting on one of the five tables 
cluttering the hotel room.

Zola’s first step on arrival in England had been to take a room in the 
Grosvenor Hotel round the corner from Victoria Station, and with the help of 
his old friend the artist Fernand Desmoulin and his English translator Ernest 
Vizetelly, he started to get his bearings and clarify the legal situation 
regarding extradition. Vizetelly and his lawyer friend Frederick Wareham argued 
that Zola needed to get out of the centre of London where he was easily 
recognised. Partly as a result of Vizetelly spreading misinformation, the 
newspapers in Britain, France and then, all over the world produced “evidence” 
that Zola was in Norway visiting a novelist friend, crossing into Switzerland 
on a bike, or alternatively still in France.

Zola meanwhile was having trouble enough buying himself a pair of socks and 
some underpants, but in the end got taken to the Oatlands Park Hotel in 
Weybridge. By now, Desmoulin had brought over some of Zola’s cameras and he was 
off out along the Thames, pursuing what had become his one great hobby, if not 
obsession: photography. Zola is one of the first great amateur photographers, 
using his camera to take family snaps, posed portraits and thousands of 
pictures of buildings and landscapes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F364a7fe00a20a89b4b0686c5a0c07339fbdae86a%2F73_0_882_1236%2F882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F364a7fe00a20a89b4b0686c5a0c07339fbdae86a%2F73_0_882_1236%2F882.jpg>
 Alexandrine Zola, near the bottom of Hermitage Road, Upper Norwood, in 
November 1898. Photograph: Émile Zola/© Association du Musée Émile Zola 
He also needed the great stack of papers and books that would provide the 
documentary material for Fécondité as he wanted to reveal in detail how 
contraception, coitus interruptus, infanticide, wet nursing and false foundling 
hospitals were ruining France. This would be contrasted with an alternative 
view of a fecund, breast-feeding woman raising many children, while she and her 
husband grew in prosperity and, ultimately, travelled to Africa to teach the 
natives the wisdom of this way of life.

Though Christmas 1898 was on the bleak side, Zola, Jeanne and the children had 
spent an idyllic summer in a house called Penn in Walton-on-Thames, then at 
Summerfield in Addlestone, Surrey. Apart from the short Easter break of 1899, 
these weeks would turn out to be the only time that they would live together. 
When his family weren’t with him, Zola wrote adoring letters to Jeanne and the 
children. In fact, his mix of finger-wagging, admonishment, encouragement and 
jesting is a rare insight into a man of this era “talking” to his children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F555acbca29b9c819b81b157a79b8febc2b993c7f%2F0_0_2103_2860%2F2103.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F555acbca29b9c819b81b157a79b8febc2b993c7f%2F0_0_2103_2860%2F2103.jpg>
 Emile Zola at work onFécondité, Walton-on-Thames , 1898. Photograph: VR 
Vizetelly/© Association du Musée Émile Zola 
As for his state of mind, Zola was hurt and furious that France was, in his 
eyes, descending into barbarism, propping up an injustice with a state 
conspiracy and unleashing the forces of racism against a minority. The Dreyfus 
affair was proving to be a testing ground for the socialists. Antisemitism was 
winning recruits: the antisemitic papers said that Jews were a “syndicate” who 
had brought France to its knees through the Panama crisis, so some socialists 
asked why the fate of a rich Jewish army officer should be of any concern to 
them. It was largely through Zola’s articles making a strong impression on the 
socialists’ leader, Jean Jaurès, and Jaurès’s subsequent efforts, that the 
socialists joined the cause. Small wonder then, that one of the few visitors 
whom Zola met while he was in England was Jaurès, who came to the Queen’s Hotel.

For reasons that are not quite clear, Zola didn’t meet up with any of his 
English literary admirers other than the Irish novelistGeorge Moore 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/mooreg/1.html>. Bernard Shaw and Henry 
James were both keen on Zola’s work, but there was no encounter. Thomas Hardy – 
whose attitude to Zola was at best contradictory, at worst hypocritical – 
doesn’t appear to have made any effort to track him down either. I discovered 
that even as Zola was sitting in the Queen’s Hotel, Madame Tussauds was 
displaying a waxwork of him, the Fabians were holding meetings on him and the 
Social Democratic Federation was discussing the ideological content of his 
novels.

Only when it was certain that Dreyfus would get a retrial, did Zola return to 
France. He had spent some 11 months in the UK. Dreyfus was freed, but it was a 
juridical fudge – an amnesty for all – which Zola loathed. He died of carbon 
monoxide poisoning on 29 September 1902 while in bed with Alexandrine. There 
was a blocked flue.

The exile is an extraordinary episode in Zola’s life, in which he lifted 
himself out of the turmoil of Paris and dropped into the houses and hotels of 
south London. He struggled to keep the three strands of his life connected to 
their place back home: his loves, his literary work and his politics. At times, 
it all got too much for him, at others he felt a sense of calm and hope.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e193178497410e2b2bccb669d1e1237c4a51a7%2F0_67_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emile%20Zola%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20run%20in%20Upper%20Norwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Femile-zola-french-novelist-christmas-south-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e193178497410e2b2bccb669d1e1237c4a51a7%2F0_67_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Mock-up of the front page of l’Aurore newspaper is hung on a wall of the 
National Assembly in Paris. 10 January 1999. Photograph: Michel Gangne/EPA 
He didn’t need to get involved in any of this. He could have pressed on with 
more novels. He was achieving new success with collaborations with the composer 
Alfred Bruneau. He could have exhibited his photos. Instead, he threw himself 
into the middle of France’s maelstrom, committed himself utterly, sacrificed 
his popularity and wealth and, if indeed the blocked flue was deliberate, as 
some allege, he paid the ultimate price. He was also, I think, one of the first 
people in the socialist movement anywhere in the world to give it a clear steer 
towards anti-racism. For me, he is a hero.

• The Disappearance of Emile Zola: Love, Literature and the Dreyfus Case by 
Michael Rosen is published by Faber on 5 January. To order a copy for £13.93 
(RRP £16.99), go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/disappearance-of-zola.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 