


We live in an era in which humans have become the dominant force of change on 
the planet. First proclaimed at the turn of the millennium by the climate 
scientist Paul Crutzen,the Anthropocene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/declare-anthropocene-epoch-experts-urge-geological-congress-human-impact-earth>
 asserts that since the Industrial Revolution, humans have altered the 
environment so extensively as to create a new geological epoch.

It might seem an enormous subject to tackle with art, but in my projects I 
like to consider disciplines like physics from an artistic point of view, and 
to think about the larger context in which the Earth exists. Many of my works 
seek to merge the poetic and the scientific to delve into a field that’s 
unknown to me. It is through this context that my current project, an 
exhibition called Crystalline, has been percolating over the past few years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F430304fecc1e40259b85a8f41aab6982976a8e7d%2F0_0_2560_1920%2Fmaster%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F430304fecc1e40259b85a8f41aab6982976a8e7d%2F0_0_2560_1920%2Fmaster%2F2560.jpg>
 “Missed the Passage,” Digital photo taken during my expedition to the Arctic 
Circle, 2015. Photograph: Siobhan McDonald 
In 2010, my direct experience of Eyjafjallajökull erupting in Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iceland-volcano> catapulted my practice as a 
painter into working directly with the primary materials of geology and 
physics. Working on site next to a volcano felt like travelling to the centre 
of the Earth. Looking at seismology charts to explore how an earthquake can 
inscribe itself into scientific records I started to visualise these dark 
fluctuations as patterns generated by the forces of nature. My drawings of the 
unseen world of the microscopic brought a new form of alchemy into my paintings.

Crystalline: art from the Arctic, space and beyond - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/gallery/2016/dec/01/crystalline-art-from-the-arctic-space-and-beyond-in-pictures>
In 2013, I was offered a place at Parity Studios, University College Dublin 
(UCD) and I am currently working on a commission for the school of biology and 
environmental science, which aims to rediscover the many hidden and inspiring 
collections in the university. To be working in a studio in school of Biology 
and Environmental Science at University College Dublin has enabled my 
collaboration with scientists to broach subjects at the edges of current 
scientific knowledge.

Meeting with Jenny McElwain, professor of palaeobiology, opened the the depths 
of space and time for me, and prompted my curiosity in the period of time just 
before climate change was identified around 1820. This was a time of polar 
exploration just preceding the Industrial Revolution when humans started to 
etch ourselves into geological history. For the exhibition I am making a work 
calledCyathea australis, using the early tools of photography reducing this 
medium to its bare essentials in a series ofphotogenic drawings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2015/mar/16/google-doodle-tribute-anna-atkins-pioneer-of-botany-and-photography>
 that interrogate an era before the Anthropocene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd39c5ff179b8360e7aa598dfd22b3fb3b915e4ed%2F0_0_1890_2362%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd39c5ff179b8360e7aa598dfd22b3fb3b915e4ed%2F0_0_1890_2362%2F1890.jpg>
Cyathea australis. 8cm x 10 cm photogenic drawing made with silver nitrate and 
light on antique paper. Created as part of the Programme for Experimental 
Atmospheres and Climate at University College Dublin, the image was generated 
in carboniferous glacial atmospheres of 400 ppm CO2 and 24% O2. Photograph: 
Siobhan McDonald 2016 
Jenny has been using fossilised leaves to reconstruct the ancient atmospheric 
carbon dioxide record from 330 to 260 million years ago, when large rainforests 
expanded throughout the tropics, leaving as their signature the world’s coal 
resources. In tandem with this scientific study, I set up a dark room in the 
atmospheric chambers to record the silhouettes of our earliest plants. Using 
silver nitrate and light I created a series of ghostly imprints generated by a 
400-million-year-old atmosphere – an atmosphere so deadly that two inhalations 
would suffice to kill a person. This constricting and resonant environment 
calls to mind the fatal impact our collective activities have had on our planet.

My research for this project was extended in 2015 when I found myself on a 
barkentine Arctic expedition in the same waters that had subsumed ships and 
Arctic explorers for hundreds of years. By 1823 the North AmericanArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> was still the last undiscovered 
ecosystem on the planet. It was a landscape so cold that it fractured 
everything it penetrated, including the stones. It was uncharted, unclaimed 
territory and Europeans had perished in it miserably.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a3c11bb68339d5a45f7d3587ed3c5981311bec%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a3c11bb68339d5a45f7d3587ed3c5981311bec%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
 “Unknown Landscape” Oil on paper, 15 x 9 cm. Illustration: Siobhan McDonald 
2016 
I was captivated by the story of the disappearance of the Franklin ships in 
1845: the expedition of two vessels, HMS Terror and HMS Erebus, that vanished 
while searching for the Northwest Passage. I am retracing this territory by 
developing Unknown Landscapes, a series of oil paintings based on photographic 
plates from these expeditions. The cameras survived in the permafrost when the 
ships and crew disappeared into nothingness. The plates carry the melancholy 
and the magic of those frontier times.

In September, the story of the 1845 Franklin Expedition hit the headlines again
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/hms-terror-wreck-found-arctic-nearly-170-years-northwest-passage-attempt>
 with the discovery of HMS Terror. I discovered that the doomed ship’s captain 
was an Irishman with a keen interest in botany. Thanks to his interest, buried 
in the Antiquities Department of the National Botanic Gardens is a superb 
collection of Arctic pressings from the 1825 Franklin expedition that have 
never been on public view. Matthew Jebb, the director, graciously opened the 
collection to me over the summer to extract some 75 seeds from the pressings. 
These seeds that belong to another time are an important finding as they 
represent that moment just before the industrial revolution that we can’t go 
back to. I am now developing a work, A Space And Time Outside, with the 
Millennium Seed Bank at Kew Gardens, to explore the potential life force of 
these seeds from the Arctic that have been around for close to 190 years. For 
the duration of the exhibition scientists will test the seeds as a live project.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498e200c15c961df410edc458263e91df9867ad2%2F0_0_3508_4961%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498e200c15c961df410edc458263e91df9867ad2%2F0_0_3508_4961%2F3508.jpg>
 “Franklin’s Passage in 1825”, pencil on antique paper, collection of arctic 
pressings from the 1825 expedition. Courtesy of Matthew Jebb, Director, 
National Botanic Gardens, Dublin. Photograph: Siobhan McDonald 2016 
Another work related to the theme of the expedition stems from a collaboration 
with theEuropean Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency> (ESA) this summer. 
The piece is called Crystalline, which is also the overall title of the 
exhibition In this work, a series carbon works dominate the entrance of the 
exhibition hall. This work is a poetic response to the retreating Arctic 
glaciers that were mapped circa 1845, when the region was still a blank space.

To make this installation, I am working with a material developed by 
scientists at an Irish company called Enbio. They have developed a 
revolutionary use for carbon, which is intriguing to me given that it is one of 
the most indestructible materials on the planet and essential to all forms of 
life on Earth. Each piece in my installation is coated with a pigment once used 
by early cave painters to coat the walls of their shelters. In spray painting 
the material, I am re-enacting the process used in space technology; engineers 
at Enbio will apply a contemporary version of the charcoal, made from carbon 
and burnt bone, to the outside of the European Space Agency’sSolar Orbiter. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/17/mars-space-missions-exomars-esa-solar-orbiter>
 The spacecraft is due to launch in 2018 and will study the sun at 
unprecedentedly close proximity. The pigment will be added to the outside of a 
spacecraft’s titanium heat shield.

The surfaces for Crystalline are also cured at high temperatures to create a 
motif of cracked and disjointed cartographies, which exude an air of shabby 
beauty. Their cracked surfaces seem both vulnerable and inveterate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfee8b7a1c8a9b31b5d8f53167262438be5b922b%2F0_0_904_778%2F904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20works%20seek%20to%20merge%20the%20poetic%20and%20the%20scientific%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmy-works-seek-to-merge-the-poetic-and-the-scientific-siobhan-mcdonald-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfee8b7a1c8a9b31b5d8f53167262438be5b922b%2F0_0_904_778%2F904.jpg>
 “Crystalline”. This is part of an installation made of carbon, sea sponge and 
charred bone from Enbio (used for thermal control of satellites and deep space 
probes.). As a whole, the piece is a series of maps of dying glaciers. By 1823 
the North American Arctic was the last undiscovered ecosystem on the planet. It 
was a landscape so cold that it fractured everything it penetrated, including 
the stones. Photograph: Siobhan McDonald 2016 
 A sound piece in the show is prompted by my experience of the Arctic shelf 
melting. On my Arctic research trip in 2015, I used a heliograph – a device 
that was historically used to record the sun. Tom McCormack, a physicist at UCD 
designed a version for me, which I attached to the binnacle of the expedition 
ship to create a response to the melting glaciers by recording a sound score of 
the sun’s track at the summer solstice. I recorded messages and pulses as the 
sun moved through the sky on 21June 2015 to produce a series of notations for 
the score. The burn holes created are photographic in the strictest sense, as 
each mark is a small black sun, and each dot is a repeat pattern of the sun’s 
image scaled down many million times on its journey to the Earth. In March 
2017, an original music scoreby Irene Buckley <http://www.irenebuckley.com/>, 
with recordings I made in the Arctic, will be beamed into space from by ESA.

 In art as in science, in the process of following an enquiry, many other 
enquiries emerge – my forthcoming exhibition in Paris is certainly a point of 
resolution of some of these, but many other stories have opened up, and the 
interconnectedness of the parts has been astonishing. I am realising the power 
of expression that visual art can bring in unleashing the potential infinity 
encapsulated in a given story.

Crystalline, curated by Helen Carey, will open at the Centre Culturel Irlandais
 <http://www.centreculturelirlandais.com/en/>, Paris, on 26 January 2017 and 
will travel to the European Space Agency in April 2017.

You can also hear Siobhan talking about her work in this broadcast for RTE 
Lyric FM  
<http://www.rte.ie/culture/2016/1011/823162-my-arctic-voyage-of-self-discovery/>
 and see previous workon her website <http://www.siobhanmcdonald.com/>

Collaborative Partners: European Space Agency; The Millennium Seed Bank; 
Enbio; Born Na Mona; UCD Parity Studios, University College Dublin. Photographs 
of artworks taken byVincent Hoban.
 