
A former heavyweight boxer who inspired the Rocky movies is suing a former 
business associate 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/chuck-wepner-rocky-inspiration-sues-868617>
 for allegedly stealing his life story for a new film.

Chuck Wepner went 15 rounds with Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/o2-muhammad-ali-exhibition-boxing>
, knocking down his opponent in the ninth round, as an unheralded challenger 
for the WBA and WBC world heavyweight champion crowns in 1975. Legend has it 
that Sylvester Stallone saw the fight – which Wepner lost to a knockout in the 
final seconds – and was spurred to writeRocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/rocky-in-numbers--creed-sylvester-stallone>
, which won the 1976 best picture Oscar and made a star of the actor. Stallone 
has never denied that Wepner was an inspiration for Rockybut settled out of 
court in 2006 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/people/2006-08-08-stallone-lawsuit_x.htm> 
with the New Jersey-born boxer, arguing that inspiration was not legally 
binding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-newwOs8-i4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-newwOs8-i4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-newwOs8-i4&media=>
 Watchhighlights of the Wepner-Ali fight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-newwOs8-i4>. 
Wepner’s life story is finally due to hit multiplexes next year, with Spotlight
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/27/spotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-video-interview>
’s Liev Schreiber in the lead role, under the title The Bleeder. However, the 
film’s subject is now suing the makers of a rival project, apparently titled 
American Brawler, which he claims stole essential details from his planned 
biopic.

According to the 79-year-old former boxer’s suit, he began working with 
producer Mary Aloe and her company Aloe Entertainment in 2013 with the aim of 
securing funding for a film project but found the relationship to be 
unsatisfactory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ec4579e548047d86a3adef2e94a2a100552132%2F0_0_3828_3172%2F3828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Real-life%20Rocky'%20to%20sue%20over%20copycat%20film%20based%20on%20heavyweight%20contender's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Real-life%20Rocky%27%20to%20sue%20over%20copycat%20film%20based%20on%20heavyweight%20contender%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ec4579e548047d86a3adef2e94a2a100552132%2F0_0_3828_3172%2F3828.jpg>
 Liev Schreiber and Naomi Watts filming The Bleeder last November. Photograph: 
Steve Sands/GC Images 
“Almost immediately after they were hired … Aloe and Aloe Entertainment began 
to deviate from the parties’ oral agreement and the confirmed terms,” the suit 
reads. “Among other things, Aloe incessantly peppered plaintiffs with emails 
and phone calls – sometimes in excess of two dozen per day – with requests from 
purported investors to adjust the budget, interview the cast, and/or otherwise 
compromise the confidentiality and integrity of the project.”

Wepner and his team then moved to secure their own funding and severed ties 
with Aloe Entertainment. Then, late in 2015, they discovered the existence of 
the rival project.

“Comparison between the two scripts, sizzle reels and marketing materials 
makes it clear that defendants used portions or all of plaintiff’s script, 
budget, production schedule, sizzle reel, and other production materials to 
develop their own copycat film, which defendants apparently intend to release 
before the authorised Wepner Film,” claims the suit, which also cites producers 
Robert Simmons and Daniel Grodnik as defendants. The former boxer’s lawyers 
also allege that Aloe Entertainment tried to lure away Schreiber and 
screenwriter Jeff Feuerzeig to work on the rival film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63d8f40ef30f02c14b7dd6297527699051ae89e%2F0_273_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Real-life%20Rocky'%20to%20sue%20over%20copycat%20film%20based%20on%20heavyweight%20contender's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Real-life%20Rocky%27%20to%20sue%20over%20copycat%20film%20based%20on%20heavyweight%20contender%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Freal-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63d8f40ef30f02c14b7dd6297527699051ae89e%2F0_273_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Defending heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali goes down after a punch from Chuck 
Wepner in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1975. Photograph: AP 
The suit 
<https://pmcdeadline2.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/chuck-wepner-the-bleeder-lawsuit-wm-deletions.pdf>
, filed at the Los Angeles superior court on 22 February, demands damages and 
an injunction preventing the production, promotion and distribution of American 
Brawler.

Aloe issued a statement to the Hollywood Reporter through her lawyer, Richard 
M Rosenthal, who said: “This lawsuit is completely meritless and lacks adequate 
factual or legal basis. My clients intend to vigorously contest the allegations 
which have been made against them and to file a countersuit at the appropriate 
time.”
 