
All year, a shop at the intersection of Lawson Square and Regent Street has 
hung from its window a banner that reads “Happy 2016, the year of Redfern”. The 
banner is a wordplay on the suburb’s postcode – 2016 – and in many ways the 
promise has rung true for the local Indigenous community.

Sydney to Hobart 2016 – 'harder to pick than winner of Melbourne Cup'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/sydney-to-hobart-2016-harder-to-pick-than-winner-of-melbourne-cup>
In July the Aboriginal Medical Service celebrated its 45th anniversary, in 
August the Redfern All Blacks won the South Sydney rugby league competition in 
front of an adoring crowd at Redfern Oval, and in October – after a year of 
meticulous planning – the All Blacks hosted and won the annual Koori Knockout 
tournament.

And now, after 16 years of dreaming, a few months of training, a crowd-funding 
campaign and despite a late change of vessel, an Indigenous crew will set sail 
for the first time in the iconicSydney to Hobart yacht race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-to-hobart-yacht-race>. Indigenous 
communities along the coast of NSW are preparing to conduct smoking ceremonies 
to greet the yacht as it travels south, and the Southern Excellence 11 will fly 
a four-by-three metre Aboriginal flag from the main sail.

At the centre of it all is Shane Phillips: crew member, life member of the 
Redfern All Blacks and head of the Tribal Warrior Association. Based in 
Redfern, Tribal Warrior is a not-for-profit cultural engagement organisation 
that trains Indigenous people with maritime and other employment skills. 
Already Phillips is calling this race “the Redfern to Hobart”.

Planning for the big moment, however, has not been without a few setbacks. 
Just weeks ago, the keel on the Kayle yacht that the crew had been preparing to 
sail snapped, and repairs could not be completed in time for the race.

I wish I’d started [sailing] a lot earlier. I didn’t realise how much I love 
it.
Athol Boney, crew member 
This misfortune meant that Tribal Warrior was unable to register an 
alternative vessel on deadline, although organisers have since allowed the crew 
to race the Southern Excellence 11 from a different starting position. 
Technically their involvement will be considered a training exercise, but as 
Phillips says, “we’re actually there to race”.

Tribal Warrior has also set up a crowd-funding campaign 
<https://donate.grassrootz.com/tribalwarrior/redfern-to-hobart> to meet the 
$58,000 budget. “What we’re trying to do is get sponsors involved,” says 
Phillips. “We got knocked back by a lot of people, but it’s amazing, now that 
we’re at the starting line people are starting to offer support. There are 
families and grandmothers, there are anonymous donors. We started with almost 
nothing.”

The son of Richard Phillips, aka Dickie Blair 
<http://www.curiousworks.com.au/project/heart-of-the-fight/>, an Aboriginal 
pastor and boxing champion, Shane Phillips was raised on The Block. He has seen 
the drugs and the crime and the conflicts, and for the past few years has been 
the centrifugal force driving community renewal.

With support from Redfern Local Area Commander Superintendent, Luke 
Freudenstein, Phillips conducts early-morning community boxing sessions at the 
National Centre of Indigenous Excellence in Redfern for theClean Slate Without 
Prejudice <http://tribalwarrior.org/clean-slate-without-prejudice/> program; as 
well as running water, strapping sore joints and coaching footy players at the 
Redfern All Blacks.

When Phillips joined Tribal Warrior in 2000, The Block was “at its worst”, he 
says. “We represented death and destruction – it was pretty bad. We had to 
change it ourselves and own it. It’s not happening quick enough, and one of the 
reasons we’re doing this race is to keep upping the ante.”

Skippered by Andrew Wenham and Wayne Jones, the crew members are mostly from 
Sydney’s Indigenous communities of Redfern and La Perouse. Many have been 
through their own personal hurdles to be there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fredfern-to-hobart-first-indigenous-boat-to-set-sail-after-16-years-of-dreaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b224505bfd9dc2597ade9020e2ec8cf783623c%2F0_0_2848_4288%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Redfern%20to%20Hobart'%3A%20first%20Indigenous%20boat%20to%20set%20sail%20after%2016%20years%20of%20dreaming%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fredfern-to-hobart-first-indigenous-boat-to-set-sail-after-16-years-of-dreaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Redfern%20to%20Hobart%27%3A%20first%20Indigenous%20boat%20to%20set%20sail%20after%2016%20years%20of%20dreaming%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fredfern-to-hobart-first-indigenous-boat-to-set-sail-after-16-years-of-dreaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b224505bfd9dc2597ade9020e2ec8cf783623c%2F0_0_2848_4288%2F2848.jpg>
 The Southern Excellence 11, which the crew will sail from a different starting 
position from the race proper. Photograph: Tribal Warrior Sailing 
For example, the two bowman at the front of the yacht are Isaiah Dore, 22, and 
Athol Boney, 36. Dore, who grew up in 17 different foster homes, only started 
sailing on a yacht this year. Boney grew up in Moree, a regional town more than 
400 kilometres inland from the ocean. Until recently Boney, a Gamilaraay man 
who now works with Indigenous youth on the Central Coast, hadn’t even swum in 
the sea. Now, after just 11 weeks of contact with Tribal Warrior and 10 
training sessions, he’s ready to conquer one of the toughest yacht races in the 
world.

“I’m only a beginner,” says Boney. “I’m very fresh to it. I’ve only swum in 
the ocean a couple of times, and my second time on a boat was when I got on the 
yacht! Its a great opportunity for me to show the boys to not be shame to try 
something new, and to not be scared of failure. I can’t wait – I’ve barely 
thought about Christmas. I wish I’d started [sailing] a lot earlier. I didn’t 
realise how much I love it.”

The intensive training and survival courses have now been completed, and the 
crew are putting the final touches on preparation before the Boxing Day start. 
Phillips hopes that participating in the Sydney to Hobart yacht race will be an 
experience of a lifetime for the crew, as well as an incentive for the younger 
members of his community in Redfern. As always, he is talking reinvention.

“All we want to do is move the lens and let people see all of what Aboriginal 
people can do, and particularly Redfern,” explains Phillips. “Good things can 
come out of Redfern. We want to take it away from footy and boxing.

“People keep asking us, ‘why are you doing maritime’. We say, ‘hey, our people 
have been out at sea for thousands of years, why shouldn’t we?’ This is not 
new, it’s just a different vessel.”
 