
This felt like a snapshot of Tottenham’s progress. At the same time last year, 
Mauricio Pochettino’s team had wobbled in a sequence of fixtures that proved 
too much for them. Part of the run sawan exit over two legs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/tottenham-fiorentina-europa-league-match-report>
 from the Europa League last 32 at the hands of Fiorentina.

It was the same opponents at the same stage of the same competition here at 
White Hart Lane but witha different outcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/25/tottenham-v-fiorentina-europa-league-second-leg-live>
, as the confidence that is coursing Tottenham ranks was writ large across the 
occasion. Fiorentina sit third in Serie A and the manager, Paulo Sousa, put out 
his strongest possible lineup. But they were never in with a sniff.

Tottenham v Fiorentina: Europa League second leg – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/25/tottenham-v-fiorentina-europa-league-second-leg-live>
Ryan Mason scored a lovely opening goal on 25 minutes – his fourth for the 
club – and Érik Lamela made sure of things just after the hour with his ninth 
of the season. Only Harry Kane has scored more for Spurs this season. Lamela 
loves this competition. There have been no rabonas in it this time but there 
have been six goals.

The scoreline was gilded by an own-goal from the Fiorentina captain, Gonzalo 
Rodríguez, who turned Kieran Trippier’s cross into the roof his net under 
pressure from Dele Alli, and the serene nature of the victory was fortifying 
for Tottenham after theFA Cup exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/tottenham-hotspur-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
 here against Crystal Palace last Sunday.

More importantly, it lifted morale at the club before a run of Premier League 
fixtures against Swansea City, West Ham United and Arsenal which come in the 
space of six days starting from Sunday, and which stand to have a major bearing 
on their title prospects. There is a burgeoning confidence at the club that the 
“key period” Pochettino has talked about can yield greater encouragement.

The only blot for Tottenham was the 78th-minute booking for Alli. Otherwise 
outstanding, he was pulled up for diving, much to Pochettino’s dismay, and he 
will be suspended for the first leg of the last 16. Alli did go down easily as 
he battled with Rodríguez, but Pochettino disagreed with the censure.

“Like all the people in the stadium, I think it wasn’t a yellow card,” the 
manager said. “It was hard for us. Sometimes the referee can make a mistake. 
But we have enough players to come in before the next round.”

Pochettino made changes from the Palace defeat but such is the depth in his 
squad it hardly seemed like Tottenham were weaker, although they were without 
Kane due to his broken nose.

Mason’s goal was a celebration of technique and composure. Davide Astori slid 
in on Alli and the ball broke towards Mason, not kindly, but he made it look 
that way with his first touch. In on goal, he did everything right before 
stroking a low shot past Ciprian Tatarusanu into the far corner.

Alli was a blur of tricks and industry in behind Nacer Chadli, and Tottenham 
were always in control. They were denied a penalty early-on when Trippier’s 
cross hit Marcos Alonso’s hands, and Eric Dier and Christian Eriksen went close 
in the first half.

Fiorentina’s only flicker came on 23 minutes when Josip Ilicic cut inside and 
bent a shot wide of the far post. They were dreadfully below par and their 
evening was summed up when Federico Bernardeschi, their scorer in the first leg 
last week, sliced a shot so woefully on the hour that it went out for a 
throw-in.

At 1-0 the tie was technically on a knife-edge, but it never felt that way. It 
was more a question of when Tottenham would score the second and Lamela did so 
when he spun and shot home after Tatarusanu had beaten out Chadli’s shot.

After Gonzalo Rodríguez had suffered his moment of misfortune, Tottenham might 
have had more through Mason’s rasping volley and Eriksen.

Manchester United see off Midtjylland with Marcus Rashford’s debut double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/25/manchester-united-midtjylland-europa-league-match-report> 