
Fancy dress shops have been urged by police not to sell clown costumes to 
children because of the recent craze for frightening people while wearing them.

Northumbria police officers have visited shops in Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle>, including one that has sold out of 
a £34.99 “scary clown” outfit for children and adults.

Graeme Shaw, a partner at Magic Box, one of Newcastle’s best-known fancy dress 
shops, said his store would continue to sell clown costumes despite the 
“ridiculous” police action.

The police action follows scores of clown-related incidents across the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/killer-clown-craze-uk-sightings-police-warning>
 after the craze took off in the US. In Kent alone, police received reports of 
59 clown-related incidents in just three days.

Clown sightings: Ronald McDonald keeps low profile amid creepy craze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/12/clown-sightings-ronald-mcdonald-keeps-low-profile-amid-creepy-craze>
In one of the latest incidents, officers from Scotland Yard’s aviation unit 
held a suspect in Hillingdon, west London, on Tuesday, about five miles (8km) 
from Heathrow, after he was spotted wearing the mask and carrying a fake 
firearm.

In Blackburn, Lancashire, a man suffered severe cuts to his hand 
<http://www.lancashiretelegraph.co.uk/news/14796636._It_was_like_something_out_of_a_horror_movie____Blackburn_dad__left_disabled_for_life__after_being_attacked_by_knife_wielding_clown/>
 when a clown wielding a 25cm (10in) knife confronted him at a cash machine.

Simon Chinery, 28, said he grabbed at the knife to defend himself but the 
blade sliced through his hand.Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
are hunting for the assailant, who was said to be wearing a green curly wig 
with black eye make-up, a red nose and painted red beard.

A teenager in Dinnington, South Yorkshire, also claimed he was left with a 
head wound when a tree branch was thrown at him by a person dressed as a clown 
on Tuesday night. That incident was among 61 clown-related reports received by 
South Yorkshire police over the past three weeks.

In Cumbria, a man dressed as Batman was spotted trying to chase away a masked 
prankster. The intervention of the ‘Caped Crusader’ was apparently the idea of 
a costume company called Cumbria Superheroes.


A post on BBC Cumbria’s Facebook page read: “’Crazy clowns’ beware... Batman 
is in Whitehaven.Cumbria Superheroes 
<https://www.facebook.com/cumbriasuperhero/> heard that many children had been 
left traumatised by the clowns lurking around the town. So now Batman is 
patrolling the streets so that kids (and adults?) can feel at ease.”

Vera Baird, the police and crime commissioner for Northumbria, told BBC radio 
on Wednesday that officers were now asking shops to stop selling clown costumes 
after 20 incidents since 20 September.


Police officers are also carrying out high-visibility patrols at schools after 
an incident in nearby Durham, where a man dressed as a clown and carrying a 
knife followed four children, aged 11 and 12, to school on Friday. The children 
were left distressed but unhurt, police said.

But Shaw said the craze had been “blown out of all proportion” and refused to 
stop selling the outfits from his three stores across Newcastle.

“We’re certainly not stopping selling costumes or anything like that. We have 
had the police in but they have never at any point said that and to be honest I 
don’t think they can say that – they can’t stop us,” he said.

Shaw said police had visited the shop and told them to be cautious about who 
they sold the outfits to. “We’ll try to be, but that’s ridiculous as well when 
you’re having to judge whether someone is responsible by their costume,” he 
said.

The Magic Box stores have sold out of £34.99 “scary clown” outfits for adults 
and children,which are advertised online 
<http://www.magicboxfancydress.com/scary-clown-4731.html>, but has dozens of 
other clown-related masks and costumes in stock.

Shaw, a professional magician and former president of Newcastle Magic Circle, 
said sales of clown outfits had risen by 25% over the past fortnight. They have 
slowed over the past couple of days because of the police intervention, he 
added.

“It’s a joke that’s gone too far,” Shaw said. “I don’t think it’s got anything 
to do with what they’re wearing – it’s their actions. It’s just unfortunate 
that it’s a clown costume.

“Clowns have always been a popular Halloween costume anyway but because of 
this whole YouTube pranking thing they have been more popular this year than 
they ever have been.

“They would have to stop eBay selling them, they would have to stop Amazon 
selling them and they certainly can’t do that. They also can’t really tell us 
what we can and can’t sell unless it’s illegal.”


One 18-year-old, named locally as Connor Jones, from Caerphilly, Wales, is 
believed to be one of the first offenders to be hit with a criminal record over 
the stunts. He was issued with a fixed penalty notice and fined £90 for a 
public order offence after reports of a menacing figure on a pedestrian bridge 
outside a school.

Meanwhile, the film studio behind an upcoming Stephen King movie, It, has been 
forced to deny it sparked the craze, which began within weeks of the first 
published images of the fictional killer clown Pennywise, played by Bill 
Skarsgård, in the US.

Baird said most of the “clowns” in Northumbria were children under 16, 
including one who was cautioned for possessing a knife. Police officers in 
Northumbria are visiting schools to ask children not to dress as clowns in an 
attempt to stem the craze and also to provide high-visibility patrols.

She added: “This is not an outbreak of major crime but I assure residents that 
Northumbria police are taking it seriously. If anyone was planning to dress as 
a clown – don’t. If anyone does so and causes alarm and distress it is a 
criminal offence under the public order act. Halloween is not a justification 
for this behaviour.”

Clown sightings: sinister craze is putting our livelihood at risk, say 
professionals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/professional-clowns-killer-clown-sightings-damaging-livelihood>
Dandy Events, a fancy dress shop in Newcastle, is also understood to have been 
visited by officers. But Gemma Forrest, from the Dr Funkenstein fancy dress 
shop in Sunderland city centre, said police had not visited and that she had 
not seen an increase in sales of clown costumes.

“We sell some clown masks but not scary ones,” she said, adding that their 
last remaining clown mask appeared to no longer be on the shop floor. “They’re 
probably buying them on the internet, to be honest.”

McDonald’s said its mascot, Ronald McDonald, was keeping a low profile as 
reports of creepy clown sightings sweep communities. The fast food giant told 
US media that it was being “thoughtful in respect to Ronald McDonald’s 
participation in community events as a result of the current climate around 
clown sightings in communities”. McDonald’s in the UK did not comment.
 