
Finding a mentor can be an invaluable career asset for women – especially in 
industries not renowned for their gender diversity, like technology. As well as 
boosting confidence, mentors can help open up networks, set and achieve goals, 
and generally give a sense that someone is looking out for you.

Traditionally this sort of relationship is fostered in the workplace, with 
senior employees mentoring juniors. More recently, a number of mentor-matching 
schemes for women in tech have launched in the UK, such asDevelopHer 
<http://www.developher.org/>, Structur3d People <http://structur3dpeople.co.uk/>
 andFreeformers <http://www.freeformers.com/>. However, it’s still possible to 
find a mentor less formally, meeting people through networking events likeGeek 
Girl Meetup <http://www.geekgirlmeetup.co.uk/>, or simply messaging them on 
LinkedIn to ask if they would meet for a coffee.

Three sets of mentors and mentees who work in tech discuss their 
relationships, and what makes a good pairing.

Zoe Partridge, 24 and Tabitha Goldstaub, 31 

Tabitha Goldstaub never received any formal mentoring when setting up her two 
companies – video technology business Rightster and artificial intelligence 
directory CognitionX – but she wishes she had. “I always felt that you had to 
try much harder as a woman – you had to know more, do more research, constantly 
prove why you’re in the room,” she explains. “Women could never wing it, 
whereas I saw a lot of men winging it. And while it does make you good at what 
you do, it also knocks your confidence. A mentor can help bolster that 
confidence and stop you beating yourself up so much.”

The experience made her determined to help other women. She is part of 
FutureGirlCorp <http://futuregirlcorp.com/>, a female leadership school, set up 
by entrepreneur Sharmadean Reid, and she also mentors young female tech 
founders. One of these is Zoe Partridge, chief executive of fashion rental 
startup We Are the Walk, who she was introduced to by mutual contacts 18 months 
ago. At the time, Partridge was struggling to raise money, and was “treated 
like a little kid with a fluffy business renting dresses to my friends”, by 
prospective investors. “Tabitha helped me realise I approached the wrong 
people: male investors and people with a financial background. You need people 
who share your values.”

Partridge admits she had Goldstaub “on speed dial” in the early days. “She sat 
down with me and went through how much of her time I could take up. She said 
that unless I had a really important question, I had to try and figure it out 
by myself. I felt really guilty but it was useful to learn that.” The pair now 
meet monthly for two-hour sessions, and Goldstaub is still on hand if there is 
a crisis. Investment, equity and employment law are just a few of the areas 
Goldstaub has taught Partridge.

But it is not just a one-way street. “I love mentoring young people – I gain 
insight into how they feel about technology and what they find interesting,” 
says Goldstaub. “I get to see where gaps in the market are.”

June Angelides, 31 and Amali de Alwis, 36
 Mentee June Angelides and mentor Amali de Alwis. 
June Angelides decided to find a mentor when she was on maternity leave with 
her second child. Working in the entrepreneur arm of Silicon Valley bank in 
London, she felt established in the industry yet worried about slipping behind. 
“I had a drop in confidence after my first child because things move on so 
quickly,” she recalls. “Having a baby makes it difficult to network in the same 
way – you can’t just join everyone for drinks and you also worry that people 
will see you as less committed.” She decided that learning to code could give 
her an advantage when she returned from leave, as she’d be able to “speak to 
startup founders on their level”.

She found Amali de Alwis, chief executive of Code First: Girls 
<http://www.codefirstgirls.org.uk/>, a coding school that aims to get more 
women into tech, through a Google search and messaged her to ask if she would 
like to meet for coffee. “I was too old to do her courses but was keen to see 
if she could help me in any way. She asked me lots of open-ended questions and 
helped open up exactly what I wanted to do and why. She then suggested that, as 
I hadn’t been able to find a course that was right for me, I set one up myself.”

The result was Angelides’ company, Mums in Technology 
<https://www.mumsintechnology.co.uk/>, which runs coding classes that women can 
bring babies to. “Amali opened up her network to me and was so generous with 
contacts. She started unofficially mentoring me immediately – she didn’t hold 
my hand too much, I’d go off and do things and she’d then review them. She’s 
been life changing.” Angelides also turned to de Alwis when deciding whether to 
return to work or pursue her business full-time – she chose the latter.

It’s almost like having an agent – someone who keeps an ear out and looks for 
opportunities for you

From de Alwis’s perspective, her own experience of being mentored – by the 
woman who hired her in her previous role – has helped her understand what works 
and what doesn’t. “I meet a lot of people for coffee but I don’t end up 
mentoring everyone – it’s a very organic thing,” she explains. “One of the 
biggest challenges for women is having the confidence to enter into leadership 
roles or entrepreneurship. That’s where role models come in – it’s good to see 
people’s career road maps.”

Megan Gubler, 28 and Sarah Drinkwater, 35
 Mentee Megan Gubler and mentor Sarah Drinkwater. 
With so many young founders and chief executives in tech, the industry can be 
an intimidating place for people moving into it as a second career. Sarah 
Drinkwater, who heads up Google Campus London, the tech giant’s co-working 
space for entrepreneurs, previously worked as a journalist before moving into 
startups in her 30s. “It was really difficult for me to find my way as an arts 
graduate, and what really helped was the people I met who had faith in me,” she 
recalls.

Megan Gubler found herself in a similar position when she recently started her 
first job in the industry, as an account manager at startup incubator Runway 
East. “It was quite overwhelming and I felt like I needed some guidance,” she 
says. “My boss told me aboutLocal Globe’s Ambitious Ladies in Tech 
<https://localglobe.typeform.com/to/rgCuWs> mentoring scheme and suggested I 
apply.”

She was matched with Drinkwater in November 2016, and the pair found a strong 
parallel between their interests and career paths. “[Gubler] really reminded me 
of myself when I was younger,” says Drinkwater. “I’ve worked with around 15 
mentees now, and I’ve learned it’s about chemistry, people have to want to 
build a relationship, and you need a mixture of structure and flexibility to 
set and meet goals.”

The pair meet once a month to discuss Gubler’s career path, rather than just 
focusing on her current role. “I’m going to a storytelling event that Sarah 
recommended, which isn’t related to my work but fits with my long-term goals,” 
she explains. “It’s almost like having an agent – someone who keeps an ear out 
and looks for opportunities for you.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 