
Anonymous, artist, 63, former New Yorker now living in Mexico

I went to a job interview in the 1980s in New York, when I was in my early 
30s. It was something to do with hotel marketing. There I was, dressed in a 
nice suit with a crisp résumé, feeling like a grownup. Halfway through, the 
interviewer said, “I don’t think you really want this job.” I didn’t, and she 
had the insight to see it.

I was broke and in tears, but I remember to this day how I felt walking down 
the street. I never went to another interview and dedicated my life to 
studying, to travelling and making art. I am 63 now, and still learning to 
dance.

Anonymous, doctor, 67, Hampshire

I was 14 and at an average private school. It was the school my father had 
been to and his brother taught there, which I found uncomfortable. My younger 
brother had just won a scholarship to a much better private school. I was at a 
sports event with my father at my school and he got talking to another parent, 
who congratulated him on having clever children. My father indicated towards me 
and said, “No, he’s the dim one.” I remember the parent’s intake of breath and 
a surprised, “Oh.” I have never forgotten this.

It is shattering how one unguarded comment can resonate for a lifetime

My father died at the age of 51, when I was 29. It is shattering how one 
unguarded comment can resonate for a lifetime. I feel that the very many things 
I have done in my professional life have been to try to prove him wrong.

Anonymous, fiftysomething dog-owner, northern England

In the 1980s, I applied to one of the most lauded universities in America. The 
form was many pages long, and the last page was blank; it said, “Write 
something about yourself.” After several days of agonising, I thought, “What 
wouldWeird Al <http://weirdal.com> do?” (I was a massive fan of his song 
parodies even then.) So I wrote the story of my life to the tune of Itsy-Bitsy, 
Teeny-Weeny, Yellow Polka-Dot Bikini. I was immediately ashamed, as if I’d made 
fun of the seriousness of applying.

The conversation that changed my life was a message left on my answering 
machine. A woman from the university intake department said everyone there had 
read my song and thought it was the funniest thing they’d heard. She ended her 
message with, “I really hope –everyone here really hopes – you get in.”

I did get accepted to that university, but it was $16,000 a year, so I had to 
decline. To this day, though, I’ll never forget the giggles in that woman’s 
voice, and the image of an office full of people singing the song I’d written. 
I treasured that message until the tape wore out.

Richard, 50, mortician, US

My wife of 18 years asked me to see if I could fix something on her computer. 
In doing so, I found a journal she had written revealing she was in a 
“loveless, parenting partnership”. This was news to me. I didn’t confront her 
about it at the time, but she revealed an affair a couple of years later and 
our marriage ended. We are now parenting partners by law, and not particularly 
friendly.

Anonymous, 80, retired, Lanarkshire

I served with the RAF in Cyprus in the mid-1950s. An airman on my watch came 
around with a load of addresses of English girls who would like to correspond 
with us. I picked a girl out because she had such a lovely name, and we started 
to write to each other.

We have been married for 57 years, and all because a lonely airman liked the 
sound of a girl’s name

When I came back home, I decided to pay her a visit and we got on really well 
– so well, in fact, that I moved up north and we got engaged. We have been 
married for 57 years, and all because a lonely airman liked the sound of a 
girl’s name. But for her, I don’t think I’d have had such a wonderful life.

Anonymous, freelance management consultant, father of two sons, Doncaster 

I was working for a well-known mobile phone company. There was an expectation 
to be connected almost 24/7 – taking calls in the car, logging on from home 
after a long working day.

He ran up to me, full of the joys of childhood, but I waved him away, miming a 
shush as harshly but silently as I could

One summer’s day, I drove home while participating in a difficult conference 
call that was still going as I turned into the driveway. The front door opened 
and out ran my youngest son, about six, a mop of blond hair and a big smile. He 
ran up to me, full of the joys of childhood, but I waved him away, miming a 
shush as harshly but silently as I could.

The phone call ended badly and I had work to do that evening. As I waited to 
log on in my home office, I noticed a piece of paper on the printer. At the top 
was a clip-art picture of a builder, complete with hard hat and overalls. Below 
were the words that changed my life: “Once there was a builder who went to work 
every day. It was very hard work and when he got back from work he was cross.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa8ad3eab7ad4ee1c629d19babf3d706e7c9327b%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='She'll%20never%20realise%20the%20impact%20she%20had'%3A%20life-changing%20conversations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27She%27ll%20never%20realise%20the%20impact%20she%20had%27%3A%20life-changing%20conversations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa8ad3eab7ad4ee1c629d19babf3d706e7c9327b%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 ‘I still carry this piece of paper in my laptop case.’ 
I must have sat for an hour staring at it. Was this how I was? I turned off my 
laptop. I’m not saying I never worked long hours again, but I’ve done it on my 
terms. I decluttered my life. I took steps to eliminate stress. I made my sons 
a priority and, years on, I am relieved and honoured to have an incredible bond 
with both. I still carry that piece of paper with me in my laptop case.

Lisa, 36, part-time solicitor and mother, Bristol

The last text message I received from Tig said, “Not lame at all xx.” It was 
summer 2008 and I was standing at the bus stop by Clapham Common waiting for a 
bus back to Norwood. We had just had a phone conversation where I had backed 
out of going to a gig with him the following evening – Chromeo playing at The 
End. I rang him and explained; he sounded amused at my newfound concern for 
work and being a grownup. I followed up with a text: “Sorry to be lame. Can’t 
take the pace these days x.”

I had met Tig at university, where we both studied English. We were best 
friends, then went out together, and then lived together. The weekend after 
that text exchange, I got a call from our mutual friend Anna. Tig had died at a 
pre-Notting Hill carnival party on the Saturday night. I don’t have that phone 
any more, but the text stays in my mind. I miss him, and I miss dancing with 
him.

Carol Jeffery, New Hampshire, US

As a senior at university, I was making up for an incomplete in the only 
course I had taken that semester. My professor, who had known me and my family 
since I was a toddler, asked me what I expected in my future. I told him that I 
would be a dedicated teacher. “Dedicated?” he said, “You are the most cavalier 
person I know.”

I was, at that moment, liberated from all the admonitions of my upbringing, 
and I have gratefully acknowledged his comment ever since. I believe I have 
been true to my moral code. I also think that I have had more fun than most 
people ever do.

Anonymous, 30, surveyor, London

In 2013, I was diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and after numerous types of 
chemotherapy, the decision was made that I required a donor stem cell 
transplant. In November 2014, I received my donor cells; all I knew was that 
they were from a 22-year-old American man, blood type O+.

My recovery was tough. I was desperate to get back to being a “normal” 
twentysomething, which I now recognise wasn’t really possible. By February 
2016, I was about ready to give up. I couldn’t keep up with my peers, was 
finding a fledgling relationship difficult, and felt under enormous pressure at 
work. Because I looked well, having finally ditched the wig and lost the 
weight, it was expected that Iwas well – only I wasn’t.

The contents of the short letter were vague, but they were still the words of 
the man to whom I owed my life

I returned home from work one day to my empty flat, talking to my mother on 
the phone while I absentmindedly opened the post. My jaw dropped when I read 
the words, “Please find enclosed a letter from your donor.” The contents of the 
short letter were vague, because they had to be non-identifying, but they were 
still the words of the man to whom I owed my life: touching a piece of paper he 
had touched moved me to floods of tears. It was a simple letter, describing the 
path he had taken that led him to donate his cells to me.

I stopped feeling quite so hard done by and came to accept that I have a 
different lot in life. Yes, I have scars, I tire easily, I am not as “fun” as I 
was, and I will never experience the joy of having a child. But I was given an 
opportunity to see my 30th birthday, and to find the boyfriend who accepted all 
of my past.

Brent Wilson, 57, professor of geology and palaeontology at the University of 
the West Indies, Trinidad and Tobago

My father studied O-level geology in the early 1960s, when the subject was a 
novelty, and when he was a trainee surveyor for the Coal Board. As an infant, I 
had no interest in the sandstones and shales of my West Yorkshire home in 
Huddersfield. One spring weekend when I was about eight, however, we went to 
the Lake District, and one chance remark set the course for my entire life.

We were walking across the hillsides when my father scuffed a pebble with his 
boot. In my mind’s eye, I picture it as granite, but who can say after all this 
time? It fell into several pieces. My father picked up one of them, showed me 
the broken face, and said, “You know, we are the first people ever to see that.”

“To see what?”

“The inside of this rock.”

I was hooked. Over the years, he taught me the difference between igneous, 
metamorphic and sedimentary lithologies; he was with me when at age 10 I found 
my first fossil (a Jurassic clam that I still keep in a Captain Webb matchbox). 
He nurtured the interest that would become my career as a micropaleontologist – 
and all of it can be traced back to his one, probably chance comment on a 
windswept, sun-drenched hillside. Thanks, Dad, for facilitating me having such 
a rich life.

Anonymous, 50, Wiltshire

I was sitting in a hospital canteen with my father. My mother was having an 
operation to remove a tumour in her breast, and we were waiting for news. We 
were talking about my sibling, who was thinking about being a foster carer. My 
father, avoiding eye contact now, said, “Of course we fostered a girl when you 
were little – do you remember?” I said I did. I asked why she had been with us 
and was told that she had been abused by her father. I asked what had happened 
to the girl and why she left us; he replied that she had been a bad influence 
on me.

It was a conversation of very few words, but held so much meaning. I have 
since cut ties with my parents

I felt as if I could faint. For years, I knew I had been abused myself and 
that it was by a female, but I could not work out who. It all came flooding 
back. I sought counselling and have put the past in order. It was a 
conversation of very few words, but held so much meaning. I have since cut ties 
with my parents.

Anonymous

My father was a Pole who decided to remain in the UK after the end of the 
second world war. He had had a torrid time; he was 16 and had been taken by 
Russian groups who mistook his Scouts uniform for a military one. He had not 
only lost what remained of his childhood, but the deep understanding of family 
that accompanies it.

He ruled the family like a dictator. Being over 6ft 3in with a loud voice and 
a short fuse, he was quite intimidating. But he could also be kind, taking the 
family, including numerous cousins, camping and for days out to the seaside.

One evening, we were driving home after dropping my mum off for her night 
shift in a local hospital. I had been reading about the possibility that the 
moon had once been part of the Earth, and was explaining this to him. His 
response was to shout me down and tell me to shut up. I did, more or less for 
the rest of our lives.

That one conversation encouraged me to listen to others and to appreciate the 
importance of an open mind. Sadly, our relationship never recovered. It turned 
out that, at least in this regard, I was as pigheaded as him. We both lost out.

Rich, 25, teacher, Hangzhou, China

I applied for a teaching job in China after finishing university. I had always 
been terrified of public speaking and wanted to conquer that fear. A few months 
into the role, I received a thank you letter from one of my students, who had 
done particularly well in an English competition. It was the moment I felt 
everything click, when I realised I was far more happy and confident than I had 
ever been. She was a phenomenal student, determined to become a lawyer, and I 
doubt she will ever truly realise the impact that letter had. We are still in 
touch.

Anonymous, works in IT

I landed a job at a very large tech corporation as a business manager – a 
sales role with a revenue target and lots of forecasting about what customers 
will do and when. Within the first day, it was clear I was out of my depth. 
After six weeks, I decided to walk. I packed up my desk, stood up and headed 
briskly for the exit. As I did, a colleague pulled me into the on-site cafe. 
His name was Lewis and our 10-minute conversation changed everything.

I told him just how badly I was doing, how convinced I was that I would never 
understand this new world. He told me, with a smile, that I shouldn’t quit and 
that I should try two things: 1) Don’t say thank you (I was always so enthused 
when people spoke to me). Just nod instead, with eye contact. 2) Everyone wants 
to impress their manager and colleagues. Just tell them what they want to hear. 
He explained how a single nod of thanks was far better than fawning over 
someone: it says that you recognise the help, but you would have got there 
eventually. It makes you look more assured, while the recipient feels validated 
and keen to impress you again.

It worked, and seven years later I am still doing the same thing. Customers 
started to place more and more orders. Colleagues asked me for advice (I 
repeated their question back to them in the form of advice and praised them for 
asking the question). Managers trusted that I had a plan.

I genuinely question whether I have any ideas of my own, because I always just 
repeat, in a variety of ways, what the other person is saying. After two years, 
intelligent people completely figure me out, so I have to move departments 
fairly regularly.

Alex, 34, copywriter, Kent

My dad had died a few days before, and I was on a train going home from my 
mum’s. The funeral was scheduled and my mum wanted me to read a poem. I was on 
my own, trying to memorise the poem while I looked at a happy childhood photo 
of me, my sister and my dad. The tears were flowing.

She was only on the train for one or two stops, but she asked if she could 
give me a hug, and I said yes

A stranger come over with a pack of tissues. She sat next to me, looked at the 
photo and chatted to me about why I was upset. I can’t remember most of the 
conversation, but she told me it didn’t matter if I got upset at the funeral 
and cried while reading the poem, because that’s what people expect. And that 
my dad would be proud of me for just considering reading it. She was only on 
the train for one or two stops, but she asked if she could give me a hug, and I 
said yes. Her words stayed with me, and I remembered that kind stranger while I 
read the poem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de4c08466e535a95751dd3e78f7b8b581e58054%2F269_625_7996_4797%2F7996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='She'll%20never%20realise%20the%20impact%20she%20had'%3A%20life-changing%20conversations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27She%27ll%20never%20realise%20the%20impact%20she%20had%27%3A%20life-changing%20conversations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnever-realise-impact-she-had-life-changing-conversations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de4c08466e535a95751dd3e78f7b8b581e58054%2F269_625_7996_4797%2F7996.jpg>
 Photograph: Nisian Hughes/Getty Images 
Anonymous, Worthing


It was a phone conversation with a lady from Alcoholics Anonymous. She said 
there was good news and bad news. The bad news is that there is no cure: once 
an alcoholic, always an alcoholic. The good news is that it’shis problem, not 
mine. This happened 40 years ago, and helped me move on.

Sue, 46, pharma medical affairs director, Surrey

The phone call was from my mother when she told me she had made up her mind to 
travel to Dignitas to end her life. We knew she was considering it after having 
been diagnosed with motor neurone disease five months earlier, but this was the 
moment when a possibility became a reality. She explained that, as the world’s 
most independent woman, the prospect of losing all mobility and dignity was 
intolerable, and she asked if I would accompany her. I replied that it would be 
my privilege (and silently crumbled at the thought of what was to come).

After she swallowed the barbiturates that would end her life, she told me how 
lucky and grateful she was to have felt such love for her friends and family, 
and to have been so loved in return. Then she fell asleep.

John Lees, 59, retired, Denmark

In August 1982, I was on my way to India for a year out. My ticket let me have 
a two-week stopover in Greece, so I headed up the coast to get some long 
overdue sun. Once settled into my hostel, I went into the village, hoping to 
meet other youngsters heading east, but ended up falling in with a retired 
couple from Derby.

Bert and Mary took me under their wing and we spent much of their last four 
days’ holiday together. On the last day, we went for a walk and I drew Bert, a 
retired army officer, on the Falklands conflict with a statement I thought he’d 
warm to. With all the innocence of someone who had no experience of war, I 
said, “We beat the Argies then. I’ll bet you’re proud!” He turned to me with 
eyes filled with contempt and anger: “Listen, war is about young men dying on 
their own far away from home!” I thank Bert for those words every day.
 