
It’s not quite as vital as the battles to save the likes of the Amur leopard 
and giant panda from extinction, but a campaign to preserve a host of 
endangered regional American words and phrases has been launched, looking to 
save the likes of “wamus” to “sonsy”, and “spouty” to “bonnyclabber”.

The list of 50 words and phrases was compiled by the Dictionary of American 
Regional English, a project that has been running since 1965, when almost 3,000 
face-to-face interviews were conducted with people across the US to map the 
thousands of differences in dialect across the states. DARE has chosen the 
words it believes to be “on the cusp of extinction” and teamed up with 
podcasting platformAcast <https://www.acast.com/>, asking its producers and 
presenters to “adopt” an endangered word or phrase and use it on their shows.

'Sewing needle' is a dragonfly, because 'folklore says it would sew up one’s 
eyes and mouth if one fell asleep outside'

The words and phrases range from to “be on one’s beanwater”, a New England 
phrase that means to be in high spirits or to feel frisky, to the south 
Atlantic verb “to fleech”, meaning to coax, wheedle or flatter. A heavy rain is 
described as a “frog strangler” in the southern states and south midlands, or a 
“goose drownder” in the midlands; “to vum” is to swear or declare in New 
England; “the last button on Gabe’s coat” is used in the south to refer to the 
last bit of food.

 “Although language change is inevitable, it’s too bad to see some of our most 
colourful expressions going out of use,” said Joan Hall, former editor of DARE. 
“It would be fun to see them revitalised.”

There’s “nasty-neat”, meaning overly tidy, or “sewing needle”, which is a 
description for a dragonfly in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Massachusetts 
– because “folklore says that it would sew up one’s eyes and mouth (or fingers 
and toes) if one fell asleep outside”. “Bonnyclabber” is thick, sour milk; 
“spouty” is soggy, spongy ground; “sonsy” means cute, charming or lively; and 
“wamus” is a man’s work jacket.

The 50 podcasts you need to hear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/14/fifty-best-podcasts-bob-mortimer-john-oliver-jemaine-clement-serial>
The first of Acast’s programmes to take on the challenge is Thomas Daly’s 
history podcastAmerican Biography <https://www.acast.com/americanbiography>. 
Daly said he hoped that by using the endangered words and phrases on his show, 
he could help “bring them back into the public consciousness and common 
discourse”.

“I’m happy to be part of this project, and hope to help preserve and 
revitalise these cultural heirlooms of America’s great and varied regional 
vernaculars,” said Daly. “American Biography is a show about contextualising 
America’s past and building bridges with its present, and language plays a 
crucial role.”

Acast Stories USA founder Karl Rosander said that more than a fifth of 
Americans now listened to podcasts every month. “This popularity should help 
bring these endangered words back into public discourse, with our podcast hosts 
using, pronouncing correctly and contextualising the DARE words and phrases in 
an organic and replicable way,” he said. “As they say in New England, ‘I vum’ 
that this project should help restore these words and phrases to their former 
glory.”

The 50 endangered words and phrases

Barn burner: a wooden match that can be struck on any surface. Chiefly 
Pennsylvania, southern New Jersey and Maryland.

Bat hide: a dollar bill. Chiefly south-west.

Be on one’s beanwater: to be in high spirits, feel frisky. Chiefly New England.

Bonnyclabber: thick, sour milk. Chiefly north Atlantic.

Counterpin: a bedspread. Chiefly south and south midland 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Midland_American_English#South_Midland>.

Croker sack: a burlap bag. Chiefly Gulf states, south Atlantic.

Cuddy: a small room, closet, or cupboard.

Cup towel: a dish towel. Chiefly Texas, inland south region.

Daddock: rotten wood, a rotten log. Chiefly New England.

Dish wiper: a dish towel. Chiefly New England.

Dozy: of wood, decaying. Chiefly north-east, especially Maine.

Dropped egg: a poached egg. Chiefly New England.

Ear screw: an earring. Chiefly Gulf States, lower Mississippi Valley.

Emptins: homemade yeast used as starter in bread. Chiefly New England, upstate 
New York.

Farmer match: a wooden match than can be struck on any surface. Chiefly upper 
midwest, Great Lakes region, New York, West Virginia.

Fleech: to coax, wheedle, flatter. South Atlantic.

Fogo: An offensive smell. Chiefly New England.

Frog strangler: a heavy rain. Chiefly south, south midland.

Goose drownder: a heavy rain. Chiefly midland.

I vum: I swear, I declare. Chiefly New England.

Larbo: a type of candy made of maple syrup on snow. New Hampshire.

Last button on Gabe’s coat: the last bit of food. Chiefly south, south midland.

Leader: a downspout or roof gutter. Chiefly New York, New Jersey.

Nasty-neat: overly tidy. Scattered usage, but especially north-east.

Parrot-toed: pigeon-toed. Chiefly mid-Atlantic, south Atlantic.

Pin-toed: pigeon-toed. Especially Delaware, Maryland, Virginia.

Popskull: cheap or illegal whiskey. Chiefly southern Appalachians.

Pot cheese: cottage cheese. Chiefly New York, New Jersey, northern 
Pennsylvania, Connecticut.

Racket store: a variety store. Particularly Texas.

Sewing needle: a dragonfly. Especially Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, 
Massachusetts.

Shat: a pine needle. Chiefly Delaware, Maryland, Virginia.

Shivering owl: a screech owl. Chiefly south Atlantic, Gulf states.

Skillpot: a turtle. Chiefly District of Columbia, Maryland, Virginia, West 
Virginia.

Sonsy: cute, charming, lively. Scattered.

Spill: a pine needle. Chiefly Maine.

Spin street yarn: to gossip. Especially New England.

Spouty: of ground: soggy, spongy. Scattered.

Suppawn: corn meal mush. Chiefly New York.

Supple-sawney: a homemade jointed doll that can be made to “dance”. Scattered.

Tacker: a child, especially a little boy. Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, 
eastern Pennsylvania.

Tag: a pine needle. Chiefly Virginia.

To bag school: to play hooky. Chiefly Pennsylvania, New Jersey.

Tow sack: a burlap bag. Chiefly south, south midland, Texas, Oklahoma.

Trash mover: a heavy rain. Chiefly mid-Atlantic, south Atlantic, lower 
Mississippi Valley.

Tumbleset: a somersault. Chiefly south-east, Gulf states; also north-east.

Wamus: a men’s work jacket. Chiefly north-central, Pennsylvania.

Whistle pig: a groundhog, also known as woodchuck. Chiefly Appalachians.

Winkle-hawk: a three-cornered tear in cloth. Chiefly Hudson Valley, New York.

Work brittle: eager to work. Chiefly midland, especially Indiana.

Zephyr: a light scarf. Scattered.
 