
I got in trouble over a four-letter word the other day. None of the ones you 
are thinking of: it was “they” that caused a fracas that Jeremy Clarkson would 
have been proud of.

At the start of 2016, the good folks of the American Dialect Society got 
together to crown their 
<http://www.americandialect.org/2015-word-of-the-year-is-singular-they>Word of 
the Year <http://www.americandialect.org/2015-word-of-the-year-is-singular-they>
. They (see what I’m doing here) have decided that the word could now be used 
as a singular pronoun, flexing the English language so a plural could denote a 
singular, genderless, individual.

Eight words that reveal the sexism at the heart of the English language | 
David Shariatmadari
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/27/eight-words-sexism-heart-english-language>
They has long been used in the singular in English, but not to denote 
genderlessness. One of the earliest examples comes from Geoffrey Chaucer in 
1395, who wrote inThe Pardoner’s Tale 
<http://qz.com/578937/this-year-marks-a-new-language-shift-in-how-english-speakers-use-pronouns/>
: “And whoso fyndeth hym out of swich blame, They wol come up…” Shakespeare 
followed in 1594, in The Comedy of Errors:“There’s not a man I meet but doth 
salute me/As if I were their well-acquainted friend”. It took a few centuries 
for they to pop up in reference to women: Jane Austen uses they in the singular 
75 times in Pride and Prejudice (1813) and as Rosalind muses in 1848’s Vanity 
Fair: “A person can’t help their birth.”

Around 1809, Samuel Taylor Coleridge rejected “he” as the generic pronoun (“in 
order to avoid particularising man or woman, or in order to express either sex 
indifferently”, he wrote in his notebooks), settling on “it” as an ideal, 
neutral solution. Roughly around the same time, the philosopher John Stuart 
Mill wasstruggling to define the philosophy of language itself 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mill/#Aca>: what we could know – if anything 
– beyond our language? Mill came to the conclusion that language tells us what 
is thinkable, possible; so, if a young woman never sees the word “she” or 
“they”, could she naturally know that “he” represented her, too? No. In this 
sense, women were inherently excluded.

If the English language had been properly organised … there would be a word 
which meant both ‘he’ and ‘she’
AA Milne 
Growing up almost two centuries later, I was just supposed to understand that 
language excluded me because I was a girl: I was out, except when it came to 
naming hurricanes and referring to ships. I was once told as a kid that all 
hurricanes were female because women were so destructive; a barbed comment I 
never questioned because at the time I already sensed some things were easier 
if you were a boy.

These days there is an increased awareness of gender and how we define it. The 
ever prevalent pay gap, the high rate of male suicide. The rise of transgender 
celebrities: Laverne Cox, Caitlyn Jenner, the Wachowski sisters. Maria Munir, 
the non-binary studentwho came out to Obama in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/24/now-or-never-says-student-who-came-out-as-non-binary-to-obama>
. Debates about contraception, consent, masculinity, body image: so many public 
conversations are opening up how we define gender and its roles. But there are 
many insidious examples of gender divides that persist in English usage:Oxford 
Dictionaries defining the word “rabid” with the example “a rabid feminist” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/25/oxford-dictionary-review-sexist-language-rabid-feminist-gender>
 or “housework” with “she still does all the housework” – but then using the 
male pronoun for all examples involving doctors. There are220 words for a 
sexually promiscuous woman in English, but only 20 for 
<http://webspace.buckingham.ac.uk/kbernhardt/journal/5_1/5LingLei.pdf>their 
male equivalents 
<http://webspace.buckingham.ac.uk/kbernhardt/journal/5_1/5LingLei.pdf>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fthe-moment-a-student-told-barack-obama-she-was-non-binary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20moment%20a%20student%20told%20Barack%20Obama%20they%20were%20non-binary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fthe-moment-a-student-told-barack-obama-she-was-non-binary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20moment%20a%20student%20told%20Barack%20Obama%20they%20were%20non-binary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fthe-moment-a-student-told-barack-obama-she-was-non-binary-video&media=>
The moment Maria Munir told Barack Obama they were non-binary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/apr/25/the-moment-a-student-told-barack-obama-she-was-non-binary-video>
. 
Turkish, Hungarian, Finnish, Persian – are entirely genderless

Winnie-the-Pooh author AA Milne once wrote: “If the English language had been 
properly organised … there would be a word which meant both ‘he’ and ‘she’, and 
I could write: ‘If John or May comes, heesh will want to play tennis,’ which 
would save a lot of trouble.” And thisis an English problem; the “all languages 
are this way, it’s just the way of the world” argument is a convenient one, but 
not true. While the push to use “they” as a genderless pronoun is new for 
English, it is rather old hat in other languages: while English was picking and 
choosing its vocabulary from Latin and German, so many other languages – 
Turkish, Hungarian, Finnish, Persian – are entirely genderless. The Pipil 
language, a language indigenous to Central America, uses a genderless pronoun – 
“yaja” – to refer to “he or she”. Others have attempted to amend their language 
by borrowing from others – as Sweden did by introducing the gender-neutral 
“hen”, based on “hän”, meaning “he or she” in Finnish – with varying degrees of 
success. Not English.

In the past, I have tried solving the problem of inherent sexism in language 
by alternating male and female pronouns when referring to generic professions – 
where I refer to a patient as “he” in one sentence, I may refer to his doctor 
as “she” in the next. Because I’m one of the rabid feminists of which Oxford 
Dictionaries speaks, I make certain that my generic “shes” are not always in 
positions of vulnerability. Within the last few decades, we have seen a shift 
in this regard: air hostesses became cabin crew, male nurses are nurses, 
firemen are firefighters. Women are no longer just hurricanes and boat names, 
and in turn, men are no longer ridiculed for working in ‘female’ professions 
like airplane service or nursing. These are modest but significant changes, all 
the more significant when you consider these terms came into practice from a 
deliberate drive to address outdated stereotypes. We still need deliberate 
effort to remove sexism – like the Washington Post’s recent movefrom she/he to 
they 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-post-drops-the-mike--and-the-hyphen-in-e-mail/2015/12/04/ccd6e33a-98fa-11e5-8917-653b65c809eb_story.html>
 as their default pronoun.


As part of a liberal, feminist, grammar-nerd circle of friends, I had a small 
expectation that we would all see “they” as a positive thing; what I didn’t 
expect was fights to break out on my Facebook feed. Some friends cited jobs 
where they had been treated as sex objects or second-class citizens for their 
gender. Others recalled reading books as children about experiences they would 
have liked to have had, but couldn’t because it was always a “he” on the 
adventure. But some could not be moved: switching to “they” was meaningless, 
changing nothing in a world where being born female could justify your being 
killed. Actions against actions, rather than language, made more sense. And 
wasn’t this push for “they” just an example of a new political correctness, in 
a time of Caitlyn Jenner and genderless bathrooms, a fuss driven by those who 
compulsively find offence in everything they can?

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
In 1986, Joan Scott wrote that gender <http://www.jstor.org/stable/1864376> is 
not just about sex, but is also “a primary way of signifying relationships of 
power”: two decades since she wrote that, these battles continue. Personally, I 
think we should make a fuss over any use of language that excludes us by 
gender, race, sexuality, or religion, but I know that this is itself another 
issue of contention. I think “they” is the way to proceed as a default, until 
English is spoken in a world where the inherent power disparity between the 
“hes” and “shes” is eradicated. I know it won’t happen in my lifetime, but as 
long as we continue to use a language that is inherently sexist, we will be 
forever perpetuating sexist ideology, even without intending to. I still do not 
know how to talk about this without inspiring fights – but it is an important 
one.
 