
A Charlton fan who was threatened with having his season ticket withheld 
unless he signed a contract preventing him from making “derogatory comments” 
about the club, says he has “had enough” of the way he and his fellow 
supporters are being treated.

The fan, who had been involved in protests against the way the club has been 
run under owner Roland Duchâtelet, received a letter from Charlton last week 
stating that unless he signed an “Agreed Behavioral Contract” governing what he 
said about the club, he would not be issued with his season ticket. The fan 
then met with the club, who withdrew the threat and ultimately did grant him a 
season ticket, but only after he apologised for comments made on social media.

The letter, posted on Twitter by another supporter, was written by the club’s 
duty safety officer, Cliff Eager, and noted that “certain comments made by you 
on social media websites by yourself have been not particularly constructive” 
and that “as a result we it has been decided that your season ticket will be 
allocated to you, in person by myself at the club by mutual appointment...”
James Maddison (@JamMad83) 
@SamWallaceTel <https://twitter.com/SamWallaceTel> #cafc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/cafc?src=hash> started blackmailing fans with 
their season tickets to stop them protesting against the board
pic.twitter.com/iTU4q3SMLw <https://t.co/iTU4q3SMLw>
 <https://twitter.com/JamMad83/status/763992662365974528> August 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JamMad83/status/763992662365974528> 
It continued: “I need to advise you that the granting of your season ticket 
will be ‘conditional’ and subject to you signing an ‘Agreed Behavioural 
Contract’ (ABC) which will request that you refrain from posting derogatory or 
inflammatory comments regarding the Club or people representing the club in the 
future on any social media websites, or carrying out any other form of 
behaviour that could be deemed to be of an anti-social nature.”

The comments made by the fan, on social media and captured on camera at the 
Valley, contained profanities but are not thought to be defamatory in nature, 
and indeed the club have not claimed as such.

Charlton’s controversial chief executive Katrien Meire joins FA Council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/charlton-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fa-council>
“I’ve been gobby, but that’s nothing unusual for football fans and was nothing 
that anyone else hadn’t said on Twitter,” the fan, who asked not to be named, 
told the Guardian.

“They said I was being inflammatory, but inflammatory is inciting violence or 
hate; all I’ve been saying is we want our club back. I wasn’t going to put it 
online - my friend put it up, but it needs to be out there, how they’re 
destroying the club that we all love.”

The fan, accompanied by the chairman of the Charlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> Supporters Trust 
Richard Wiseman, met with Eager and Mick Everett, the club’s head of matchday 
operations, expecting to be presented with the contract, but there seemed to 
have been a change of heart about placing restrictions on his statements.

“I expected to walk in there, they’d have the contract laid out and that would 
be it,” he said. “I said I didn’t want the meeting to be mentioned, but they’ve 
[made it public] now regardless. I was going to take the contract away and take 
legal advice, but instead they gave me a telling off.

“I apologised for whatever was said, but at the end of the day they shouldn’t 
be sending these sort of letters. I am sorry, but I haven’t signed any 
conditions. I said I wanted to record the conversation so it was clear what had 
been said, but they said no.

“I don’t care what they do now. I’ve had enough of the club and how they’ve 
tried to treat me, and every other supporters. Let them do what they’ve got to 
do. I can still travel to away games. They can’t ban me from away games – I 
haven’t committed a criminal offence.”

It would appear that cooler heads prevailed between the writing of the letter 
and the meeting. Nevertheless, this represents another example of the troubling 
attitude the club has taken towards its supporters, and how they seemingly 
initially tried to threaten the fan into staying quiet.Protests against 
Duchâtelet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/charlton-athletic-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fans>
 and chief executive Katrien Meire were a feature of last season, as supporters 
disrupted games by throwing objects onto the pitch, held up banners and even 
conducted a mock funeral procession to the Valley, mourning what they perceived 
to be the death of the club under the Belgian.

The club were relegated to League One last season, after the sale of several 
key players and an erratic approach to their managerial position. In 
Duchatelet’s two-and-a-half years at the Valley, Charlton have had six 
permanent managers, taking in two spells by Jose Riga and the sacking of club 
hero Chris Powell. Fans were also unhappy after Meire compared them to 
customers of a restaurant or cinema, and seeming to mock the way they ‘cared’ 
about the club.

In March, Duchatelet released a statement 
<http://www.cafc.co.uk/news/article/statement-3009419.aspx> on the Charlton 
website in which he accused fans of wanting the club to fail, seemingly an 
attempt to place the blame for some of their woes on the supporters. In the 
wake of the statement, the club’s head of communications resigned.

Charlton issued a statement on Friday 
<http://www.cafc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/charlton-statement-3243379.aspx> in 
which they confirmed the meeting had taken place, and that they “called the 
meeting to explain the Agreed Behavioural Contract process with the individual 
and the reasons behind it. It was emphasised that the meeting was not due to 
any involvement with supporter protests, but solely in response to his 
continuous, personal behaviour and abuse.”

The statement continued: “The individual met with Head of Matchday Operations 
Mick Everett... and recently appointed Duty Safety Officer, Cliff Eager... 
During the meeting, the level of abuse, which the individual has since 
voluntarily removed from their Twitter account, was discussed. The club also 
discussed the video footage, after which the individual apologised on several 
occasions for his behaviour and assured the club that he would not continue to 
engage in an abusive manner…

“The meeting ended amicably and, as he appeared sincere in his apology, the 
club handed the individual his 2016/17 season ticket and he was not asked to 
sign an Agreed Behavioural Contract.”

Wiseman, who accompanied the fan, welcomed the reversal of the club’s 
position, but was concerned that the threat had been made in the first place.

“The crucial thing is that the club appeared to have rethought the contract 
idea and it was dealt with informally and satisfactorily,”Wiseman told the News 
Shopper 
<http://www.newsshopper.co.uk/sport/14679069.Charlton_Supporters_Trust_satisfied_with_meeting_after____alarming_and_naive____letter_to_fan/>
. “Having said that, the email was alarming and naive.

“The supposed contract regarding particular comments and behaviour that was 
originally asked to be signed is pretty broad. When I read the letter I thought 
it was another own goal. It was a naive letter for sure.”
 