
Hisham Matar: Your new book, East West Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/east-west-street-origin-genocide-crimes-against-humanity-philippe-sands-review>
, is more personal than anything you’ve written before. What made you take this 
different direction?

Philippe Sands: Chance, and an excess of curiosity. In the spring of 2010, 
immersed in teaching and cases, I received an unexpected invitation from 
Ukraine. Would I visit Lviv and give a lecture on my work on “crimes against 
humanity” and “genocide”? I accepted because my grandfather, Leon, was born in 
the city in 1904, when it was called Lemberg, a place of painful memories of 
which he never spoke. I wanted to see his streets, find the house where he was 
born, know more about his identity and mine.

Over the summer, preparing the lecture, I discovered that the lawyers who put 
the terms “genocide” and “crimes against humanity” into international law – 
Raphael Lemkin and Hersch Lauterpacht – both lived in Lviv. They’d even 
attended the very university that had invited me, although not at the same 
time. How curious that my roots – family and work – shared a common soil. Thus 
came the idea for a double detective story about family and work. Focusing on 
one city, two crimes and three men, the heart of the book was about identity – 
who was I? – and the relationship between the individual and the group. In the 
course of writing, a fourth character entered the scene: the fascinating but 
dastardlyHans Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/16/nazi-war-criminal-nuremberg-prosecution-bach>
, Hitler’s lawyer, whose dalliance with mass murder would connect the lives of 
my three other characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc331c737222a1854cda986368e2c608ecb96eb91%2F0_0_2010_2311%2F2010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc331c737222a1854cda986368e2c608ecb96eb91%2F0_0_2010_2311%2F2010.jpg>
 Philippe’s grandfather Leon’s house in Lviv Photograph: Diana Matar 
I know it was different for you, of course, as the story of your memoir is a 
story that has shaped your life. But you have only written novels before, why 
the turn to non-fiction, and why now?

HM: You’re right; this book has been running in my veins for a long time. What 
triggered it was the trip I made back to Libya in 2012, shortly after the fall 
of the dictatorship. I had left the country with my family in 1979. It had not 
been my choice. And for the following 33 years I could not return. In that time 
I had lost my father, who was kidnapped and forcibly returned to Libya. He was 
imprisoned, tortured and then made to disappear. I have spent most of my adult 
life searching for him, living with his vague and inconclusive absence. And 
once it was possible to go to Libya after the fall of Gaddafi, I returned to 
see the places and the people I loved and had learned to live without, but also 
to look for my father.

I travelled exactly how you are advised not to travel: with my wife and 
mother. Yet it was wonderful exactly because of that, and not only because they 
are both extraordinary women, but because the three of us knew how to support 
and offer one another the gentle space needed to engage with Libya. My wife 
Diana did this through her camera and I, every night as I lay in bed, tried to 
write down the events and private adjustments the day had exacted on me.
 Libya Photograph: Diana Matar 
Back home in London, and over the three months that followed, I could not 
write a word. This had never happened before. I wondered if I had, somehow, 
reached the end of my writing life. It was in such a state of mind that I 
visited an old friend who lives in Piedmont, Italy. For some reason I took 
those Libyan diaries with me. One afternoon I started, very slowly, picking out 
the first line, as if it were a thread, and using it to begin. In fact, the 
first couple of lines of the book were lifted straight off that diary.

PS: And your book is not only personal, is it?

HM: The book is about that return, of course, about my complex relationship 
with Libya, its history and present, my family, my search for my father, but it 
is also about the relationship between the past and present, how history weighs 
on us, how we ought to respond to all that has happened before, the nature of 
belonging to anything or anyone, the mysterious distance between what we feel 
and how we act, and the relationship between art and life.

PS: These issues of identity seems so relevant right now, the idea of 
belonging, of how history shapes us.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s statement at the Tory party 
conference – “If you believe you are a citizen of the world, you are a citizen 
of nowhere” – seemed trite and troubling. They came up with a dismal proposal 
that British companies – perhaps even my own university – should be required to 
list all its foreign employees (as a Brit and Frenchman, would I be listed?). 
It was the kind of thing Frank would concoct on a less bad day, a reminder of 
my grandfather’s struggles, about which he didn’t want to talk but which I 
uncovered while researchingEast West Street. A moment in 1943, for example, 
when his Parisian employer was ordered by the Gestapo to fire all its foreign 
Jewish employees, including him. The employer refused, which led to a roundup 
by the SS and deportations to Auschwitz. Little actions and ideas can lead to 
terrible things. Leon narrowly avoided that fate: he had the good fortune to be 
by a door whenAlois Brunner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/01/nazi-war-criminal-alois-brunner-syria>
 entered the room to lead the roundup. He managed to hide behind it, thankfully.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ca4363be09b3eb7a918468f2f6434d59b8c00b2%2F0_0_2010_2010%2F2010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ca4363be09b3eb7a918468f2f6434d59b8c00b2%2F0_0_2010_2010%2F2010.jpg>
 Philippe Sands Photograph: Diana Matar/PR 
A constant theme in my day job, as a lawyer, is that one small initial horror 
– a government failure to condemn newspaper headlines that label judges as 
“Enemies of the People” for example – invariably leads to the next, up the 
scale. Words matter, and soon a dark place has been reached. I saw that with 
the move to “enhanced interrogation” techniques – AKA torture. The prime 
minister’s speech might seem innocuous, but it crosses a line, one that pushes 
Britain further along a nasty, xenophobic and populist path that allows 
foreigners, “elites”, experts – and now even judges – to be seen as fair game. 
Someone needs to press the pause button, or this will end very badly.

When my grandfather was stripped of his Polish nationality in the 1930s and 
became stateless, he truly became a citizen of the world. For him it meant no 
rights at all. The lesson of 1945 was a move to human rights, the idea that 
every individual had certain minimum rights, at all times and in all places. 
That too is now under threat: when I served on the last government’s Commission 
on a Bill of Rights one of my colleagues put forward a proposal that the rights 
for any individual should depend on the nationality: Brits would get all 
rights, EU nationals fewer, and others even fewer. Appalling. That’s where some 
want to take us, back to the 1930s. May opposes UK membership of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. If she could, she’d probably try to find a way to 
strip you of your British nationality, and me of mine. Send you back to 
Benghazi and me to Lviv. Both places have good pickles at least.

HM: Not good, exceptional. But seriously, look, I actually found her statement 
fascinating. Notwithstanding how simplistic it is – how, for example, it 
collapses a deeply complex and, particularly in these times, urgent question, 
into a binary choice (as though such things are ever a choice) – I nonetheless 
welcomed her intervention as I hoped it might provoke a more thoughtful 
conversation about the meaning of citizenship in the 21st century. Who knows; 
it might still.

The abiding duty of language, it seems to me, is to expose us, to say a little 
more than we had intended to say, and so her choice of words, their muddled 
logic, opened a window into the mind of our new prime minister and articulated 
a sentiment that is shared by a significant number of people, I have no doubt, 
and is a genuine anxiety, I think. Which is why the conversation needs to be 
better. And we must consider the timing too. Her speech was delivered just as 
thousands of men, women and children were escaping war, running across borders, 
floating in the middle of the Mediterranean – as they are continuing to do 
today, of course, as you and I speak – and as complex as the causes are and the 
solutions would need to be, I was immediately struck by how her words were not 
only erroneous but insensitive to the point of being indecent.

PS: What is it about those words, exactly?

Who among us would just want to be tolerated? We want to be appreciated, or at 
least recognised as equals
Hisham Matar 
HM: Perhaps it’s that they seemed to represent the other face of that 
much-exalted trait, tolerance, which I have never managed to feel enthusiastic 
about – for who among us would just want to be tolerated? We want to be 
appreciated, or at least recognised as equals. Instead of this limited 
repertoire of either tolerance or nationalism, what is required, what has been 
required long before May’s speech, and what I continue to believe we are 
capable of, is an intelligent and imaginative engagement. It is unintelligent 
and unimaginative to leave thousands of children languishing at our border, 
parentless citizens of the world who truly occupy that “nowhere” she speaks of. 
For us to go to bed every night pretending those unaccompanied children are not 
there sleeping in the open is unthinking and unimaginative. Such deeds narrow 
the heart. Their consequences on our society are perhaps as great as they are 
on those we abandon. What our public discourse and we deserve instead is 
expansive thinking, active kindness and sober humility. Otherwise, the 
“somewhere” May advocates might not be worth much all.

And what has just taken place in the US shows how many people are seeking 
certainty not in reason but in nationalism, where sentiments are more important 
than facts.

The election of Donald Trump reflects a rejection of globalisation, a move 
toward walls, and against openness
Philippe Sands 
PS: More than nationalism, sadly. The election of Donald Trump surely reflects 
a broader trend, an embrace of the politics of identity and fear, of the idea 
of “them” and “us”; a rejection of globalisation and a further unravelling of 
the post-second world war 1945 settlement; a move toward walls, and against 
openness.

But let us speak of happier things. Congratulations on being shortlisted for 
theBaillie Gifford prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/17/first-hand-reporting-dominates-baillie-gifford-shortlist>
.

HM: And to you. Are you already composing your acceptance speech?

PS: Of course not. But I’ve written one for you, as you instructed. You said 
no Adorno on this occasion, right? Seriously, the only aspect I worry about is 
what to wear. You always look so elegant, maybe I’ll wear the tie your wife 
Diana bought me. I credit you with many things by way of support, and not just 
in matters sartorial. You helped me discard the shackles of my professional and 
academic constraints, to find a personal voice. Your friendship offered a 
different confidence. Remember that key moment in The Hague, the self-styled 
city of international justice, a few years back? Walking, we came across a 
second-hand car dealership that offered pride of place to a black, open-top, 
vintage Alfa Romeo Spider. We both fell in love with it instantly. Even at the 
most trying of moments we could permit ourselves to imagine something else. 
Let’s buy it, we fleetingly thought, share it, drive it back to England, just 
take the flak from our (fabulous) sensible wives.

HM: They wouldn’t have minded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bd2822a193b80ac8e269bc7c05dea3df86c92be%2F0_0_1105_1107%2F1105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20on%20a%20xenophobic%20path%20%E2%80%93%20someone%20needs%20to%20press%20pause%E2%80%99%3A%20Philippe%20Sands%20in%20conversation%20with%20Hisham%20Matar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fxenophobic-populist-path-philippe-sands-conversation-with-hisham-matar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bd2822a193b80ac8e269bc7c05dea3df86c92be%2F0_0_1105_1107%2F1105.jpg>
 Hisham Matar, taken by his wife. 
PS: I feel that moment encapsulates my sense of our friendship, one brushed by 
the darknesses and mysteries of our families’ experiences, but which always 
manages to find a crack through which light and laughter will enter. I’d love 
to share that Alfa with you, or have it for myself. But I’d be equally thrilled 
if you got it all for yourself.

HM: We certainly should have bought it … Isn’t it interesting how certain 
friends come to resemble private rooms in which the things that can be said and 
done there cannot be said or done anywhere else? You’re right about that range 
of registers we enjoy: the playful and the serious. Ours has never really been 
a literary friendship, more a fraternal one. This is perhaps partly because we 
met in the trenches, fighting for human rights, and partly due to our histories 
that have helped make us sensitive to dislocation and rupture. Perhaps I 
reminded you of your grandfather.

PS: That resonates. A grandson in search of a grandfather, whom he sees in the 
son seeking his father?

HM: Yes, perhaps. But over the years, our friendship has evolved in ways that 
I am grateful for and which delight me. I do wish, though, you would stop 
wearing these awful T-shirts. I am relieved to hear that you will be putting on 
a shirt for the award.

PS: I mentioned a tie, but I don’t think I said anything about a shirt. 
Magical thinking. Again.
 