
Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> roared 10 
points clear at the top of Serie A after the champions secured a 3-0 home win 
over Cagliari today and second-placed AC Milan drew.

The Macedonian striker Goran Pandev slotted in a scuffed shot from Samuel 
Eto'o after six minutes to grab his third goal since rejoining Inter last month.

Defender Walter Samuel then powered in a header from a corner and Argentina's 
Diego Milito netted his 14th goal of the league campaign after a fine move just 
after the break.Cagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> felt 
hard done by when Alessandro Matri's goal was ruled out for offside despite 
replays suggesting otherwise.

"We can definitely improve a lot more but I'm happy for the three points. We 
are only thinking about ourselves, other results don't bother us," Pandev, 
whose relentless side are coasting towards a fifth straight scudetto, said.

Milan failed to win for the fourth straight game in a 0-0 draw at struggling 
Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> where winger Mancini, 
who signed on loan from Inter on Monday, made his debut in place of the dropped 
David Beckham.

The Rossoneri hit the bar but their creative problems remain as they miss the 
driving force of the injured Alexandre Pato. Beckham had played all five 
leagues games since arriving for a second loan spell from Los Angeles Galaxy in 
January.

Elsewhere, in-form Roma can move up to second from third and cut Inter's 
­advantage to eight if they win atFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> later today, although Inter 
and Milan will still have a game in hand.

A fight between supporters before kick-off and a scuffle in the players' 
tunnel marred Antonio Di Natale's hat-trick in lowly Udinese's 3-1 win over 
fourth-placedNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, who had 
goalscorer Christian Maggio sent off for diving.

The defeat was Napoli's first in the league for 16 games under coach Walter 
Mazzarri. Italy forward Di Natale, Serie A's top scorer with 16 goals, netted 
early when he knocked in the rebound after his penalty was saved and he made it 
2-1 in ­stoppage time with an acrobatic finish before adding a third. Four 
people including a policeman received minor injuries in trouble outside the 
ground, media reported.

Sampdoria's 2-1 win at the bottom side Siena meant the Genoa club climbed to 
sixth spot, above free-fallingJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> who drew 1-1 at Livorno on 
Saturday.

Genoa beat fellow mid-table side Chievo 1-0 and Catania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/catania> boosted their hopes of survival 
and left Lazio third from bottom thanks to Maxi Lopez's second-half goal in a 
1-0 win in Rome.

Also at the bottom, Atalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> 
beat Bari 1-0 at home.
 