
Doncaster children’s services trust <http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/>
 with the police and the charityFoundation 
<http://www.foundationuk.org/about/support-for-homeless-and-vulnerable-people/> 
has been working intensively since February with fathers and mothers who have 
abused their partners through violence or controlling behaviour.

The parents are encouraged onto the programme following police custody, or by 
the trust’s unique team ofspecialist case workers.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone/2016/mar/14/new-approach-families-domestic-abuse>

Just a few months in, the programme is turning family lives around. Parents 
are finding the strength to transform their behaviour thanks to interventions 
by the trust and its partners.

What does it take to change an abuser’s behaviour?

We hear from Rob Keane, who joined the trust to work with perpetrators earlier 
this year.

“At the trust, we work from the stance that people can change – that’s what we 
really believe.

Before I joined , I spent eight years working alongside Doncaster Drug and 
Alcohol Services, supporting clients to start afresh through education and 
employment.

To help clients to improve their lives you have to build up relationships, and 
find out about their personality. The key is to have high aspirations for them, 
while recognising and managing risk. There is always a ‘revolving door’ feeling 
when clients relapse, but you can’t take it personally.

The trust created the Growing Futures 
<http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/growing-futures> model as a whole 
family approach to tackling domestic abuse. I thought this sounded like a great 
opportunity: I wanted to help children in Doncaster to live better, safer, more 
fulfilled lives, and I knew that I could engage with difficult to reach 
clients, like perpetrators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62bd14995680363db18ffc3b5091ef84a749cf44%2F0_227_1965_1179%2F1965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20work%20from%20the%20stance%20that%20people%20can%20change'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20work%20from%20the%20stance%20that%20people%20can%20change%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62bd14995680363db18ffc3b5091ef84a749cf44%2F0_227_1965_1179%2F1965.jpg>
 Rob Keane takes the time to get to know perpetrators and their families to 
offer a long-term change after abuse. Photograph: Dean Atkins Photography 
Any domestic abuse service that doesn’t work with perpetrators isn’t going to 
be as effective. Perpetrators are really the source of the problem. If you’re 
not turning that tap off – if you’re only working with partners and children 
it’s much less likely to stop. Growing Futures is a really innovative new model 
and I hope it will be emulated.

It’s important to get to know perpetrators, like anyone else you work with. I 
take them for a cuppa, and I listen. We don’t always talk about the abuse. We 
just chat, so that I get an insight into that person. By showing respect and 
not making judgements, you have a better chance of eliciting change.

I found a place in town where you can hire bikes for free. Going for a bike 
ride together is a great way of opening up conversations.

My most used technique is ‘motivational interviewing.’ Allowing the client to 
identify areas of their life that need to change through discussion, not 
prescribing to them what they need to do, but letting them come up with their 
own ideas about how they can progress. Then they take ownership, and are more 
likely to follow it through.

You have to believe that people can change, and I’ve seen that in this 
programme. It’s just eight weeks long, but gives clients building blocks they 
can put into practice when they’ve completed the course. It’s not a soft option 
and we challenge their behaviour and core beliefs at a very personal level. 
Most of the perpetrators I’ve worked with have come to the realisation that 
their behaviour has been totally inappropriate, and become extremely regretful 
and remorseful about the abuse. You see a total change of beliefs and behaviour.

I work with other agencies to get clients back into employment or training, or 
to access the rehabilitation therapies they need. In this role, there is the 
freedom to do whatever it takes to improve the lives of the people we are 
trying to help in all areas of their lives.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8586c86d01478f58b3252ea3dfe3a4292507295%2F0_170_1413_847%2F1413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20work%20from%20the%20stance%20that%20people%20can%20change'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20work%20from%20the%20stance%20that%20people%20can%20change%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwe-work-from-stance-that-people-can-change-domestic-abuse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8586c86d01478f58b3252ea3dfe3a4292507295%2F0_170_1413_847%2F1413.jpg>
 Keane often takes abuse perpetrators for bike rides to get them talking. 
Photograph: Dean Atkins Photography 
‘I saw abuse in my house and thought it was normal. But that’s the old me.’

A former abuser’s story:

*Dave, who had previously blamed his behaviour on drink and drugs, realised 
that he needed to take control, since completing the course.

“I was scared that my violence was getting worse.

When I was a kid I saw abuse in my house, between my mam and dad. I kind of 
grew up with it. It was just normal. Or I thought it was.

I thought this programme wasn’t going to help, thought it was just going to be 
a waste of time. But I got a lot from it. It actually really helped me. I think 
now, instead of acting straight away. I learned how to control my temper 
better. Now I can set goals and carry things through. That’s not me anymore, 
that’s all in the past. That’s the old me. I haven’t got drunk or used drugs 
since New Year. I feel loads better.

Doncaster children’s services trust is improving – and staff are keen to reach 
outstanding rating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone/2016/oct/06/doncaster-childrens-services-trust-improving-paul-moffat-interview>
My family see that I’ve changed. They’ve told me I am different now. I feel 
more positive about things now. I have told three of my mates already about the 
programme. They are in abusive relationships. I have told them how good the 
course was. I’ve told them they should give it a try. It could help them as 
much as it’s helped me.”

Growing Futures is a £3.1m Department for Education-funded project led by 
Doncaster children’s services trust with partners to reduce domestic abuse and 
its effects on Doncaster’s children and young people.

The project is being evaluated by external researchers to inform future 
development.

*Names have been changed to protect identities.

Visit www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/growing-futures 
<http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/growing-futures> and follow 
#DAisnotOK for more information about the services.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Doncaster children’s services 
trust
 