
This wasn’t the first time we’d shared a bill with the Beatles. A few years 
earlier, they were our warm-up band, when we headlined the Cavern in Liverpool. 
We really admired them.

I was the trombonist in the Mike Cotton Sound,  
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/the-mike-cotton-sound-mn0000112415>a footnote 
to the 1960s music scene. On this occasion, we were their support band; we are 
pictured here at the press call forAnother Beatles Christmas Show 
<https://www.beatlesbible.com/1964/12/24/live-another-beatles-christmas-show/>, 
a follow-up to their successful production a year earlier.

The show opened on Christmas Eve and ran until 16 January, and consisted of 
variety performances, with sketches and comedy that seemed anachronistic even 
then. Produced by a friend of Brian Epstein, it was lavish, with cascading 
waterfalls that flooded the stage. We started the night on a revolving podium 
and the leads kept getting tangled up. Jimmy Savile was compere; none of us 
liked him. He was an awful show-off.

At the press call, John Lennon knew all the photographers and journalists, and 
called out to them: “How do, Daily Express? How’s it going, Sunday Times?” So 
we called out, too, reflecting our lowly status: “Hello there, Willesden 
Chronicle!”

I’m standing next to the singer Elkie Brooks <http://www.elkiebrooks.com/>, 
apparently with a thatched roof on my head. We wanted to look like the Beatles, 
and copied their hair and wore the same boots: Cuban heels fromAnello & Davide 
<http://www.handmadeshoes.co.uk/>, which became known as the Beatle Boot. Mike 
Cotton, on my left, was keen to do something special for the show, so we had 
silver suits specially made. We’re both from London and had known each other 
since we were 18. I’m from East Ham, Mike from Tottenham.

Our job was to play incidental music and accompany Elkie; we had a spot of our 
own, too. At the beginning of every show, each act made a brief walk-on 
appearance, and we had to play a few bars of appropriate music. You couldn’t 
hear anything the Beatles played because of the screaming. I think I was one of 
the few people at that time who got to hear their live shows clearly, because I 
watched a few of their afternoon rehearsals at the almost-deserted Hammersmith 
Odeon, as it was called then.

Andy Collins captured by Martin Parr: ‘I left that chippy and never gave it a 
second thought’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/09/martin-parr-buying-chips-andy-collins>
A residency like this was rare for us; we were usually touring. At the time, 
we were playing about 300 gigs a year. We had a good time, behaving as a group 
of young men do when they’re on the road.

In 1965, our keyboard player, Dave Rowberry 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_Rowberry>, was poached by the Animals. We 
auditioned a lot of people to replace him, includingJoe Cocker  
<https://www.cocker.com/>and Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john>, who we knew then as Reg. We 
were an attractive proposition as we earned more than some bigger bands. Joe 
and Elton both failed their auditions – not for musical reasons, of course. Joe 
didn’t look right, and Elton was so shy and vulnerable, he wouldn’t have fitted 
in. He’s probably grateful now.

The Beatles’ Christmas shows were a hit; no one but them could pack the 
Hammersmith Odeon twice nightly for more than two weeks. They were full of 
traditional songs, as well as their own hits. It doesn’t get more Christmassy 
than this.
 