
On a cold winter’s morning last November, Michelle James bent over a bulky 
grey package on her patio. Wrapped in plastic, it lay lengthways on the ground 
beneath a wooden plant holder. She was with her friend Rhian, and they were 
about to find out what was inside.

A month earlier, James’s friend and upstairs neighbour, Lee Sabine, had died 
at the age of 74. In the late stages of cancer, Sabine told James about an old 
medical skeleton she kept in the house: wouldn’t it be funny, Sabine said, if 
James got it out after she’d gone and put it up in the attic, to scare the 
people who moved in after her?

Armed with kitchen knives, James and Rhian set about cutting through the thick 
layers of plastic, 41 in all, thinking about the laugh they would have when 
they sat the skeleton on the couch; the two women wanted to play a joke on 
their friend, Gareth. But as the final layer gave way, James began to scream. 
There was an unmistakable stench of decay; this was no student prop, but 
something much more sinister.

James ran inside, telling Rhian to call the police.

***

The former mining village of Beddau sits in the Rhondda valley, surrounded by 
lush hills in every shade of green. On a warm late summer evening, children 
gather in its many playing fields, flying kites and kicking balls between 
discarded clothes doubling as goalposts; doors are left ajar to let in a breath 
of air. In its industrial heyday, Beddau was dominated by social housing 
estates, built to support the colliery and coking plant; more recently, tiers 
of new estates with smarter cars parked outside have sprung up to accommodate 
the Cardiff commuters, attracted by low house prices and the proximity to the 
M4. Newcomers have loosened the stitches of this tight-knit community, where a 
third of the children attend a Welsh-speaking primary school. Even so, it is a 
place where generations of families have grown up together, where neighbours 
still look out for each other and secrets are hard to keep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b866d84a639172048a5d3399db817fbfff7f2d%2F0_0_771_463%2F771.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b866d84a639172048a5d3399db817fbfff7f2d%2F0_0_771_463%2F771.jpg>
 Lee Sabine. Photograph: Media Wales Ltd 
When the police arrived at James’s flat in the Trem-y-Cwm block on 24 November 
2015, they found human remains on the patio she had shared with Sabine; 
although partially decomposed, the skull had been well-preserved. A pathologist 
identified evidence of foul play – a blow to the back of the head – and a 
murder inquiry was launched.

That a body had been found in their midst came as a shock to the villagers: 
there is little serious crime in Beddau. SouthWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> police had no recent missing persons 
reports, no assaults, no 999 calls. Initially, they considered the possibility 
that the corpse had been dumped on the patio by someone who had travelled there 
from outside the area; but the patio was accessible only via the flats, putting 
the spotlight on its residents.

James was the first to find herself under suspicion. Within hours of calling 
the police, she was arrested and taken into custody. But as the police looked 
into James’s account of her neighbour, Lee Sabine, they discovered that a John 
Sabine – an accountant and a veteran of the Korean war – had once been 
registered at the same address. No one remembered seeing him, and there was no 
record of his death. The couple had signed a joint tenancy agreement in 
February 1997; it turned out that John had registered with the local GP that 
year, and ordered a repeat prescription in April – but it was never picked up. 
The body was still clothed in pyjamas with a St Michael label, last used by 
Marks & Spencer in the year 2000. Detectives identified dental records and a 
hip replacement serial number, and set about trying to match them with local 
surgeries or hospitals. They found nothing useful. After 48 hours in custody, 
James was released.

Finally, on 11 December, three weeks after the body was discovered, police got 
the breakthrough they were looking for. A relative of John Sabine came forward 
to provide them with a DNA sample: it matched the remains found at Trem-y-Cwm. 
A postmortem confirmed that Sabine had died as a result of “blunt trauma” to 
the head. His wife, Lee, was named as the main suspect.

The friends who had gathered at Lee’s funeral just a month earlier were 
stunned. How could the woman they knew, a former nightclub singer and Beddau 
resident for 18 years, be a murderer? How could her neighbours, who had enjoyed 
Sabine’s summer barbecues, her tarot card readings and invitations to tea 
(which often turned into something stronger), not have noticed anything was 
amiss? With her bleached blond hair and theatrical antipodean accent (she had 
come to Wales from New Zealand), Sabine could hardly be accused of keeping a 
low profile. But the more they thought about it, the more they realised the 
clues had been staring them in the face.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806328eb47a3d11620bcb031f52ff7061ba0b7ae%2F0_333_5722_3433%2F5722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806328eb47a3d11620bcb031f52ff7061ba0b7ae%2F0_333_5722_3433%2F5722.jpg>
 Neighbour Michelle James opened the package left lying on their shared patio; 
she was accused of murder. Photograph: Francesca Jones for the Guardian 
Mary Gardner, a former foster carer who lives in a bungalow with her partner, 
Ralph, and their teacup Yorkshire terriers Coco and Trixie, still laughs at the 
memory of the first time she met Lee. “She was bent over in the street, looking 
at the ground. I thought she’d lost something, so I went over.” Mimicking Lee’s 
accent, Gardner continues: “She said, ‘Oh I’m all right, darling, I’m just 
looking for pretty stones.’ I said to her: ‘You’re not going to find them 
there.’ She laughed and said: ‘Take no notice of me, I like to do mysterious 
things.’


“She was a bit of an eccentric. I would always say she was as mad as a box of 
frogs. But she said it with a smile, and she was always fizzy and bubbly. We 
hit it off. She made me laugh.”

Back then, Gardner lived in a house next to Sabine’s flats; it has since been 
demolished. Over the years, the pair would often sit together in Sabine’s 
garden and talk. Sabine, who was 56 when they met, would tell her what she got 
up to with her male admirers, and Gardner, half scandalised, half intrigued, 
would never know whether to believe her or not.

I was terrified I would go to prison for a crime someone else committed. Lee 
knew she was dying. Why didn't she confess?

“She used to wear this wide leather belt and leather gloves,” says Gardner. 
Standing up, she swishes her arms around in imitation of Sabine’s flamboyant 
gestures. “She was always, darling this, darling that. She liked male attention 
– any attention. Her bedroom was all silks and satins, with a silk canopy on 
the ceiling. There were different coloured drapes and cushions over the bed, 
and the headboard was all gold. I told her her bedroom was like a tart’s 
boudoir. I’d never seen anything like it. But I liked her: she was a character.”

Even so, Gardner had a nagging suspicion that her friend was not all she 
seemed. She felt Sabine was familiar from somewhere, but couldn’t put her 
finger on where. And while she liked to talk, Sabine could be mysterious about 
her own past, retreating from anyone who got too close. Her house was devoid of 
any photographs, save one black and white shot of her during her days as a 
nightclub singer in Australia.

“I always thought: ‘Lee, what are you hiding?’ I’d say: ‘Haven’t you got 
someone?’ She’d say, ‘No, I’m better off on my own.’ I asked about kids and she 
said, ‘God, no.’ I always thought I had met her previously, but she would say, 
‘No, I’m from New Zealand.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4accf0b335651c26d39df2748c771d904dbac7%2F0_182_5716_3430%2F5716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4accf0b335651c26d39df2748c771d904dbac7%2F0_182_5716_3430%2F5716.jpg>
 Sabine told her friend Mary Gardner she had a grandson who had killed himself, 
which turned out to be a half-truth. Photograph: Francesca Jones for the 
Guardian 
Once, after Gardner’s only daughter, Adele, died in 2006, Sabine told her she 
had a grandson, who she said had killed himself. Gardner was stunned. “I said: 
‘I thought you didn’t have kids?’ She said, ‘Oh no, he’s not mine, I just refer 
to him like that. We were close.’”

The truth was, the stories Sabine told about her past depended on her 
audience. She told some people she had been married a long time ago, and that 
her husband had been violent and unfaithful; she had left him in New Zealand 
before emigrating to Wales, where she was rehoused by a women’s charity. But 
she told others that he had left her.

***

Lynne Williams, a 54-year-old, gently spoken mother of two from Pontyclun, 10 
minutes from Beddau, met a frailer, softer version of Sabine. Sitting in her 
freshly decorated living room, with a new wooden floor and sparkly silver 
wallpaper, Williams recalls meeting Sabine at the Royal Glamorgan hospital in 
Talbot Green; Williams was visiting a relative, and Sabine was then a patient.

Over cups of tea made by her daughter, Williams smiles as she recalls the 
summer of last year. Her heart went out to Sabine, she says, who had been 
diagnosed with brain cancer after a fall. She had no visitors, and there was 
nothing on her bedside table to suggest anyone who cared for her. “It was 
pitiful, really, she had no one,” she says, her Welsh lilt pausing over the 
consonants. “She was suffering, she had ulcers all over her legs. But she was a 
bubbly person and hid her pain so as not to worry anyone. And that’s what I 
would do.”

Williams, who runs her own cleaning business, took Sabine under her wing, 
visiting her daily along with the relative she already cared for. She was 
touched by the older woman’s gratitude. “I would take her out for a fag. It was 
little things that meant a lot to her. I’m not the most well off, but I’d take 
her a packet of cigarettes, or I’d make her a hot meal. She would go, ‘Oh, why 
did you do that?’”

Her bedroom was all silks and satins, with a silk canopy on the ceiling. The 
headboard was gold

They became close, which was when Williams started to notice that not 
everything added up. “There was always a sticky silence when she talked about 
the past. But she opened up a bit about her children.” Sabine told her she had 
five children, three girls and two boys, all of whom she and her then husband 
had abandoned in New Zealand, when she was 28. If Williams probed further, she 
changed the subject.

“She said they didn’t want to know her, but her stories were changing all the 
time. I could see there was a hell of a dark side there.”

Pulling her curtains against the low evening sun, Williams takes out her phone 
to pull up pictures of Sabine in the last months of her life. Dressed in a 
crushed velvet dressing gown, she is frail, although smiling, and her makeup is 
immaculate. It always was, William says, even at the end.

Several times in those final weeks, Sabine seemed ready to open up, she adds. 
“She once said: ‘I’ve got a secret’ but then changed the subject.” Later, she 
asked Williams for her address, saying she wanted to write her a letter. But 
after she died, no letter was found.

One night, after Sabine had been allowed home from hospital, Williams and 
Michelle James were sitting at her kitchen table, when she asked her friends 
for help. “Her words were, ‘I need you to do me a favour,’” Williams says. 
“‘There’s a skeleton in the shed and I need you to move it to the attic to 
scare the people who move in.’

“I turned around and said: ‘I hope it’s not a bloody real one.’ She pointed 
her finger at me with those big orange nails – she always painted her nails 
orange – and said, ‘You never know.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbff978619965da024cc786acce05259d47077da9%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbff978619965da024cc786acce05259d47077da9%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Lee Sabine in the 70s. Photograph: Francesca Jones for the Guardian 
By that point, Sabine knew she was dying. To this day, Williams isn’t sure 
whether she meant them to open the package before or after her death.Had she 
not been so busy with her cleaning business, she would have moved the package 
up to the attic, she says. It could have been her, not James, who found John 
Sabine.

After Lee died, Williams cleared out her cluttered two-bedroomed flat, along 
with other friends and neighbours. She was disturbed by what she describes as a 
number of “nasty” letters she found, written by Sabine to people in Beddau. 
They were unkind, full of bile, and seemed at odds with the community-loving 
woman she knew.

Then came James’s macabre discovery on 24 November. “For a long time I 
couldn’t sleep,” Williams says. “Why didn’t she say something? She knew she was 
going to die – why didn’t she tell us? Sometimes I would say that I was used. 
Other times, I remember the way she thanked me every night before she went to 
sleep. I am a good dealer with things. I can’t be bitter.”

It was a mystery to her, and to the police: how had Sabine managed to conceal 
her husband’s body for so long? Apart from the attic, there was simply no room: 
a double divan took up most of the space in one bedroom, and there was a single 
bed in the other. “One of the drawers was half the length of the divan,” 
Williams remembers. “You couldn’t put a body in it.”

She is convinced that the fall Sabine suffered just before her cancer 
diagnosis came as she was moving the heavy body down from the attic. (As for 
how a frail 74-year-old woman managed to do this alone, nobody can say, but the 
police are not looking for an accomplice.) Williams wondered why, as soon as 
Sabine got home from hospital, she was so keen to get her carpets 
professionally cleaned. “They didn’t even look dirty,” she remembers. “The 
machine broke down and she demanded they come the following day to finish it.”

***

By mistake or design, in her dying days Sabine let her guard down, although 
she never went as far as a confession. As the police investigated, they found 
she had gone further in the past, and on more than one occasion. In early 2000, 
while carrying out a tarot card reading, she blurted out a confession to 
Bernadette Adamiec, a Beddau hairdresser. Adamiec, who did not take her 
seriously, told police that Sabine had told her she was going to be “famous... 
because of the body in the bag”. The police still consider this evidence vital, 
but Adamiec tells me she thinks that as a confession it has become overblown; 
she no longer wants to talk to journalists.

Sabine was hiding in plain sight: a relative newcomer in a Welsh village where 
she could construct whatever version of herself she wanted. As for her husband, 
no one missed him, because no one had ever met him. But, as the murder 
investigation progressed, it turned out that little in Sabine’s carefully 
constructed story, or series of stories, was true.

Detective chief inspector Gareth Morgan of South Wales police led the inquiry. 
His team traced the Sabines back to the 50s, when they first met in London, 
where Lee was training as a nurse. The couple had four children together in 
Britain, before emigrating to New Zealand where they had a fifth. Then, in 
1969, they abandoned their children in an Auckland nursery: two boys, Steve and 
Martin, and three girls, Susan, Jane and Lee-Ann, aged between two and 11 years 
old.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff37c319ac9a903c0539c4c80bf4c6a6e901524%2F0_0_808_1045%2F808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ff37c319ac9a903c0539c4c80bf4c6a6e901524%2F0_0_808_1045%2F808.jpg>
 Lee Sabine in the gardens of the Royal Glamorgan hospital before she died last 
year. Photograph: Francesca Jones for the Guardian 
“That was an incredible story in itself,” Morgan says. “We made contact with 
the children, and the whole story started unravelling.” The couple had fled to 
Perth in Western Australia, where they went by the names Lee and John Martin, 
and where Lee tried to build a career as a singer. In 1984, they returned to 
New Zealand and made contact with their children in an apparent change of 
heart. But after their daughters brought a TV reporter to the house, the couple 
quickly disappeared again. During the investigation,heartbreaking film footage 
emerged <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-35104524> from New Zealand, of Jane 
and Lee-Ann, then teenagers, confronting the parents who had abandoned them.

As more details emerged, Sabine’s neighbours were forced to adjust their 
memories of her. Gardner learned that the “grandson” Sabine had referred to was 
in fact her son, Martin, who killed himself in 2000. She was not from New 
Zealand, as she had claimed, but the daughter of a Welsh miner and a mother who 
abandoned her when she was a toddler. She was born 11 miles from Beddau, in the 
village of Gelli. “You know, like her, I was in and out of care,” Gardner says. 
“So it’s possible we had met before. She was a Rhondda girl. We saw a Lee and 
it wasn’t a Lee.” Her real name was Ann.

***

It wasn’t until a BBC news report screened footage of that family 
confrontation in New Zealand that Morgan found the final piece of the jigsaw: 
the murder weapon. A friend who had known the couple when they lived in Reading 
in the 90s came forward and told the detective about a call she received from 
Sabine, “out of the blue”, in 1997. Valerie Chalkley asked her friend, who had 
just moved to Beddau, whether she was still with John, joking that she thought 
they might have killed each other by now. Sabine said: “I have killed him. I 
hit him over the head with a stone frog.”

Chalkley laughed it off as a typical exaggeration, but was rattled enough to 
call her back a couple of days later to ask how John was.

“Oh, he’s all right, just the same,” came the reply. It was as if the previous 
conversation hadn’t happened, but it stayed with Chalkley.

Morgan remembered Michelle James telling him that Lee had told her to take 
what she wanted from the flat after she died. He asked her: “I don’t suppose 
you have a stone frog?” She had, stored in a shoebox alongside other items she 
had yet to sort through; Sabine had kept the frog by the side of her bed. When 
pathologists matched it against the cluster of injuries and skull fractures on 
John Sabine’s head, they found the distinctive shape of its leg and eye fitted 
exactly.

On the wall of Morgan’s office at Bridgend police station is a picture of his 
prime suspect, taken from an interview about her garden in a local magazine – 
his trophy of a two decade old murder that has now been solved. “I do really 
love living in Beddau and feel part of the community,” Sabine says in the 
article. “It’s a special place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f32d294e7d9aed46c0b010386e15fd32057289b%2F0_0_808_457%2F808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20didn't%20she%20confess%3F'%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20didn%27t%20she%20confess%3F%27%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20John%20Sabine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fwhy-didnt-she-confess-killing-of-john-sabine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f32d294e7d9aed46c0b010386e15fd32057289b%2F0_0_808_457%2F808.jpg>
 Lee and John Sabine abandoned children Jane, Steve, Susan, Martin and Lee-Ann 
in 1984. Photograph: Media Wales 
Morgan believes Lee may have killed her husband during one of their heated 
arguments, and that she kept her husband hidden in the flat for 18 years; but 
he has found no evidence of the attack site, and no clue as to where the body 
was stored. “We did meticulous forensic work,” he says, “but nothing. It was an 
immaculate house. She had steam cleaners in over the years.”

Morgan believes she wrapped the body intermittently over the years, using 
Tesco bags, plastic sheeting and bungee cords. “When it started to smell, she 
would add another layer.” (Ironically, it was this process, wrapping the body 
so tightly it was effectively mummified, that preserved the evidence; had she 
not been so careful, James might have uncovered something that looked like a 
medical skeleton – as Sabine must have expected.)

With every year that passed, Sabine had grown bolder. She removed John’s name 
from the tenancy in 1998, enabling her to have a single occupancy council tax 
discount and improve her benefits. She continued to receive his army pension. 
In August 2005, when he would have been 75 and eligible for a free TV licence, 
she transferred it to his name.

If she ever felt remorse for her crime, Sabine never expressed it. But in her 
final months, there were signs that, even as a staunch atheist, she had begun 
to dwell on whether she might be judged after her death.

***

Mary West, a street pastor who became the executor of Sabine’s will, recalls 
an intelligent woman, an avid Radio 4 fan who loved to argue and discuss 
issues, including God. Sabine would look in on West’s sick mother, who lived in 
a downstairs flat at Trem-y-Cwm.

“I remember her coming down one day and saying, ‘There’s so much love here,’” 
West says. “I think she began to reflect on what she’d given up.”

If she did, it did not extend to contact with the children she had left 
behind. When it became clear Sabine did not have long to live, West got in 
touch with her neighbour’s children on Facebook. Her youngest daughter, 
Lee-Ann, called West.

“The first thing she asked me was, ‘How’s my father?’ I said I didn’t know. I 
asked Lee and she said: ‘Darling, he left me.’ Lee-Ann was in straitened 
circumstances herself, but said she was prepared to come over and see her.”

West recalls Sabine’s reaction: “Lee was horrified. She was losing her voice 
then and she said: ‘I don’t want them to see me in this state.’” Then, 
presumably referring to the reunion that had gone so badly wrong in 1984, she 
worried that her daughter would bring the press with her.

In 1969, the couple abandoned their five children in an Auckland nursery; she 
said she had a singing contract

West still struggles with Sabine’s abandonment of her children when they were 
so young. “I can’t get my head round that. I asked her about it and she said: 
‘Well, I had a singing contract in Australia. I left them in the care of social 
services.’

“Towards the end, she said to me: ‘You know, don’t you?’ I said, ‘I know you 
have cancer.’ She said to me: ‘You are close to God. He sent you.’”

With hindsight, West believes this was the closest Sabine got to expressing 
some kind of remorse.

In the eulogy she gave at Sabine’s funeral, at Glyntaff crematorium on 10 
November 2015, West told the 40-strong congregation, all of whom seemed to know 
a different side of her: “The only person who knows the true story of Lee’s 
life was Lee.” She paid tribute to the caring side that many in Beddau had 
seen. She told the gathering of friends and neighbours: “We do not know the 
difficulties she had in her life – only she and God know that. But we do know 
that she was an immensely loving person.”

While West and, to a lesser extent, Williams have come to terms with the lies 
and half-truths Sabine told them, others have found her betrayal harder to deal 
with. As West explains, “The sad thing is, it touched a community, a caring 
community. There is a level of hurt still there.”

James, 45, remains haunted by her ordeal. A mother of three and grandmother of 
five, she suffered the trauma not only of finding the body, but then being 
arrested and put in custody. She was taunted by locals who called her a 
murderer, and subsequently rehoused by the council; she now feels isolated and 
misses her old friends in the village. Already fragile, she has recently been 
diagnosed with PTSD as a consequence of what happened that November morning 
last year.

“She has messed me up,” she says of Sabine. “I can’t sleep properly. When I 
close my eyes, it’s all there. That poor man, left out there. I can’t look 
after my grandchildren. I can’t watch the programmes I used to watch. When I 
was at the police station, I thought I would never see my kids or grandkids 
ever again. I was terrified I was going to prison for a crime someone else 
committed. They were saying to me ‘Who is it?’ and I said, ‘I promise, I don’t 
know.’

“I used to go around almost every day and help her,” she continues, wiping 
away tears. “Why didn’t she confess? She knew she was dying. She knew what she 
was doing to me. She is still doing it to me. Why?”

On the other side of the world, Sabine’s children have struggled to come to 
terms with the revelations of the past year, too. A year before their mother 
died, her daughter Jane – prompted by her own daughter, Nicole – decided to 
write Sabine a letter. The response was a card bearing an image of a phoenix 
rising from the ashes. Inside was a note, handwritten and in capitals: “Like 
the phoenix, I will arise from the ashes and sleep will obey me and visit thee 
never. For my eyes are upon thee, forever and ever. I have served my life 
sentence of shame and blame. Now it is your turn to do the same.” She signed 
it: “Your nemesis, Ann Lee Sabine.” It was the last contact they had.

Since their mother’s death, amid the resurfacing of painful memories, the 
children have discovered something else: family members they did not know 
existed. They had no idea they had two half-siblings (their father’s two 
children from a previous relationship), and that their mother had a cousin who 
still lives in Wales. Jane, now 50, says these new connections have given them 
a glimmer of hope. Next year, she says, talking to me on Facebook, she plans to 
travel to the UK with her sister, to meet the family she never thought she’d 
see.
 