
Janet, a Walmart shop assistant in Louisiana, is so visibly stressed by 
working in a very understaffed store that a customer tells her she looks as if 
she’s going have a heart attack. Rochelle, a care worker in Newcastle, is 
miserable that her hours are so long that she can’t get home to put her 
children to bed. She also wishes she was better paid so that she didn’t owe 
£4,000 in catalogue bills, from buying clothes and shoes on credit for her 
children. Leah, a KFC worker from Richmond, Virginia, works six days a week, 
but is still behind on her rent and juggles calls from debt-recovery companies. 
Everyone in Katharine Round’s new documentary,The Divide 
<http://thedividedocumentary.com/>, is struggling, trying to improve their 
lives; everyone is feeling the pressure. This is the reality of a low-wage 
existence in two of the world’s most unequal economies. Based onThe Spirit Level
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-spirit-level>, the 2009 bestselling 
book studying global inequality, the film highlights the toxic effects of 
divided communities on everyone who lives in them. Even the wealthy are 
scrabbling to stay happy.

We meet Wall Street psychologist Alden, who wants to get ahead and join the 
top 1% of earners, and who is working so hard to save up to move his family 
into a gated community that he gets home too late for story time with his 
daughters. When he has back surgery, he can’t afford to convalesce, and is in 
his office the next morning.

The Divide is the reality of a low-wage existence in two of the world’s most 
unequal economies

When The Spirit Level was published, it quickly attracted global attention to 
the ideas ofits authors Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/09/society-unequal-the-spirit-level>
. It argued that income inequality is the key cause of most modern social ills 
– violence, obesity, drug abuse, depression, teenage pregnancies, ill health.Ed 
Miliband quoted the book 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/03/why-ed-miliband-set-declare-war-inequality>
 in a piece for the New Statesman,David Cameron 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-11518509> referred to it in his Big 
Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2012/feb/08/what-is-big-society>
 addresses,Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> said 
it was a “fantastic analysis”. It was the most talked-about political book of 
the year, but also a very dense volume that analysed vast international data 
sets. No one said: “This would make a great movie!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6f49f9b1caa297d5f348a138e39260f663fc3a%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6f49f9b1caa297d5f348a138e39260f663fc3a%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The finished film gives moving portraits of the lives of seven people 
Apart from Round. “It was a totally mad idea to get a book of graphs and make 
it into a feature film,” she concedes, acknowledging moments of doubt over the 
years spent researching and raising money for a documentary based on a book 
that sweeps through 27 different countries and grapples with huge, abstract 
concepts of capitalism, globalisation and inequality. She persisted, raising 
more than £120,000 of the total budget, from a successful crowdfunding exercise.

The finished film gives moving portraits of the lives of seven people, five in 
the US and two in the UK, illustrating how economic division creates another 
division socially, with dangerous consequences for everyone. Its scope is 
ambitious, looking back over 35 years at the political and economic decisions 
that have caused the widening divide. The film races from person to person, 
from one side of the Atlantic to the other, giving sharp snapshots of the 
problems people encounter as they scrape along in economically divided nations. 
The documentary attempts to answer the teasing question in the film’s subtitle: 
“What happens when the rich get richer?”

“I wanted to cover as many social themes as the book does, but in a way that 
didn’t make it feel like we were talking about social themes. I wanted to put a 
face to things that we talk about but that are everywhere and nowhere – 
breakdown of society, fear of crime, rising mental-health issues. I wanted it 
to be very human,” Round says. She hopes to bring the issues explored inThe 
Spirit Level <https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-spirit-level> to people who 
“probably wouldn’t read a book on inequality”.

The thesis of The Spirit Level is that life is worse for everyone in divided 
societies, so it makes sense to focus on the US (where the top 0.1% owns 
roughly the same wealth as that owned by the bottom 90% of the population) and 
the UK (where the 1,000 richest people own more wealth then the poorest 40% of 
the population).

Her film makes the point powerfully, focusing on the unhappiness of people 
such as Jen, from Sacramento, California, who has recently moved to a gated 
community (where people spend $10,000 on converting the golf carts they drive 
everywhere, to make them look like mini Mercedes or BMWs), and finds that her 
neighbours don’t talk to each other, and certainly don’t much like their 
children playing with hers. Jen notes that residents are planning to build a 
second fence within the community, to exclude the cheaper properties around the 
edges, and the (relatively) poorer inhabitants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0f51fd0e0d034a7b3083b035f53038683b4ca9%2F75_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0f51fd0e0d034a7b3083b035f53038683b4ca9%2F75_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Katharine Round hopes to bring the issues explored in The Spirit Level to 
people who ‘probably wouldn’t read a book on inequality’. 
The film is book-ended by a clip from Barack Obama’s 2012 state of the union 
address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/jan/25/state-of-the-union-president-obama>
, where he declares: “No challenge is more urgent. No debate is more important. 
We can either settle for a country where a shrinking number of people do really 
well while a growing number of Americans barely get by, or we can restore an 
economy where everyone gets a fair shot, everyone does their fair share, and 
everyone plays by the same set of rules.” It’s a gloomy reminder, in the run-up 
to the nextUS elections <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>
, of how little of this urgent challenge has been tackled.

The Divide weaves together footage of Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> beginning to dismantle 
the unions, and news clips from the 90s that show the emergence of 
billionaires, tracking a $10bn leap inBill Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates>’s fortune in the space of 
just six months, bringing his personal net worth up to $26bn. It sails through 
the corporate history of Walmart, problems with the UK’s care industry, the 
effects of violent crime, the three-strikes-and-you’re-out policy of the 
judicial system, debt, alcohol addiction in Glasgow – there’s so much here that 
it leaves your head spinning. You come out wanting to know more about the 
individuals whose lives are fleetingly opened up along this journey.

You come out wanting to know more about the individuals whose lives are 
fleetingly opened up along this journey

But the selected material is sharp. There is a telling bit of archive footage 
showing an exchange betweenJeremy Paxman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman> and a youthful-looking Tony 
Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, who looks momentarily 
confused, then genuinely puzzled when asked: “Do you believe that an individual 
can earn too much money?”

“What, you mean that we should sort of ... cap their income?” he asks. “No, 
not really. Why? What’s the point?”

We don’t hear much from the super-rich, except a passing few insights from 
Richard Berman, an exhausted-looking 70-year-old venture capitalist, who offers 
a hilariously plaintive justification of the system: “Without big rewards, 
people like me aren’t going to work 15-20 hours a day in order to get rich.”

The rise of debt and the origins and consequences of the sub-prime crisis in 
the US are also touched on; look out for the footage ofGeorge Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush> saying first: “We certainly 
don’t want fine print to get in the way of people owning their own homes” and 
“achieving the goal of a five and a half million unique minority home owners” 
and then a few years later, after the financial crisis, remarking sternly: “We 
should not help out those who made the reckless decision to buy a home they 
could never afford.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d3d24d611e6bff79ae50a20ccc14c9d806b2f8c%2F0_0_1347_757%2F1347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d3d24d611e6bff79ae50a20ccc14c9d806b2f8c%2F0_0_1347_757%2F1347.jpg>
 The film is book-ended by a clip from Barack Obama’s 2012 state of the union 
address, where he declares: ‘No challenge is more urgent. No debate is more 
important.’ 
Cathy O’Neil, a former Wall Street analyst, observes how the rise of easy 
credit in the past 35 years has meant “people went from pretty simple financial 
lives pre-1980 to the point now where people are just totally submerged in 
their financial accounts, and they’re all in debt”.

Disaffected banker and former vice-president of Deutsche Bank Alexis Goldstein 
explains: “Debt to us might seem like ‘I need a loan to go to school’ or ‘I 
need a loan to buy a house’ but for [my former colleagues], it is just a 
product that they can buy, sell and package – another way for them to get as 
much profit as they want.”

Goldstein’s distaste for the banking industry was bred from exposure to its 
entrails. “There is nothing wrong with aspiring to be comfortable. I don’t even 
know that there’s anything wrong with aspiring to be rich. But the aspiration 
of Wall Street is to have fuck-you money. Fuck-you money is the amount of money 
so vast that you could pick up the phone and say ‘Fuck you’ to whoever you 
wanted without repercussion.”

Interspersed with the frustrations of Round’s subjects is a lot of 
constructive anger. Care worker Rochelle says wistfully: “I wish I didn’t have 
to work so much. I wish I could see the kids a bit more. I don’t want much out 
of life. I just wish it was a bit easier.” But she is campaigning against a 
system that forces care workers into zero-hour contracts where they often find 
themselves working for less than the minimum wage.

I don’t want much out of life. I just wish it was a bit easier
Rochelle, care worker 
Janet explains how the corner shop she owned went bust when Walmart moved in, 
how she switched to working irregular shifts at the retailer, and now finds 
herself on the brink of eviction because she can’t afford her mortgage 
repayments. But we also see her standing up at a Walmart annual shareholders 
meeting to announce bravely: “When I think about the fact that our CEO made 
over $20m last year, more than 1,000 times the average Walmart associate, with 
all due respect, I have to say I don’t think that’s right.”

Leah, who is now working shifts at both McDonald’s and KFC to pay off her 
debts – also campaigns for better pay for struggling fast-food workers.

Round told her subjects that she was “making a film about the link between the 
economy and society and how that affected people on different levels of the 
income scale”. Most of them wanted to take part so that they could articulate 
their confusion about the disconnect between efforts they were putting into 
staying afloat and the paltry rewards they were reaping.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43dae995eb9e8863aead4ff70052aa09fd97c1b1%2F51_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43dae995eb9e8863aead4ff70052aa09fd97c1b1%2F51_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Most people wanted to take part to articulate the disconnect between efforts 
to stay afloat and the paltry rewards they were reaping. 
Leah (who has been too busy working shifts to view the film on the link Round 
sent her) says by phone from the US: “I am glad that the message got out that 
we are struggling.” Her take-home pay after deductions is around $150 a week 
for 38 hours of work. “It is never enough. I have to make do until I do 
better.” Her 11-year-daughter resents how much her mother has to work to earn 
so little. “I can’t be there for her, to help her with her homework. But the 
bills have to be paid and we have to eat. I have to go to work, or starve or be 
put out in the street,” she said.

“America is a very divided country; we’re at the bottom level. The upper class 
keep getting richer. Why is there such a wide gap? We are working hard, as much 
as we can. Why aren’t we earning enough to be able to live?”

She said she hoped people would see the film, “wake up and understand that 
real lives are at stake and real families are involved”.

I don’t want diamonds, furs, ski trips and all that. I just want to be able to 
take my baby to the movies every so often
Leah, fast-food worker 
“We all deserve to live and be happy. The American Dream is to have a family, 
a home, where you don’t have to worry about going hungry, not being able to pay 
your bills, or not being able to provide for your kids. It is a reachable dream 
if the CEOs of the companies relinquish their power and go ahead and give 
people raises so that they can provide for their family,” she said. “I don’t 
even want to be a millionaire. I don’t want the diamonds and furs and ski trips 
and all of that. I just want to be able to take my baby to the movies every so 
often.”

In Newcastle, Rochelle says she also was thrilled that her life was included 
in the film. “Sometimes people don’t listen to you if you’ve got nothing and 
you’re nobody,” she says. “I would love people to realise that you don’t have 
sit back; we all have a voice. I was scared, but I have a voice.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c29ef0cdd4a0ea7dc849760e8042e6f5257c58%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Why%20aren%E2%80%99t%20we%20earning%20enough%20to%20live%3F%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20how%20The%20Divide%20lays%20bare%20global%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-divide-inequality-documentary-katharine-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c29ef0cdd4a0ea7dc849760e8042e6f5257c58%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The film concludes that greater inequality triggers greater unhappiness. 
Round is interested in the way that film can spark social change and was 
inspired byAl Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Inconvenient_Truth>, which raised global 
awareness of climate change, andThe End of the Line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/feb/18/end-line-film-fish>, which 
highlighted the threat to the world’s oceans from over-fishing, and also 
triggered policy change. There is a very gentle call to arms in a “take action” 
link on the documentary’s website, which refers viewers to the charities 
working on this area, among themOxfam <http://www.oxfam.org.uk/>, the Living 
Wage Foundation <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/> and the Equality Trust 
<https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/> (set up by The Spirit Level’s authors).

The Spirit Level asks: “How is it that we have created so much mental and 
emotional suffering despite levels of wealth and comfort unprecedented at any 
time during human history?” Its conclusion that greater inequality triggers 
greater unhappiness is a useful one on which to reflect as reverberations from 
thePanama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> are 
felt internationally, and Round is delighted that the film’s premiere comes the 
week after the offshore revelations have hammered home the consequences of 
tolerating such a divided economy. She says: “I think some people will be 
angry, some will be sad, some [will] think it is crazy. My main aim is that we 
question what is going on and that it brings more people into the debate on how 
we change our society.”

•The Divide <http://thedividedocumentary.com/> UK Premiere is tonight at 
Picturehouse Central, in London. It is on at selected cinemas from 22 April and 
released nationwide on 31 May.
 