
When people used to ask me, a serving police officer, how I was feeling, “OK” 
became an easy phrase to use. It didn’t show how much I was hiding.

I have worked for Essex police for more than 30 years. After 20 years of 
service, in 2013 my mental health started to decline. There were no big warning 
signs, no alarms, no sirens, just the start of a really difficult period of my 
life.

 As a police officer, you see tough things. I started to have flashbacks to 
certain incidents I had encountered. I would feel sick as some memories flooded 
back. At other times I would feel an overwhelming sense of despair, feeling 
that life was just not worth it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fpolice-officer-post-traumatic-stress-disorder-mental-health-mind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2f2f72a3aa531b21255fed3a2a1f9a28c7417c%2F0_98_640_640%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You%20see%20tough%20things%20as%20a%20police%20officer.%20I%20felt%20sick%20as%20memories%20flooded%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fpolice-officer-post-traumatic-stress-disorder-mental-health-mind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%20see%20tough%20things%20as%20a%20police%20officer.%20I%20felt%20sick%20as%20memories%20flooded%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fpolice-officer-post-traumatic-stress-disorder-mental-health-mind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2f2f72a3aa531b21255fed3a2a1f9a28c7417c%2F0_98_640_640%2F640.jpg>
 Alan Phillips: ‘There were no big warning signs’ 
In January 2014 I started to drink, a little too much most days. My behaviour 
at work became more erratic and on several occasions I was spoken to by 
supervisors. I wanted to tell them how I felt but I couldn’t find the words. I 
gave little clues but these were not picked up on. When anyone asked me if 
anything was wrong, I’d always respond that I was OK.

 Mentally, I crashed in April 2014. I spent a week-and-a-half unable to move, 
not washing, shaving or dressing, just staying in bed. I finally saw a doctor. 
I’d been off work nearly a week and my wife encouraged me to go.

This wasn’t the end of the problems – I still live with stress, depression and 
symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder. But at the moment, I’m managing; 
I’m working. I’m open about my mental health now and that has changed a lot. 
Being in the police force can mean you encounter some difficult things. This 
condition is not because we are weak; thoughts of suicide are not a sign that 
you are a coward. This condition is one suffered by the strong.

I have been involved with Mind’s Blue Light programme 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/campaigns/bluelight/> from the 
beginning. Mind’s research shows that nearly two-thirds (63%) of emergency 
service staff and volunteers have contemplatedleaving their job or voluntary 
role 
<https://www.mentalhealthtoday.co.uk/one-in-four-emergency-services-workers-have-had-suicidal-thoughts.aspx>
 because of stress or poor mental health.

Police stress costs thousands of working days in Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/19/police-scotland-stress-working-days-lost>
The Blue Light infoline 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/campaigns/bluelight/blue-light-infoline/?ctaId=/news-campaigns/campaigns/bluelight/slices/blue-light-infoline/>
 offers vital support to people in the emergency services who may be 
experiencing similar feelings to the ones I had. It serves an important 
purpose. If you have any worries at all about your mental health while working 
in the emergency services and are afraid to tell someone, this service can 
offer a confidential ear and tailor support to the field you work in.

Once you speak, people will listen, but you have to tell them.


Alan Phillips is a detective constable in Essex police. Mind has just run a 
Blue Light Infoline 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/campaigns/bluelight/blue-light-infoline/>
 awareness week.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community – it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 