
We’re used to being told that it’s young people who are struggling to find 
employment and careers, but older people face their own challenges.

Millions of workers in their 50s and over have been forced to postpone their 
retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/22/delay-retirement-financial-pressures-pension-savings>
 because of a lack of pension savings and high levels of debt, but are finding 
it hard to keep or find new work.

We asked you what it felt like to be an older person in the workplace and your 
experiences of trying to find employment. This is what you said:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd00400b833c5a3d1594d64db66acf2426dfc88%2F148_374_2086_2606%2F2086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don't%20tweet'%3A%20what%20it's%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don%27t%20tweet%27%3A%20what%20it%27s%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd00400b833c5a3d1594d64db66acf2426dfc88%2F148_374_2086_2606%2F2086.jpg>
 Anne Arnott. 
 ‘I miss earning a decent amount’


I yearned for retirement until I was forced to stop work two years ago due to 
ill health brought on by stress at work. The reality of retirement is quite 
different to the visions of being free to do what you want every day – 
particularly if you live alone, your family are not close by and your income is 
low. I still long for the days when I worked full tilt all day and earned a 
decent amount.
Anne, 63, Scotland

‘I had to look after my sick mother, now I can’t find work’ 

When I was 55, I was promised I would be able to work part-time as my mother 
had developed short-term memory loss and could no longer be left alone (she was 
later diagnosed with dementia). A reorganisation was carried out before I was 
able to start part-time working and I was told that there was no longer the 
opportunity for me to work part-time and no alternative offered. I left my job. 
My mother died in September 2014 and I decided to return to work. I have 
applied for several jobs but find that recruitment processes have changed 
radically from when I was last interviewed, about seven years ago. I feel that 
the knowledge and experience gathered over many years of practical work is no 
longer valid. Because of the changes in pension age brought in 2011, I cannot 
retire until I am in my mid-sixties and am locked into finding work where my 
hard earned skills, it seems, are no longer needed or wanted. Soul destroying 
for a person who up until 55 has always worked.
Katie Delamare, 59, UK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d53ab51aaeaf9ab36c247fa43d8304dbbb6e1a%2F255_201_2039_2549%2F2039.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don't%20tweet'%3A%20what%20it's%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don%27t%20tweet%27%3A%20what%20it%27s%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d53ab51aaeaf9ab36c247fa43d8304dbbb6e1a%2F255_201_2039_2549%2F2039.jpg>
 Jerry Knight. 
 ‘I have to give advice to the guys who got my job’

The way you are perceived changes. No longer the next upcoming thing, no 
longer the first point of call for new challenges, you become the wise old guy 
in the corner to whom the guys who got your job go to for advice. Gradually you 
realise that you must choose between seeing out your time with limited 
development chances, or getting out and giving up on your lifestyle.
Jerry Knight, 58, Germany

‘If my partner didn’t earn, I wouldn’t survive financially’

I was made redundant at the age of 58 and have found it impossible to get 
employment since. Like many women, I work for a charity for free. I think it is 
one of the worst sectors to be in, as so many of us work for free making it 
almost impossible to get paid. I have many responsibilities in the charity – 
I’m a board member – it is very fulfilling but were I not married to an earner 
it would be impossible to survive financially. I have worked all over the world 
and have met many women who have started their own business – usually 
charity-related because they could not find work. When you ask what they did 
before as paid work nearly all of them say “I was only a secretary”. The only 
way we have been able to move into exciting and challenging work has been to 
work for ourselves. I just think that for my generation there is a huge waste 
of talent, but we are a generation which refuses to stick to a stereotype 
because of our age. We all hope to work until we are well into our seventies.
Anonymous, 60, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624bfcca4bfffc4a484eedbe3d0ba5932ee931f8%2F111_0_849_1061%2F849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don't%20tweet'%3A%20what%20it's%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don%27t%20tweet%27%3A%20what%20it%27s%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624bfcca4bfffc4a484eedbe3d0ba5932ee931f8%2F111_0_849_1061%2F849.jpg>
 Kate Allsopp, 62, UK. 
‘From the age of 40 I was considered too old for PR jobs’

Public relations must be one of the most age sensitive industries in the UK. 
From the age of 40 I found getting jobs in the commercial sector difficult, and 
had to move to the voluntary sector, which is more accommodating regarding age. 
But basically 55 is the cut-off date for PR folk, unless you run your own 
business or go freelance. I’m in the “pension gap” women born in 1953-56 face. 
I won’t get my state pension until I’m 64.5, so what am I supposed to do 
workwise between 55 and 65? Work as a supermarket cashier or deliver phone 
directories (I might even be too old for that)? Just as my generation of women 
(we went to university in the early 70s) were the first to be employed in 
executive and management roles, rather than secretarial, so I think we will be 
at the vanguard of encouraging employers and other workers generally to 
consider older colleagues as a natural part of the workforce.
Kate Allsopp, 62, UK

I can't afford to retire, but will companies keep employing me?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/15/cant-afford-retirement-companies-employment-pension-ageism-discrimination>
‘I’ve got no chance of a permanent job’ 

After you gray out, office jobs above clerical are out. Whatever your degrees 
and experience, if you leave cubicle-land, you can’t go back. Heavy lifting is 
iffy for the sciatica set. For me, it’s meant 8-hour shifts standing at a cash 
register, never knowing more than a month in advance what my hours will be. 
Older employees musn’t expect ‘permanent’ status, which comes with vacations, 
benefits and so on. That’s for younger folk who may have ‘a career.’
Anonymous, 61, US 

‘People in their 20s and 30s don’t respect older people’


If you can get an employer to take you on at an older age I have found them 
reasonably fair – government legislation and employment tribunals have seen to 
that. The main problem is other workers, especially those in their 20s and 30s 
who have no respect for your experience or knowledge. They assume you are a 
dinosaur because you remember the Beatles and don’t send tweets every few 
minutes.
Anonymous, 62, UK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb74250e1c86d7c73cd99b66edc5f5fa21730b1%2F27_0_642_803%2F642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don't%20tweet'%3A%20what%20it's%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20treated%20like%20a%20dinosaur%20because%20you%20don%27t%20tweet%27%3A%20what%20it%27s%20like%20being%20an%20older%20worker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Folder-worker-business-employ-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb74250e1c86d7c73cd99b66edc5f5fa21730b1%2F27_0_642_803%2F642.jpg>
 Larry Steward, 72, US. 
‘Starting my own business means no one can fire me’

I feel more, if not most, people reaching retirement should investigate the 
many benefits of starting their own business doing something they love. You 
control your destiny. No one can fire you. You can work from home and reach a 
worldwide audience by using the internet. You save money not having to commute, 
eat out, pay for parking, etc. You can plan and launch your business while 
still working. You can work as long as you want as long as your health holds 
up. Just remember: “You’re never too old to become what you were meant to be.”
Larry Steward, 72, US
 