
Robins are not just for Christmas. Pigeons don’t always fit in holes. 
Sometimes birds are worth more in the bush.

The year is still new, frost is lifting from the path on the south-facing side 
of the hedge and a robin, with half an eye on what may wriggle free of the 
thawing mud, is singing his heart out.

He has flown to every fencepost, the prrrr of his wings as loud as he can make 
them. On each post he flexes as if acknowledging the indifference of his 
audience of sheep, then delivers a burst of song.

He turns his head from side to side throwing his voice through 180 degrees. 
This is the Beau Geste of robins, announcing to all his possible lovers that he 
is noble and virile and to his enemies that he is 100 robins, all of them 
fierce, fearless and free.

The year is still new and few birds are singing without circumspection, except 
robins. One or two blackbirds are daring a phrase. Great tits do their 
running-a-squeaky-wheel-up-a-tree thing. I heard a thrush at a nearby railway 
station announcing something other than trains.

The mornings are cold. On the slopes that catch the sun, there are cuckoo-pint 
leaves unfurling and strange green clusters of spurge laurel flowers have 
opened. On darker slopes there are suds of snow in the moss and everything 
still feels tightly wrapped.

There are slot skids down the path where deer, chased by something in the 
dark, came out of the woods too fast. A blatter of wings betrays thewoodcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/06/country-diary-claxton-norfolk-birds-woodcock-snipe-wigeon>
, her secret browns trapped in the narrows between thorn scrub and tall ash 
trees, and she must hurt herself to escape in case whatever chased the deer 
finds her too.

A charm of mixed goldfinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/09/country-diary-magic-charm-goldfinch-song>
 and chaffinch dither in a dogwood thicket. They are reluctant to show 
themselves and their mutterings are of those sharing a secret.

Five jackdaws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/28/flashmob-jackdaws-rises-from-trees>
 perch on the church tower, one of them on the plastic head of the eagle owl 
put there to scare jackdaws away. They are listening and waiting with 
Hitchcockian intentions. “Lightweights,” whistles the robin.

Twitter: @DrPaulEvans1 <https://twitter.com/drpaulevans1>
 