
There was a flash of the richest blue, as the bird emerged from the forest and 
strutted across the path in front of us. Instantly recognisable, yet at the 
same time oddly unfamiliar, it lifted its neck and flicked an enormously long 
tail, before melting into the vegetation, never to be seen again.

Encountering a peacock in the wild, in its native India, is a surreal 
experience. I regularly see them in the grounds of Bath Spa University’s 
Corsham Court, where they strut around as if they own the place. Yet now I was 
watching them in the fields and forests of India’s most populous state, home to 
the secondUttar Pradesh Bird Festival <http://upbirdfestival.in>.

The peacock – or Indian peafowl, to give the bird its correct name – wasn’t 
the only familiar sight and sound. Noisy flocks of rose-ringed parakeets tore 
across the sky like a bright green version of the Red Arrows, while we also 
came across ared junglefowl 
<http://www.arkive.org/red-junglefowl/gallus-gallus/>, the ancestor of the 
domestic chicken, looking for all the world like a farmyard cockerel.

Other birds were more exotic and unfamiliar. Graceful black-winged kite 
<http://indianbirds.thedynamicnature.com/2015/05/black-winged-kite-elanus-caeruleus.html>
s floated overhead, whilelong-tailed shrikes 
<http://orientalbirdimages.org/search.php?Bird_ID=2405&Bird_Image_ID=129606&Location=>
 perched on the walls.Hume’s warblers 
<http://www.arkive.org/humes-leaf-warbler/phylloscopus-humei/> constantly 
uttered theirdistinctive disyllabic call 
<http://www.xeno-canto.org/species/Phylloscopus-humei> from the dense foliage 
of the trees above our tents, though these tiny birds, which migrate here from 
north of the Himalayas, were frustratingly tricky to see. This species was 
named after the Victorian bird collector and colonial administratorAllan 
Octavian Hume 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/victorian/history/empire/india/hume.html>, who has 
been dubbed the father of Indian ornithology, and in later years also helped 
found the Congress Party.

Each day, after we had enjoyed talks from both Indian and foreign 
ornithologists, we headed out into the surrounding countryside. If it were an 
independent country, Uttar Pradesh would rank sixth in terms of population – 
behind only China,India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the United 
States, Indonesia and Brazil – so you might imagine that there are few places 
where birds can find sanctuary. Yet during our visit we collectively saw well 
over 200 different species.

These included one of the world’s largest birds, the stately sarus crane 
<http://www.wwfindia.org/about_wwf/priority_species/threatened_species/sarus_crane/>
, whose name derives from a Hindi word meaning “bird of the lakes”; along with 
some of the smallest, such as thered avadavat 
<http://orientalbirdimages.org/search.php?Bird_ID=1886>, a tiny finch with a 
rich crimson plumage that perches on strands of elephant grass to feed on the 
seeds.

On a boat trip along the mighty Chambal River we caught up with bar-headed 
geese <http://www.arkive.org/bar-headed-goose/anser-indicus/>, great thick-knees
 <https://www.beautyofbirds.com/greatthickknees.html> – a relative of our own 
stone-curlew – andblack-bellied terns 
<http://www.arkive.org/black-bellied-tern/sterna-acuticauda/>. But for many of 
us, the highlight was catching sight of the critically endangeredIndian gharial 
<http://www.arkive.org/gharial/gavialis-gangeticus/>, a slender, long-snouted 
crocodilian seen basking on the mudflats.

Our final destination was Dudhwa National Park 
<http://www.dudhwanationalpark.in>, close to India’s border with Nepal. Here we 
marvelled at vast flocks of waterbirds, with a dozen species of ducks, sixteen 
different kinds of herons, storks and ibises – including the wonderfully named 
intermediate egret – and a pair ofHimalayan goldenbacks 
<http://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/18389-Dinopium-shorii>. 

This colourful woodpecker was a species I had always wanted to see. That was 
not just because it is strikingly attractive, but also because before its name 
was shortened, it used to be the longest of any bird in the world: Himalayan 
golden-backed three-toed woodpecker. One to include in my current work in 
progress, a book on the origins of bird names…

 