
It’s not a line you’re likely to see often in the Guardian, but thank you 
George Osborne for the towering achievement of your reign as chancellor:you got 
rid of annuities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/14/george-osborne-pensions-giveaway-annuities-older-voters-pensioners>
 and saved millions of pensioners-to-be from a spiral of catastrophically low 
payouts from their life savings.

Annuities, for those not in the know, are an income for life. The idea is that 
at retirement you swap your pension savings accumulated while at work for an 
agreed fixed income, paid out every year until you die. They used to be 
compulsory until Osborne stunnedthe £12bn-a-year industry, freeing retirees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/14/pension-companies-stopping-retirees-access-savings>
 to do what they like with their money.

Today, annuity incomes have fallen to near-invisible levels. That’s because 
they are influenced by two things: the level of interest rates; and the 
longevity prospects of the population. This week’sBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> base rate cut – 
and the prospect of negative interest rates – have pushed the incomes paid on 
annuities to levels unthinkable even a few years ago.

I got a quote for annuity this week, assuming I had saved a total of £100,000, 
that I was 64, that my partner was 64, that we were both in good health and 
that on death, my partner would receive an income of 50% of the original 
annuity, with a small degree of inflation protection as well. I also assumed 
we’d take the 25% tax-free lump sum first (ie: £25,000). So what did I get for 
my remaining £75,000? A lousy £2,183 a year. If I had saved a gargantuan 
£500,000, my annual income would still be under £11,000 a year. Count your 
blessings, you millionaires who have a final salary-based pension, now largely 
confined to the public sector. A £20,000 a year pension is equal to nearly £1m 
in savings across a lifetime. The average male GP retiring at 60 years old 
picks up a pension of around £47,000 a year, which is equal to having put away 
savings of around £2.5m across their working life. The chances of workers with 
new-style stock market-based schemes saving anywhere near £2.5m are slim, to 
say the least. The typical sum used to buy an annuity before compulsion was 
abolished was around £40,000.

Annuity rates hit all-time low as pension freedoms introduced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/24/annuity-rates-all-time-low-pension-freedoms-introduced>
Annuities are now so bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit> 
that in the example of our 64-year-old with £75,000, they would have to survive 
to 98 years old just to get their money back (although they would have 
benefited from inflation protection).

So we must be thankful that we no longer have to buy these products. But what 
do we do instead? The historic rule of thumb is that the “safe” level of 
drawdown is 4% a year, which in our example of a £75,000 pot equates to around 
£3,000 a year. But you should start “de-cumulating” as you get older – in other 
words, start drawing down capital as well as the income from your life savings. 
So maybe that £75,000 can creep up towards an income of £4,000 a year.

There are fears that 4% drawdown is too ambitious when the base rate is just 
0.25% and the best cash Isas pay around 1.3%-1.4% (for now). That said, the 
FTSE 100 yields an annual dividend income of 3.85%, equity income funds yield 
4.1% and peer-to-peer lenders give you 5% or more. Don’t lose all hope quite 
yet.

Meanwhile, final salary (and even “career average”) schemes are looking 
ruinously expensive. The deficits in the schemes have widened again with this 
week’s rate cut. How long before the contracts underlying these schemes are 
broken?
 