
With the Guardian’s unstoppable rise to global dominance (NOTE: actual 
dominance may not be global. Or dominant) we at Guardian US thought we’d run a 
series of articles for newer football fans wishing to improve their knowledge 
of the game’s history and storylines, hopefully in a way that doesn’t patronise 
you to within an inch of your life. A warning: If you’re the kind of person 
that finds The Blizzard too populist this may not be the series for you.

It’s quite possible that a footballing genius from Argentina will dominate the 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> final 
this weekend. ‘Twas ever thus. The current generation will tell you that 
Barcelona forward Lionel Messi is the greatest player in the history of 
Europe’s No 1 club competition, and perhaps the greatest player of all time. 
They may have a point. Then again, quite a few older folk will tell you how 
Alfredo Di Stefano would have had something to say about that.


Di Stefano was the first star of the European Cup. Uefa launched their new 
competition – the European Cup would morph into the Champions League in 1992 – 
back in 1955.Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, the 
English champions, didn’t bother entering, because the big cheese of the 
Football League, Alan Hardaker, was a myopic little-Englander fool who couldn’t 
(or didn’t want to) see what was happening on the other side of the English 
Channel. Hardaker went on to launch the League Cup in an attempt to see off 
Uefa’s new continent-wide midweek club competition, and that illustrates his 
judgment perfectly.


Anyway, Chelsea meekly followed orders not to bother going toe-to-toe with 
Johnny Foreigner. Their decision looks daft now, but perhaps it was just as 
well. Ted Drake’s champions could only finish 16th in the league the following 
season; chances are they’d have gotten steamrollered by Di Stefano’sReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>.


Real Madrid dominated the early days of the European Cup, winning the first 
five finals, and Di Stefano – who wore the number nine shirt as a nominal 
striker, but in fact roamed wild and free – was their main man. Not that Real 
always had it easy. The very first final proved a hell of a struggle. It was a 
minor classic.

Real faced Stade de Reims of France, and found themselves two down within 10 
minutes. Reims’ star playmaker Raymond Kopa was pulling the strings, Michel 
Leblond scored the first-ever goal in a European Cup final after six minutes, 
and Jean Templin added another. But Di Stefano quickly grabbed a goal back. 
Real equalised. Michel Hidalgo – who would go on win Euro 84 as France boss – 
put Reims ahead again just after the hour, but Marquitos levelled for Real on 
71, before Rial tucked away a Francisco Gento cross with 11 minutes left. Di 
Stefano, a month away from his 30th birthday, went home and spent his win bonus 
on his first car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4735f1c1836c1f147de3ee749884bf08054af12%2F0_98_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it's%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it%27s%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4735f1c1836c1f147de3ee749884bf08054af12%2F0_98_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Real Madrid’s Alfredo di Stefano celebrates Real’s sixth goal as Eintracht 
Frankfurt goalkeeper Egon Loy appeals to his defenders for help Photograph: 
SMG/Press Association Images 
Di Stefano was unstoppable. (Bobby Charlton has him down as the greatest 
player in history, even if he never played at a World Cup.) He scored again in 
the 1957 final victory over Fiorentina, the 1958 win overMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>, and the 1959 triumph against 
Reims. The best was saved for last, though. The 1960 final between Real Madrid 
and Eintracht Frankfurt is the most storied European Cup final of all, Real 
winning 7-3 in front of 127,621 spectators at Hampden Park in Glasgow. (A young 
Alex Ferguson was in the crowd, jaw agape at what Real were up to against a 
side which had battered his childhood favourites Rangers 10-4 on aggregate in 
the semis.)

In truth, the 1960 final wasn’t much of a contest, more an exhibition of 
absurd brilliance. Eintracht took the lead through Richard Kress on 18 minutes, 
but Di Stefano responded with a quickfire double, and the great Ferenc Puskas 
(some forward line, this) made it 3-1 before half time. Di Stefano went on to 
complete a hat-trick, while Puskas helped himself to four. At one point, Erwin 
Stein pulled a goal back to make the score 6-2; Real countered by kicking off, 
stringing five quick passes together near the centre circle, then sending Di 
Stefano away on a determined run, the ball eventually sent whistling into the 
bottom-right corner from distance. Perfection.

Real Madrid finally got knocked out of Europe for the first time by – who else 
could it be? –Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>. The 
Catalans reached the 1961 final, but lost to the new European powerhouse 
Benfica. The Lisbon club’s flame only burnt briefly, however. The great Eusebio 
turned up the season after, and inspired a second-half comeback as Benfica beat 
Real Madrid, for whom Puskas had scored a hat-trick, 5-3. Puskas remains the 
only player to have scored three times in a final and yet end up on the losing 
side. Benfica, meanwhile, are still waiting for another European trophy.

Benfica lost the 1963 final to Milan. The Italians had arrived, and would 
shape the narrative of the decade. Milan’s city rivalsInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>, a thoroughly modern 
defensive outfit, won the next two finals against Real Madrid and Benfica. It 
wasn’t that they didn’t sparkle in attack when it suited them – Sandro Mazzola 
and Jair were no mean partnership – but their signature tactic wascatenaccio, a 
five-man defensive lock designed by their brazenly cynical manager Helenio 
Herrera.

This no-nonsense style turned Inter into the pantomime villains of Europe, a 
state of affairs which set up the 1967 final in Lisbon nicely. They faced Jock 
Stein’s swashbuckling Celtic, and the tale told was a pure 
roundheads-versus-cavaliers romp. Inter took an early lead, decided to sit 
back, and were utterly pummelled by Stein’s side, who came at them from all 
angles. They took 42 attempts at goal. Inter managed five. It took a while, but 
Inter eventually buckled in the second half, Celtic winning 2-1, one of the 
great romantic victories.

Real Madrid had, in winning the previous year’s final against Partizan 
Belgrade with 11 Spanish players, become the first home-grown team to win the 
European Cup. Celtic’s Lisbon Lions ramped it up: they were all born within 27 
miles of Parkhead. Scottish football’s high-water mark, without any shadow of a 
doubt. And it was the first time the trophy had been spirited away from Latin 
Europe, the north rising.

Manchester United lifted the trophy in 1968, a delicious end to Matt Busby’s 
bittersweet quest, which had begun in 1956, United refusing to buckle to the 
small-minded pressure that had done for Chelsea and heading off for a European 
tour. Understandably, that quest had became an emotional obsession after the 
tragic loss of the Busby Babes at Munich in 1958. George Best scored the 
signature goal of the 68 final, sashaying through to land the decisive blow at 
the start of extra time, Benfica subsequently crumbling to a 4-1 defeat. 
Eusebio really should have won it at the end of normal time, mind you, but 
clean through, he shot straight at Alex Stepney.

United’s reign as European champions ended at Old Trafford in the following 
season’s semis against Milan, though they’ll always tell you that Denis Law’s 
shot crossed the line. Milan went on to thrashAjax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> of Amsterdam in the final, 4-1, 
Johan Cruyff’s side not quite perfecting the old Total Football just yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433257436078%2F7a63dd07-8301-4f31-b6ae-fd6d72ac8ba5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it's%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it%27s%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433257436078%2F7a63dd07-8301-4f31-b6ae-fd6d72ac8ba5-1020x612.jpeg>
 Johan Cruyff views with Francesco Morini in 1973. Photograph: Stewart 
Fraser/Colorsport 
The 1970s began with Feyenoord’s shock 2-1 win over Celtic, but this decade 
was all about imperial phases. Cruyff and Ajax finally got themselves up to 
speed, and won three on the bounce between 1971 and 1973, Panathinaikos, Inter 
and Juventus vanquished. Ajax’s performance during the first 20 minutes of the 
73 final againstJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> is 
legendary, one of the most mesmeric passages of play in history, total 
domination. They scored just the one goal, though, before appearing to get a 
little bored of their own brilliance. A 1-0 win would do, but there laid bare 
was the germ of the problem that cost Holland victory in the 1974 World Cup 
final.

Then it was the turn of Bayern Munich: Franz Beckenbauer, Gerd Müller, Paul 
Breitner, Uli Hoeness, Sepp Maier, all that. They’d win three in a row, too, 
though they very nearly didn’t manage the first. Atletico Madrid – not for the 
last time, as we shall see – were seconds away from victory in the 1974 final, 
only for Georg Schwarzenbeck, a central defender, to desperately try his luck 
from 30 yards. Atlético keeper Miguel Reina – father of 2007Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> finalist Pepe – stood rooted to the 
spot, and the final went to a replay for the first and only time. Bayern 
thrashed Atlético 4-0 in the second match, the high point an exquisite lob from 
the majestic Müller. Bayern saw off Leeds United in 1975 – controversially so, 
as Peter Lorimer scored what would have been the game’s opener, only for it to 
be ruled out for a questionable offside call on Billy Bremner – and 
Saint-Étienne in 1976.

At which point the English hove into view. So far, Manchester United were the 
only English team to win the trophy. That was about to change in some style, as 
England won seven of the next eight finals. Liverpool – boasting the buzzing 
menace of Kevin Keegan, and one of the most underrated midfielders of all time 
in Terry McDermott – dismissed Borussia Mönchengladbach with panache in 1977, 
then held onto their trophy a year later by beating Club Brugge. Keegan had 
gone, but no matter: Graeme Souness and Kenny Dalglish had arrived, the former 
setting up the latter for a can-opener of a winner.

Liverpool were hot favourites to match the hat-trick feats of Ajax and Bayern, 
but they had their hands prised off the big cup by Brian Clough’s Nottingham 
Forest, who went on to win back-to-back cups themselves. Forest stand tall as 
the smallest club to win the European Cup, and the only one to win Uefa’s big 
prize more often than their own domestic league championship (it’s two to one 
on that score). That takes some doing. Bob Paisley and Carlo Ancelotti both 
have three European Cup wins to their name, but pound for pound, Clough was 
surely the European Cup’s greatest manager. Even if the actual finals, one-goal 
wins over Malmö and Kevin Keegan’sHamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, were rather forgettable (though 
the goal scored by tobacco’s John Robertson in the latter is worth seeking out).

Liverpool reclaimed the cup in 1981, full-back Alan Kennedy the unlikely 
scorer of the winner, chipping in from an acute angle with eight minutes to go 
against a non-vintage Real Madrid. Kennedy was the hero again in 1984, as 
Liverpool beat Roma on penalties in Roma’s own back yard of the Stadio 
Olimpico; Kennedy scored the decisive spot-kick. This was almost certainly 
Liverpool’s signature performance in Europe, Souness wandering the midfield 
with a haughty strut, letting nothing pass. Check out his penalty in the 
shoot-out, whipped into the top-right corner. Imagine possessing the stones to 
execute that one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDFEJRRB_2FM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDFEJRRB_2FM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDFEJRRB_2FM&media=>
 Graeme Souness: now that’s how to take a penalty. 
In between those Liverpool wins, Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> beat Bayern in 1982, the 
Bavarians beginning what would become a long tradition of freezing in the 
final, while Hamburg saw off Juventus in 1983. After it, in 1985, came the 
horror of Heysel, as 39 supporters, nearly all of them Juve fans, were crushed 
under a collapsed wall, Liverpool fans having charged at them across the 
crumbling terraces of a stadium that was never fit for purpose. Michel Platini 
scored a penalty that was awarded for a trip outside the box, Juve won 1-0, and 
nobody much cared. English clubs were asked to stay away for a few years. RIP 
the 39.

Barcelona hoped to win their first-ever European Cup in 1986, but missed all 
of their penalties in a slapstick shoot-out against Steaua Bucharest, who 
became the first eastern Europeans to make off with the trophy. Bayern lost 
another final in 1987; they were 13 minutes from victory against unfanciedPorto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> when Rabah Madjer scored with an 
impudent backflick, one of the iconic goals, and soon enough shipped a second 
to go down 2-1.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnk6ZtOEmP4w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnk6ZtOEmP4w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnk6ZtOEmP4w&media=>
 Rabah Madjer: cheeky. 
Then a run of fairly miserable finals. PSV Eindhoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/psveindhoven> beat Benfica on penalties 
after a spirit-sapping goal-free final in 1988. The great Milan team of Marco 
van Basten, Ruud Gullit and Frank Rijkaard steamrollered Steaua 4-0 in 1989, a 
one-sided non-event, then squeaked past Benfica in 1990. Neither victory fairly 
represents the sheer magnificence of that Milan side, but back-to-back European 
Cups are back-to-back European Cups. Nobody’s managed it since.

The 1991 final matched 1988 as a total misfire, which was a shame, as eventual 
winners Red Star Belgrade were a class act when on song. Red Star defender 
Miodrag Belodedici became the first player to win the European Cup with two 
clubs, having done so with Steaua four years earlier. It was the only 
noteworthy point of the match. Red Star beat Marseille on penalty kicks.

Then the last-ever European Cup final, before the tournament was rebranded as 
the Champions League. Seeing Real Madrid had so dominated the early years, it 
was perhaps fitting that Barcelona got a sniff of the old-school action before 
it was too late. Ronald Koeman swept home an extra-time free kick at Wembley to 
see off Sampdoria – and so to Uefa’s fancy new tournament: the Champions League.

We’re 23 years in now, and still no team has done what Real Madrid, Benfica, 
Internazionale, Ajax,Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>, Liverpool, Nottingham 
Forest or Milan did during the European Cup years, and win two finals in a row. 
So imperial phases have been harder to come by. A lot of clubs have given it a 
good go, though.

Italy tried its best in the early days. Milan contested three finals in a row 
between 1993 and 1995, losing two of them, in 1993 to Marseille and Louis van 
Gaal’s young Ajax in 1995. But those defeats sandwiched a 4-0 thrashing of 
Barcelona which stands as the most dominant display of the modern era, Dejan 
Savicevic scoring one and making the other three. That Barca side contained 
Ronald Koeman, Pep Guardiola, Hristo Stoichkov and Romario – and hardly got a 
kick.


Juventus were the next to try their luck, also making three finals in a row. 
They took Ajax’s title off them in 1996, but lost the next two despite starting 
both matches as favourites. The 1997 final was a memorable romp,Borussia 
Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> registering a 
3-1 shock, Lars Ricken raking one in from 40 yards, Alessandro del Piero 
back-flicking a saucy consolation goal in the Madjer class. The 1998 final 
wasn’t so great, but did end Real Madrid’s 32-year wait for a seventh title, 
and so marks the beginning of the super club era, where organisations such as 
Real began growing into the modern behemoths they are today.


Alex Ferguson’s greatest Manchester United side – built around that midfield 
of Giggs, Scholes, Keane and Beckham – should probably have dominated around 
the turn of the millennium, but they had to settle for a single victory. Still, 
what a victory: that night in Barcelona, Teddy Sheringham and Ole Gunnar 
Solskjaer scoring in the final minutes of the 1999 final to turn certain defeat 
against Bayern Munich into the most widescreen of wins. It was definitely the 
most dramatic.


The first final between two teams from the same nation occurred in 2000, Real 
Madrid seeing off Spanish rivals Valencia with ease, 3-0. Steve McManaman 
scored a typically insouciant effort in that game, and at the time plenty of 
folk wondered if a goal scored by their former charge would be the closest 
Liverpool, down on their luck after being once so dominant in Europe’s top 
competition, would ever achieve anything in the new Champions League. Hmm.

Valencia lost the final again in 2001, Bayern Munich finally managing to see 
the job through after those failures against Aston Villa, Porto and Manchester 
United. Real Madrid revisited Hampden in 2002, and produced something almost as 
memorable as 1960, Zinedine Zidane skelping home a spectacular volley of 
angular precision to see off Bayer Leverkusen. Poor Neverkusen, who managed to 
come runners-up domestically in both league and cup that season as well. Their 
star turn Michael Ballack also managed to get himself suspended from that 
summer’s World Cup final.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQryFUtRtUiM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQryFUtRtUiM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQryFUtRtUiM&media=>
 Zinedine Zidane scores a screamer in 2002. 
A couple of fairly mundane finals followed. A defensive grind in 2003 between 
Milan and Juventus, straight outta the 1960s, saw the former prevail on penalty 
kicks. A one-sided nonsense between Porto and Monaco, 3-0, is chiefly 
remembered now for José Mourinho announcing himself in the big league. But it 
was worth waiting: 2005 would prove to be the craziest final in history, Milan 
thoroughly dominant as they romped to a three-goal lead against Liverpool, only 
for Steven Gerrard, Didi Hamann and Jerzy Dudek to have the games of their 
lives.More on that here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/may/29/newsstory.sport12>; Field 
Notes simply doesn’t have the room or energy to tell the story again.

The miracle of Istanbul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/may/29/newsstory.sport12> 
This sparked a period of English domin… well, no, not quite domination, not 
like the late 70s and early 80s. But Premier League clubs did start reaching a 
lot of finals again. Arsenal were 14 minutes from the title in 2006, despite 
Jens Lehmann having been sent off early in the first half, but Barcelona turned 
it round late on. Milan took their revenge on Liverpool in 2007, winning 2-1 in 
Athens; you could argue that the better team lost in both of their finals. All 
fair enough, then.

The first all-English final came along in 2008. Manchester United’s victory on 
penalties over Chelsea wasn’t up there with their previous two iconic wins, the 
game’s one memorable moment being John Terry’s risible technique-free attempt 
to win the cup from the spot, a slip that cost the Londoners everything. You 
have to admire their fans’ subsequent chutzpah in belting out that Steven 
Gerrard number. Short memories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433257015347%2F2981f81a-4348-4f15-a57e-e4482714f727-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it's%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20it%27s%20so%20hard%20to%20win%20two%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchampions-league-brief-history-barcelona-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433257015347%2F2981f81a-4348-4f15-a57e-e4482714f727-2060x1236.jpeg>
 John Terry in 2008: gutted. Photograph: Tom Jenkins/Guardian 
United were simply brilliant in the defence of their title in 2009 against 
Barcelona. For 10 minutes. But Cristiano Ronaldo couldn’t put away his early 
chances, and Samuel Eto’o’s 10-minute goal turned the tide. Barcelona won 2-0, 
and when the pair met again two years later, the Spaniards declared at 3-1, 
Ajax-73 style, utterly dominant, the job done. Messi scored in both final 
appearances; you wouldn’t bet too much against him making it three from three 
against Juventus this weekend. But United were a force of nature under Alex 
Ferguson for the best part of two decades; a return of just two European Cups 
during that period seems awfully low. But then it goes to show just how hard it 
is to win the damn thing in the first place.

Meanwhile, it was back to bad habits for Bayern, who were thoroughly outplayed 
by Mourinho’s Internazionale in 2010, then had their pockets picked on their 
own doorstep in 2012, Chelsea finally bringing the trophy to London after 57 
years after their former player Arjen Robben missed an extra-time penalty. 
Robben eased his and Bayern’s pain 12 months later, scoring the late winner to 
see off Borussia Dortmund. Bayern’s fifth win meant only Real Madrid and Milan 
had won more European Cups and Champions Leagues. Only Benfica and Juventus 
have lost as many finals (five). It’s a strange record Bayern boast.

This time last year, Real Madrid won their 10th trophy, whipping it from under 
the noses of city rivals Atléti, who in a callback to 1974 once again conceded 
a late, late equaliser when the cup was all but theirs. On Saturday we’ll find 
out whether Barcelona will replace their great enemy as European champions, 
joining Liverpool and Bayern Munich on five wins. Juventus meanwhile look to 
join Inter and Manchester United on three wins, and avoid becoming the least 
successful finalist of all by suffering a record sixth loss. Whoever wins the 
famous old cup, good luck in hanging onto it.
 