
People of a certain age remember where they were when they heard that 
President Kennedy had been shot.Aberfan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1966/oct/22/fromthearchive> was my 
second JFK moment. On 21 October 1966,116 children and 28 adults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/oct/22/ameliahill.theobserver> were 
crushed or suffocated when a coal spoil tip engulfed Pantglas primary school, 
together with some of the nearby houses, in the village of Aberfan, south Wales.

Aged 22, I had just started a post-graduate year at the Royal Academy of Music 
in London. The tragedy was caused by an accumulation of water that rendered the 
tip unstable. The official inquiry cited the National Coal Board’s gross 
negligence and chairman Lord Robens for issuing misleading statements. 
Parliament subsequently passed legislation to ensure there would be no repeat 
of such an appalling event. The father of one of the victims requested that the 
official report would carry the words “buried alive by the National Coal Board”.

Two years ago, I was approached by Ian Jones of S4C and Hefin Owen of Rondo 
Media to compose a work commemorating the 50th anniversary of the disaster.

When the word Aberfan is mentioned, no further explanation is necessary; its 
eternal effect is encapsulated in its name. What resonates, of course, is that 
the great majority of victims were children.

Memories of Aberfan raise ethical questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2006/oct/20/memoriesofaberfanraiseethi>
The catastrophe and its aftermath have been comprehensively documented, but 
one story still haunts me. A girl, feeling unwell that morning, didn’t attend 
school and instead spent the day at her grandmother’s house. It was one of 
those that lay in the path of the avalanche, and she perished. If she had gone 
to school, she would have been in a section of the building that escaped.

One reason for the intensity of feeling in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> is that it is such a small country. I 
was raised in Penclawdd, a village on the Gower peninsula, and Aberfan was only 
40 miles away; the disaster seemed local.

I have been asked where the inspiration comes from in setting about this task. 
Inspiration is a curious concept, and one with which I am not really in accord. 
Geniuses such as Bach or Mozart, employed by church or court, had to compose a 
piece by a given day; the process, if not the quality, is the same for lesser 
mortals like me.

Paradoxically, dealing with a subject that lies so deep in the soul of Welsh 
people was both a harrowing and an uplifting experience, but the journey was 
made easier, more rewarding and essentially only possible by my travelling 
companion, Mererid Hopwood, the brilliant Welsh poet, academic and linguist who 
has written a remarkable libretto that was the peg on which I hung my musical 
coat.

While the work’s genesis is in Aberfan, we were mindful of how it might 
encompass other tragedies involving children:Dunblane  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/mar/14/dunblane-massacre-scotland-killing>
(1996), theBeslan school siege <https://www.theguardian.com/world/beslan> 
(2004), the Korean ferry disaster and the Peshawar school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/19/peshawar-school-massacre-pakistans-911>
 massacre (both 2014).

We have all been children, many of us are parents and grandparents, and our 
hope is that the work encompasses children all over the world, as well as 
offering a memorial in music for the disaster in Wales. As Mererid says: “We 
sincerely hope the work speaks from two hearts to many hearts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcantata-people-aberfan-karl-jenkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82760a6f766746842decfeb4a4108db05ab7266a%2F0_157_3054_3818%2F3054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20cantata%20for%20the%20people%20of%20Aberfan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcantata-people-aberfan-karl-jenkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20cantata%20for%20the%20people%20of%20Aberfan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcantata-people-aberfan-karl-jenkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82760a6f766746842decfeb4a4108db05ab7266a%2F0_157_3054_3818%2F3054.jpg>
 A school classroom in Pantglas primary school. Photograph: Bill Orchard/Rex 
Features 
Cantata Memoria: For the Children/Er Mwyn y Plant is both music and a poem. It 
is not a documentary, nor even a dramatisation, but it does include a 
conflation of ideas and facts that are by now part of the legacy. There wasn’t 
just one cortège (the title of a movement), but we do know that “All Things 
Bright and Beautiful” was sung at Pantglas School from time to time. A poignant 
line in the hymn has sinister ambiguity in our context as the “rivers running 
by” alludes to the hidden river running underneath the village that contributed 
to the disaster. The Welsh song “Myfanwy” (written by Joseph Parry from nearby 
Merthyr Tydfil and also quoted) was sung by the soldiers who dug for victims. 
“Myfanwy” was also the first piece performed by the local Ynysowen Male Choir, 
formed after the tragedy, and from which the community sought to find some 
solace.

The text is multilingual: English, Welsh and Latin (from the Mass), while also 
referencing words in many other languages which, it is hoped, symbolise how 
this memorial is at once both specific and universal.

Cantata Memoria, sung by Bryn Terfel among others, is in two distinct sections 
but performed continuously. The first deals with the disaster and its immediate 
aftermath, and the second moves from darkness to light, reliving memories and 
celebrating childhood.

It is said that no birdsong was heard in the hours before or after the tragedy 
and so the words “light” and a “bird” provide the textual thread towards 
the conclusion of the piece; the orchestra concludes with a glistening 
arrangement of celesta, glockenspiel and various bells to depict “light”, 
which, quietly spoken by the children and sung by the soprano, brings the canta 
ta to a close.

• Cantata Memoria is released by Deutsche Grammophon on 7 October and will be 
premiered at Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff, the following day. wmc.org.uk 
<http://www.wmc.org.uk/>.
 