
Local government may be shrinking as a result of savage cuts, with job losses, 
reduced services andsocial care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/social-care-threat-level-reaches-new-high>
 funding in existential crisis, but everyday, council staff are working to 
provide a wide array of local services, and that is something the annual 
#OurDay tweetathon sets out to celebrate.

From just after midnight on Tuesday 15 November, council employees and 
councillors in England and Wales will take to Twitter armed with the hashtag 
#OurDay to showcase the work they and their colleagues do. Last year’s event 
resulted in 18,000 tweets.


This year’s social media event takes place ahead of the autumn statement on 23 
November and provides an ideal opportunity, according to the Local Government 
Association, which organises the day, to highlight the work of councilsand the 
key issues they face. This year’s event takes place at a time when the 
chancellor Phillip Hammond will be severely limited in his options for public 
finance. A new report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies says the £10.4bn 
surplus pencilled in for 2019–20 by George Osborne in his last budget as 
chancellor in March is now on course to be a £14.9bn deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/philip-hammond-autumn-statement-ifs-inflation>
.

Local government staff show us what they do each day – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/gallery/2015/nov/27/local-government-staff-in-pictures-council-ourday>
So this year’s social media event is even more important in order to provide 
an insight into the huge variety of jobs councils do.

If you work in local public services, or use and value your local public 
services, show us what you do and why these services matter. To support the 
#OurDay tweetathon, we want you to share your pictures and stories that 
represent a day in your life. Afterwards we will be putting together a gallery 
of your images on theGuardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network>.

You can share your photographs or videos by clicking on the blue “contribute” 
button on this article, or you can download the freeGuardianWitness app 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> if you have a smartphone. Please use the 
description field to tell us more about the photo or video.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of 
user-generated content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and 
stories, and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will 
be reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will 
feature on the Guardian site.  