
One of the many things this job has taught me is how careful you have to be 
about the dangers of plagiarism, even when accidental. Therefore I should say 
that I think it wasDavid Blundy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Blundy>, 
that fine foreign correspondent, killed in San Salvador in 1989, who likened 
weekly journalism to a cold. In his case it was working for three Sunday 
newspapers – the Times, the Telegraph and finally the Sunday Correspondent. 
Even humble readers’ editors, far from the front, have similar feelings as 
deadline approaches.

As a weekly columnist you get up on Monday feeling fine, but by the evening 
that first slight headache sets in as you begin to wonder what you will write 
about. As Tuesday passes into Wednesday your nose begins to stream and by 
Thursday the fever has really taken hold as the deadline charges head-on at you.

This, my last column as Guardian readers’ editor, was no different. The issue 
most complained of last week was the use of the picture of two female victims 
of the bombing of Brussels airport, which ran across the front of the newspaper 
on Wednesday 23 March, as well as online. Readers felt outraged on behalf of 
one of the women, whose yellow top had been blown off to expose her midriff and 
bra.

This email was typical of a dozen we received: “I am appalled that the 
Guardian has chosen to include on its front page today the picture at Brussels 
airport of a woman left half-dressed following the explosions. Why are you 
adding to her distress by choosing that shot? What would you feel if that was 
you or a friend or family member? I had thought better of you.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fchris-elliott-on-being-the-guardian-readers-editor-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Elliott%20on%20being%20the%20Guardian%20readers'%20editor%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fchris-elliott-on-being-the-guardian-readers-editor-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Elliott%20on%20being%20the%20Guardian%20readers%27%20editor%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fchris-elliott-on-being-the-guardian-readers-editor-video&media=>
Chris Elliott reflects on his five and a half years as the Guardian readers’ 
editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/mar/31/chris-elliott-on-being-the-guardian-readers-editor-video>
Others felt it was voyeuristic, an intrusion into her privacy, and had taken 
away the woman’s dignity. The shot, taken in the immediate aftermath by Ketevan 
Kardava, a special correspondent for the Georgian Public Broadcaster network, 
was used by news organisations around the world to capture a moment after the 
bombs went off.

As Nadia Khomami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/23/the-photograph-that-has-come-to-define-horrors-of-brussels-attacks>
, reporting for the Guardian 24 hours later, wrote: “The woman has since been 
identified as Indian air stewardess Nidhi Chaphekar, a mother of two from 
Mumbai who arrived at the terminal ahead of meeting her colleagues for a flight 
to Newark in the United States. Chaphekar was at the check-in in the departures 
area when the explosions occurred, bringing down the ceiling of the building 
and killing 11 people, with dozens more wounded.”

Complaints from readers about the use of photographs taken in the aftermath of 
violent events have featured in Open door columns before, one reason I 
hesitated about returning to the subject.

Many readers, especially in a digital age where the images will be accessible 
for a very long time, feel that the privacy of the individual is more important 
than the photograph.

However, many readers have a different concern: that the Guardian tones down 
the pictures it uses. There was a readers’ backlash when the Guardian 
manipulated a photograph in the wake of the Madrid train bombing 12 years ago 
to bleach the blood out of a severed limb in the foreground of the image.

It is important to tell the story honestly, even if that means using difficult 
images. I think the Guardian was right to use that picture last week. This was 
debated at the Guardian’s morning conference, where opinion was divided. 
However, as I wrote in my replies to readers’ emails: “It was the terrorists, 
not the photo, that took her dignity.”

I know that many readers will disagree with my view – that’s the nature of 
this job for whoever has the privilege of holding it. The new Guardian global 
readers’ editor will find no shortage of readers expecting to challenge and be 
heard. In my experience this is not a sign of their hostility but commitment to 
their understanding of what the Guardian stands for and should be.

There is one other great quote from David Blundy, which was remembered by his 
former editor Harry Evans at Blundy’s memorial service and is reproduced in the 
epilogue to The Last Paragraph, a collection of Blundy’s journalism brought 
together by his great friend Anthony Holden. According to Evans, Blundy once 
looked up from his notebook as he hunched over his typewriter:“Do you find a 
problem,” he would say, “of getting the words in the right order? What’s it all 
about?” 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=spbUD_QBhlQC&pg=PA10&lpg=PA10&dq=Blundy+Do+you+find+a+problem+in+getting+the+words+in+the+right+order?+What%E2%80%99s+it+all+about?&source=bl&ots=MQYOMWssgg&sig=mMCNMnAacBy_HqHSJaTmQw57oWU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjfn6rvi9zLAhVFfhoKHZOFCn0Q6AEIHzAA#v=onepage&q=Blundy%20Do%20you%20find%20a%20problem%20in%20getting%20the%20words%20in%20the%20right%20order%3F%20What%E2%80%99s%20it%20all%20about%3F&f=false>
 That doesn’t change.
 