
We had a visitor. All pin and fluff, beak and claw, it hopped up on the garden 
table. It was a welcome guest. Mostly black but with hints of green and blue, 
it had some white wing feathers and a pale band across its fanned tail. Its eye 
was an adult black but the rose-pink at the edge of its gape remained that of a 
fledgling. Bigger than a jackdaw and not crow-shaped, our visitor was amagpie 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdguide/name/m/magpie/>.

The stranger brought with it the stories and prejudices that apply to its 
kind, and its materialisation out of thin air gave it an air of mystery. 
Awkward yet bold, vulnerable yet insistent, the squab seemed unruffled by our 
presence, as if it were seeking us out. On the table it shuffled on its knotty 
black legs and gammy feet; the claws on one foot were white. Something was 
wrong but it seemed too able to take to the wildlife rescue down the road, 
which was inundated with young birds.

The magpie began to wipe its beak on the table. I'd heard this was a 
displacement action made when two conflicting drives – perhaps escape or beg 
food – inhibit each other. It remained silent, presenting itself as a 
foundling: a life abandoned to be brought into our family.

The bird had a character far greater than the beaky fluffy ball on wobbly legs 
suggested. I hesitated, thinking about appropriative relationships between 
people and wild animals, and the way domestication replaces an understanding 
and respect for wildness. Then I found a rasher of bacon and pinched off little 
bits, which the magpie ate ravenously.

It grabbed a larger piece, hopped down from the table and stashed it under a 
plant. We took this forward thinking as a good sign, and the young magpie 
flapped up into a lilac tree to roost. The next morning I found it dead. What 
if I'd brought it in overnight, taken it to the refuge, fed it proper stuff? I 
felt responsible for losing the foundling. One for sorrow.

@DrPaulEvans1 <https://twitter.com/DrPaulEvans1>

Paul Evans is the author of Herbaceous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/18/herbaceous-paul-evans-sharp-observations-nature-writing>
 