
On Saturday, Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> called a fight with Conor 
McGregor “possible”. As far as fights go it would be the ultimate made-for-TV 
sideshow, almost like a Fear Factor meets the Kardashians. It would offer 
little in athletic value, even less in benefit to society as well as hurting 
the legitimacy of the fighters’ chosen disciplines. But it would make millions. 
And a huge number of people would watch.

The idea that the biggest names in boxing and mixed martial arts would collide 
in a ring (or octagon? or hexagon?) to the amusement of a worldwide audience 
seems preposterous. Their worlds and skills are too different. Finding a way to 
match them evenly would be impossible. Common sense says the idea is too 
ridiculous to consider.

Except for one thing… 

There may not be two other athletes in sports today more gifted in 
self-promotion than Mayweather and McGregor. They are also men consumed with 
making money. Both men talk about it endlessly, and Mayweather would generate 
hundreds of millions just by stepping into the ring again.

The fight game reloaded: how MMA and UFC conquered the world | Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/the-fight-game-reloaded-how-mma-conquered-world-ufc>
Ever since he went from anonymity to the biggest name in the UFC, McGregor has 
talked about getting rich. He orchestrates public shopping sprees and boasts – 
with alternate touches of humility and pride – of his vast collection of luxury 
cars.After he beat Jose Aldo at UFC 194 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SxFyXWEKbDc> his rhetoric turned away from his 
love of MMA to an all-out discourse on wealth.As his fight with Nate Diaz at 
UFC 196 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-ufc-196>
 drew close almost everything he talked about was money: how much he was making 
himself, how much he was making Diaz, how much he was making the UFC.

He seemed more interested in the towering visage of Mayweather on the side of 
the MGM Grand where he was fighting Diaz that weekend than the lure of being 
the headliner at July’sUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 200 in the 
giant new arena across Las Vegas Boulevard. If he longs to be as rich as 
Mayweather he will probably have to fight Mayweather as ludicrous as that 
sounds.

Who knows if this rumored fight even has a chance of happening. UFC president 
Dana White told Yahoo! Sports’s Kevin Iole:“It’s not true, it’s just a tabloid 
story.” 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/boxing/floyd-mayweather-returning-to-box-conor-mcgregor--don-t-count-on-it-144758160.html>
 And the proposed financial arrangement first reported by the Sun had 
Mayweather earning $144m while McGregor would get just $10m. It seems hard to 
picture McGregor embracing a financial package he could get from the UFC to box 
against one of the best of all time. There is no way Mayweather would agree to 
fight using mixed martial arts.

Kell Brook should not get too excited by Floyd Mayweather rumours | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/02/kell-brook-should-not-get-too-excited-at-floyd-mayweather-rumours>
McGregor would not last long boxing against Mayweather and Mayweather would 
not be able to grapple with McGregor. Most likely is that the two fighters are 
using each other to promote something else. Mayweather, who has claimed to be 
retired,told FightHype.com that he started the rumors of a match with McGregor. 
<http://www.fighthype.com/mayweathernews/mayweather_mcgregor_fight_possible.html>
 McGregor has played along, tweeting a fake match poster of he and Mayweather.

By keeping the thought of a fight between the two of them alive, Mayweather 
and McGregor keep their names in the news. Many expect Mayweather to fight (as 
a boxer) at least one more time and what better promotion for another big 
payday? Meanwhile, McGregor needs to keep his feud with White and the UFC 
going, battling for control against a president and organization that does not 
cede power to their fighters.

Mayweather v McGregor is more likely Mayweather v the rest of the boxing world 
and McGregor v the UFC. Neither Mayweather at the end of his career and 
McGregor in the middle of his should want to ruin their fighting legacies with 
a pay-per-view circus. But then again, neither man has ever been predictable, 
especially when an Everest of money sits on the table. Would they be above 
diving in, clawing at each other’s eyes for a one-time reality-show payday like 
no other?

You can’t say no ... as stupid as that seems. 
 