
When it comes to its dealings with China, the UK is at a critical juncture. 
Following the Brexit vote, the debate on Chinese investment in Britain, and 
unfavourable media coverage of President Xi Jinping’slavish reception last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/23/chinese-president-xi-jinping-uk-visit-roundup>
, the challenge for the British leadership now is to develop a new strategic 
engagement with Beijing. It is vital in doing so that the UK stands its ground, 
alongside other like-minded governments, and promotes an approach that balances 
its business, trade and diplomatic interests with a respect for the rights of 
the Chinese and Tibetan people. It must hold fast to its commitment to 
upholding the democratic values that shape the spirit of this great country.

I have recently been elected to serve a second term as the sikyong, or 
political leader, of the Central Tibetan Administration, based in exile in 
India. Our democracy, which is a source of great pride among Tibetans 
everywhere, was a culmination of the vision and actions of His Holiness the
Dalai Lama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dalailama> – who has emphasised 
the importance of democracy and education since his escape from 
Chinese-occupied Tibet in 1959.

Failing to stand up to China only endorses its efforts to impose an 
anti-democratic narrative on the rest of the world

Britain has been an inspiration to Tibetans not only as one of the world’s 
oldest democracies and a bastion of free speech, but also because of its has a 
special relationship to Tibet. Prior to the Chinese invasion in 1949, Britain 
was the only country to formally recognise Tibet as an independent nation. This 
is because British representatives were stationed in Lhasa from 1904 to 1947 to 
liaise with the Tibetan government. In 1949 Mao Zedong, the newly victorious 
leader of the Chinese Communist party, announced over the radio waves his 
intention to “liberate” Tibet from this “foreign imperialism”. Over the past 
60-plus years, of course,Tibet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tibet> has 
been anything but “liberated” by the Chinese Communist party.

In 2008, Britain rewrote the historical record on Tibet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/11/dalai-lama-china-tibet-miliband>
. An apologetic statement by the then foreign secretary David Miliband stated 
that Britain now recognised Tibet as part of the People’s Republic of China, 
after almost a century of recognising Tibet as “autonomous”, with China having 
a “special position” there.

This was a major shift in position, and signalled the beginning of a more 
accommodating stance. But it only led China to push for more concessions, 
limiting the UK’s leverage still further. After David Cameron met with the 
Dalai Lama in 2012,China subjected him to censure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/15/china-unhappy-cameron-dalai-lama>
, consigning him to the diplomatic deep freeze. Last year, the UK’s red carpet 
reception of Xi was widely criticised, with sinologists pointing out that 
standing up to China is not only preferable for moral reasons but is also in 
the interests of Britain’s economy and national security.

Dalai Lama visit to Strasbourg provokes threats from China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/dalai-lama-visit-to-strasbourg-european-parliament-provokes-threats-from-china>
How much better, instead of struggling in the face of China’s efforts to 
divide and rule, if those governments thatChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> coerces stood shoulder to shoulder, 
bound by their common values. Failing to do so only endorses China’s efforts to 
impose its narrative on the rest of the world – a discourse that is 
anti-democratic, in which the law is viewed as a tool to maintain power and not 
to achieve justice, and one that is hostile to any views that do not accord 
with the official party line. The need for such a joined-up approach is 
becoming ever more urgent – regardless of Brexit – as the Chinese government 
continues to oversee an unprecedented crackdown on basic human rights and civil 
society, and steps up its efforts to subvert and undermine the values of 
western democracies.

In Tibet, China asserts its control through policies of intensified 
militarisation, hyper-securitisation, enhanced surveillance and ideological 
campaigns. Given Tibet’s importance as the “roof of the world”, source of most 
of Asia’s major rivers and epicentre of climate change, this should be of 
profound concern to us all. China’s disregard for fundamental freedoms is 
demonstrated in the continuing large-scale demolitions at the internationally 
renowned Tibetan Buddhist institute Larung Gar – the largest Buddhist academy 
in the world.

In recent months we have seen two initiatives where governments have joined 
together to tackle China about major issues of concern; the first a letter 
signed by four governments and the EU, telling China that its new laws on 
cyber-security, counter-terrorism and control of foreign NGOs go too far, and 
an unprecedented joint statement by 12 governments at the United Nations human 
rights council, criticising China over its detention of lawyers and
disappearances of Hong Kong booksellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/13/china-criticises-britain-for-interfering-in-case-of-missing-hong-kong-booksellers>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-crowd-sings-happy-birthday-to-the-dalai-lama-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435493618876%2FKP_327044_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glastonbury%20crowd%20sings%20happy%20birthday%20to%20Dalai%20Lama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-crowd-sings-happy-birthday-to-the-dalai-lama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glastonbury%20crowd%20sings%20happy%20birthday%20to%20Dalai%20Lama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-crowd-sings-happy-birthday-to-the-dalai-lama-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435493618876%2FKP_327044_crop_640x480.jpg>
Glastonbury crowd sings happy birthday to Dalai Lama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/jun/28/glastonbury-crowd-sings-happy-birthday-to-the-dalai-lama-video>
As China seeks to bend the rest of the world to its anti-democratic 
principles, such collective statements can only be in the interests of the UK 
and other European nations, as well as serving the Chinese and Tibetan people 
who struggle for peaceful reform of a one-party state.

British people are among the most staunch supporters of our Tibetan cause; 
tens of thousands of themjoyfully sang happy birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/28/dalai-lama-glastonbury-verdict-isis-unthinkable>
 to the Dalai Lama at Glastonbury last year. So many have expressed their 
profound sadness at the unprecedented wave of self-immolations that has swept 
Tibet since 2009 – a terrible act that is testimony to often unbearable 
oppression as well as an expression of the desire for freedom, and for the 
Dalai Lama to return home.

As new alignments form and the ramifications of Brexit become clearer, it is 
time for a re-evaluation of Britain’s engagement with China. There may have 
been a change in language on Tibet, but the historical and cultural connection 
between the British people and Tibetans is irrefutable.

The UK should take a leading role in reaching out to other like-minded 
governments, to act together from a position of strength to confront the 
Chinese leadership. A united front can be used to push for a meaningful 
dialogue based on the Central Tibetan Administration’s middle way approach to 
resolve the longstanding issue of Tibet. It cannot allow Brexit to distract or 
damage relationships with other EU nations that will be needed if change is to 
be secured.
 