
Any response but a straight no became deeply unfashionable during the 
Conservative era. Industrial policy - a contradiction in terms, they snorted. 
Blairites seemed to take on board the Tory objections. Now, however, they seem 
to be wondering.

There's no single formula to explain how or when bureaucrats can pick winners. 
But there are some absorbing foreign examples showing it can be done. The 
recent history of Israel offers a lesson. The elements are: policies for the 
supply of trained personnel (from public institutions of higher education, 
especially mathematicians and engineers). There's also military spending.

The fact of Israeli transformation is indisputable. From being a nation 
producing low-value citrus and textile products Israel has become a focused 
technology economy. There must be pointers here for Blairite Britain. Indeed 
the UK may have an opportunity to piggy-back on the Israeli experience through 
Britech, a joint British-Israeli scheme intended to marry Israel's innovative 
skills in the technologies of the internet, communications and biotech with 
Britain's more sophisticated marketing and financial experience.

A deal negotiated by Peter Mandelson when he was Trade and Industry Secretary 
has been taken up his successor Stephen Byers and it reflects Britain's 
determination to foster competitiveness by linking with the hi-tech revolution 
which led Newsweek to call Israel 'A land of tech and money'.

Israel has a large number of high-technology start-ups - including a new 
generation of internet-based technologies - many quoted on the booming Nasdaq 
stock market in New York. Germany's dynamic Neuer Markt, the European answer to 
Nasdaq, also wants to bring Israeli companies to their markets. Big British 
companies such as GEC and Cable & Wireless - which are seeking to develop their 
technological base - are investing heavily in Israel's new medical and 
communications technologies.

The European Union has accepted that Israel must be part of its just-agreed 
$15 billion research and development fund. The chip maker Intel is busy 
expanding its semi-conductor design centre in Haifa, which gave birth to the 
Pentium chip which powers most of the world's personal computers. And there's 
Bird, the Bi-national Research and Industrial Development Foundation, put 
together by the United States and Israel almost 20 years ago: it has seen more 
than 500 projects successfully off the starting blocks generating billions of 
dollars of income.

What factors have fostered Israel's high-technology revolution? Here is a 
small socially-divided country, with enormous security problems (as the 
situation in the Lebanon demonstrates). But there, maybe, is the first lesson. 
Military culture. Over the decades Israel has been criticised for the way in 
which it has allowed the defence forces to dominate society. But the Israeli 
Defence Forces are both technologically advanced and well-known for their 
improvisation skills. And it is out of this background that some of the most 
successful hi-tech start-ups have emerged.

Checkpoint, the world leader in network security or 'firewalls', was founded 
by four twentysomethings (all now near billionaires) straight out of the 
military. A similar story lies behind Nice systems, which adopted 
communications technology skills honed in the military to develop the digital 
logging systems used to record data and voice transmissions at airports and in 
City of London and Wall Street financial houses.

A second factor is the level and quality of mathematical and engineering 
training. Israel has two of the best research-based institutions of higher 
education anywhere in the world, the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot 
and the Haifa Technion. They are a source of both practical scientific 
development (the smart cards on BSkyB digital equipment are a Weizmann product) 
and well-qualified postgraduate scientists, mathematicians and engineers.

I spoke to the Israeli government's chief scientist Orna Berry. She pointed 
out that the country had 140 scientists and engineers per 10,000 people, the 
highest proportion anywhere in the world. It also had a very highly-educated 
population, some 20 per cent with university degrees and some 12 per cent 
advanced degrees.

The third factor is that this intellectual cutting edge has been reinforced in 
the 1990s by the high quality of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. Of 
the 822,000 who arrived in 1990-97, an astonishing number are qualified in the 
natural sciences. Some 40 per cent of those who arrived had academic degrees 
and better. Many were immediately absorbed into hi-tech industries, others 
brimming with ideas have already become - with government assistance - 
self-made entrepreneurs.

But none of this could have worked without government seed money and a healthy 
venture capital sector, willing to back ideas. In some cases the creators of 
software companies are now backing a third generation of enterprises as 
investors in their thirties support even younger people straight out of the 
Technion or the armed forces, using the cash that they made with their own 
technology.

The government puts up to $500 a year into the hi-tech sector, which now 
accounts for an astonishing 78 per cent of the nation's exports and is the 
magnet for inward investment. The Israeli example provides a powerful model for 
this country; and, as part of the comprehensive spending review, the 
Chancellor, Gordon Brown, earmarked pounds 1 billion for research and 
development projects in Britain in an effort to encourage the new 
technologies.There are three basic programmes paid for by the Israel government 
which provide a sort of template.

 The first is the 'incubator' programme in which the government backs 
individual entrepreneurs with up to $350,000 each. In the Jewish state the 
companies to be backed are picked by chief-scientist Dr Berry, herself a 
successful entrepreneur who is now giving something back to the state. At 
present her office supports some 40 such start-ups each year providing both 
cash and management tutoring. Each start up is given legal, managerial and 
accounting back-up so that the scientists can initially concentrate on the 
product. So far some 350 companies have graduated from the incubator schemes, 
including several run by Russian immigrants, attracting $90 million of private 
sector investment. The success rate is reported to be 56 per cent. The scheme 
means that the Israel has the highest number of start-ups globally, after the 
US, in absolute terms(1).

At a science park in the Jerusalem suburbs the young mathematician Jonathan 
Moore has used government incubator money together with cash from the Gemini 
venture capital fund to develop what he believes to be ground-breaking internet 
technology. He and his team of software engineers, using highly-advanced 
mathematical models, have developed a three-dimensional technology, which can 
be used in almost any internet application (it is to be marketed as Morfit). 
Moore believes that it jumps over the capacity of present-day equipment. Rather 
than launch an expensive marketing campaign Morfit intends to take the open 
access route, offering potential consumers the chance to take his technology 
directly from internet sites and try it out for themselves. This was exactly 
the technique used by another Israeli internet group, Mirabalis, which recently 
has been sold to America Online for $400 million.

A second cluster being supported by the chief scientist's office is Magnet. 
Consortiums of companies and academics come together to develop and explore 
promising new technologies. Recently, there has been a focus on improving 
broad-band communications: as a result of work in this area new systems can 
handle five times the current traffic down existing wires. Magnet schemes have 
proved particularly useful in biotechnology where it has been possible to 
eliminate duplicated research effort and share the new techniques across a 
whole industry.

The third type of scheme involves support for projects, which may not be able 
to attract commercial capital. Some of the projects presented to the chief 
scientist win, others fall over the cliff. As a result of the country's growing 
reputation for new technologies, particularly in the medicine, the internet, 
software and communications, there is no shortage of overseas capital flowing 
in. During 1994 to 1997 total foreign investment in Israel doubled from $4.3 
billion to $8.6 billion. But like other emerging market economies Israel was 
hit by the 1998 global crisis and saw a substantial outflow of short-term 
financial investment in the stock market. Despite this, however, direct 
investment in Israeli companies - running at $2 billion a year - continues to 
grow(2). In October 1998, at the peak of the global crisis, foreign investors 
such as the telecom group Lucent bought into Israel's telecommunications paying 
$117 million for Lannet, which has a global lead in intelligent switches.

The cherry-picking by overseas companies of Israeli technology is a cause of 
some concern. But it is in the nature of a small economy which has a limited 
local market to look to foreign assistance in the marketing and distribution of 
its technologies. This is precisely what joint ventures like Britech, Bird and 
the European Union's R&D project are designed to encourage. Firms such as 
Aladdin, founded by 25-year-old Yank Margalit in 1986 and based in Tel Aviv, 
have persevered. Aladdin has built itself an international reputation in an 
area in which Israel has excelled - computer security. Having established a 
strong market position in software it is now seeking to deploy those same 
skills on the internet through eSafe, which seeks to deal with security 
problems at the gateway to the internet. But it is a long process which has 
taken Aladdin more than a decade to build up $100 million of exports sales to 
become the first Israeli management case to become part of the Harvard Business 
School curriculum(3).

There is, however, a recognition that Israel's competitive advantage is in 
mathematical and engineering prowess and creativity. At a time when Britain 
finds it increasingly difficult to find engineers willing to go on to higher 
education, Israel is churning them out.

Sources: (1) Office of the Chief Scientist, Ministry of Trade & Industry, 
Jerusalem. 'Technologies and Innovations 1998.' http://www.tamas.gov.il; (2) 
State of Israel's Annual Report For 18-K to the US Securities & Exchange 
Commission Washington DC December 31, 1997; (3) Harvard Business School, 
February 24,1998 www.aks.com Graphic sources: Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
State of Israel; OECD; World Bank Atlas Graphics: Carol Anderson Research: 
Matthew Keating

 Alex Brummer is the Guardian's financial editor, recently in Israel.
 