
I imagine that Mark Lowcock, like most civil servants, had a draining 2016. 
The Christmas break might have offered a little respite, but instead, the 
permanent secretary at the Department for International Development found being 
personally targeted by the Daily Mail, following publication of theNew Year 
honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/30/public-servants-civil-service-2017-new-year-honours-list>
. I can only hope he took it in good cheer.

Related: Public servants celebrated in 2017 New Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/30/public-servants-civil-service-2017-new-year-honours-list>

Attacking Lowcock was easy to write, easy to predict, and in keeping with the 
artillery campaign the newspaper has launched against a foreign aid policy held 
over from the Cameron administration. It also provided a pitch for taking cheap 
shots at overpaid officials.

Complaining about the honours system is an annual game played all over the 
country and the system certainly deserves more scrutiny. But what is telling 
about the attack on Lowcock is not the blast against the honours system, but 
the appearance of senior civil servants in the cross-hairs of anti-elite 
sentiment.

 For most of last year, Whitehall escaped direct hits from resurgent populism, 
but this could be a year where public servants come under sustained attack. It 
is easy to imagine how this might happen. In 2017, any honeymoon will be well 
and truly over for prime minister Theresa May. Brexit draws closer. The 
difference by rhetoric and delivery will widen. Months will have passed since 
the referendum, yet everything will appear to be the same or worse. Who to 
blame? Those pesky Europeans? Well, of course. But they will bite back. How 
about going for those who can’t respond? Officials are a tempting target.

Whitehall will need to respond to this, but will find the going very hard. We 
are all wired to seek out information that supports the coherence of our 
worldview. The civil service’s worldview is compiled of data, evidence and the 
opinions of other learned folks. But if 2016 reminded us of anything, it’s that 
many people don’t make their decisions on that basis, however much one insists 
they should. A neat, logical chain of facts is only one form of argument. It 
was not one that performed well last year.

When it comes to making a case, the civil service is completely wedded to this 
logical framing of arguments. It provides the basis for every ministerial 
submission, every white paper, every business case. Civil servants are not 
allowed to appeal to rhetoric, emotion, beauty or pride. That is not their job. 
But narrow-mindedness presents a real problem. How can the civil service defend 
itself adequately if it is unable to put forward arguments that resonate with 
people who intuit things in a different way to civil servants?

Related: Dark days for civil servants, as autumn statement leaves budgets to 
shrink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/23/dark-days-civil-servants-autumn-statement-leaves-budgets-shrink>

The thrust of the argument, in pieces like the Mail’s attack on Lowcock, is 
clear, emotive and adversarial. It relies on simple stereotypes: overpaid, 
inefficient, distant senior civil servants is a motif that everyone can grasp. 
It resonates with a large section of the population in a way that a forward 
defensive press release filled with statistics about DfID’s successes can not. 
You can call it sensationalist if you wish. It is. It also works.

Framing an argument in a different way does not mean making stuff up. We do 
not need a post-truth civil service; that way madness surely lies.

What we might need, however, is a bureaucracy that is more savvy at using the 
techniques currently lined up against it. That doesn’t mean throwing away the 
facts, data and evidence. It means keeping in mind that out there, in the real 
world, not many people only care about the same things as economists do.

We should be more open to explaining the value of public servants in terms 
that resonate to different groups; pride, reliability, fairness, loyalty. And 
more open to doing that explaining in places where officials don’t usually go; 
on social media, in blogs, in person outside Westminster.

If I were to suggest one New Year’s resolution, it would be for the civil 
service to realise that if it presents itself only in one way and only in one 
place, it will reach only one group of people. And if it continues to do that 
in 2017, a hard year lies ahead.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 