
It is the hour before sunset and the paddock is bathed in liquid gold light. 
Heavy rain and frost melt have saturated the soil and the turf is pockmarked 
with hoofprint craters. The horsesâ€™ coats and feathered fetlocks are caked with 
mud the colour of wet concrete. Huddling round an old tractor tyre stuffed with 
hay, they jostle each other for the best stalks.

Related: Birdwatch: Sparrowhawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/21/birdwatch-sparrowhawk-tawny-owl-raptor-predator>

With the temperature rapidly dropping, birds have also gathered to top up 
their fat reserves before dusk falls. Blackbirds and robins congregate at a 
midden of horse manure, picking through the steaming dung in search of 
invertebrates. Song thrushes,mistle thrushes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/25/mistle-thrush-numbers-decline>
 andredwings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/12/redwings-too-busy-eating-sing-country-diary>
 have formed a mixed-species foraging flock, 18 of them altogether, tugging 
worms from their burrows beneath the divots. Gangs of magpies, carrion crows 
and wood pigeons swagger among them, scratching and pecking for overlooked 
morsels.

Three rabbits are grazing on the field margin, where electric fencing has 
protected the sward from trampling feet. One starts as it spots a shadow of 
movement against the hedge, a flash of white scut signalling the alarm to its 
companions, which scuttle into a dugout beneath the field shelter. The 
potential predator, abuzzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/14/winter-scene-through-eyes-buzzard-country-diary>
, is oblivious; it is engrossed in a tug-of-war with an earthworm, which is 
stretching like an elastic band. The worm snaps and the buzzard staggers 
backwards, gulping down the tail end.

Alerted to its presence, the magpies begin to crowd and heckle the buzzard. 
Other birds follow suit, but their attention is misplaced. Like a sprinter 
surging off the starting blocks, a femalesparrowhawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/21/birdwatch-sparrowhawk-tawny-owl-raptor-predator>
 launches from her concealed Scots pine perch. Swift and straight as an arrow, 
she sweeps down into the midst of the mob. Screeching, the corvids explode into 
the air like a firework starburst, followed by a wave of wood pigeons. Last 
into the air, the thrushes propel themselves on whirring wings towards the 
cover of an ivy-cloaked beech copse.

The sparrowhawk fans her barred tail and skims the ground in jinking pursuit. 
Her outstretched talons strike at a lagging redwing and they disappear in a 
puff of feathers.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 