
On ebbing or flowing tides, the muddy rhine that curves behind the dunes is a 
fascinating place. This time of year the estuary throngs with geese. Plangent 
calls tug at your emotions as they pass in V-formations overhead. Occasionally 
– all too seldom nowadays – a curlew’s bubbling call pitches to crescendo, then 
cascades down, the massed choirs of thousands a thing of the past.

What memory might the few survivors hold of legions so drastically dwindled 
away? I harbour a strong belief in the intelligent connection between living 
creatures, have seen it manifest time and again in the natural world. It gives 
rise to some odd liaisons and intriguing behaviour.

This draining rhine, for example, often as not is a fishing place for a 
solitarylittle egret 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/l/littleegret/>
 – a bird that, if collective avian memory does exist, would know something 
about declining populations. It might bea better symbol for the RSPB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/feb/19/birdwatch-devon-estuaries-winter>
 than the avocet, for it was awareness of the little egret’s fate in Britain, 
driven to extinction on the altar of female fashion at the end of the 19th 
century, that brought that organisation into being.

How to converse with a raven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/how-converse-raven-country-diary>
Now little egrets are making a British comeback, but the elegant sentinel of 
this muddy tidal creek is usually solitary. Or, at least, unaccompanied by his 
own kind. Often I encounter him fishing here, with anoystercatcher 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/o/oystercatcher/index.aspx>
 orredshank 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/r/redshank/index.aspx>
 for company, the pair of them mincing through the shallow stream, watching 
acutely, spearing for small fish and crustaceans.

On a day of cold, louring drizzle when only the mud gleamed, suddenly out of 
the bed ofphragmites <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/common-reed> 
upstream darted a whirring sky-jewel, a swift vision in lapis lazuli and Indian 
orange. It dipped between egret and redshank, came up with a small fish in its 
beak, sped back whence it came.

The firstcomers glanced significantly at each other and stalked over to the 
pool from which thekingfisher <https://duckduckgo.com/?q=kingfisher&ia=meanings>
 snatched its prey. Areed bunting 
<https://duckduckgo.com/?q=reed+bunting&ia=web> clung to an adjacent reed stem 
and watched as the halcyon bird gulped its stickleback or minnow down.

 * The Hills of Wales by Jim Perrin is published by Gomer Press at £14.99.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 