
At this time of year, it can sometimes seem as though the bare trees have been 
decked out with toy birds.The broad-spreading alder 
<http://www.2020site.org/trees/alder.html> across the river is tinged 
purple-pink (the fuchsia-coloured catkins persist deep into the winter) and the 
branches are busy with tinkling finches:green siskins 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/s/siskin/index.aspx>
, bright motleygoldfinches <http://goldfinches>, chaffinches 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/c/chaffinch/index.aspx>
 in pink and soft greys.

I pause on the riverbank as a detachment of long-tailed tits 
<http://restoreuk.orgwww.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/l/longtailedtit/index.aspx>
, perhaps a dozen or so, makes its shuttling way through the willows. For a few 
moments I’m surrounded by them, a cloud of them; beneath the familiar hubbub of 
zingingtsees and tsirrups, I can hear their soft chut, chut contact-calls. 
Dinkiest of all are the two tinygoldcrests 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/g/goldcrest/>
 that pick over a low-hanging ash branch while working through a programme of 
deft variations on the theme “upside-down”.

The redwings are too busy eating to sing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/12/redwings-too-busy-eating-sing-country-diary>
All of these birds – none weighing more than an ounce, and the smallest of 
them, the goldcrest, barely tipping the scales against a 10p piece – have a 
crisp, spruce look; their colours might be new-applied by a fine paintbrush, 
their songs are jaunty tintinnabulations, even their movements from twig to 
twig have a ticking clockwork quality. They might have arrived in a box from a 
toymaker’s workshop.

A wren 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/w/wren/>
 (twice the bulk of a goldcrest, but still seldom heavier than a pound coin) 
looses off a blistering volley of song from the hedgerow to my right. Then it 
buzzes across the path and, landing neatly on a bowing elder-stem, has a 
teacherly, head-cocking look at me.

The wren is known in the Netherlands as the winterkoning – the winter-king. 
You can hear its earsplitting song all year round; wrens will suffer in harsh 
winters – all small birds will – but the song goes on, its note of challenge 
undiminished.

We used to hunt wrens on Boxing Day (or on Christmas Day, in certain places: 
one antiquarian wrote that on theIsle of Man the dead bodies of the wrens 
<http://www.isleofman.com/lifestyle/culture-entertainment/hunt-the-wren/> so 
caught would be pinned to hollyboughs and paraded through the town). All the 
more reason to celebrate the bird’s resilience. If I had my way the winter-king 
would displace the robin on all our Christmas cards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpraise-wren-resilient-winter-king-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd6999a6772fd6d8c854b06b9f7edff9b0563f0%2F0_0_1181_768%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20time%20for%20dinky%20birds%20and%20winter-kings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpraise-wren-resilient-winter-king-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20time%20for%20dinky%20birds%20and%20winter-kings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpraise-wren-resilient-winter-king-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd6999a6772fd6d8c854b06b9f7edff9b0563f0%2F0_0_1181_768%2F1181.jpg>
 Illustration from theWren Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/19/wren-boys-carol-ann-duffy-christmas-poem>
 by Carol-Anne Duffy. Illustration: Dermot Flynn 
Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 