
Corpus Christi, Texas, calls itself the “sparkling city by the sea”. But 
lately it doesn’t feel very sparkling. The city imposed a four-day ban on 
consuming any tap water last Wednesday. No one could drink the water, shower, 
bathe, do dishes, wash laundry, hands, faces or children with it. There were 
fears that a corrosive asphalt emulsifier Indulin AA86 had snuck all the way 
from the city’s industrial district into our homes due to a “back-flow incident 
<http://news.cctexas.com/news/back-flow-incident-leads-to-discontinuation-of-tap-water-usage-citywide-until-further-notice>
”. There was water, water everywhere, and not a drop to drink.

On 1 December, the Corpus Christi city hall received the first report 
<http://www.caller.com/story/news/special-reports/energy-effects/water/2016/12/17/corpus-christi-water-contamination-continues-some-sick/95569662/>
 of dirty water from Refinery Row. On 7 December the city hall received their
second 
<http://www.caller.com/story/news/special-reports/energy-effects/water/2016/12/17/corpus-christi-water-contamination-continues-some-sick/95569662/]>
, on 12 December theirthird 
<http://www.caller.com/story/news/special-reports/energy-effects/water/2016/12/17/corpus-christi-water-contamination-continues-some-sick/95569662/>
. By then the water was shimmery, sudsy – just the kind of sheen we would soon 
fear creeping into our commodes.

On 14 December, city hall told us not to consume tap water. If it was 
contaminated with Indulin AA86, then drinking it couldsear 
<http://www.sfm.state.or.us/CR2K_SubDB/MSDS/INDULIN_AA_86.PDF> our stomachs, 
light up our lungs and burn any bodily organ it contacted through water or air.

Where were the men and women who would put public safety before all else? 
Where were the leaders who would make sure that the companies in charge 
installed and maintained a backflow preventer thatwould 
<http://www.kristv.com/story/34068375/city-of-corpus-christi-explains-what-led-to-tap-water-ban>
have 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/corpus-christi-water-may-be-contaminated-texas-city/>
 kept Indulin AA86 where it belonged: out of our tap water.

Why can’t we elect a Native American like Faith Spotted Eagle as president? | 
Julian Brave NoiseCat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/native-american-faith-spotted-eagle-president>
But this is only Corpus Christi, a forgotten scab of a city. A tiny, 
immaterial industrial outpost marking naught but the dwindling Texas shoreline 
as it slopes and surrenders on its muddy fall to Mexico. This is the small 
potatoes of municipal incompetence; until it isn’t. Until we look to the future 
of theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> and see the 
shimmering signs of far worse to come.

Streets need their protectors, cities need them too. And countries? Most 
notably, a country that’s among the biggest environmental offenders, a country 
whose ties to big business, big oil, big money are notorious for putting profit 
before the public good? That kind of country doesn’t need Scott Pruitt, it 
doesn’t need Rex Tillerson and it certainly doesn’t need Rick Perry.

Had Corpus Christi taken as much care with its public facilities as it does 
with the maintenance of private residencies, my two-year-old daughter might not 
have known what it was to be thirsty on the morning of 15 December, 2016. But 
with a Trump administration around the corner, I have to check myself: four 
days without water is nothing compared to the damage that four years without 
oversight, without vigilance, without care could do to our water and to our 
land.

Four days of thirst. Will it foreshadow the harm that Trump’s fossil fuel 
friends in the cabinet will bring? We all know the line-up: Scott Pruitt, a 
climate change denier and advocate for fossil fuel, at the helm of the EPA; 
Rick Perry, a climate change denier and apostle of Texas oil and gas directing 
the department he famously forgot he wanted to eliminate; and Rex Tillerson, a 
man whose successful devotion to commercial profit as the CEO of ExxonMobil is 
the absolute epitome of placing private over public good.

The Clintons turned the Democratic party over to donors. Can it recover? | 
Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/clintons-democratic-party-donors-recover>
This is the very formula for successful municipal management that helped land 
me and my family thirsty and hunting for water last week. This is the very 
mindset that may have introduced Indulin AA86 into our water supply. This the 
very philosophy that sent me scouring supermarket shelves for four hours in 
three towns while my daughter cried in her carseat.

Our water is back now; the ban has been lifted. But every time I turn on the 
tap I hesitate, I hope for the best. That feeling will only grow stronger the 
closer we get to a Trump administration.
 