
Restaurant critic AA Gill <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> has been 
diagnosed with “an embarrassment of cancer, the full English”, breaking the 
news in his regular “Table Talk” dining column.

The 62-year-old Sunday Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> 
writer said he was alerting readers who follow his restaurant recommendations 
and who ought to know if there were “any fundamental, gastro, epicurean 
personal changes that would affect my judgment”.


Gill, a father of four, also announced he is to marry his long-term partner, 
Nicola Formby, after 23 years together.

Describing how the disease, diagnosed in the summer, had spread, he wrote: 
“There is barely a morsel of offal that is not included. I have a trucker’s 
gut-buster, gimpy, malevolent, meaty, malignancy”.


Gill, who was married to home secretary Amber Rudd during the 1990s, is the 
latest of a number of high-profile journalists and celebrities to have chosen 
to go public about cancer and chronicle their journeys.


Early pioneers to have written newspaper diaries about their cancer include 
Ruth Picardie, journalist and mother of two, whose Observer column was 
published as the memoir Before I Say Goodbye after her death in 1997 aged 33 
from breast cancer. Broadcaster and journalistJohn Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-diamond>, husband of Nigella Lawson, 
who died after being diagnosed with throat cancer in 2001 aged 47, won a What 
the Papers Say award for his weekly column.


The Vanity Fair columns written by author, essayist and journalist Christopher 
Hitchens <https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens>, who died 
aged 62 in 2011 from esophageal cancer, were published at book length entitled 
Mortality after his death.


Sun columnist Jane Moore, a friend of Gill, told the Andrew Marr show she had 
urged him to write about his illness “because I thought it would be the 
definitive article on having cancer”.


Experts have long applauded those who share their experiences publicly for 
helping break the taboo of talking openly about the disease. Martin Ledwick,
Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK’s head nurse, 
said: Although over recent years attitudes have begun to change, cancer is 
still a subject that people find difficult to discuss. When people in the 
public eye are open about their cancer diagnosis it can be extremely helpful in 
demonstrating that it is OK to talk about it”.

Broadcaster and journalist Steve Hewlett, 58, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stevehewlett> who earlier this year was 
diagnosed with cancer of the oesophagus, charts his journey through broadcast 
interviews and an Observer column. He said his decision to go public came after 
deciding to be entirely open with his family, especially his children. By doing 
so, he allowed them to find support networks they might not otherwise have 
found, he said.


My cancer diary: ‘One of the most difficult days’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/13/steve-hewlett-cancer-diary-most-difficult-day>
Writing about it also helped him stay in control, and not mired in a negative 
mindset. “I have something of a public profile anyway. I am naturally drawn to 
storytelling,” he said. “I didn’t go into it expecting to generate any 
reaction. I just thought it really interested me. My own case began to interest 
me as a story very early on.”


In his quest for information about his illness and treatment, he stumbled 
across things he thought others might need to know and wanted to share. “There 
remains for some people, and it is not irrational, a significant taboo about 
discussing cancer.

“The reaction has been absolutely extraordinary,” he said. “I honestly had no 
idea what to expect, but I certainly didn’t expect what happened. I have been 
contacted by well over 3,000 people, offering help, or support, people sharing 
their own stories, and a lot just saying ‘thank goodness someone is doing 
this’,” he said.


“I have come to the conclusion that it is helping people. It is extraordinary 
that it has touched.”


Pour Me: A Life by AA Gill review – from drunk to doyen of Fleet Street
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/15/pour-me-a-life-aa-gill-review> 
In an interview in the Sunday Times, Gill, said he had no regrets about his 
diagnosis. “I realise I don’t have a bucket list; I don’t feel I’ve been 
cheated of anything. I’d like to have gone to Timbuktu, and there are places I 
will be sorry not to see again,” he said.


Gill, who gave up alcohol when he was 30, added: “But actually, because of the 
nature of my life and the nature of what happened to me in my early life – my 
[alcohol] addiction, I know I have been very lucky.”



 