
The sad death of journalist AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-obituary> from lung 
cancer has led toa barrage 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/letters-to-the-editor-vswxqx20m> of 
criticism of the NHS. Inhis last piece for the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/magazine/the-sunday-times-magazine/more-life-with-your-kids-more-life-with-your-friends-more-life-spent-on-earth-but-only-if-you-pay-d7lwpht3j?shareToken=26ba6b281d3f84f5012acb27d51932f6>
, Gill described how his cancer had spread, despite conventional treatment, and 
how he was thenunable to get a pioneering treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/11/aa-gill-said-nhs-could-not-give-him-new-cancer-treatment>
 called immunotherapy on the NHS.

Gill described asking his oncologist, Dr Conrad Lewanski, why the UK is “such 
a bad place to get cancer”.Lewanski replied 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38280057>: “It’s the nature of the health 
service. The key to cancer outcomes is the speed of diagnosis and treatment.” 
In response to the piece there have been letters and articles supporting the 
perception that you will be doomed if you rely on the NHS. It cannot be 
acceptable, writes oncologistDr Mark Saunders 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/5299490/Cancer-doctors-do-not-tell-patients-about-drugs-which-could-prolong-lives.html>
, “that in a 21st-century NHS, patients must have to pay privately for a drug 
that can extend life”.

AA Gill's final column says NHS could not give him new cancer treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/11/aa-gill-said-nhs-could-not-give-him-new-cancer-treatment>
Gill paid for the drug Nivolumab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/09/immunotherapy-drug-a-gamechanger-for-head-and-neck-cancer>
 privately; unfortunately, it wrought no miracles. Nivolumab, marketed as 
Opdivo, is a so-called checkpoint inhibitor, helping the body’s immune system 
to attack cancer cells by boosting the impact of our ownT-cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/15/cancer-extraordinary-results-t-cell-therapy-research-clinical-trials>
. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) has approved the use 
of this drug inadvanced melanoma <https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/TA384>, but 
ruled 
<http://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/nice-turns-down-opdivo-as-first-line-treatment-for-lung-cancer>
 that it’s not cost-effective to offer it to all patients who have the specific 
kind of lung cancer Gill had. Instead, Nice recommends that these patients are 
tested for a certain biomarker, which predicts whether they are more likely to 
respond to Nivolumab. Funding could come from theCancer Drugs Fund 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/cancer/cdf/> for these patients, who make up a 
third of those with this type of lung cancer.

Reaction to Gill’s death has included a wave of letters and comment along the 
lines of: “God help me if I get cancer and have to rely on the NHS.” Many 
issues and arguments have been thrown into the pot along the way, includinglack 
of funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/aug/24/avastin-too-expensive-for-patients>
 for advanced cancer drugs,late diagnosis 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/cancersurvivalbystageatdiagnosisforenglandexperimentalstatistics/adultsdiagnosed20122013and2014andfollowedupto2015>
 and poor cancer survival rates in the UK compared to some other countries. 
Gill himself thought delays in getting a GP appointment, rushed consultations, 
delayed referral and slow investigations might all play a part, although he 
visited a private doctor until he started treatment, so wasn’t able to present 
personal evidence for his view.

But he may well have been right and there is no doubt that we could do better. 
Thefive-year relative survival rate 
<http://www.ecco-org.eu/Vienna2015/Global/News/ECC-2015-News/2015/09/PR-26-SEP-EUROCARE-results-show-large-variations>
 for breast cancer in England in women diagnosed up to 2007 was 79.1%, compared 
to 86% in Sweden. And the corresponding figures for bowel cancer were 51.3% in 
England compared to 62.2% in Germany.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Faa-gill-journalist-and-restaurant-critic-dies-aged-62-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AA%20Gill%2C%20journalist%20and%20restaurant%20critic%2C%20dies%20aged%2062%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Faa-gill-journalist-and-restaurant-critic-dies-aged-62-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AA%20Gill%2C%20journalist%20and%20restaurant%20critic%2C%20dies%20aged%2062%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Faa-gill-journalist-and-restaurant-critic-dies-aged-62-video-obituary&media=>
AA Gill, journalist and restaurant critic, dies aged 62 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-journalist-and-restaurant-critic-dies-aged-62-video-obituary>
So for those of us who live in the UK and rely on NHS care, just how bad is it 
to get seriously ill here? The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) produced apithy summary 
<https://www.oecd.org/unitedkingdom/Health-at-a-Glance-2015-Key-Findings-UK.pdf>
 of the state of UK healthcare last year. It said access to care is good, while 
quality of care is “uneven” and “continues to lag behind that in many other 
OECD countries”. We’re good at keeping people with diabetes out of hospital, 
but less good when it comes to asthma and respiratory diseases. UK health 
spending per person is slightly below the OECD average. And the main factor the 
summary highlights is the fact that we smoke, drink and overeat more than the 
OECD average. “To reduce premature mortality, more attention to tackling health 
risk factors – smoking, alcohol consumption and obesity” are needed, according 
to the report.Public Health <https://www.gov.uk/government/topics/public-health>
 bodies are trying, but the alcohol, sugar and tobacco lobbies are powerful 
brakes on change.

And what about if you get cancer? Should you board a plane as soon as you’re 
diagnosed? In truth, survival following diagnosis for cancer has improved in 
the UK over the past 10 years but we are still in the bottom third of OECD 
countries infive-year relative survival 
<http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/health-data.htm> for colorectal, breast 
and cervical cancer. On the plus side, writes the OECD, “survival rates are 
improving at least as fast as the OECD average”.

Perhaps the solution lies in taking out private health insurance? But buyer 
beware: read the small print. Insurance companies pay for some treatments, not 
others. Say you find you havea genetic mutation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/11/mastectomy-risk-reducing-personal-procedure>
 that gives you at least a one in two chance of getting breast or ovarian 
cancer. You may want to opt forrisk-reducing surgery 
<https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/risk-reducing-surgery-fact-sheet> as 
Angelina Jolie and Sharon Osbourne did. But you may besurprised to learn 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/12110311/en-with-high-risk-of-cancer-effectively-told-come-back-when-you-have-tumours.html>
 that most health insurance policies won’t cover you for any form of preventive 
treatment; you have to wait until you get the cancer to be treated. If you want 
it done, you will be able to get it on the NHS if eligible.

If I have cancer will I die? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/if-i-have-cancer-will-i-die-google>
But why have any system at all? Why not just stow away some cash and use it to 
buy 
<https://www.google.com/url?hl=en-GB&q=http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/health-services/private-insurance/a4513/a-consumers-guide-to-self-pay-treatment/&source=gmail&ust=1482225591224000&usg=AFQjCNFw5QtT4DslPUIEUwX-MNNqQ8pKsA>
 whatever healthcare you need directly? That would work if you have unlimited 
wealth, never get sick and are determined not to access modern medicine even if 
one of your kids gets seriously ill.

Most would agree that we do need some sort of system in place for our 
healthcare. And there is no system on Earth that offers the full range of 
treatment options as soon as they come to market.Each system in operation 
<http://www.oecd.org/eco/healthcaresystemsefficiencyandpolicysettings.htm> has 
pros and cons; it is tempting but daft to attribute headline figures about 
cancer survival rates in different countries entirely to the way they deliver 
healthcare.

The NHS is not the monolithic, static system some would have us believe; there 
is scope to deliver theevolutionary changes 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/5yfv-web.pdf> that we 
certainly need. This means adapting to the new opportunities offered by science 
and technology; expect to see rapid innovations in coming years in the field of 
genomics and artificial intelligence. And there will be more emphasis on 
promoting wellbeing and preventing ill-health rather than just treating 
disease. This can only happen if the NHS engages better with patients, carers 
and citizens. That’s the vision, and we’re all a part of it.
 