
I have a bad habit of not telling writers I admire them until it’s too late. 
The only time I sawNora Ephron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron> 
in person was when I spotted her at a party in New York in 2010. “Oh wow, look 
there’s the woman who wrote your favourite collection of journalism,Crazy Salad 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A17418-2004Nov1.html>, your 
favourite novel, Heartburn, and one of your favourite movies,When Harry Met 
Sally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/when-harry-met-sally-rerelease-film-review-nora-ephron>
,” I vaguely thought to myself. “Should I say something to her? I could tell 
her how her writing taught me that being funny is a great way to make people 
listen. How writing the way you think, as opposed to relying on established 
formulae and cliche, is the way you carve out a writing voice. How she is 
always her own heroine and never the victim, which is probably the most 
valuable and inspiring thing of all. Nah, that might be a bit embarrassing. 
I’ll just try to interview her at some point and tell her then. No rush! Good 
plan, Freeman.” And of course,within two years she was dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/27/nora-ephron>, and a fat load of 
good it does her now, me sitting here mooning over her.

Which brings me to AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-obituary>. Now I was not 
close to Gill. In fact, I could probably count the number of chats we had on 
two hands with fingers to spare. But I was always pleased to see him, which is 
not, to be frank, something you can say of many journalists as well known as he 
is. In his writing and in person, he made everything seem funny and 
interesting: how many people can do that? So each time I saw him, and many 
times when I didn’t, I’d think, “I really ought to seek him out more, you know. 
He’s always so kind to me, and I should reciprocate in my own small way by 
telling him how much his writing has thrilled me since I was a teenager, with 
its fearless uniqueness and shameless silliness and courageous seriousness. I 
should tell him how much I love seeing him with his partner Nicola Formby, 
because it’s so heartening to see two people who have been together for decades 
still so palpably red hot for one another. And finally, I should say how much I 
love his dandified fashion sense, because it’s just brilliant to see a straight 
man take such unhesitating delight in camp. But hey, no rush! Maybe I’ll bump 
into him next month, or whatever.” And we all know how that turned out.

I was not good at being a teenager. But I do have some advice...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/10/was-not-good-being-teenager-some-advice>
Successful writers are not known for their lack of ego, and Gill, I think it’s 
fair to say, knew how brilliant he was. But did he know how inspiring he was 
for the rest of us? I don’t know if he did, and now I never will. To read 
articles that combined archness with sincerity and never sacrificed substance; 
to see that he never – not once – filed a half-arsed that’ll-do piece, not even 
when he was on his actual deathbed: how could that not inspire? But if I was 
dazzled by Gill as a teenager, I am even more so after working in journalism 
for 16 years. The sheer strength of bloody will required to stay so original 
and curious for decades is what it takes to be a great writer, and is why so 
few of us are.

I could cite any number of his articles as favourites: his hilarious takedown 
of the pretentious Paris restaurant L’Ami Louis; his reportage with migrants 
marching desperately through the Balkans; his extraordinary final cover story, 
which managed to both damn the NHS and celebrate it. But his best work was 
probably his autobiography,Pour Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/15/pour-me-a-life-aa-gill-review>, 
which captured how silly, scary, monumental and ephemeral life is. Gill’s 
writing was never one note, which is why he was so suited to writing about life 
itself.

You don’t have to agree with everything a writer writes to be thrilled by 
them. Within an hour of his death being announced, I saw snarks on social media 
about how Gill had written things that offended some people and how therefore 
they had never liked him, the end. Oh well, their loss: outrage, despite 
popular opinion today, is not the be-all and end-all response. To dismiss a 
writer’s entire output because he occasionally offends you is like saying you 
hate a movie because you found the plot disagreeable – and there is a lot more 
toManhattan <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0079522/> than just Woody Allen dating 
a schoolgirl.

What great writers teach you is not just a new way of framing the world, but 
to be bold in your framing. They make you see the world the way they see it 
and, in doing so, show you how to find your own voice. A lot of my friends 
learn this lesson from pop music, which is why they felt so bereft at the 
beginning of the year about thedeath of David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>. I learn 
it from writers, which is why I feel so sad at the end of this year about Gill. 
But I also learn it fromMelissa Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview24>
,Helen Fielding <https://www.theguardian.com/books/helenfielding>, Edward St 
Aubyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/17/edward-st-aubyn-interview>, 
Joan Didion,Clive James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clive-james>, 
Marina Hyde <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marinahyde> and Curtis 
Sittenfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/books/curtis-sittenfeld>, all of whom 
are, happily, still alive, and all of whom have written books and sentences 
that sing in my head daily. And having learned my lesson enough times now, I 
have told them before it’s too late.
 