
In an article about “the terrible story of Aberfan” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/men/thinking-man/aberfan-was-a-man-made-disaster-50-years-on-we-must-remember-thi/>
, Huw Edwards reminded readers of the Sunday Telegraph that it “was a man-made 
disaster”.

He was marking the 50th anniversary of the colliery tip collapse in the Welsh 
village that cost the lives of 116 children and 28 adults on 21 October 1966.*

In so doing, he argued that the lessons of Aberfan “are still of profound 
relevance today” because “they touch on issues of public accountability, 
responsibility, competence and transparency”.

One of those issues relates to the media, specifically the failure of national 
newspapers to hold to account the state-owned National Coal Board (NCB) and its 
high-handed chairman,Lord (Alf) Robens 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Robens,_Baron_Robens_of_Woldingham>. 


His conduct, wrote Edwards, “was, by general consent, thoroughly 
reprehensible”. He tried to avoid blame for the tragedy, lied to the tribunal 
of inquiry and refused to pay for other dangerous tips to be cleared.

Edwards wrote: “Those in charge of a public body found liable for a disaster 
on this scale would be justly denounced, vilified and prosecuted. There would 
be charges of corporate manslaughter brought”.

At the tribunal, the NCB’s lawyers argued that the collapse was due to a 
“critical geological environment” and insisted there was no way of knowing that 
a slide was foreseeable.

Edwards wrote: “This was the line Lord Robens had given to a (mostly gullible 
and deferential) press when he finally appeared in Aberfan some 36 hours after 
the disaster happened... Robens had powerful friends in politics and, it goes 
without saying, in the press”.

Gullible and deferential? And, it would appear, some were even willing to 
accept a muzzle. Before the tribunal opened, the attorney general, Elwyn Jones,
“imposed restrictions on speculation in the media about the causes of the 
disaster” 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ukresilience/response/recovery_guidance/case_studies/g1_aberfan.aspx>
.

Imposed restrictions on the media? Imagine that. Not that every editor obeyed, 
of course, but Robens - despite some reputational damage - went on, remarkably, 
to chair a government inquiry into workplace health and safety.

A further point. Edwards believes there “is a powerful parallel between the 
conduct and response of the NCB in 1966 and that of South Yorkshire police 
after Hillsborough in 1989”.

They were “public bodies, led by strong-willed men, seemingly determined to 
put institutional face-saving before the needs of bereaved families”.

But there is an even more powerful parallel: in both instances, several 
newspapers allowed themselves to be spun by those institutions. That was a 
classic case of gullibility and deference.

*Aberfan: The Fight for Justice is being screened on BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> tomorrow (18 October) at 10.45pm


See also two recent Guardian articles, A cantata for the people of Aberfan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/01/cantata-people-aberfan-karl-jenkins>
 andAberfan 50 years on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/09/aberfan-50-years-owen-sheers-the-green-hollow-film-poem>
.
 