
In the moments after Panglas junior school was engulfed in a black avalanche 
of slurry, coal waste and tailings, the abiding memory of those first at the 
scene was of the silence.

Aberfan: a reporter's letter home reveals the true horror of the tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/20/aberfan-a-reporters-letter-home-reveals-the-true-horror-of-the-tragedy>
Exactly half a century on, the village of Aberfan, and communities the length 
and breadth of Wales, once more fell silent as thoughts turnedto the 144 people 
– 116 of them children – who died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/21/aberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster>
on 21 October 1966.

A cemetery on the hillside above Aberfan, where the children’s bright white 
headstones stood out in the bright autumn sunshine, and a beautifully manicured 
memorial garden designed to echo the footprint of the lost school, were the 
public focal point of the commemorations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c81efb43e1951e3ebc874df06616c596f3701c%2F185_189_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster's%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster%27s%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c81efb43e1951e3ebc874df06616c596f3701c%2F185_189_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
 The sun rises over the valley as people arrive for a memorial service at 
Aberfan cemetery. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Prince Charles and government ministers were among the dignitaries paying 
their respects. But it was the survivors, the still-grieving families, and the 
rescuers –one of whom brought a clock recovered from the debris, forever frozen 
at the time the disaster hit 
<https://twitter.com/rupertevelyn/status/789377888307011584> – who were centre 
stage.

People such as Gerald Kirwaun, who as an eight-year-old was pulled out of the 
rubble of Pantglas, which means green hollow. He recalled walking to school via 
the canal bank that day, cheerful at the thought of the half-term holiday just 
hours away.

Rupert Evelyn (@rupertevelyn) 
It stopped at precisely 9:13. This clock was recovered by one of the rescuers 
#Aberfan <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Aberfan?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/hV3OvETjC8 <https://t.co/hV3OvETjC8>
 <https://twitter.com/rupertevelyn/status/789377888307011584> October 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rupertevelyn/status/789377888307011584> 
After singing All Things Bright and Beautiful in assembly, the class was 
settling down to their final lessons before half term. Kirwaun’s usual 
classroom neighbour was off school, so another friend slipped into the desk 
next to him. Then came the roaring sound.

“It was like a jet airplane coming,” said Kirwaun. “And then I must have been 
knocked out or something. When I woke I hadn’t a clue what had happened. I 
thought maybe it was an earthquake.” He asked his friend if he was OK. “His 
head was on my shoulder and he had blood coming from his mouth.” The friend did 
not make it. Had he not moved desk he may have done.

Kirwaun went to work as a mining engineer – coal was still king here back then 
– and had spoken little of his memories until now. “But I think the 50th 
anniversary is a good time to talk. We must make sure future generations will 
remember.”

Susan Robertson, who was carried out of the rubble by a policeman – an image 
that was beamed around the globe – laid a wreath at the cemetery with her 
10-year-old grandson Mackenzie.

“It felt so right that he should come with me to the cemetery to lay a wreath 
because no-one should ever forget what happened that day,” she said. “I’m 
overwhelmed at the way Mackenzie has taken such an interest in what happened 
and so proud of him.”

Many still cannot talk about what happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/aberfan-50-years-survivors-meet-memorial-coal-spoil-tip-survivors>
. Some stay at home behind closed curtains when the anniversary comes around; 
others time their holidays so they are away for the duration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba161481dd3d3bbe32256d188613c5566b7ece3%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster's%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster%27s%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba161481dd3d3bbe32256d188613c5566b7ece3%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 The Aberfan memorial garden. Photograph: Rebecca Naden/Reuters 
At first light one middle-aged man man stood silently in a corner of the 
memorial garden, slipping away before the official programme of events began. 
Later in the day other men and women quietly placed bouquets on the precise 
spots where their loved ones had died.

But the consensus seemed to be there was still a story that needed to be told. 
People had to be reminded how the National Coal Board (NCB) tried to avoid 
blame for the tragedy and how, disgracefully, the people of Aberfan had to pay 
£150,000 from the disaster fund to have the remaining tips from around the 
village removed.

It was fitting that among those at the ceremonies was Iain McLean 
<http://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/academic-faculty/iain-mclean.html>, an academic 
whose acute analysis of the papers that emerged under the 30-years rule helped 
expose the failings of the NCB and led to the £150,000 being paid back.

But there were some absentees on Friday. The prime minister, Theresa May, did 
not visit. The UK government was represented by the Welsh secretary, Alun 
Cairns. The Queen is said to regret waiting eight days before she visited 
Aberfan in 1966. 
<http://%20http//www.itv.com/news/2015-09-08/how-the-queen-kept-her-promise-to-comfort-the-families-of-the-aberfan-tragedy/>
 For this anniversary, her son was here in her place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08e31253f74485adde63020b0ce433c1078d271b%2F0_248_3951_2371%2F3951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster's%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aberfan%3A%20Prince%20of%20Wales%20among%20those%20marking%20disaster%27s%2050th%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faberfan-survivors-mark-50th-anniversary-of-disaster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08e31253f74485adde63020b0ce433c1078d271b%2F0_248_3951_2371%2F3951.jpg>
 Rescuers at Pantglas school in Aberfan. Photograph: AP 
The chatter in the Megabytes cafe on Aberfan Road was of the regret that there 
had not been more of an effort to promote the minute’s silence around the UK. 
It felt like a Welsh silence rather than a UK-wide one.

Once Charles had gone and the media began packing up, the playground where the 
press had been corralled was once again the domain of children rather than 
reporters.

The 50th anniversary ceremonials were over but, of course, they do not draw a 
line under anything.

Another survivor, Gaynor Madgwick, who lost two siblings in the disaster, said 
the media interest had made this year’s anniversary more intense, visits to the 
cemetery and memorial garden more charged. But she said: “We were here for the 
49th anniversary and will be here for the 51st. I’ll be coming here until the 
day I die.”















 