
The most famous chess tournament on the planet, Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee in the 
Netherlands, starts its 2017 edition this weekend with the first round free and 
live to watch online from 12.30pm on Saturday.

Its central theme will be Magnus Carlsen’s attempt to win by a clear margin 
and so reinforce the 26-year-old world champion’s ambitions to establish 
himself as the best player of all time ahead of the legends Bobby Fischer and 
Garry Kasparov.

Carlsen has a good opportunity because three of his major rivals, the world 
No2, Fabiano Caruana, and the dangerous Hikaru Nakamura from the US as well as 
France’s world No5, Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, have all preferred to play at 
Tradewise Gibraltar, which starts on 24 January and is cementing its reputation 
as the best organised and strongest open tournament.

The Norwegian still faces two top-class challengers. Russia’s Sergey Karjakin 
will be out for revenge for his match defeat by Carlsen in New York and will 
want to confirm his victory at the world blitz (see this week’s puzzle). The 
world No4, America’s Wesley So, won the 2016 Grand Tour along with last month’s 
London Classic and was the most successful elite grandmaster of all in 2016. 
Friday’s drawing of lots gave Carlsen the black pieces against So in Saturday’s 
opening round and White against Karjakin in the 13th and final round on 29 
January.

Armenia’s Levon Aronian and Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi will be serious 
contenders, while Hungary’s Richard Rapport, aged 20, and the 17-year-old 
Chinese champion Wei Yi are the rising stars.

Wijk also features a Challengers tournament where 12 of the 14 players are GMs 
and where England has a serious contender. Gawain Jones, the 29-year-old UK 
No5, has been in fine form recently. Jones will aim to surpass his No3 seeding, 
finish first and so qualify for Wijk’s top event in 2018.

India’s Deep Sengupta, who won the Hastings Masters last week, used an 
interesting strategy to defeat a weaker opponent looking for a draw. His 
queen’s side castling as Black is very unusual in this type of quiet opening 
but it had the desired effect of inducing White to throw pieces at the castled 
king, which Sengupta repelled by active piece play and then forcing judicious 
exchanges. Gordon Scott should have tried 22 Nd2! since as the game went he 
resigned three pawns down without compensation.

Gordon Scott v Deep Sengupta

1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 b6 3 Nc3 Bb7 4 Qc2 d5 5 cxd5 Nxd5 6 e4 Nxc3 7 bxc3 e5 8 Nf3 exd4 
9 Bc4 Nd7 10 O-O d3 11 Bxd3 Qe7 12 Qa4 c6 13 Qc2 Nc5 14 Ba3 O-O-O 15 Bxc5 Qxc5 
16 a4 Bd6 17 a5 bxa5 18 Qe2 Bc7 19 Ba6 Rhe8 20 Rfb1 Bb6 21 Bxb7+ Kxb7 22 Nd4? 
Qxc323 Nb3 Re5 24 Ra3 Ka8 25 Qa2 Rxe4 26 g3 Re1+ 27 Kg2 Rxb1 28 Qxb1 Qd3 29 Qc1 
Qe4+30 Kg1 Qd5 0-1

 3477 1 e3?? Na5! forks queen and rook.
 