
Friday afternoon at a Liverpool city centre hotel and Adam Morgan is speaking 
enthusiastically about life at Curzon Ashton. The goals are flowing for the 
striker and so is he in his praise of the National League North side and belief 
before Sunday’s FA Cup second-round tie againstAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> that they can cause an 
upset by beating opponents who sit three divisions and 81 places above them.

Suddenly, Morgan’s mood changes. Looking over his shoulder in the ground-floor 
coffee shop-cum-bar, the 22-year-old becomes briefly but noticeably 
embarrassed. A woman is walking over. It’s his mum.

Maxine Morgan takes a seat at a nearby table and waits patiently for her son 
to finish this interview. They are going on a shopping trip straight 
afterwards, but her presence is also symbolic, representing the support Adam 
has required during the past four years, a period when he has gone from the 
high of making his debut for his boyhood club,Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, to the low of falling so out 
of love with football that he came close to quitting.

At the end of a week when Ben Woodburn announced himself as Anfield’s latest 
goalscoring prodigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-ben-woodburn-record>
, Morgan’s story shows just how perilous the road ahead can be for young 
talents at the highest level. He describes what happened to him as a downward 
spiral and it is only now, with the help of loved ones and having joined a club 
where he feels truly appreciated, that Morgan is on the up.

Ben Woodburn’s rise no surprise despite Klopp’s kid-gloves approach at 
Liverpool | Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/ben-woodburn-liverpool-wales-jurgen-klopp>
“Everyone at Curzon has been great,” he says. “They’ve took the pressure off 
me. Normally, when I’ve gone somewhere there’s been a win-at-all-costs 
mentality, but that’s not the case there. We play with freedom and I’ve been 
given a licence to express myself. The manager’s told me to go out and do what 
I do best, which is score goals.”

There have been six in six appearances (three of which have been starts) since 
Morgan arrived at Curzon in October, including two in the 3-1 victory over 
Westfields that secured the club’s place in the second round of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> for the second time in their 
history. Morgan is seen as a key figure in Curzon’s efforts to make the third 
round for the first time, his potency in front of a goal a reminder of the 
talent that marked him out as a prospect at Liverpool.

Having joined the club at the age of five, Morgan was a prolific goalscorer at 
youth level, scoring 18 times in 16 games during the 2010-11 FA Premier Academy 
season. That led to Robbie Fowler hailing the boy from Halewood as “one of the 
best finishers I’ve seen for a long time”.

Morgan made his first-team debut in a Europa League first-leg qualifying tie 
against Hearts in August 2012. Morgan, who grew up following Liverpool home and 
away with his father, Shaun, remembers the moment with joyful clarity. “The 
night before we were training on the pitch at Tynecastle and Andy Carroll said 
to me that he was pulling out, so I was going to be on the bench,” he says. “I 
didn’t know officially until three hours before the game when Brendan Rodgers 
named the squad – and I was on the bench.

“I replaced Fabio Borini for the last couple of minutes and I don’t think I’ve 
ever taken a jacket off as quick. It was special, the best feeling in the 
world.”

A week later Morgan, who represented England at the 2011 Under-17 World Cup in 
Mexico, was handed his first start in the return leg, which meant playing at 
Anfield in a team containing Jamie Carragher, Steven Gerrard and Luis Suárez. 
“It was our strongest lineup at the time and to be part of it made me so 
proud,” says Morgan. “And it meant a lot to my dad – to see your son walk out 
for the team you love, at Anfield, was fantastic for him. A few tears were shed 
in our house that night.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fadam-morgan-curzon-ashton-liverpool-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64fced089ca0eac7356437f1c5c43ac04b0ec5db%2F12_18_3545_2127%2F3545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Morgan%20content%20with%20Curzon%20Ashton%20after%20Liverpool%20rejection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fadam-morgan-curzon-ashton-liverpool-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Morgan%20content%20with%20Curzon%20Ashton%20after%20Liverpool%20rejection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fadam-morgan-curzon-ashton-liverpool-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64fced089ca0eac7356437f1c5c43ac04b0ec5db%2F12_18_3545_2127%2F3545.jpg>
 Adam Morgan made his first Liverpool start against Hearts in the Europa League 
at Anfield in 2012. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
There were tears of a different kind after Morgan was informed by Rodgers that 
his Liverpool career was over having played one more time for the club, in 
another Europa League match against Anzhi Makhachkala.

The circumstances were brutal in more ways than one – Rodgers instructed 
centre-back Martin Skrtel to go against Morgan during a training session and 
intentionally rough him up. The striker struggled to compete and was told by 
Rodgers that it served as proof he was physically not cut out to be a Premier 
League player. “His decision wasn’t off the back of that one session but what 
happened with Skrtel emphasised his reasoning,” Morgan says. “And he was right 
– I wasn’t ready to play in the Premier League. But I would’ve liked to have 
signed a new contract and gone out on loan. Instead, the manager said I could 
leave altogether.”

Morgan holds no ill-feelings against Rodgers – “I’ll never say a bad word 
against Brendan, he made my dreams come true” – but there is no hiding his 
sense of devastation at being shown the door at Liverpool after three 
appearances and no goals. “I sat in my car at Melwood [Liverpool’s training 
ground] and cried my eyes out,” he says. “It was also really tough for my dad. 
He’s travelled everywhere to see me play. One time with Liverpool, when I was 
15, we played a tournament in Italy and he drove there on his own. That’s how 
much my career means to him and seeing me reach the top and then fall down the 
levels hurt him.”

Morgan joined Yeovil Town in November 2013 on loan with a long-term deal in 
place for the following January. He struggled to make an impact and after a 
brief loan spell at St Johnstone, agreed a pay-off with Yeovil in June 2015 
after scoring once in 19 appearances with rumours that his focus was more on 
having a good time off the pitch than on it. “I didn’t do one bad thing at 
Yeovil,” Morgan says. “For starters, there’s nothing to do down there to get 
you in trouble.”

There then followed a spell at Accrington Stanley where Morgan played 21 
minutes across three appearances before he found himself without a club and 
training purely for fitness at non-league Hemel Hempstead and Colywn Bay. 
“After what happened at Liverpool I’d stopped enjoying football,” he says. “It 
was disappointment, anger and heartbreak rolled into one and that hits you 
hard. I was close [to quitting]. I looked into courses but my family and my 
girlfriend kept on telling me I had the talent to make a living out of football 
and shouldn’t give up.”

Morgan heeded that advice and after a chat with his long-time friend and 
Curzon midfielder Luke Clark, he signed for the club – who were playing in the 
Manchester League in 1978 – on a week-by-week contract. Life in English 
football’s sixth tier takes some getting used to for someone who once existed 
at elite level but Morgan has embraced the contrast. “At Liverpool, there were 
five or six physios, two masseurs, a state of the art gym … whereas at Curzon 
you wash your own training gear and bring your own boots,” he says. “But I come 
from a working-class family and haven’t been brought up to depend on other 
people. Also, I love that the fans sit with us on the coach to away games.”

Training two evenings a week means Morgan has a fair amount of time on his 
hands and his dad has suggested he could keep himself busy by doing shifts at 
his minicab company, Wiggys Wheels. Morgan has declined the offer, with his 
focus on continuing to score goals for John Flanagan’s side, which has been 
aided by namesake and fellow Liverpool academy graduate Jon Flanagan.

“I’m good mates with Jon and sent him a picture of my boots, which weren’t the 
best, alongside a message that said: ‘Lad, sort me with a pair’,” says Morgan. 
“He gave me a few and said one pair were magic. They’re my match boots and I’ve 
been scoring in them every week.”

Morgan will aim to do so again on Sunday in a match that should end in an 
obvious winner given it is 16th in the National League North versus seventh in 
League One. But with the tie being held at the Tameside Stadium, where the 
majority of the capacity 4,200 crowd are sure to be vociferous in their support 
of Curzon, a shock cannot be ruled out.

That the match is being televised also provides Morgan with an opportunity to 
remind a wider audience of his qualities. “I believe I can play in the 
Championship,” he says. “But I’m not thinking too big. All I want to do right 
now is enjoy my football.

“These past few years have made me a man. When I made my debut for Liverpool, 
I wasn’t mentally tough enough [to be a footballer] – a little thing would hurt 
me for a week and a big thing would hurt me for a month. It’s taken a lot of 
soul searching and the love of the people around me, but I’ve finally got my 
head right and if I have a setback now, I know how to deal with it.”
 