
Traditional owners fighting to stop Australia’s largest proposed coalmine are 
at the centre of a new University ofQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> project exploring 
worldwide Indigenous rights movements in the era of climate upheaval.

Leaders from the Wangan and Jagalingou traditional owners council, who are 
enmeshed in a legal and lobbying effort to head off Adani’s Carmichael mine, 
will collaborate with academics and human rights lawyers for the first 
“flagship” project chosen by UQ’s Global Change Institute.

The prominent Canadian activist and journalist Naomi Klein said the W&J 
traditional owners were “at the forefront of fossil fuel resistance and 
protecting their land, water and culture”.

Adani's Carmichael mine protected from legal challenges under Queensland water 
changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/adanis-carmichael-mine-protected-from-legal-challenges-under-queensland-water-changes>
UQ said the project would “explore the international Indigenous movement that 
is reimagining human rights and social and economic development in the global 
era of scarce water resources, climate change and energy transition”.

The project – We Are The People From That Land: Centring Indigenous Peoples’ 
Rights in the Transition to a Sustainable, Low-Carbon Future – will involve 
work by three UQ “investigators” across different disciplines.

The academics will work with W&J leaders including Murrawah Johnson, who Klein 
said was “a powerful spokesperson and organiser who is on the front line of 
holding back one of the largest proposed coal mines in the world”.

“With her elders and council, she is shining a light on the urgent need for a 
justice-based transition in the face of the climate crisis,” Klein said.

The W&J at large are divided over the question of allowing Adani to exploit 
their Galilee basin homelands for the open-cut Carmichael coalmine.

Questions about discrete payments by Adani to some W&J representatives who 
support the mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/16/revealed-traditional-owners-accepted-payments-to-attend-adani-meetings>
 were this year a flashpoint inan ongoing dispute over who legitimately speaks 
for traditional owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/21/adani-mine-traditional-owners-vote-to-sack-representatives-who-received-benefits-from-adani>
.

The UQ project researchers are the economist John Quiggin, the social science 
researcher Kristen Lyons, who has worked in development and environmental 
sociology, and the political scientist Morgan Briggs.

UQ said the GCI “flagship projects cut across disciplinary and thematic 
boundaries, demanding new ways of thinking”.

Human rights lawyer Benedict Coyne, who has acted in some of the W&J 
challenges around the mining proposal, will provide legal analysis.

Johnson said the project was “a great opportunity for the Wangan and 
Jagalingou people to chart a new path to justice and sustainability, and to 
social and economic opportunities in the transition to a low-carbon world”.

Adani's Carmichael mine granted 'unprecedented' powers, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/adanis-carmichael-mine-granted-unprecedented-powers-says-report>
“The project will help shape a shared understanding of how to sustain our 
lands and waters and enrich our culture, and build our futures on this,” she 
said.

Adrian Burragubba, the senior W&J traditional owner who is spearheading legal 
challenges around the mining proposal, said: “We want to share our knowledge 
and give the world an appreciation of the significance of our culture and the 
way in which the protection of lands and waters is a matter of Indigenous law 
and environmental sustainability”.

Coyne said the project would “greatly enhance our understanding of the 
intersection of the important issues at play in contemporary Australia and 
internationally regarding climate change, natural resource conservation and 
human rights – particularly the rights of Indigenous peoples”.

The project will be funded to the value of up to $120,000 over two years.

It is backed by a longtime GCI supporter, the multimillionaire Wotif founder 
turned philanthropist Graeme Wood, who is also a financial backer of Guardian 
Australia.

Wood said W&J council leaders were “forging new ground in our understanding of 
Indigenous rights in Australia in the transition to a low carbon and just 
future”.

• This story was amended on 14 November 2016 to clarify that Benedict Coyne is 
not acting in his capacity as president of Australian Lawyers for Human Rights.
 