
If you had expected Adebayo Akinfenwa to be talked out by now, you probably 
needed to improve your research. A Football League launch at Craven Cottage is 
winding down, a good three hours in, and theWycombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> Wanderers striker has commanded 
more attention than any of the players and coaches from higher divisions who 
have passed through. There have been endless television appearances, 
photographs with supporters and, latterly, an impromptu Facebook Live event 
with the relatively reserved Brighton goalkeeper David Stockdale that swiftly 
sees first acquaintances playing off each other like old friends.

League Two 2016-17 season preview | Michael Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/league-two-2016-17-season-preview-portsmouth-morecambe>
That is the effect Akinfenwa has. These are the twilight years of a 
peripatetic career that has run alongside an off-pitch brand through his 
exceptional – maligned and admired in turn – upper-body strength and size, and 
the instinct is to enjoy every moment. It is not hard to see why Gareth 
Ainsworth, the Wycombe manager, enlisted the 34-year-old to bolster a shot-shy 
team for the newLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> campaign; Akinfenwa’s 
charisma certainly lights up a room and he intends to use the audiences he is 
afforded for good.

“The attention is humbling, mindboggling really,” Akinfenwa says. “I’ve played 
in the lower leagues for most of my career, but everyone here wants to talk to 
a League Two player. At the same time, I embrace it. It may sound cliched, but 
it just shows that when you don’t let people put you in a box then anything can 
happen.”

There is still the sense that mouth occasionally acts before brain, but in a 
way that reassures. This summer one member of the media felt the sharp side of 
Akinfenwa’s tongue after suggesting the image he projected – he has made the 
nickname “Beast” his own – was merely a persona, a gimmick. Akinfenwa asserts 
that he has simply been given a chance to be himself and as the words pour out 
it would take some very confident judgment to accuse him of affectation.

“This isn’t a reward for anything, I didn’t set out to be this way, I’m 
honestly just me,” he says. “People said: ‘You’re too big to play football’, 
but I kept playing and it just happened that people have caught on to me and 
taken to me. The nicest thing I get from it is that I can be myself and people 
seem to like it.

“When you’re in that position I think you’re obligated to try and help the 
next generation. The areas where I went wrong, things like that, I’ll talk to 
them about it. I’ve seen where you can go left or right; I was raised in an 
inner-city school and some of my classmates went to prison or down other bad 
roads. Football was my saving grace so I want to let people know that you can 
achieve whatever you want. People like to concentrate on what you can’t do, so 
let’s preach what you can. Why would I want to talk about not being quick when 
I’m strong? That’s what I want to get across.”

Fame has had its perks. Akinfenwa has more than a million followers across his 
social media platforms, his “Beast Mode On” clothing line has led to commercial 
opportunities on both sides of the Atlantic and it is a rare day when he is not 
recognised in the street. His five children – “Yes, five,” he emphasises, 
unprompted – keep him grounded. “I come home and I’m like: ‘I got stopped in LA 
and Vegas’, and they just go: ‘Daddy, stop making noise.’ I’m just the 
embarrassing dad to them.”

The more serious business begins now and there was quite a choice for 
Akinfenwa when,straight after helping AFC Wimbledon to promotion in the 
play-off final at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
, he found himself a free agent. “I think I’m technically unemployed, so any 
managers, hit me up on WhatsApp,” were his words broadcast live by the side of 
the pitch, and they did, offers coming in from Qatar, Australia, Mexico, Turkey 
and the US.

Ainsworth’s entreaty came by the comparatively old-fashioned medium of a text 
and it struck a chord with Akinfenwa. The two knew each other as playing 
opponents of old and Ainsworth says they “had that feeling of respect for each 
other, the look you can give someone that says: ‘You know what, I know what 
you’re about.’”

Wycombe fell away from the play-off race at the end of 2015-16, a goal tally 
of 45 their major deficiency, and his presence on and off the pitch would have 
obvious benefits. “A year ago I’d have been more geared for a move to MLS, but 
this year going abroad wasn’t high up on my priorities,” he says. “When I sat 
down with the gaffer, everything he said resonated. It’s just a nice fit and 
it’s very similar toAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> – tight-knit, everyone in 
it for each other, putting in the work with nothing just given to you. After 
the first conversation I knew it was where I wanted to be.”

The final kick of Akinfenwa’s two years at Wimbledon was the penalty that 
confirmed their ascent, one that caused a degree of awkwardness after he took 
the ball from the designated taker, Callum Kennedy. Here is where the showman 
comes out; he has no qualms admitting he was working to a script.

“I’d known I was leaving and the night before you play it out in your head and 
think: ‘What’s the best scenario to depart with?’” he says. “It played out 
exactly as I’d dreamed. It was an emotional, euphoric moment, but I’d already 
come to terms that it was my last game. Getting promoted with the team, scoring 
at Wembley aged 34, it’s just dreams – if I didn’t still have the desire to 
play football, I could have left the game off the back of that.”

Wycombe will need that desire. Ainsworth is unlikely to fill his substitutes’ 
bench at Crawley on Saturday and, at 43, the ex-QPR winger has signed on as 
backup for another season. A club with no academy or reserve team – although 
there are plans to resurrect both – has a squad of 19 and, through Fifa’s 
wisdom, there is no emergency loan system this season to help plug gaps. It 
seems like the kind of challenge Akinfenwa relishes; neither player nor manager 
is the type to go quietly. “It’s been intense so far, I’m not going to lie, and 
that’s what the gaffer is,” Akinfenwa says. “Nothing gets left on the training 
field or the pitch. I’m mad excited about this new challenge and we’ll see what 
the season brings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fadebayo-akinfenwa-wycombe-wanderers-afc-wimbledon-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b214e6875ab2b3ec2ed3780d7f0c793d9e3135%2F423_31_3393_2035%2F3393.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adebayo%20Akinfenwa%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20said%20I%E2%80%99m%20too%20big%20to%20play%20football%2C%20but%20I%20kept%20playing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fadebayo-akinfenwa-wycombe-wanderers-afc-wimbledon-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adebayo%20Akinfenwa%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20said%20I%E2%80%99m%20too%20big%20to%20play%20football%2C%20but%20I%20kept%20playing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fadebayo-akinfenwa-wycombe-wanderers-afc-wimbledon-beast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b214e6875ab2b3ec2ed3780d7f0c793d9e3135%2F423_31_3393_2035%2F3393.jpg>
 Representatives of all the Football League clubs gathered at Craven Cottage on 
Wednesday for a 72-club team photo, Akinfenwa among them. Photograph: Courtesy 
of EFL  