
The government’s flagship adoption policy is showing signs of faltering, with 
thelatest figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2015-to-2016>
 showing a 12% drop in the number of vulnerable children matched with adoptive 
parents over the past year.


Adoption numbers in England have risen in recent years after David Cameron 
introduced reforms designed to“tear down the barriers” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/01/fall-in-adoptions-of-vulnerable-kids-sparks-charity-warning>
 preventing children from being matched with parents.

But official figures show that 4,690 children in care were adopted in 2016, 
down from 5,360 in the previous year, and experts said further falls should be 
expected.

Ministers believe the decline, which follows a significant slowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/01/fall-in-adoptions-of-vulnerable-kids-sparks-charity-warning>
 in the rate of increase in adoptions in 2015, is a result of local authorities 
misinterpreting family court judgments made three years ago that indicated 
adoption should be treated as a last resort.

A 2013 ruling  
<http://www.newlawjournal.co.uk/content/munby-slates-sloppy-practice-adoption>
by Sir James Munby, the president of the high court family division, said the 
political drive to hasten and increase adoption should not override due process 
and break up families unnecessarily. The law states that a child should only be 
separated from its parents in extreme circumstances.

Ministers and expert advisers insist that the ruling did not change the law, 
but there are continuing signs that local authorities are opting to place 
children with foster parents or kinship careers.


Hugh Thornbery, chief executive of the charity Adoption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> UK, said: “I’ve feared for some 
time that there would be a dramatic fall in adoptions this year, so the drop 
comes as no surprise. We expect to see a further fall in the current year.

“Adoption can offer the best chance to permanently break a cycle of neglect 
and abuse and give a child a second chance at fulfilling their potential with 
the support of a loving family. So we cannot stress enough the importance of 
clearing up any confusion over the 2013 rulings, which has undoubtedly had a 
negative impact upon adoption decisions and placement orders in recent years.”

A Department for Education spokesperson said the children and social work bill 
 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2016-07-06/debates/1607071000518/ChildrenAndSocialWorkBill(HL)>
 currently going through parliament would ensure adoption was prioritised when 
it was in the child’s best interests. “It is right that we make sure children 
are protected and that we aspire to have every child grow up in a loving, 
stable home,” the spokesperson said.

The latest statistics show there were 70,44o children in care in England in 
2016, up 1% on 2015. Numbers have risen steadily every year since 2008, in the 
wake of the Baby P child protection scandal. Nearly three-quarters of children 
in care are with foster parents.

The increase includes a 54% rise in the number of unaccompanied asylum seeker 
children in care. There were 4,210 young asylum seekers in care at the end of 
March 2016, two-thirds of them in London and the south-east.

• This article was amended on 30 September 2016 to clarify that the 54% rise 
is in the total number of unaccompanied asylum seeker children in care, not the 
number “being taken into care”, and to correct the number of young asylum 
seekers in care.
 