
For more than 100 years Wimbledon FC called south London home. It was there, 
like any home, that foundations were laid, memories were created and a legacy 
was built. Until the 1960s the club was a dominating force in the amateur 
Isthmian League. They turned professional in 1964, joined theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> in 1977 and then the 
unthinkable happened in the 1980s as they secured three promotions in four 
years to reach the First Division. The rise was complete when Lawrie Sanchez’s 
near-post header looped into the net at Wembley and they were crowned FA Cup 
winners in 1988.

Where did it go wrong for Newcastle this season? Fans react to their relegation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/may/13/newcastle-fans-react-relegation-championship>
The club was forced to leave Plough Lane in 1991 – their home since 1912 – 
after the Taylor Report recommended that all top-flight teams should have 
all-seater stadiums. Wimbledon spent a decade looking for a permanent home and 
in May 2002 the FA approved a new stadium, 56 miles away in Milton Keynes.

A club isn’t supposed to move willy-nilly to any market the owner thinks 
beneficial. A club embodies a community and its people. So, the people who had 
their club ripped away from them decided to make sure the area of Wimbledon 
wouldn’t be without their football club for the first time in more than 100 
years.

When Wimbledon FC was moved 90 minutes’ drive away to Milton Keynes, 
supporters of the abandoned club foundedAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>. Try-outs were held, a 
team was assembled and by 2002 the resurrected club was competing in the 
Combined Counties League Premier Division, the ninth tier of English football.

What happened next was nothing short of magical. The new Dons earned five 
promotions in nine seasons, including a run of 78 matches unbeaten from early 
2003 to December 2004. Suddenly, this club born from the ashes of its former 
self, had a spot in the fully professionalLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. Now, some five 
seasons later, the Wombles are on the verge of another promotion, this time to 
League One, just two steps from the Premier League. We travelled to south 
London to speak to the people who helped revive football in a community that 
wouldn’t let greed take their club away forever.

Follow KICK <http://www.kicktv.com/> on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/kicktv>, Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/kick> and 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/kick?lang=en>

 