
AFC Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> have 
reached a historic milestone by climbing above Milton Keynes Dons in the 
football pyramid for the first time – only 14 years after they were formed.

Neal Ardley’s side defeated Oxford United 3-1 to move up to 10th in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>, two places 
above MK Dons, who lost 1-0 at home to Port Vale. Wimbledon took a 3-0 
half-time lead at the Kassam Stadium through Tom Elliott, Darius Charles and 
Andy Barcham, before a Charles own goal offered Oxford consolation.

AFC Wimbledon: their manager, fans and staff on their rise through the leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/may/18/afc-wimbledon-players-fans-manager-league-two-play-off>
Alex Jones’ first-half goal proved enough for Port Vale to prevail at 
stadium:mk, with Ben Reeves hitting the bar for the hosts with a late 
free-kick. Karl Robinson’s team drop to 12th, while Port Vale climb to fourth.

AFC Wimbledon were formed by Wimbledon FC supporters in 2002 after the 
original club were allowed to relocate to Buckinghamshire, and were later 
renamed MK Dons. The new team started life in the Combined Counties League, 
despite the FA panel who approved the move famously claiming a new club was “
not in the wider interests of football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/afc-wimbledon-league-two-playoff-plymouth>
”.

Football League your thoughts: Bradford City and Carlisle extend unbeaten 
starts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/08/football-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle>
The club have since climbed six tiers, earning promotion to League One 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/proxy/preview/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
 via the play-offs last season, while their relocated rivals are in the same 
division where they began their first full season in Milton Keynes.

The sides have played each other three times in cup competitions – all in 
Milton Keynes – with AFC Wimbledon earning their first win over MK Dons in the 
2014-15 Johnstone’s Paint Trophy. The sides will meet in the league for the 
first time on 10 December, with AFC Wimbledon hostingMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>, a team whose existence many of 
their supporters refuse to acknowledge, at Kingsmeadow on 14 March.
 