
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> is now home to more than 
160,000 people with personal fortunes worth in excess of $1m (£642,000), a 
twofold increase in the number of wealthy individuals since the turn of the 
century that highlights the problem of deepening inequality as some of the 
world’s poorest nations register strong economic growth.

The combined wealth holdings of high-net-worth individuals – those with net 
assets of $1m or more – in Africa totalled $660bn at the end of 2014, according 
to areport by New World Wealth <http://www.nw-wealth.com/>, a South African 
market research firm.

Meanwhile, the number of poor people in Africa – defined as those living on 
less than $1.25 a day – increased from 411.3 million in 2010 to 415.8 millon in 
2011,World Bank data 
<http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=POV_REG_1&Id=be849c9d&tb=y&dd=n&pr=n&export=y&xlbl=y&ylbl=y&legend=y&isportal=y&inf=n&exptypes=Excel&country=SSA&series=SI.POV.NOP1,SI.POV.DDAY&zm=n>
 shows.

By 2024, the number of African millionaires is expected to rise 45%, to 
approximately 234,000, according to the report.

During the past 14 years, the number of high-net-worth individuals in Africa 
has grown by 145%. The rate for the Middle East over the same period was 136%, 
while in Latin America it was 278%. The global average was 73%.

The report said that by the end of 2014, the number of people worldwide worth 
more than $1m had reached 13 million with a combined worth of $66tn, although 
the number of millionaires can vary depending on what assets are included and
different methods have produced different figures 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/06/24/how-many-millionaires-in-the-world-it-depends.html>
. New World Wealth, for example, do not include primary residences when 
assessing wealth or net assets.

The World Bank has forecast <http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/overview> 
an average of 5.5% economic growth for sub-Saharan Africa over the next year, 
though it warned that “extreme poverty remains high across the region”.

Nick Dearden, director of the advocacy group Global Justice Now, said the 
report shows deepening inequality across the continent. “It’s no wonder that 
rich individuals in Africa are getting richer, because we’re seeing a form of 
‘development’ … which hugely benefits the wealthy but makes the lives of the 
poor even harder. Aid money, trade agreements and corporate ‘investment’ pushed 
by Britain are locking countries into a form of growth which is all about 
making the rich even more rich and the poor even more poor.”

Mauritius has the wealthiest individuals in Africa, with average per-capita 
wealth of $21,470, according to the report. The rankings show that people in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> are 
the poorest, at $230 a person.

Wealth per capita 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/africa_wealth/giv-30080vioMGtb18t2c/>
To put Africa’s wealth into context: the global average wealth per capita is 
$27,600, with top-ranking countries such as Switzerland and Australia boasting 
per-capita wealth of more than $200,000.

“Over the last year there’s been very strong growth in places like Mozambique, 
Zambia and Tanzania. Going forward, we expect Mozambique to continue to be the 
fastest growing market for high-net-worth individuals in percentage growth 
terms. So I’d say that Mozambique stands out in this report,” said Andrew 
Amoils, head of research at New World Wealth.

Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>, where per-capita wealth 
rose from $620 a person in 2000 to $3,920 in 2014, recorded the highest growth 
over the 14-year period analysed.

Flats, cars and oil for China: Angola's growth tempered by growing inequality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/angola-elections-china-oil-growing-inequality>
In Zimbabwe, the worst performing country, wealth per capita dropped from $630 
a person in 2000 to $550 a person in 2014. Zimbabweans have until September to 
turn in their Zimbabwean dollars before the currency is discarded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/13/zimbabweans-get-chance-to-swap-quadrillions-of-cash-for-a-few-us-dollars>
.

The southern African country was one of the wealthiest countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa on a wealth-per-capita basis, said the report’s authors, but 
the country is now bottom of the rankings. They also note that while other 
low-ranked countries on the list such as Libya and Tunisia have been affected 
by uprisings and political instability,Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> remains under the same leadership.

The study identifies erosion of ownership rights in Zimbabwe, ongoing 
political intimidation, election fixing and investor confusion arising from the 
banning of the independent media in the early 2000s as key reasons for the 
country’s poor performance.

South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> is home to the 
highest number of millionaires on the continent at 46,800 in 2014. Egypt comes 
in second with more than 20,000, followed by Nigeria in third place.

Amoils said African economies benefit from rich citizens: “A lot of 
[high-net-worth individuals] keep their wealth locally, so normally, for most 
African countries, it’s between 50% and 70% local wealth. There’s lots of 
advantages because a lot of [these individuals] are business owners and a lot 
of them start businesses even if they are in corporate environments..”

Dearden said: “From Nigeria to Mozambique you can see poverty rising at the 
same time as rapid growth. What does this mean? The growth is being gobbled up 
by the super-rich and transnational capital. And that means ordinary people, by 
comparison, find their lives even more impoverished.

“It could be different: with decent government spending on public services, 
progressive taxation, regulation to control capital and regional trading 
relationships to wean countries off dependency on western markets.”

Sector breakdown of African individuals worth $1m or more

 *  Angola: 41% in oil and gas, 13% in financial services, 12% in real estate 
and construction, 8% in basic materials, 6% in transport.

 * Ghana: 24% in financial services, 16% in real estate and construction, 13% 
in fast-moving consumer goods, 10% in basic materials, 7% in retail.

 * Kenya: 19% in real estate and construction, 18% in financial services, 10% 
in manufacturing. 
 * South Africa: 20% in financial services, 16% in real estate and 
construction, 14% in basic materials, 8% retail. 
 * Nigeria: 24% oil & gas, 16% basic materials, 13% transport, 10% financial 
services. 
 * Zambia: 22% in basic materials, 16% real estate and construction, 12% 
financial services, 9% transport.
 