
Sergio Agüero scored his second hat-trick in two Champions League starts as 
Manchester City prolonged their 100% opening to the season witha comfortable 
victory in their rain-delayed Champions League game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live>
, making it seven wins out of seven in all competitions.

Tottenham left to lament Wembley woes after Lemar strikes for Monaco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
The only surprise of an impressive display against outclassed opponents was 
that it took Agüero so long to register his third goal after putting his side 
two up inside half an hour. He had a number of chances but looked like being 
thwarted until Raheem Sterling finally played him into miles of space with an 
imaginative pass. Agüero only just managed to stay onside, though after that 
rounding Yann Sommer was a formality. The Argentinian had already left the 
field to a standing ovation by the time Leroy Sané conjured a fourth goal for 
his fellow substitute Kelechi Iheanacho, for a final scoreline that amounted to 
a fair reflection of City’s overall superiority.

Pep Guardiola was a little disappointed the stadium was not full – he is not 
used to seeing gaps on the terraces – but otherwise pleased by the performance, 
in front of a crowd of 30,270. “When you are in the same group as Barcelona you 
have to make sure you take as many points as possible,” the City manager said.

“Ilkay Gündogan showed what a big player he is going to be for us, I would 
like to thank Txiki [Begiristain] for buying him, but our players deserve the 
stadium completely full. We are here to create something big. All we can do 
when we see empty seats is play so well that people say wow, I want to watch 
that.”

Manchester City v Borussia Mönchengladbach: Champions League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live>
As a result of the previous night’s postponement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
 Gündogan made his first start for City following his £21m move from Dortmund, 
replacing David Silva who was in the original lineup but had not felt well on 
the morning of the game. Returning for the home side due to domestic 
suspension, Agüero needed only nine minutes to take his tally for the season to 
seven. Sterling did well first to put pressure on the German defence on the 
left, then to hold possession until Aleksandar Kolarov arrived, the full-back 
whipping in an unanswerable low cross that only needed a touch of Agüero’s boot 
to divert the ball into the roof of the net.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-borussia-moenchengladbach-champions-league-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardiola%3A%20Manchester%20City%20need%20fans'%20support%20in%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-borussia-moenchengladbach-champions-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardiola%3A%20Manchester%20City%20need%20fans%27%20support%20in%20Champions%20League%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-borussia-moenchengladbach-champions-league-video&media=>
Guardiola: Manchester City need fans’ support in Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-borussia-moenchengladbach-champions-league-video>
Gündogan himself was almost on the scoresheet next, bringing a full-stretch 
save from Sommer after Kevin De Bruyne had escaped down the right and attempted 
to find Agüero in the area. The striker could only help the ball on to 
Gündogan, whose first time shot was on target, though possibly too close to the 
centre of goal to make life hard for the goalkeeper. Mönchengladbach are 
perfectly aware of Gündogan’s strengths, of course, just as they are familiar 
with De Bruyne. Their problem lay in denying space to them both and, when De 
Bruyne drifted wide to allow Gündogan to advance through the middle, the latter 
played in Sterling for a shot that Tobias Strobl had to clear off the line.

The visitors were just showing signs of life in attack midway through the 
first half when City went further ahead. Nicolás Otamendi brought the ball 
forward, something he is clearly being encouraged to do by Guardiola, and De 
Bruyne found Gündogan in the area via a deflection off Oscar Wendt, only for 
Christoph Kramer to trip Gündogan from behind before the pass could be 
collected. It might have been accidental but it was an obvious penalty and 
Agüero scored confidently from the spot. The striker could have had his third 
by the interval, though put a shot too high from the edge of the area in the 
last minute of the half following remarkable persistence from Sterling, who 
seemed to have lost the ball on a couple of occasions but managed to hold on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd385343bdb0b30d3fad8217c4400dbc5f2567df8%2F0_67_2106_1263%2F2106.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ag%C3%BCero%20hat-trick%20inspires%20Manchester%20City%20against%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ag%C3%BCero%20hat-trick%20inspires%20Manchester%20City%20against%20Borussia%20M%C3%B6nchengladbach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmanchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd385343bdb0b30d3fad8217c4400dbc5f2567df8%2F0_67_2106_1263%2F2106.jpg>
 Agüero scores from the penalty spot to make it 2-0. Photograph: Alex 
Livesey/Getty Images 
Gündogan also brought a save from Sommer towards the end of the first half, 
while Claudio Bravo at the other end was a virtual spectator until Lars Stindl 
tested him three minutes from the break with a shot from a corner. Bravo must 
have been relieved to see the first 45 minutes go by without having to deal 
with any crosses under pressure, and the second half was so undemanding he even 
managed to begin the move that led to Iheanacho’s goal by coming out of his 
area to use his feet.

Agüero limped off with what appeared to be a twisted knee at the interval but 
reappeared for the second half, which began in exactly the same way as the 
first with De Bruyne finding acres of space. Agüero’s hat-trick should have 
arrived in the 50th minute, courtesy of a Sterling pass following a goalkeeping 
fumble yet, just when it appeared the Argentinian had the goal at his merc, 
Sommer recovered to get a hand to a shot bound for the top corner. City were 
playing some relaxed, adventurous football, moving the ball to and fro across 
the pitch with only Jesús Navas’s habitual inability to deliver a decisive 
final ball interrupting their flow.

Leicester City ease to victory over Club Brugge on Champions League debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/club-brugge-leicester-city-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
Sterling, too, lost the ball on occasions, though he beat his man in several 
instances, too, and appears to have rediscovered the zest and willingness to 
take risks that deserted him last season. John Stones was assuredness 
personified at the back, not that the Germans put the City back-line under any 
great pressure, ably accompanied by Otamendi who seems a more confident, 
buccaneering type of defender this season.

De Bruyne was running the show, though, with Gündogan gradually fading in his 
first competitive game for months. If Guardiola can find a way of playing De 
Bruyne, Gündogan and Silva in the same team City will be almost impossible to 
stop and there will be no need to mourn the demise of Yaya Touré. Not that 
everything is perfect, Sterling should have scored from De Bruyne’s invitation 
long before Agüero completed his hat-trick instead of hesitating with only 
Sommer to beat, though at least he redeemed himself by playing in Agüero for a 
similar one-on-one 10 minutes from time. City’s leading scorer was never likely 
to miss that sort of opportunity nor did he.
 