
The world governing body for amateur boxing has sidelined all 36 of the 
referees and judges who officiated at the Rio Olympics and dismantled its 
controversial “five-star” officiating system that was implicated in corruption 
allegations.

Two months after the Guardian exclusively revealed concerns among senior 
officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-2016-olympics-boxing-corruption-allegations>
 over corrupt judging at the Rio Olympics and a string of high-profile 
incidents followed at the Games, the Amateur International Boxing Association 
(Aiba) said it has made the unprecedented decision while it carries out an 
investigation.

Rio 2016: Olympic boxing tournament hit by corruption allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-2016-olympics-boxing-corruption-allegations>
When the Guardian first revealed the concerns, Aiba said it would “continue to 
use any means, including legal action, to protect our sport and its community” 
and insisted that its certification process “ensures all our R&Js [referees and 
judges] have the highest levels of officiating and are in optimal situation to 
perform accordingly”.

But following meetings of its referee and judges and technical and rules 
commissions in Lausanne, the governing body said it had sidelined all 36 
officials pending an investigation and proposed a series of changes to its 
judging system.

In the wake of the Guardian’s warning, the boxing competition erupted into 
controversy when the Irish boxer Michael Conlanpublicly railed against 
corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
 after losing in the bantamweight quarter-finals to the Russian Vladimir 
Nikitin. Conlan shouted into a ringside microphone: “They’re known for being 
cheats. Amateur boxing stinks from the core right to the top … I think boxing 
is dead. It’s about whoever pays the most money.”

There was widespread outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/aiba-top-boxing-executive-olympics-rio-judging-controversy>
 after another Russian, the heavyweight Evgeny Tishchenko, beat Kazakhstan’s 
Vassiliy Levit to claim gold. Tishchenko was booed by the crowd after the 
decision.

And the American camp was furious after Gary Antuanne Russell lost to 
Uzbekistan’s Fazliddin Gaibnazarov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/gary-antuanne-russell-boxing-fixing-allegations-rio-olympics>
. His father, Garry Russell Sr, said: “He got robbed, this is fucked up.” Floyd 
Mayweather Jr, who watched the bout, also said that Russell was “robbed – 
clearly, clearly”.

The governing body said in a statement: “While the majority of the boxing 
competition inRio 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> was 
received very positively … a small number of decisions under debate indicated 
that further reforms in the Aiba R&J procedures were necessary.

“Initial decisions were made on-site during Rio 2016 to ensure the smooth 
running of the rest of the competition. The results of a specific R&J 
investigation, currently under way, will allow Aiba to fully assess what action 
needs to be taken.”

During the Games, an unspecified number of judges were removed from the 
action. The Guardian understands that all seven so-called “five star” judges 
were among them.

Aiba has now dismantled the system, which it stoutly defended before the 
Games. The statement continued: “The current five-star R&J programme will be 
disbanded and there will be greater empowerment and efficiency brought to the 
role of the R&J evaluators during competitions.”

A spokesman would not elaborate on whether the individuals concerned would 
officiate again but did say that the enhanced terms enjoyed by the five-star 
judges, who typically oversaw the biggest bouts, would expire. The spokesman 
said: “The five-star R&Js are part of the ongoing global investigation 
concerning all of the 36 R&Js who officiated in Rio, there will be no comment 
made around their future assignments until the conclusion of our investigation. 
Following the disbanding of the five-star programme, all contracts will 
naturally expire.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e4f69354deb51eb38f3a676a7ea26fcf016df90%2F0_136_3384_2030%2F3384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aiba%20sidelines%20all%20Rio%20Olympics%20boxing%20referees%20and%20judges%20amid%20inquiry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aiba%20sidelines%20all%20Rio%20Olympics%20boxing%20referees%20and%20judges%20amid%20inquiry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e4f69354deb51eb38f3a676a7ea26fcf016df90%2F0_136_3384_2030%2F3384.jpg>
 After his defeat in Rio, Michael Conlan said: “Amateur boxing stinks from the 
core right to the top … I think boxing is dead. It’s about whoever pays the 
most money.” Photograph: Christian Petersen/Getty Images 
Karim Bouzidi, the Aiba executive director who had operational control for the 
Rio competition,had his duties “reassigned” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/aiba-top-boxing-executive-olympics-rio-judging-controversy>
 during the Olympics at the same time as the judges were stood down.

Asked whether the Algerian, who took over from his South Korean predecessor, 
Kim Ho, in controversial circumstances two years earlier, still worked for Aiba 
the spokesman said: “Both parties are currently in ongoing discussions and no 
further comment will be made at this stage.”

Dr CK Wu, the Aiba president who is also a member of the International Olympic 
Committee executive board, refused to address the crisis in Rio beyond a 
limited statement.

Michael Conlan farce leaves amateur boxing nursing a black eye in Rio | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/michael-conlan-boxing-black-eye-rio-olympic-games>
Under pressure over the corruption allegations and the financial status of the 
governing body after a period of bold expansion, with the World Series ofBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> and other initiatives, Wu on 
Thursday said that the Rio Olympics were a “watershed moment” for Aiba. He 
continued: “Boxing was in the spotlight for positive reasons but occasionally 
also for the wrong ones. As an organisation, we have pulled together and I am 
extremely happy with the work that has been done this week by highly 
experienced members of our commissions, whose expertise and counsel will allow 
Aiba and its community to develop further throughout this next Olympic cycle.”

Amid a number of recommended changes, Aiba said it would continue with the “10 
point must” scoring system introduced before Rio but in future would take all 
five judges’ cards into account rather than discounting two.

“It was also recommended that the draw of the R&Js for each bout will now be 
automated via our supplier Swiss Timing, and no longer conducted by a 
three-person draw commission to instil greater transparency,” said the 
statement.

The IOC told the Guardian after the Games that it would review Aiba just as it 
would every other sport. At the end of August, Aiba published a letter from the 
IOC president, Thomas Bach, in which he praised the “contribution and 
dedication” of Dr Wu. However, the same letter was sent to every sport after 
the Games.
 