

Aid groups in Calais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> are struggling 
to sift through huge quantities of inappropriate donations sent from the UK, 
ranging from plus-sized clothes, which are usually too large for refugees, to 
wedding dresses, DVDs and electric heaters intended for use in a camp that has 
no electricity.

Volunteers are appealing instead for blankets, tents and warm, waterproof 
coats as well as building materials to help them construct more weather-proof 
huts to accommodate the camp’s rapidly expanding population.

The horror of the Calais refugee camp: ‘We feel like we are dying slowly’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/03/refugees-horror-calais-jungle-refugee-camp-feel-like-dying-slowly>
Reports of the appalling conditions in the Calais camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/france-calais-refugee-camp-improvements>
, where more than 6,000 people are now living in tents and shacks with limited 
access to water and sanitation, have triggered an enormous surge of donations 
from schools, faith groups and Facebook networks in the UK. On Saturday 22 vans 
full of donations arrived from England; on some Saturdays in October as many as 
40 vans arrived.

While this support has been gratefully received by refugees, the scale of the 
response and the haphazard way that some donations have arrived is now creating 
logistical difficulties in the Calais-based warehouse as volunteers race to 
distribute food and strong winter shoes.


 They have been forced to use valuable time extracting much-needed sleeping 
bags and blankets from boxes that sometimes contain flimsy clothing, 
high-heeled shoes, skirts and baby clothes, largely unsuitable for worsening 
conditions in a camp where 90% of occupants are young men.

 The aid groups running the warehouse, Help Refugees and l’Auberge des Migrants
 <http://www.laubergedesmigrants.fr/>, are urging people to consult online lists
 <http://www.calaidipedia.co.uk/site/calaisaid/donations> of the most urgently 
needed items before bringing anything to France. Theregularly updated lists 
currently highlight 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2015/11/02/calais-needs-2nd-november-2015/> the 
need for waterproof men’s walking boots (high ankle, particularly sizes 42 and 
43); pre-packed bags containing sets of hats, gloves and scarves; men’s jeans 
and tracksuits, waist sizes 28-36 (“There aren’t a lot of fat people in the 
camp,” one volunteer in the warehouse said).

People have the best of intentions but it seems they are using this as an 
opportunity to clear their cupboards
Philli Boyle, volunteer 
 Because there has been limited support from major aid agencies and the French 
and UK governments, the response of grassroots organisations and volunteers to 
the crisis has had a very positive impact on conditions. Volunteers from the UK 
and around the world are providing clothes, tents, hot meals and English 
lessons, and in the past few weeks have built a play centre for children, a 
library and a refugee advice centre.

 But as the camp grows in size, the absence of a more organised response is 
becoming increasingly problematic. The only major charity working in Calais,
Doctors of the World <http://doctorsoftheworld.org.uk/>, has expressed concern 
about the unsustainable nature of this kind of support. “In many ways it is 
wonderful that so many people are collecting for Calais, but Calais is a 
serious humanitarian emergency which needs an organised humanitarian response,” 
a spokesperson for the charity, which has been providing medical care to 
refugees in Calais since 2003, said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Faid-workers-at-calais-refugee-camp-make-plea-for-right-kind-of-donations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0035443bd81b281d6a48fbf515e95de5233e848%2F0_212_4797_2879%2F4797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aid%20workers%20at%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20appeal%20for%20right%20kind%20of%20donations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Faid-workers-at-calais-refugee-camp-make-plea-for-right-kind-of-donations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aid%20workers%20at%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20appeal%20for%20right%20kind%20of%20donations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Faid-workers-at-calais-refugee-camp-make-plea-for-right-kind-of-donations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0035443bd81b281d6a48fbf515e95de5233e848%2F0_212_4797_2879%2F4797.jpg>
 Aid workers at the Calais refugee camp have produced an online list of 
much-needed items, such as strong, waterproof boots and warm clothing. 
Photograph: Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty Images 
“Part of the reason that so many grassroots groups have sprung up is that 
people have felt frustrated with the lack of government action and feel 
compelled to take action themselves; they are to be commended for that, because 
they have done this more quickly than the big charities. But this kind of 
response is not sustainable; it goes with the whims and the flows of the news 
agenda.”

 Financial donations to Doctors of the World <> or Salam 
<http://www.associationsalam.org/Welcome-to-the-website-of-the>, a local group 
providing daily hot meals, may help provide more regular, sustainable 
assistance to refugees in Calais.

 “People have the best of intentions but sometimes it seems that they are 
using this as an opportunity to clear their cupboards of everything they don’t 
want,” Philli Boyle, a volunteer working at the warehouse with l’Auberge des 
Migrants, a Calais-based group, andHelp Refugees 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, a UK group set up this summer to provide aid.

 But François Guennoc, who has worked with l’Auberge des Migrants for the past 
two years, said he was impressed at the response from Britain. “Two months ago 
we had perhaps 10–15 volunteers, no money, nothing in our warehouse. Now we 
have between 40–120 volunteers every day – 90% from Britain – money is coming 
in from UK churches and mosques. It’s a new phenomenon. I think it is a way of 
saying they are not happy with the government’s refugee policy,” he said.

French court orders water, latrines and garbage pickup at Calais refugee camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/france-calais-refugee-camp-improvements>
Some volunteers, like Toby Caruana, 30, from south London, have been working 
at the camp since August. He runs a tent and sleeping bag distribution centre 
from a pink caravan, helping organise bedding and sleeping arrangements for new 
arrivals. He said more volunteers, able to commit long stretches of time, were 
needed.

 “The problem is that there are 5,000 people collecting stuff in England, 20 
people sorting in the warehouse and 10 people like me giving things out in the 
camp. We need more volunteers,” he said. “The biggest need now is blankets. 
It’s so cold.”

 With outrage mounting at the squalid conditions in the camp and the lack of 
government response, Doctors of the World and Secours Catholique took a lawsuit 
out against the local authorities last week.On Monday, a French court ordered 
the authorities to build new toilets, water standpipes and introduce a garbage 
collection system within eight days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/france-calais-refugee-camp-improvements>
.


 