
A follow-up to An Inconvenient Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/21/inconvenient-truth-evolution-climate-change-film>
, the Oscar-winning documentary about climate change, will be among the opening 
night films at the forthcomingSundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/sundance-2017-film-festival-aint-them-bodies-saints-obvious-child-jonbenet-ramsey-oakland-police-ferguson-protesters>
.

Like its predecessor, the film will follow Al Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> as the former vice-president 
continues to make his case around the world that the world most wake up to the 
imminent threat of climate change.

“Now more than ever we must rededicate ourselves to solving the climate 
crisis. But we have reason to be hopeful; the solutions to the crisis are at 
hand,” Gore said in a statement released on Friday.

Rumors of a follow-up film have circulated since 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/03/an-inconvenient-truth-sequel>, 
but on Friday it was confirmed that the film will be part of the festival’s The 
New Climate section, which features films that all have the climate or the 
environment at their core. The spiritual sequel comes 10 years after the 
original film debuted at Sundance and went on to win two Oscars, including best 
documentary.

It’s expected the film will be released in 2017 by Paramount. The company’s 
CEO Brad Grey said: “Al’s tireless efforts to bring about change continues to 
inspire all of us as we fight for the health of our world for future 
generations.”

Gore recently met with president-elect Donald Trump for a series of meetings, 
after which the former vice-president said he was hopeful that Trump, who has 
falsely claimed climate change was a Chinese hoax, would reverse his position.

“My message would be that despair is just another form of denial,” he said 
after the meeting. “There is no time to despair. We don’t have time to lick our 
wounds, to hope for a different election outcome.”

Gore also fronts the Climate Reality Project 
<https://www.climaterealityproject.org/> advocacy group, which recently hosted 
its sixth annual24 Hours of Reality <https://www.24hoursofreality.org/>, a 
24-hour live event which focused on he 24 largest national emitters of carbon 
dioxide in the world.
 