
Their support inside the stadium may be dwarfed by the masses from Merseyside, 
but DeportivoAlaves <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> will stride 
on to the pitch this evening carrying the hopes of the Basque people.

It is 24 years since the last club from the region reached a European final, 
Athletic Bilbao were edged out of the Uefa Cup on away goals by Juventus after 
a 2-2 aggregate scoreline. "The Basques have been waiting a long time to have 
another go," said the Alaves captain Antonio Karmona. "It would mean a 
tremendous amount to win this trophy. This game means everything to them."

To mark the occasion Alaves will wear a new kit, tempting fate perhaps by 
discarding their trademark pink shirts, which will carry the names of 13,200 
members of the club. "For the Basque people this match is a way of expressing 
themselves and putting the region on the map," added Jordi Cruyff, the former 
Holland midfielder.

If his club's first European final is not enough to leave him salivating, 
Karmona will be pinching himself at the kick-off. As a Liverpool fan he 
stumbled into the big time at the age of 30; life can hardly get much better 
than this. "It could," he smiled, "if we win."

The 33-year-old - stocky with more than a hint of Roberto Carlos in his glare 
- is a veteran of the Alaves side who emerged from the shadows of the second 
division two years ago; his grounding is in the lower leagues even if his 
future may be etched in Basque folklore.

"Personally this is something very special," he said. "I had to work really 
hard to get to play first division football, let alone in a European final, so 
I intend to enjoy every moment of it to the full.

"I didn't make my first division debut until I was 30; up to then I'd played 
at practically every level from the second division to some of the regional 
leagues. I had the luck to come to Vitoria and fall into a very good team with 
very clear objectives, one of which was to get into the first division. Now 
we've made it."

Tonight, with the Romanian Cosmin Contra to return from suspension at 
right-back, they may surpass those already heady expectations. Alaves have won 
all five of their Uefa Cup matches outside of Spain, including a startling 2-0 
success at Internazionale in February. That record alone should warn Liverpool 
against complacency.

"Away from home we have real organisation," added Cruyff, who will play in a 
free role behind the Liga's leading scorer Javi Moreno. "We haven't been 
favourites in any of the rounds up to this stage, which means our opponents 
have felt that they really have to have a go and attack us as much as possible. 
That gives us time to counter and we are comfortable with that style.

"But we also have some really good players. At this stage of the competition 
it's not a question of confidence; it's a question of being realistic. I have a 
positive feeling about this game."

His captain could not feel anything else. As a child Karmona watched the great 
Liverpool side of the 1970s steamroller through English and European 
competitions. As a young wannabe he hoped to emulate Ian Rush or Graeme Souness 
before adopting central defensive duties at the Campo Municipal de Mendizorroza.

"I identified with Liverpool," he said. "They were one of those teams that had 
everything I admire about football. They were solid, committed and strong, but 
they also played a noble type of football.

"The funny thing is that as we've been going through this Uefa Cup campaign 
we've been coming back into the dressing room each time hoping to draw 
Liverpool in the next round. This is the match that we've wanted all season."

Â• You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 