
Can Alexa Chung <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> make Ugg 
boots cool again? Chung has been hired as artistic director for a new photo 
shoot for the label. And the brand – forever associated with the fag end of 
early 00s celebrity culture – is clearly hoping Chung can sprinkle the same 
magic pixie dust that she did forMarks & Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/13/the-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa>
.

Uggs have been attempting to make their way out of TMZ infamy and associations 
with Britney in recent years with celebrity associations.Hailey Baldwin 
<http://www.glamour.com/story/hailey-baldwin-is-in-the-new-uggs-campaign> 
modelled in a campaign andRosie Huntington-Whiteley 
<http://www.ugg.com/uk/blog?postid=ugg-rosie-huntington-whiteley> was appointed 
as the women’s ambassador. Chung, for her part, has publicly called Uggs “a 
classic, something along the lines of a Barbour jacket”. Yet still the stigma 
remains, not to mention their appearance: a soft, large and lumbering Yeti foot 
that’s the exact opposite of the streamlined silhouette that has come to define 
women’s shoes. But there’s a change afoot.

If Christopher Kane can make Crocs cool then his powers are surely unlimited - 
and I think he might just do it, too. @voguerunway #lfw 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BKip_zwAD8s/>

A photo posted by @luke_leitch on Sep 19, 2016 at 7:51am PDT

The news that sales of trainers had overtaken that of high heels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/30/the-rise-of-the-alpha-trainer-sees-sneakers-step-up-in-fashion>
 (37% of women bought trainers compared to the 33% who bought shoes with a 
heel) and that Birkenstock was the mostsearched-for shoe 
<http://footwearnews.com/2016/business/retail/most-searched-shoe-brand-google-back-to-school-birkenstock-251380/>
 on Google in the summer, suggested a shift away from glamour and towards 
utility and practicality. Street style celebrities and members of the Frow wore 
classicOld Skool Vans 
<https://www.vans.co.uk/shop/en-gb/vans-gb/old-skool-shoes-D3HY28> trainers 
during fashion week, while on the actual catwalk a high proportion of “ugly” 
shoes dominated.Christopher Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christopher-kane>, whose theme was Make, 
Do and Mend, featured Crocs at his London show decorated with precious stones 
such as sodalite, red leopard, malachite, diaspro and zebra Jasper. WhileMaison 
Margiela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/06/maison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth>
 featured an elevated hiking sandal featuring velcro straps and multicoloured 
patchwork. Additionally, both Rick Owens andBalenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> took the boot shape and 
reworked it: Owens created a Muppet-like crushed boot, while a feature of the 
Balenciaga collection was pointed boots featuring a strong line of fabric .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Falexa-chungs-ugg-and-beyond-why-ugly-shoes-are-winning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc4ef321a1b4c78d7e9f5bdb26a89095fd35863%2F277_3341_2822_1693%2F2822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexa%20Chung's%20Ugg%20and%20beyond%3A%20why%20ugly%20shoes%20are%20winning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Falexa-chungs-ugg-and-beyond-why-ugly-shoes-are-winning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexa%20Chung%27s%20Ugg%20and%20beyond%3A%20why%20ugly%20shoes%20are%20winning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Falexa-chungs-ugg-and-beyond-why-ugly-shoes-are-winning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc4ef321a1b4c78d7e9f5bdb26a89095fd35863%2F277_3341_2822_1693%2F2822.jpg>
 Baby Spice platforms at the Fenty x Puma show. Photograph: WWD/REX/Shutterstock
Rihanna’s Fenty x Puma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/29/stylewatch-rihanna-and-her-fenty-x-puma-posse>
 show featured a raised trainer in baby pinks and whites, recalling Baby 
Spice’s moonboot platforms. While platform heels – the uncool 70s throwback 
associated with early Abba – were also present at the Sacai andVivienne Westwood
 <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vivienne-westwood> shows. 

But why are ugly shoes making a comeback? The boundaries of what is considered 
tasteful or not are constantly shifting season to season with a movement 
towards the geeky (Alessandro Michele’s Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/21/gucci-milan-fashion-week-frenzied-like-an-explosion-inside-a-fairytale>
) and normcore extreme (Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vetements>). With that, the shoe detail 
has become a calling card for designers to express their humour and their 
rejection of traditional tastefulness. AsDiana Vreeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/diana-vreeland> famously said: “We need a 
splash of bad taste ... no taste is what I’m against.”
 