
“Well, I have been helping old ladies across the road,” says a deadpan 
Alistair Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee>. “And 
we’ve turned on every Christmas light in Leeds and asked people to vote,” 
interjects his brother Jonny. “Yeah, more than once,” agrees Alistair. Welcome 
to electioneering Brownlee style. Sharp as a tack – yet refreshingly tongue in 
cheek with it.

Some athletes take the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year award desperately 
seriously. Alistair, while hugely proud to be on the 16-strong shortlist and be 
second favourite for the award behind Andy Murray, is not one of them. In fact, 
he has a disarming confession. “It’s amazing to be there,” he says, “especially 
in such a special year. Although I wonder how much traction I would have got 
without the Mexico incident.”

Suddenly we are transported back to the final race of the 2016 triathlon season
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-jonny-world-triathlon-series>
 – where, in the space of a few seconds and strides, Jonny went from the verge 
of being world champion to la-la land, his eyes zombie and his legs wobbly due 
to desperate heat exhaustion. It was then Alistair swooped to the rescue, like 
some comic book hero, hooking his arm around his brother’s shoulder and forcing 
him across the line in second place.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alistair%20Brownlee%20gives%20up%20chance%20to%20win%20race%20and%20helps%20brother%20Jonny%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alistair%20Brownlee%20gives%20up%20chance%20to%20win%20race%20and%20helps%20brother%20Jonny%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video&media=>
Alistair Brownlee gives up chance to win race and helps brother Jonny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video>
It was not enough to make Jonny world champion or save him from going to 
hospital. But that instinctive act of brotherly love crashed both men and the 
sport of triathlon into the mainstream. Barely a day has gone by since without 
Jonny being asked by random people whether he would like a glass of water – or 
Alistair being hailed for his supreme efforts.

“Without that I don’t think I would have been on the shortlist,” Alistair 
says. “Suddenly it brought us to the attention of people that had never known 
about us before and it was something we saw as a failure.”

Alistair Brownlee gives up chance to win World Triathlon race and helps 
brother Jonny over line
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-jonny-world-triathlon-series>
Jonny nods solemnly. “What Alistair did was amazing and it makes it a bit 
easier to take but it was definitely a failure.”

Just a month earlier, when they fought each other for Olympic gold along 
Copacabana beach, the finale was barely less dramatic.The pair were level for 
most of the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-ollympics-rio-2016-gold-silver>
 until, in the last half of the 10km run, Jonny told his brother to “relax” – 
and then watched him shoot off to glory.

“I regret saying it,” says Jonny, who finished in second as they became the 
first British brothers to win gold and silver at the same event at an Olympics. 
“It may be I gave him an edge I didn’t need to give him but he probably would 
have won regardless. But yeah, I can admire him for being ruthless, definitely.”

Does he lack a killer instinct? “That’s a bit harsh,” he replies. “Although 
maybe I have a bit less of a killer instinct than Alistair.”

Alistair Brownlee claims triathlon gold and Jonny takes silver at Rio 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/alistair-brownlee-jonny-triathlon-ollympics-rio-2016-gold-silver>
Alistair is typically honest when he is asked whether he preyed on Jonny’s 
niceness. “Maybe I did,” he admits. “But you’ve got to be ruthless to win 
things.”

We are speaking less than a week after the Canadian lawyer Richard McLaren 
revealed that the London 2012 Olympics were “corrupted on an unprecedented 
scale” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/second-mclaren-report-questions-russian-doping>
 by Russia’s government and sporting authorities, and that more than 1,000 
Russian athletes across 30 sports including triathlon were implicated between 
2011 and 2015. So do the brothers worry that some of their rivals might have 
been too ruthless?

Alistair shakes his head. “It’s just a sad fact of life, isn’t it?” he says. 
“Where there are rules they’re going to be broken. And it’s not going to 
disappear overnight – in fact it’s probably going to take generations. But I 
actually think sport is moving in the right direction.”

“Since all the Russia stuff has come out, I’ve definitely looked back and 
gone, ‘Oh, some of them looked a bit dodgy’,” says Jonny. “But at the time I 
don’t think I’ve ever been racing next to someone going, ‘You’re dodgy.’”

Still, given their dominance of a sport that is predominantly about endurance, 
do they ever get questions about whether they can be trusted? “I’ve never had 
anyone say that to my face but, if they did, I’d say, ‘Come and see how hard we 
train,’” says Jonny. “‘Come and live with me in Yorkshire and see.’”

The Anti-Sports Personality of the Year awards 2016 | Simon Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/anti-sports-personality-year-awards-2016>
“We’re very lucky that we’ve quite an open group and lots of athletes from 
different countries – people like Richard Varga – have trained and lived with 
us and seen what we do. And they all say, ‘Well, they train very hard.’” And 
that’s ...”

At this point Alistair interjects. “It does worry you, though, if someone does 
put it to your face because it’s an unanswerable question,” he says, playing 
devil’s advocate. “You can sit here and go, ‘Yeah, well I train really hard and 
I’ve never failed a drugs test and I do everything right and I look at my diet, 
I look at every improvement I can’ – but that’s what everyone else says as 
well. That’s what Lance Armstrong said until he was blue in the face. It’s just 
unanswerable. What do you say? What can you do to reassure people?”

Now it’s Jonny’s turn. “I think the answer a lot of the time is a gradual 
increase in performance,” he says. “You can plot my results quite easily and of 
course there’s a spike around 2010 but, if you’ve been a good junior since you 
were 16 years old, then it shows you have not come from nowhere.”

Alistair nods. “I also think we’ve been lucky to be in a fairly clean sport 
that doesn’t have a history or culture of it, so it would probably be very 
different if we were in athletics, where there seems to be more suspicion.”

Since the Olympics the pair have temporarily eased back on their training – 
with Jonny taking time to watch Leeds United and walk the Yorkshire moors, and 
Alistair catching up with friends.

But Alistair in particular has already set his sights towards new targets and 
especially running the marathon in 2018. “I’ve always wanted to do a marathon 
and I’d obviously love to do London,” he says, adding that he thinks he could 
run around two hours and 10 minutes. “There’s other stuff like an Iron Man that 
I might do too but at this stage I think I’ve got two years before I have to 
think about the Tokyo 2020 Olympics so I’ll try to do some different forms of 
racing and enjoy it.”

Is that a “come and get me” plea to London marathon organisers? He smiles. 
“Yeah.”

For now, though, their immediate focus is on the Sports Personality awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/anti-sports-personality-year-awards-2016>
, an event Alistair has watched since the late 90s. It is a measure of how far 
British sport has come that Greg Rusedski won it in 1997 merely for reaching 
the US Open final, while Michael Owen held aloft the gong after his wonder goal 
in England’s 1998 World Cup defeat by Argentina. “I remember it being a yearly 
institution where we sat down on a Sunday evening as a family and watched it 
just before Christmas,” he says. “I was so young that I couldn’t stay up to 
watch the final result because I had to get up for school the next morning.”

And if he does spring a surprise on Sunday? “Well, we’re going skiing the next 
day,” he says, smiling. “But it would only be right to celebrate a little bit, 
wouldn’t it?”
 