
About a decade ago, Apple ran a series of adverts featuring the comedians 
Mitchell and Webb <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e9s6Lfzdtfo>, designed to 
highlight the difference between Macs and PCs. The ads didn’t bother explaining 
what the spec differences were, or even showing you pictures of the products 
they were advertising (Alan Sugar would have fired the bladdy useless lot of 
’em on the spot). Instead, Apple’s whole purpose was to point out how much 
cooler its computers were compared with PCs.

On the left, David Mitchell was in full Mark Corrigan-mode as the PC, wearing 
a brown suit and explaining how family holidays are best represented in 
pie-chart form. On the right, Robert Webb slouched around with his hands in his 
jeans, breezily explaining how effortlessly creative he was as a Mac. It wasn’t 
a great advert series. It was smug. It was annoying. And it made you realise 
that Apple didn’t understandPeep Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peep-show>. (People rooted for Mark, 
and Jez wasn’t cool. Super Hans using his MacBook to order psilocybin on the 
dark web would have been cool, although the Advertising Standards Authority 
might have had something to say about that.) But you accepted the point: PCs 
were stuffy, out-of-touch, virus-ridden machines suitable only for grey office 
drones to run spreadsheets on. Your dad had one, and it kept freezing whenever 
he tried to show you the email he had received saying he was due £5,000 
compensation as the victim of a road accident. The Apple experience, on the 
other hand, was a constant dress-down Friday full of pictures, music and movies.

The reason Apple got away with this ad was because it was – undoubtedly – a 
very cool company. Throughout the 00s, it changed the way we consumed 
entertainment and shaped the ways in which we interacted with each other. What 
is more, it did so in the form of nice white curvy things that, compared with 
the grey/black boxy PCs, made the world seem a better place (if, by better, you 
mean a permanent episode of Black Mirror where we would sooner press handheld 
blocks of plastic than converse with our friends and family). Apple was so cool 
it had a quasi-spiritual air, with feverish launch events and a leader who 
singlehandedly pioneered normcore. Compared with all this, what didMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> have? Clippy, a crudely 
animated paperclip that was supposed to help you write covering letters.

The distressing news, then, for people who have spent approximately the 
economic output of Moldova on Apple products over the past two decades, is that 
Apple in 2016 no longer seems very cool. In fact, it now seems a bit of a mess, 
as out-of-touch and unfriendly as Mark Corrigan. Its products look increasingly 
samey or – worse – plain ugly. Its innovations, such as the Touch Bar, look 
like the kind of thing a toddler might come up with at an hour’s notice (“Put 
some iPad ... here!” *toddler points above the number keys on a nearby 
laptop*). Itraised its already extortionate prices to cash in on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
 (technically our fault that one, but still). And it seems to be on a mission 
to make everything as incompatible and user-unfriendly as possible. Currently, 
Appleis selling a whopping 17 different dongles 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-37880723> for all the different bits its 
devices no longer serve properly. Meanwhile, its compatibility is a car-crash 
example of capitalism gone rogue: even theiPhone’s new standard Lightning 
headphones won’t connect to Apple’s latest line of laptops without an adaptor 
<https://medium.com/charged-tech/apple-just-told-the-world-it-has-no-idea-who-the-mac-is-for-722a2438389b#.hap0bkee7>
. It all points to a grand strategy whereby come 2036 you won’t be able to type 
at all without special gloves that have to be individually purchased to fit 
each finger, and then will only allow you to spell out the word “plonker”. 
Where once Apple had an app for things you didn’t imagine were possible, now it 
has a dongle for things that were perfectly possible before you needed a dongle.

Oh, and on top of all this, it has now got a CEO called Tim (embarrassing) who 
wears a fleece and doesn’t seem to think he’s Jesus. It’s all wrong.

But if Apple’s cachet is fading, who does that leave us with? Surely not 
Samsung – its phonesliterally blow up in your hands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/19/samsung-galaxy-s6-explosion-lawsuit-note-7-recalls>
. Step forward ... Microsoft and Bill Gates! Once, he was derided as a 
squeaky-voiced billionaire who couldn’t possibly be as cool as that guy who 
tucked his roll-neck shirt into stonewashed dad jeans (weird times, looking 
back now). These days, Microsoft’s co-founder is doingsome pretty cool stuff 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_%26_Melinda_Gates_Foundation>. Such as 
pouring his billions into philanthropic projects fighting malaria in Africa. 
And helping to eradicate poverty. Of course, ending life-threatening disease is 
only technically cool if you can make nice, shiny computers on the side, but 
Microsoft seems to be sorting that side of things out too. At a recent launch 
event, itturned its attention to the world’s “creatives” 
<https://www.engadget.com/2016/10/26/microsoft-is-making-a-play-for-apples-base-of-creatives>
 – tempting designers and musicians to cross the bridges and start taking a
Surface Pro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/laptop-tablet-hybrid-microsoft-two-in-one>
 to their nearest organic coffee store. Is such a shift really possible? It 
could be. After all, evenClippy seems to have harnessed his valuable retro 
appeal of late 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-microsoft-future-ai-chatbots/>, 
starring in memes with all the nonchalance of a piece of animated stationery 
who always knew he was about more than page indentation advice. Have the tables 
turned? Has Mark finally got the whip hand over Jez?

The ball’s in your court, Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>
. You were cool once. But now you need to sort out your products and at least 
try to end measles. Failing that, how about making something we can plug a USB 
stick into?
 