
The Philippine president has said that Abu Sayyaf militants may have plotted 
to kill him and kidnap boxing star Manny Pacquiao, disclosing previously 
unknown details about an extremist group blamedfor the beheading of a Canadian 
hostage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/canadian-hostage-beheaded-by-islamist-militants-in-philippines>
.

President Benigno Aquino III said the Muslim militants also wanted to explode 
bombs in metropolitan Manila to try to get funding from theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> group but the plans were uncovered and 
troops have reduced Abu Sayyaf’s ability to inflict harm.

An insider's guide to Manila: where brutalism meets bamboo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/14/insider-guide-manila-philippines-brutalism-bamboo>
Aquino, whose six-year term ends in June, vowed “to devote all my energies” to 
ensure that the extremists would be “at the very least ... a very seriously 
degraded problem” for his successor.

While he has forged a peace pact with a larger Muslim rebel group, Aquino said 
there is no possibility of engaging in talks with the brutal Abu Sayyaf, which 
is accused of beheading Canadian John Ridsdel on Monday in southern Sulu 
province.

“We have always believed in the power of dialogue, development and positive 
engagement over arms,” Aquino said. But he said of Abu Sayyaf: “You have chosen 
only the language of force and we will speak to you only in that language.”

Ridsdel, 68, was beheaded after Abu Sayyaf did not receive a large ransom it 
had demanded by a Monday deadline. A fellow Canadian, a Norwegian and a 
Filipino woman who were kidnapped with Ridsdel from a southern marina in 
September are still being held by the militants, along with about 20 other 
foreign hostages.

Police have recovered Ridsdel’s head, which was dumped by the militants in 
Sulu’s Jolo town. A headless body was also found by villagers in a mountain 
clearing in Sulu and police forensic experts were checking Wednesday if it was 
that of the former mining executive.

Aquino said he sent a letter expressing condolences to Ridsdel’s family, 
describing his death as appalling.

The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said he spoke to Aquino about 
possible actions against the kidnappers.

“The discussions I had with president Aquino and are continuing to have with 
our allies in thePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> is 
the need to bring these criminals to justice and to do whatever we can to 
express that we are very concerned about security of Canadians,” Trudeau said.

The Canadian leader stressed that “we will not pay a ransom.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/philippine-muslim-militants-demand-60m-ransom-for-three-foreign-hostages>

A sizeable Abu Sayyaf force, led by militant commander Radulan Sahiron, is 
surrounding the remaining captives, Aquino said. While that is a delicate 
situation, “it is also an opportunity because smashing these forces is within 
our grasp,” he said.

“Casualties are to be expected,” he said, but he added that troops were 
adequately trained and well-armed.

Aquino said the Abu Sayyaf militants have posed as Islamic freedom fighters, 
but “have behaved as criminals focused on enriching themselves by taking 
hostages for ransom.”

“They allegedly even hatched plots to kidnap Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> or one of his children, as 
well as my sister Kris or one of her children, with the plan to use them in 
bargaining for the release of their cohorts,” he said, referring to his younger 
sister, who is a famous actress.

“Threats against my own life have been investigated,” he said, without 
elaborating.

The Abu Sayyaf began a series of large-scale abductions after it emerged in 
the early 1990s as an offshoot of a separatist rebellion by minority Muslims in 
the southern Philippines.

It has been weakened by more than a decade of government offensives, but has 
endured largely as a result of ransom and extortion earnings.
 