
The Rangers manager, Ally McCoist, branded their Ramsdens Cup exit to Queen of 
the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> "a sore one" 
after his side suffered their first defeat of the season.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were sent crashing out 
of the tournament after a dramatic penalty shoot-out decided the third round 
tie at Ibrox, which was still deadlocked at 2-2 after extra-time.

Rangers' form has been mixed so far this season, and they have yet to record 
their first win on the road in the Third Division. However, last night's loss 
ends any hopes of a domestic clean sweep of silverware this term.

McCoist: "It's a sore one, that's for sure. "It's really, really disappointing 
to get beat and knocked out in the manner we did.

"I'm not sure there was an awful lot between the teams. I thought we'd 
probably done enough to hold on when we got the second goal and we were down to 
10 men so I was disappointed with the manner in which we lost the goal as well.

"I haven't seen it again but a couple of the boys were telling me it was our 
throw-in and that the lad looked a yard offside. But, that aside, we should 
probably still be defending it a bit better."

McCoist claimed the cup exit at the hands of the Second Division leaders was 
not a kick up the backside for his players. "I don't think it's a wake-up call. 
It's a big disappointment," he said. "If any of the team were needing a wake-up 
call, then I hope that's it, that's for sure. It's certainly not a wake-up call 
for me â€“ it's just a massive disappointment."

Nicky Clark opened the scoring for Queen of the South, before Barrie McKay 
levelled and Lee McCulloch netted from the penalty spot. The visitors then 
forced the tie into extra-time thanks to Gavin Reilly's strike deep into 
injury-time, which was allowed to stand despite furious claims of offside by 
Rangers players.

Both teams finished the match with 10 men after substitute Kevin Kyle saw red 
for Rangers after just 13 minutes on the pitch, and Willie Gibson was also sent 
off for the Dumfries side.

Asked about Kyle's dismissal, McCoist said: "There didn't look to be a lot in 
it to me and Kev says the same. I haven't seen it again but sometimes you get 
the decisions and tonight we definitely didn't."

The Queen of the South manager, Allan Johnston, said: "I'm just delighted for 
our boys. With the effort they put in throughout the whole game, I think they 
got their just rewards come the end of the match."
 