
Snoop around the contents of an “eat clean” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/16/diet-eat-clean-how-to-detox-your-fridge-amelia-freer>
 aficionado’s grocery basket and chances are, among the organic cauliflower and 
mountain of avocados, you will come across a carton of almond milk. A few years 
ago, those avoiding cow’s milk because of lactose intolerance or for ethical 
reasons were drinking soya, but health scares have seen a rising demand for 
alternative plant “milks”, including rice, hemp and – most popular – almond. 
This week, Waitrose said almond milk hadovertaken soya as its customers’ 
preferred dairy alternative 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/news/waitrose-confirm-that-almond-milk-sales-overtake-soya-milk-for-the-first-time-a6701976.html>
.

Almonds are one of the healthiest foods you can eat. The nuts (or seeds, if 
you are a botanical pedant) are packed full of vitamins, minerals and 
beneficial plant chemicals, as well as protein, healthy fats and fibre, and 
eating almonds is associated with a lowered risk of heart disease and 
Alzheimer’s, among other conditions.

Alarm as almond farmers consume California's water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/14/alarm-almond-farmers-drain-california-dry>
It makes sense, then, to assume almond milk is packed with healthy properties. 
On cartons of Alpro (“enjoy plant power”), one of the market leaders that uses 
almonds grown in the Mediterranean, there is a picture of an almond breaking 
open as if this elixir of good health is exploding out of it. But, like many 
other brands, Alpro’s almond content is just 2% – the biggest ingredient is 
water, followed by sugar. Like most others, it also contains additives such as 
stabilisers and emulsifiers. The amount of sugar is less than the natural 
sugars found in cow’s milk, so it has fewer calories, but there is also less 
protein – 0.5g to the 3.5g you’ll get in the same amount of cow’s milk. 
Protein, says Helen Bond, spokesperson for the British Dietetic Association, 
“gives a feeling of fullness, it helps you to feel fuller for longer, and a lot 
of people are trying to get their protein intake up”. Dairy, she adds, “is a 
really great source of a readily available form of calcium, so you need to look 
for plant-based milk that is fortified with calcium, essential for maintaining 
bones as we get older”.

Like quinoa, another staple of hip “health” obsessives before it, production 
of almond milk also appears to have a hefty environmental impact. More than 80% 
of the world’s almond crop is grown in California, which has been experiencing 
its worst drought on record. Ittakes 1.1 gallons (5 litres) of water to grow 
one almond 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2014/02/wheres-californias-water-going>
, and thanks to the big profits they bring in, almond orchards continue to be 
planted (this isn’t to say cow’s milk, which takes about100 litres of water to 
produce 100ml of milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/jan/10/how-much-water-food-production-waste>
, is more environmentally friendly – more that its production is not 
concentrated in one area of the globe).

Last year, an apocalyptic piece for Mother Jones by Tom Philpott 
<http://www.motherjones.com/tom-philpott/2014/07/your-almond-habit-sucking-califoirnia-dry>
, who has long detailed the environmental ravages of this crop in California, 
summed up the problems: almond farmers drilling thousands of feet down into 
aquifiers to pump out water has resulted, in some areas, in subsidence of 
around 11 inches a year, which “threatens vital infrastructure like bridges, 
roads, and irrigation canals” and could trigger earthquakes. Furthermore, 
insatiable demand for almonds is harming honeybees, already an embattled 
species. Almond trees need to be pollinated but bringing in 1.6m hives to 
California every year, “into an area dripping with insecticides is a recipe for 
disaster” writes Philpott (up to 25% of the hives were damaged in 2014 
<http://www.motherjones.com/tom-philpott/2015/05/almonds-now-require-85-percent-us-beehives>
), including whole colonies killed off; this spring they fared better after 
guidelines were issued about pesticide-use during the trees’ blooming season). 
It’s enough – or should be – to make anyone spit out their almond milk latte in 
alarm.
 