
Almost a quarter of people in Wales are struggling to make ends meet and 
poverty is costing the country £3.6bn a year – a fifth of theWelsh government’s 
annual budget <http://gov.wales/funding/budget/draft-budget-2017-2018/?lang=en>
, a report has revealed.

The report from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/press/poverty-costs-wales-3-point-6-billion-every-year> 
raises concern the crisis may grow when the UK leaves the EU because of the 
funding Wales receives from Brussels. It provides a series of suggestions for 
alleviating the problem including creating an enterprise zone covering the 
whole of the south Wales valleys, one of the most deprived areas in the UK.

Drawn up with the Bevan Foundation 
<https://www.bevanfoundation.org/commentary/prosperity-without-poverty/>, a 
thinktank based in the valleys, the report concludes the initiatives that would 
solve the situation need to come not just from the Welsh government but from 
business, trade unions, charities and individuals.
Joseph Rowntree Fdn. (@jrf_uk) 
Poverty costs Wales £3.6 billion every year - equivalent to £1,150 for every 
person living in Waleshttps://t.co/sENkO3ff4m <https://t.co/sENkO3ff4m> 
#solveukpoverty <https://twitter.com/hashtag/solveukpoverty?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/KooE05zTFn <https://t.co/KooE05zTFn>
 <https://twitter.com/jrf_uk/status/795901607053508609> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jrf_uk/status/795901607053508609> 
The Labour-controlled Welsh government said it was working hard to address 
poverty but that the report, published on Tuesday, showed there was still much 
work to do. Plaid Cymru claimed it illustrated austerity was not working for
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and said the report should be a 
wakeup call for the political establishment in Cardiff and London.

The report – Prosperity without Poverty – says an average of 700,000 people 
were in poverty in Wales in the three years to 2014-15: that is 23% of the 
population.Poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> is linked to 
additional public spending on health, education, social care and police and 
criminal justice services to the tune of £3.6bn a year – equivalent to £1,150 
for every person living in Wales, the report says.

It adds that compared with a decade ago there are fewer children and 
pensioners in poverty – but more people of working age. The report flags up 
high levels of “underemployment”, highlighting that in September about 17% of 
part-time workers wanted but could not get full-time jobs.

The report says: “Tackling working poverty means recognising that for too 
many, low pay goes hand-in-hand with low hours. On average, part-time employees 
in Wales are paid much less than full-time employees, at £8.12 an hour 
(excluding overtime) compared with £12.26 an hour.”
Graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-08T12:04:15/embed.html>
It says there are particular challenges in certain areas: for example, the 
number of jobs per head in Blaenau Gwent in the valleys is half the average for 
Britain.

Millions of pounds in EU money has been ploughed into the valleys over the 
years. The report acknowledges this, saying: “An immediate priority for Wales 
is to secure the continuity of funding under current EU structural fund 
programmes as part of the negotiations about UK withdrawal from the EU. In the 
longer term, the UK government should earmark a sum equivalent to Wales’s 
structural fund receipts – approximately £400m a year in 2014 – to rebalance 
the Welsh economy and support inclusive growth and employment.”

View from Wales: town showered with EU cash votes to leave EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/25/view-wales-town-showered-eu-cash-votes-leave-ebbw-vale>
Calling for more affordable homes to be built, the report says high housing 
costs are the cause of poverty for 100,000 people in Wales.

The report sets out a series of suggestions for tackling the problem. They 
include:


 * Developing a new enterprise zone across the whole of the valleys that would 
use local planning powers and financial incentives including tax breaks to 
encourage job creation and employment of people at risk of poverty. 
 * Accelerating the Welsh government’s commitment to creating better jobs 
closer to home by encouraging local authorities, universities and hospitals to 
focus more on disadvantaged local people. 
 * Investing more money in education and creating better teachers. 
 * Developing more high-quality apprenticeships. 
 * Finding ways of increasing community collective action – such as mass 
switching of energy provider. 
Julia Unwin, chief executive of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, said: “Poverty 
in Wales is holding back almost a quarter of the population, damaging the 
economy and affecting the life chances of the next generation. This is 
unacceptable.”

Bethan Jenkins, Plaid Cymru spokeswoman for housing, poverty, communities and 
steel, said: “When we get to the point where nearly a quarter of all people in 
Wales are experiencing poverty, this should as a massive wakeup call to the 
entire political establishment, both here in Cardiff and in Westminster. This 
report shows that the current austerity approach has truly run its course.”
Joseph Rowntree Fdn. (@jrf_uk) 
We need to reduce the high cost of housing to help solve poverty in Wales: 
https://t.co/v5suez5KRp <https://t.co/v5suez5KRp> #solveukpoverty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/solveukpoverty?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/4dIYGO6XKq
 <https://t.co/4dIYGO6XKq>
 <https://twitter.com/jrf_uk/status/795926941295636480> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jrf_uk/status/795926941295636480> 
The leader of the Welsh Conservatives, Andrew RT Davies, welcomed the report 
but said solutions were needed for the whole of Wales, not just in places like 
the valleys. He said: “It’s important that we recognise these challenges exist 
in communities across the whole of Wales, not just in one area. Regeneration 
status must apply to the whole country.”

A Welsh government spokesperson said: “Employment in Wales is the highest on 
record and the number of children living in workless households is continuing 
to fall. However, as this report shows, there is still more to be done and 
we’re committed to rising to the challenge.

“We have big ambitions for Wales and its economy and we will continue to work 
hard to create and safeguard jobs. We are investing £111m next year alone to 
create 100,000 all-age apprenticeships, piloting a Better Jobs, Closer to Home 
project to create employment and training hubs in deprived areas, and 
developing a fresh approach to improving prosperity in the south Wales valleys, 
which is being driven by a new ministerial taskforce.”
 