
Britain’s richest households have pulled further ahead of the rest of the 
population as house prices have accelerated, with the top 10% now owning almost 
half of the country’s £11.1tn total private wealth.

The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the average household was worth 
£225,100 in 2012-14, when it carried out itslatest survey of the country’s 
assets 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/was/wealth-in-great-britain-wave-4/2012-2014/index.html>
.

Since the previous survey two years earlier, the top tenth of households had 
seen a 21% increase in their wealth, includingproperty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> and shares. That was three times 
as fast as the increase over the same period for the poorest half of 
households, who saw their wealth rise by 7%.

Distribution of UK wealth 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/household_wealth/giv-25750cCRRA7OZKbHu/>
 Distribution of UK wealth. 
It left the top tenth of households owning 45% of total wealth, while the 
bottom half were left to share just 9%. The poorest 1%, meanwhile, owned just 
0.05% of wealth.

Inequality of wealth tends to be exacerbated when the prices of assets such as 
property and shares are rising rapidly, and has become an increasingly 
controversial political issue. Labour advocated a “mansion tax” on the most 
valuable homes in its 2015 manifesto.

The TUC general secretary drew the contrast between the sharp increase in 
wealth for the richest households and the squeeze in earned income in recent 
years as wage growth remained weak after the financial crisis.

“The government must reshape the economy to address the UK’s over-reliance on 
property and financial investments,” Frances O’Grady said. “Future growth must 
be built on the firm foundation of higher wages in both the public and private 
sectors, and investment in skills and industry.”

The shadow Treasury minister, Rebecca Long-Bailey, said: “This Tory government 
has done nothing substantive to tackle the growing problem of wealth inequality 
in our country, in fact by cutting inheritance tax for a wealthy few at the 
same time as cutting universal credit for working families they are only making 
matters worse.”

Shadow chancellor John McDonnell has recruited the French economist Thomas 
Piketty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/14/piketty-to-investigate-inequality-in-new-role-at-lse>
 – who advocates taxing wealth more heavily to prevent inequality running out 
of control – to his panel of economic advisers.

The ONS asked Britain’s families about their savings, shared portfolios and 
housing wealth. They found that the top 10% owned at least £1,048,500 in assets 
while the bottom 10% owned £12,600 or less.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eeb0d00b57da67125a48f4ac8b8fca2c34675fa%2F0_0_742_445%2F742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Almost%20half%20of%20Britain's%20private%20wealth%20owned%20by%20top%2010%25%20of%20households&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Almost%20half%20of%20Britain%27s%20private%20wealth%20owned%20by%20top%2010%25%20of%20households&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eeb0d00b57da67125a48f4ac8b8fca2c34675fa%2F0_0_742_445%2F742.jpg>
 Wealth distribution. Illustration: ONS 
Duncan Exley, director of the Equality Trust, said: “When such a huge chunk of 
the country’s wealth is found in the hands of so few people, it is clear 
something has gone terribly wrong. Aside from the disproportionate power this 
provides the richest, we know this vast inequality also weakens our economy and 
damages our society.”

The ONS found that private pension <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>
 portfolios accounted for 40% of households’ total wealth, with the richest 10% 
of households having a £749,000 pension pot, compared with just £2,800 for 
households in the least wealthy half of the population.

It said the rising value of pension portfolios had been an important cause of 
the 18% increase in aggregate wealth over the two-year period between its 
surveys.

Asset prices have recovered strongly in recent years, helped by the continuing 
low level of global interest rates. The Bank of England is yet to increase 
borrowing costs from the record low of 0.5% they reached in March 2009.

Inequality of wealth in Britain has a clear regional dimension, the ONS data 
showed, with wealth heavily concentrated in London and the south-east, where 
the housing market has bounced back strongly since the slump that followed the 
global financial crisis.

Average household wealth in the north-east, at £150,000, was less than half of 
that in the south-east, where it was £342,400.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6347029b8297776fc457b5292669ec9701993273%2F0_0_695_686%2F695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Almost%20half%20of%20Britain's%20private%20wealth%20owned%20by%20top%2010%25%20of%20households&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Almost%20half%20of%20Britain%27s%20private%20wealth%20owned%20by%20top%2010%25%20of%20households&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fbritain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6347029b8297776fc457b5292669ec9701993273%2F0_0_695_686%2F695.jpg>
 Households in the south east and London are Britain’s wealthiest Illustration: 
ONS 
In total, property wealth in Britain, net of mortgages, increased by almost 
£400bn over the two years between its latest wealth surveys, the ONS found.

Mark Posniak, managing director of Dragonfly Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Finance, said: “In 2014, Finland’s 
GDP was £184bn, which means Britain’s property market is effectively an economy 
in itself. UK homeowners have been able to sit back while their properties, 
collectively, generate more cash than entire countries.”
 