
Four out of five junior doctors took part in the first all-out strike in NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> history on Tuesday, as David Cameron 
blasted their withdrawal of emergency care.

If patients come to harm in this NHS strike, it will be on Jeremy Hunt’s head 
| Henry Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/patients-strike-jeremy-hunt-junior-doctors-health-service>
At some hospitals, almost 90% of junior doctors refused to work between 8am 
and 5pm, in an escalation of their campaign against the new contract thatJeremy 
Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> intends to impose on 
them.

However, most hospitals coped well and did not experience any problems, with 
senior medics taking on duties usually undertaken by their junior colleagues. 
A&E units were quieter than usual as patients with minor ailments heeded NHS 
warnings to stay away.

Junior doctors – all those below the level of consultant – will stage a second 
all-out strike on Wednesday during the same hours.

Dr Johann Malawana, chair of the British Medical Association’s junior doctors 
committee, said: “The overwhelming turnout at almost 150 picket lines across 
England today shows the strength of feeling amongst junior doctors against the 
government’s plans. Tens of thousands protested against a contract they believe 
is unfair and damaging to patient care in the long term.”

None of England’s 156 acute hospital trusts reported any patient safety 
incident or sudden inability to cope with demand that might have led them to 
ask striking doctors to return to work, allaying fears that patients might come 
to harm because of the absence of so many medics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjunior-doctors-none-of-us-want-to-strike-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Junior%20doctors%3A%20'None%20of%20us%20want%20to%20strike'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjunior-doctors-none-of-us-want-to-strike-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Junior%20doctors%3A%20%27None%20of%20us%20want%20to%20strike%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fjunior-doctors-none-of-us-want-to-strike-video&media=>
Junior doctors: ‘None of us want to strike’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/apr/26/junior-doctors-none-of-us-want-to-strike-video>
Figures released by NHS England showed that 21,608 junior doctors – 78% of 
those due to work – participated in the industrial action. It claimed that this 
was down from the 88% who did so on each day during the previous strikeon 6-8 
April. However, the 88% figure raised questions as NHS England had previously 
said that almost half of doctors had worked on those days.

Turnout was highest at Barts Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, the largest trust in the NHS. The 
London trust said that 88.4% of its 1,000 junior doctors had joined the walkout.

After four previous strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/23/junior-doctors-announce-three-48-hour-strikes>
, Tuesday was the first one to affect areas of life-or-death treatment, such as 
A&E, maternity and intensive care. At the two hospitals run by King’s College 
hospital trust in south London, none of the 13 trainee obstetricians and 
gynaecologists turned up and nor did any of the 26 junior doctors working in 
its critical care unit. However, 16 of the 22 junior doctors in its emergency 
department did work as normal.

At the South London and Maudsley NHS foundation trust, only 40 out of 246 
trainees worked – an 84% turnout. Turnout elsewhere was 81% in Ipswich, 74% at 
the Royal Free in London, 64% in Blackpool and Stoke and 63% in Bournemouth.

Will Denby, a GP registrar in Hampshire, said that he opposed the action 
because withdrawal of care in emergency areas of care threatened the bond of 
trust between doctors and patients.

Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell join striking junior doctors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/26/jeremy-corbyn-and-john-mcdonnell-join-junior-doctors-strike>
“The strike is now wholly unfortunate, regrettable and damaging. I would like 
to hope that all parties wish it had never come to this – no one will come out 
of it well,” he said.

“I don’t support withholding emergency care. I don’t think it directly causes 
harm, or affects safety, but it affects our relationship with the people we 
serve. Our profession has to have trust with the society we serve at its heart, 
and while I agree there is a longer-term view in all-out striking, for me a 
line is crossed. I would support continued striking, but not over acute and 
emergency care.”

NHS services ran smoothly, although 13,000 operations and 113,000 outpatient 
appointments had already been cancelled as a direct result of this week’s 
strikes. Surgeons reported that very few trainees had turned up for work and 
that consultants had coped well with their workload.

The prime minister said the unprecedented action was unjustified because 
junior doctors had been promised a 13.5% rise in their basic pay to make up for 
having to work more antisocial shifts.

He defended the health secretary’s robust handling of the eight-month-old 
dispute, which has caused disquiet in the medical profession. “There is a good 
contract on the table, with a 13.5% increase in basic pay – 75% of doctors will 
be better off with this contract,” Cameron told ITN.

“It’s the wrong thing to do to go ahead with this strike, and particularly to 
go ahead with the withdrawal of emergency care – that is not right.”

A new opinion poll shows that 59% of people across the UK support the junior 
doctors, even though they have resorted to all-out strikes to try to thwart 
Hunt. However, the survey by OnePulse, a mobile app, found that support had 
fallen by six percentage points from the 65% backing recorded last month.


 