 The past will meet the future plenty of times during the long campaign ahead, 
but rarely as directly as it meets it right now. Here's Al Gore, the 
techno-nerd vice president and self-styled "Father of the internet", two 
radio-mics strapped to his back and a Palm Pilot wireless electronic organiser 
attached to his belt - the candidate from the future. And here's the woman 
whose vote he wants, 96 year old Sister Mary DeLourdes Verhey, lifelong nun and 
regular at the Lifetime Centre for the elderly in Dubuque, Iowa.
"Ninety-six years old?" asks Gore in mock-incredulity, ensuring his words are 
relayed to the TV crews packed at the back of the hall. "I don't believe it - 
can I see your drivers' licence?"

It's a routine campaign stop, just one of a thousand similar events Gore and 
his fellow presidential candidates will have to endure in their marathon race 
for the White House - a race which will be decided one year from today. But in 
the collision of Al Gore, politics' very own Millennium Man, and Sister Mary, 
with her childhood memories of Teddy Roosevelt, you can see the struggle 
tugging at the heart of the coming election. For this is simultaneously the 
last presidential contest of the 20th century and the first of the 21st. A 
campaign begun in 1999 will not see a president sworn in until January 2001. It 
sits on the cusp.

The result is an election which is looking both ways - ahead and over its 
shoulder. The outward trappings look familiar enough: it's still a contest of 
all white, all male politicians tramping through the snows of New Hampshire and 
the hog farms of Iowa, following the fiercely-defended tradition that grants 
those two states the right to be first in the nation to pick a president. It's 
still handshakes and stump speeches against telegenic backdrops; still country 
music when the candidate walks in, hand-painted signs held aloft while they 
talk, cheers and backslapping when they finish. And the issues even sound the 
same: still education and health care, still taxes and defence. Nothing much 
here that the ghost of Richard Nixon or Harry Truman wouldn't recognise.

And yet, for all that, it's possible to glimpse in this election the outline 
of something no one has seen before: the politics of the coming century. From 
the changing age, colour and sex of the American people to the transforming 
power of the internet, the demands of the new era are beginning to nudge their 
way into this, the last great battle of the old.

You can hear them even here, in the fluorescent-lit, low-ceilinged "day room" 
of the seniors' centre in Dubuque. For well over an hour, Gore is grilled by 
the pensioners of eastern Iowa on the cost of prescription drugs, the fate of 
the Medicare health system for the elderly and the social security fund they've 
paid into their entire working lives. The Veep has detailed, costed answers to 
all their questions - the upside to Gore's famous stiffness of style is an 
impressive grasp of substance - because he knows they matter. For one thing, 
American seniors vote: grey power has been a player in US elections for 
decades. But now they are voting in ever bigger numbers.

"Do y'all know who's the fastest growing group in our society?" Gore asks the 
Lifetime crowd. "It's the 85-and-overs - and the 95-and-overs are catching up!" 
As the silver heads turn to each other in surprise, the candidate fires off 
another zinger. "There are 70,000 Americans over a hundred years old."

Gore goes on to explain that as his baby-boom generation get older - he became 
a first-time grandfather on the Fourth of July (of course) this year - the need 
for long-term care is going to intensify. The demand on the social security 
fund will only get greater. Medicine is improving, doctors are keeping us alive 
for longer, he explains. America is going to have a lot more people around in 
the future, warns Gore - and a lot more of them will be old.

Both the vice president and his sole rival for the Democratic nomination, 
former senator and basketball hotshot Bill Bradley, can talk endlessly about 
this stuff. Pensions for the elderly and care for the sick dominated their 
first TV debate in New Hampshire last month. Both candidates agree that the sun 
may be shining in America right now - but they need to fix the hole in the roof 
before winter comes. Just like any thoughtful politician in Britain or across 
Europe, they realise that among the most pressing questions of the next decades 
will be the strain on public services: how to make them work better and cost 
less. It is a question the future is asking now.

The Democrats are not the only ones poring over the demographic forecasts. The 
Republicans have also crunched the numbers and realised that the America of the 
21st century will look very different from the nation of the past - or at least 
their front-runner and near-certain nominee has.

George W Bush, the relaxed, folksy governor of Texas and son of the former 
president, has held a commanding lead in the polls since the day he became a 
candidate - even before. This despite the fact that he is an unashamed 
lightweight on policy, almost comically ignorant of foreign affairs - he 
referred to the people of Greece as "Grecians" - and a self-confessed past 
abuser of alcohol and drugs. The secret of Bush's success lies in the changing 
face of what will be 21st century America.

George W speaks Spanish. That may not seem like a big deal, but it may well 
hand Bush Jr the key to the office vacated by his father just seven years ago. 
His rapport with Latino voters - smoothed by his message of "compassionate 
conservatism" - has opened a constituency once considered a no-go area to his 
party. Unlike his father and any previous national Republican candidate, W is 
comfortable around "ethnic" voters. That matters in a country where Hispanics 
form 11% of the total population - a figure that's projected to rise to 25% by 
2050. Latinos already account for one in four of the voting electorate in at 
least six American states - including key prizes like Texas and Florida and the 
big enchilada itself, California. The mere fact that Bush is competitive in 
those communities wipes out the Democrats' usual head start in a presidential 
election - their hold on the ethnic vote.

Republican strategists believe that Bush's unprecedented incursion into 
non-white America, coupled with his daunting lead among whites, makes it close 
to impossible for any Democrat to beat him next November. Hispanic voters 
simply matter too much. "The monopoly of white European America is over," says 
former Reagan White House official, A Mark Neuman. "The 2000 election signals 
that the minority communities are going to hold the balance of power in America 
in the next century."

The Bush team have not stumbled into this discovery. The candidate's political 
guru is one Karl Rove, who's taken to directing journalists to the dissertation 
he wrote at university. Its topic: the last fin de si√®ecle US presidential 
election. William McKinley won in 1896, wrote Rove, by reaching out to the new 
wave of immigrants then transforming the face of America. McKinley understood 
that the United States of the 20th century would no longer be English, Scottish 
and Irish but Italian, German and Russian. "A successful party had to take its 
fundamental principles," wrote the student Rove, "and style them... for the new 
nature of the country and the new electorate." McKinley did that on the eve of 
the 20th century and Bush, with his En Espanol website and his Hispanic 
brunches in New Hampshire, is repeating the trick at the dawn of the 21st.

McKinley's other winning insight was to realise America was entering a new 
economy; the industrial revolution was changing everything. The current 
election is haunted by an identical thought. The information revolution, 
globalisation, the electronic age - all these big, vague and scary ideas are 
hovering over campaign 2000.

At its most trivial, it's Gore's Palm Pilot or Bush's super-duper website. But 
it weaves through the rhetoric and substance of this campaign, too. "I took 
three years off to work out where the technological revolution and 
globalisation was going to lead the global economy," Bill Bradley told the 
audience at that first TV debate with Gore.

 The candidates all know the internet is important, but none of them is quite 
sure what else to say. They know it will reshape the next century utterly, but 
they're not sure how. There is a semi-debate on globalisation: Bush is a 
free-trader who wants to "tear down the barriers of fear", while Pat Buchanan, 
the one-time Republican now seeking the Reform party nomination, is a 
protectionist whose America First credo runs to a belief that the US should 
have stayed out of the second world war. But beyond these generalities, there 
is only uncertainty.

Even Mr Futurology himself, Al Gore, does not (cannot?) sketch a vision of how 
American working lives will look in 2050 or even 2020. Will the fact that 
American companies no longer advertise themselves, but their websites - you see 
billboards for chicagotribune.com, not The Chicago Tribune - destroy or create 
work? Will shopping online wipe out jobs for shop assistants, but create them 
for delivery drivers? Who knows? Certainly not the politicians.

"I don't think we should be so dependent on the internet," worries Kristy 
Bahl, 20 years old and a trainee teacher in the crowd at a Bush rally in 
Dubuque (Iowa towns tend to get lavished with aspirant presidential attention 
at this time of year). She adds that it would be "awesome" if there were a 
woman president; and reckons that the next century may produce one. Whoever she 
is, the chances are she is growing up right now, in the more equality-conscious 
1990s. The current crop of candidates sprung up in the 1950s and 60s - and 
there is not a woman among them.

Globalisation, the internet, sexual equality - they have something in common: 
the change is already happening, and will dominate the next century, but 
presidential politics has not yet caught up.

Still, one clear theme is beginning to break through: a worry about the future 
which voters seem ready to talk about right now. The American economy has never 
been healthier. This year alone the US government was $122.7bn in the black, 
with even greater amounts of extra cash forecast for the next 25 years. The 
pundits talk of the new "politics of surplus," with Washington disputes now 
centring not on which cuts to make in public expenditure but on a less 
familiar, more welcome question: how to spend it?

But underneath there lurks a trickier dilemma. You can find it by clicking 
onto georgewbush.com, where the banner slogan that greets you is "Prosperity 
with a Purpose." Americans know they're rolling in cash. But, as is the way of 
rich people, their wealth has allowed them to wonder about the thing money 
can't buy: meaning. "Yes, our children must learn how to make a living," 
candidate Bush said last week. "But even more, they must learn how to live and 
what to love."

Bush's answer is faith, which is why he talks less like a politician and more 
like an evangelical pastor: "Thank you for sharing your testimony with us," he 
tells one voter, "thank you for being a soldier in the army of compassion." But 
Bush's rivals also understand the problem, even if they don't rely on the same, 
religious solution. Gore always draws a knowing sigh from an audience by 
telling them the average American couple now works 500 hours more per year than 
they did a generation ago, or that seven in 10 American children have both 
parents out at work. "They're stressed out!" says Gore, voicing the exhaustion 
he can feel in the room.

So the candidates understand that the United States is in the grip of a time 
famine, a human-made disaster which technology only seems to make worse. They 
haven't proposed a remedy - nobody is talking about job-sharing or a shorter 
working week - but they are at least recognising the problem. In their words, 
you begin to guess at what the politics of the next century may hold. For if 
the last 100 years have witnessed America's breathless, urgent acquisition of 
wealth, perhaps the next hundred will be a quest for a different kind of 
resource: moral capital. Perhaps the campaigns of the next century will seek to 
end the paradox which has made America the richest nation on earth, but also 
one of the most violent and brutal. Perhaps it will see the Americans become a 
healthy nation, as well as a wealthy one. It is an idea full of promise - but, 
after all, is politics without promises?
 