
There is something that Prince Alwaleed bin Talal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prince-alwaleed-bin-talal> of Saudi 
Arabia badly wants you to know: the exact amount of his wealth.

In 2009, he invited a Forbes reporter to a week-long visit 
<http://www.forbes.com/2009/03/27/inside-prince-alwaleed-saudi-palace-business-billionaires-alwaleed.html>
 of his 420-room palace in Riyadh and to accompany him and his then wife, 
Princess Ameera, on a flight to Cairo on board his personal Boeing 747 to make 
sure the magazine realised the scale of his wealth when compiling the list of 
the richest people on the planet.

That plan did not go well. In 2013, he launched a libel action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/06/saudi-prince-libel-action-forbes-rich-list>
 against Forbes for underestimating his fortune. The magazine said he was worth 
$20bn, the 26th most wealthy billionaire in the world, but he claimed his 
fortune was much larger. After all, the 60-year-old member of the Saudi royal 
family and self-proclaimed Arabian Warren Buffett, is the wealthiest man in the 
Middle East, holding stakes in the likes of Apple, Twitter, Citigroup, Canary 
Wharf, Time Warner and Paris’s George V and London’s Savoy hotels.


Prince Alwaleed: why he's not happy to be the 26th richest person in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2013/mar/27/prince-alwaleed-not-happy-26th-richest-world>
This week, the prince, who has a penchant for texting influential people and 
has James Murdoch on speed-dial, announced he will donate all his wealth to 
charity, including empowering women through his own Alwaleed Philanthropies 
organisation, modelled on the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. As he invited 
the world media for a briefing in Riyadh, he also used the opportunity to push 
his version of the size of his fortune, which he says is $32bn (£20bn). That is 
still at odds with Forbes’s 2015 estimate of $22.6bn, which puts him 34th on 
its list.

Alwaleed, a nephew of King Salman and a grandson of Saudi Arabia’s founder, 
Abdulaziz, is unlike other big Saudi princes. He often appears in public with 
his tinted glasses and wearing suits instead of the usual ankle-length thawb. 
The prince, who is obsessive about calorie counting and usually has no more 
than 1,100 a day, has progressive views on women, music and cinema and has 
called for the Arab world, Saudi monarchy included, to implement reform.


He married the glamorous and unveiled Ameera years after she interviewed him 
for a school paper when she was 18. In a society where women are kept away from 
the limelight, he appeared with her in public – including at the wedding of the 
Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in 2011 – and insisted on Saudi newspapers 
publishing her photos despite the usual restrictions on using Saudi women’s 
images in print. The prince divorced Ameera in 2013, although they remain 
friends.


He is happy to boast that his Saudi-based headquarters employ more women than 
men and that they don’t have to wear veils at work. Not everyone believes that 
the prince’s focus on women is solely aimed at empowering them; some critics 
say it is also a way for him to gain more influence, especially in the west.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6f568637fbf414ec12d961493779a3a6ce280d%2F143_0_2032_3056%2F2032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6f568637fbf414ec12d961493779a3a6ce280d%2F143_0_2032_3056%2F2032.jpg>
 Alwaleed and his then wife, Ameera, at the wedding of the Duke and Duchess of 
Cambridge in 2011. Photograph: Jasper Juinen/Getty Images 
But there are limits to what money can buy, even if you are Alwaleed. In the 
2000s, he famously financed a woman from Mecca, Hanadi Zakaria al-Hindi, to 
become his country’s first female pilot. She was certified to fly inSaudi Arabia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> in 2014 and may be able to fly 
the prince’s private jet (though it isn’t clear if she does that in Saudi 
Arabian skies), but she surely won’t be able to drive on Saudi streets. Women 
are still banned from doing so in the the world’s most theocratic kingdom. 
Alwaleed and Ameera support the campaign to change that.


Alwaleed was born in Jeddah, on the coast of the Red Sea, in March 1955. His 
father is Prince Talal, a senior member of the royal family who was sidelined – 
and even exiled – because he was seen as a black sheep for wanting a 
constitutional monarchy.

Talal has recently been critical of the king empowering his son and 
centralising power around his son’s house. Alwaleed’s mother was Mona Al Solh, 
the daughter of Lebanon’s first prime minister Riad Al Solh. He studied at 
Menlo college in California and later received an off-campus master’s degree 
from Syracuse University.

The prince says he is a self-made billionaire, claiming that his father only 
gave him a $30,000 endowment and a $300,000 loan and a house. It remains 
unclear how he was subsequently able to amass such a huge amount of money in a 
short time.

His first investments were in construction and it was not until 1991, when he 
rescued the then fragile Citicorp, that the west came to know of his financial 
firepower. He has since come to the rescue of many other big companies and his 
wealth has grown at a startling rate, now stretching to a super yacht (which 
became the setting for a James Bond film and was once owned by Donald Trump), 
private jets (an A380 he later sold), countless acres of lands, and hotel 
giants Four Seasons and Mövenpick.

His Rotana group is the Arab world’s largest entertainment company. His 
Kingdom resort outside Riyadh has a private zoo and an underground cavern, 
according to Vanity Fair. He is the chairman of Kingdom Holding, which controls 
many of his assets.

Alwaleed’s contact book bursts with A-listers, his diary is punctuated by 
meetings with the world’s powerbrokers. He texted Carla Bruni when Nicolas 
Sarkozy lost the French presidential election in 2012. He is active on Twitter, 
where he has 3.35 million followers. His timeline is full of his pictures with 
the world’s biggest names.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6fb26e753241d47c197eaa887b33742bbe28acd%2F60_50_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6fb26e753241d47c197eaa887b33742bbe28acd%2F60_50_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 Alwaleed with Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris in 2008. Photograph: Getty Images 
The Murdoch clan are important associates. Alwaleed has a stake in Murdoch’s 
News Corp and Rupert Murdoch has shares in the prince’s Rotana Group. But in 
2015, it emerged that Alwaleed was reducing his holdings from 6.6% to about 1%.

During the phone-hacking scandal, Alwaleed stood by Murdoch’s family but 
called for Rebekah Brooks to resign. She stepped down a day after the prince’s 
intervention. “James [Murdoch] is not my partner only in News Corp,” Alwaleed 
told Vanity Fair’s William Cohan in 2013. “He’s also my partner in the Rotana … 
He’s a highly ethical, professional, decent man. I think of his honesty. I’m 
thinking of him. I know him very well.”

Saudi prince sells most of his News Corp stock for £125m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/feb/04/saudi-prince-sells-5-of-his-news-corp-stock-for-125m>
 Jane Kinninmont, a senior research fellow at Chatham House, said it is not 
unknown for billionaires to give vast amounts of their money away, but she 
underlined the political and social prominence of Alwaleed in Saudi Arabia.

“He is a very interesting figure politically and socially in the Saudi royal 
family,” she said. “One of his media companies financed the film Wadjda, which 
is the first feature film directed by a Saudi woman shown at Cannes, so he has 
a history of making high-profile gestures which are surprising and which make 
him popular, at least with a liberal constituency.”

Alwaleed has been indirectly criticised by a number of conservative Saudi 
clerics for his satellite channels, for example.


“He’s quite a young man to be making such a [philanthropic] move, it’s not as 
if he’s coming to the end of his career or that he needed to look at his 
legacy,” she added.

“Some people speculate that maybe he is someone with political ambition in 
Saudi Arabia. That’s probably unlikely because he’s so liberal, relative to 
that society. But having amassed so much wealth, he may well be interested in 
his reputation.” Bill Gates, who has worked with the prince for charity, 
praised him for his latest move this week.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14c3ccc4a2a87fea4f3023d1055f92b4ddfc966c%2F0_49_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alwaleed%20bin%20Talal%3A%20meet%20the%20Saudi%20prince%20giving%20away%20all%20his%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Falwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14c3ccc4a2a87fea4f3023d1055f92b4ddfc966c%2F0_49_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 One month after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, Alwaleed is 
escorted by then mayor Rudi Giuliani at the site of the former towers. 
Photograph: Stan Honda/AP 
Alwaleed, who likes watching CNBC and has given money to many universities – 
including Harvard, Cambridge and Edinburgh – has not been immune to 
controversies. Perhaps the most curious is his alleged retention of a group of 
dwarves as an act of charity. The prince has described reports of dwarf-tossing 
as lies. His supporters say he has shown a favour to the dwarves by giving them 
shelter and money. The prince, who frequently invited journalists to his 
palaces before, has since become somewhat press shy – at least to western media.

Another big controversy was his plan to offer 100 Bentleys to 100 Saudi pilots 
involved in the military campaign against Yemen. The Saudi-led coalition 
against Houthi rebel forces there has killed hundreds of civilians, among them 
children. Alwaleed is also believed to hold hostile views about Iran, Saudi 
Arabia’s main rival in the region. Other Saudi figures to benefit from his 
generous gifts include footballers. Not all his donations are gratefully 
received, though; his $10m cheque to New York after the 9/11 attacks was 
rejected by the city’s mayor.


Dean Mousavi, a human rights activist based in Iraq, said Alwaleed enjoys a 
surprising degree of respect in the region, even among Shia Muslims, because of 
his inclusive views of the Shia sect of Islam.

But Mousavi is unsure what result giving such a large amount of money away 
will bring. “It gives him some publicity, which he wants to have in the west 
such as in the US and France,” Mousavi said. “It’s all about presenting a good 
image of himself in the world, but I’m not sure where the money will go.”

Potted profile


Born 7 March 1955

Age 60

Career He considers himself a self-made billionaire with wealth of around 
$32bn (£20bn) and is the 34th richest person on the planet, according to 
Forbes. He is the chairman of Kingdom Holding and has holdings in everything 
from Apple and Twitter to London’s Savoy hotel, as well as owning a 420-room 
Riyadh ­palace, a superyacht, and several jets.

High point In 1991, he rescued the ailing Citicorp, investing $590m in a stake 
that is now worth billions. He is politically and socially liberal relative to 
conservative Saudi society, giving opportunities to women in a country where 
women are not allowed to drive. He has vowed to donate all his wealth to 
charity to help provide disaster relief, empower women and foster cultural 
understanding.

Low point In April, he tweeted that he was offering luxury Bentley cars to 
Saudi pilots as a reward for their efforts in the military campaign against 
Yemen, which has led to the deaths of hundreds of civilians.

What he says “I don’t make mistakes. I make blunders,” he told Vanity Fair in 
2013. “When you make a mistake you lose $10m, $50m, $100m, but when you make a 
mistake of $200m to $500m, or $1bn, that’s a blunder. So I’ve made mistakes, 
blunders, but I learned from them … by not doing them again.”
 