
UFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 200 was sold, rightly so, as the 
biggest event in the history of mixed martial arts’ ubiquitous promotion.


Yet through four fights on the pay-per-view portion of the card, action had 
been slim and fans watching at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas or on 
televisions around the world grew restless as bouts went to the judges.

Then Amanda Nunes stepped into the cage as the challenger in the evening’s 
recently rearranged main event versus bantamweight champion Miesha Tate, and 
ramped up the violence.

UFC 200: Amanda Nunes blasts Miesha Tate for bantamweight title – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/09/ufc-200-live-tate-nunez-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva>
Nunes, a 28-year-old slugger on a three-fight win streak from Salvador, 
Brazil, wasted no time in going after Tate, who captured the title in March in 
dramatic fashion against Holly Holm. “The Lioness” slammed hard right hands 
into Tate’s face, busting up the 29-year-old American titleholder.

“The first thing I saw, she was already a little bit hurt,” Nunes said. “I 
controled myself because I know [Tate] comes back strong in the next round.”

Nunes didn’t give Tate the chance.

Protecting her face, which was pouring blood onto a special deep yellow 
colored canvas in commemoration of the much ballyhooed UFC 200 card, Tate 
turtled up allowing Nunes to calmly secure back-control. The Brazilian 
jiu-jitsu black belt sunk in a hard rear-naked choke and Tate begrudgingly 
tapped at 3.16 of round one.

“She’s a very fast starter,” Tate said. “Very dangerous in the first round. 
She caught me fair and square.”

'I am so happy with my life': Nunes becomes first openly gay UFC champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/10/amanda-nunes-first-openly-gay-ufc-champion>
Nunes is the third woman to hold the UFC title at 135lbs since Holly Holm 
upendedRonda Rousey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ronda-rousey> last 
November.

The definitive result confirms that parity reigns among the bantamweight 
women, and for now there’s no sign that Rousey is interested in returning to 
claim the title she gave away in Australia.

UFC 200’s main event spotlight was not originally intended for the Nunes-Tate 
clash – one of several contests on the deep card that was overshadowed by the 
presence of Brock Lesnar as well as hype surrounding Daniel Cormier’s rematch 
against his hated rival, Jon Jones.

Instead of meeting Jones in a 25-minute contest, Cormier wrapped up one of the 
most emotional weeks of his athletic career taking an easy three-round decision 
over UFC legend Anderson Silva. Cormier, the UFC light heavyweight champion, 
was slated to fight the troubled former titleholder until Wednesday evening 
when it was revealed the United States Anti-Doping Agency flagged Jones for 
banned substances following a drug test in mid-June.

The news set into motion a wild 24 hours for all involved, and instead of 
facing Jones, whom many consider the best pound-for-pound mixed martial artist 
today, Cormier was asked to fight Silva, the man long considered the best 
middleweight inMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> history.

Prior to Saturday night Silva was 3-0 in light heavyweight contests, but the 
odds were stacked high against Cormier considering just two months ago he 
underwent emergency surgery to remove his gallbladder and hadn’t been training 
near full capacity.

“This fight was a big personal challenger to accept it and put into practice 
all the things I’ve trained over the years,” Silva said. “This is proof 
anything you can put your mind to you can do.

“I haven’t been really training since the surgery but it was a good test.”

Silva’s status as the Greatest of All Time has been questioned since he 
dropped the UFC middleweight title to Chris Weidman three summers ago, going 
0-2 with one no-contest following an embarrassing run-in with performance 
enhancing drugs that netted him a hefty fine and suspension from the Nevada 
Athletic Commission. Yet that same commission thought it was appropriate to 
license Silva as a last-second opponent for Cormier, and so the pair met in a 
contest that proved to be less than competitive.

Cormier, an American Olympic wrestler, took the safe route, choosing to mostly 
grind away at Silva en route to a unanimous decision win (30-26, 30-26, 30-26) 
that elicited boos from a crowd fantasizing to see him exchange on the feet 
with the lanky Brazilian striker.

“The fight went how it had to go,” Cormier said. “I’ve been training for a 
specific guy for eight weeks. I did what I had to do. It’s very difficult to 
switch opponents on two days.”

Jones’ latest fall from grace sets Cormier as the undisputed champion at 205 
despite the fact that the current belt holder lost convincingly 18 months ago 
to the man who bowed out on Wednesday.

“I was sad. I worked hard to fight Jones,” Cormier said. “I tried to erase 
that loss. most guys would not take this fight. They would not do it. But I 
felt I needed to. Mentally it was draining.”

In many ways, even before Cormier-Jones fell apart, the night’s feature 
attraction was Lesnar. The physical anomaly returned to mixed martial arts five 
years removed from his last appearance in the Octagon in a move designed to 
inspire wrestling fans and casual fight watchers to fork over the price of the 
pay-per-view.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fnunes-tate-ufc-200-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f451601a1021edab8b9213d929029659676e061%2F0_165_4632_2780%2F4632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amanda%20Nunes'%20title-winning%20beatdown%20of%20Miesha%20Tate%20salvages%20UFC%20200&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fnunes-tate-ufc-200-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amanda%20Nunes%27%20title-winning%20beatdown%20of%20Miesha%20Tate%20salvages%20UFC%20200&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fnunes-tate-ufc-200-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f451601a1021edab8b9213d929029659676e061%2F0_165_4632_2780%2F4632.jpg>
 Brock Lesnar celebrates his win over Mark Hunt. Photograph: Rey Del Rio/Getty 
Images 
Lesnar, who won the UFC heavyweight title in 2008 and defended it twice, and 
whose MMA career was cut short due to the intestinal disorder diverticultis, 
showed yet again that competing in grappling-centric events is something he was 
born to do.

The massive man, a national champion wrestler at the University of Minnesota 
in 2000, set out to take on one of the heaviest hitters in fighting over the 
last two decades, New Zealand’s Mark Hunt. Lesnar knew he had to rely on 
takedowns and top control and that’s exactly what he did.

Over three rounds Lesnar neutralized Hunt on the canvas and, using mostly 
short strikes with hands encased in triple-XL gloves, scored a unanimous 
decision win (29-27 three times). He earned a guaranteed purse of $2.5m, a 
publicly reported record for a UFC contest.

“It took me a little while just to get acclimated,” said Lesnar after his 
victory was announced. “Words can’t describe it.”

Lesnar appeared to be fading as action headed to the third period, however an 
early takedown planted the grappling-deficient under the mammoth wrestler’s 
mount and that was the beginning of the end. In all, Lesnar outstruck Hunt on 
the floor 43-2.

The UFC heavyweight division could use Lesnar’s presence, however the current 
WWE superstar is scheduled to return to professional wrestling next month and 
said any thoughts of future fights in the UFC should be taken “one day at a 
time.”

Taking things as they come has been Jose Aldo’s modus operandi since suffering 
an embarrassing 13-second knockout against Ireland’sConor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/conor-mcgregor> in December.

The Brazilian featherweight great returned to form in a rematch of a bout 
against Frankie Edgar from 2013, which Aldo won on points. The first fighter to 
hold the UFC gold at 145lbs once again bested the former UFC lightweight 
champion throughout a masterful five round affair in which the American’s 
wrestling was shutdown, and his face was battered with heavy counter punches.

As McGregor watched from cageside, sometimes on his feet, Aldo moved and 
planted as he pleased, shucking off Edgar’s pressure and takedown attempts at 
will. Edgar came into the contest on a roll, having won five straight since the 
loss to Aldo three years ago, but he simply did not have enough to handle the 
29-year-old Brazilian.

In a departure from his usual fare, Aldo rarely unleashed low kicks—even with 
his corner begging for him to utilize perhaps the most effective weapon in his 
significant arsenal. Instead Aldo relied on precision counter striking, 
pivoting and parrying, and an almost unimaginable ability to toss Edgar aside 
whenever the New Jersey native tried to engage him with grappling.

After scores were announced (judges saw it 49-46, 49-46 and 48-47), Aldo spoke 
about his love for his trainer Andre Pederneiras and his desire to step back 
into the cage with McGregor.

“Frankie is a great athlete,” Aldo said through a translator. “I respect 
everyone. But I have one goal and that is to beat [McGregor] and you can bet 
the next time I’m in here I will beat him.”

Kicking off the pay-per-view portion of the card, Cain Velasquez, who was 
familiar with Aldo’s pain, having suffered a stoppage loss 13 months ago in 
Mexico City against Fabricio Werdum to relinquish the UFC heavyweight title, 
rebounded to score his tenth knockout in the UFC – the most for any fighter in 
the division – capping a dominant late first round stoppage over Travis Browne.

The powerful Velasquez used his speed, relentless striking output and swarming 
wrestling to overwhelm Browne, who dropped his third fight in his last five 
chances in the Octagon.

A wheel kick to Browne’s head preceded a swarming series of punches that 
overwhelmed the tall Hawaiian until referee John McCarthy saved him with three 
seconds remaining on the clock.

“I’m always looking for perfection,” Velasquez said. “I felt like my timing 
was off a little bit, but that will come with more fights. I want to fight the 
best guys. I want to fight for a title but I want to fight the best guys.”

In the end, all the UFC has sought to do is what Velasquez desired. Pitting 
the best competitors in mixed fighting against one another has been the main 
avenue by which UFC expanded its brand of fighting. Sometimes things pan out. 
Sometimes they don’t. This is, after all, sport. And while UFC 200 won’t go 
down as the best night of action in the company’s 23-year history, it will be 
remembered for invoking the worst and best things about MMA as it stands today.
 