
Amir Khan says fighting the formidable linear middleweight champion Saúl 
“Canelo” Álvarezin Las Vegas this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/02/amir-khan-to-fight-canelo-alvarez-las-vegas-may>
 instead of a less dangerous, domestic challenge for Kell Brook’s welterweight 
belt in front of 80,000 people at Wembley was a calculated gamble he could not 
refuse.

Khan figures it this way: he has nothing to lose and everything to gain 
against Álvarez, who will be bigger and stronger, the clear favourite, and 
fighting in front of his fanatical Mexican fans at the opening of the 
20,000-seater T-Mobile Arena on 7 May, Cinco de Mayo weekend.

Amir Khan a whipping boy no longer after career-defining choice of Canelo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/02/amir-khan-a-whipping-boy-no-longer-after-career-defining-choice-of-canelo>
As Khan points out, the 35th bout of his nine-year professional career will be 
the first time he goes in as underdog – and Brook will always be there; Álvarez 
will not. It is a reasonable strategy, although Khan’s contention that he will 
make more against “Canelo” than against Brook was later contradicted by his 
father, Shah, who admitted they are taking a pay cut.

Also, Oscar De La Hoya, negotiating on Álvarez’s side, has insisted on a 
rematch clause, because they also have their sights on a much bigger contest, 
against the unbeaten knockout king, Gennady Golovkin. So, if Khan is to pull 
off the most unlikely coup in boxing this year, he will have to beat Álvarez 
twice. It is the longest of long shots, but the fighter was unfazed when he and 
the champion began a promotional tour in London on Monday.

“It’s a massive fight,” Khan said, “the first time Canelo has come to London, 
and with the WBC chairman, Mauricio Sulaiman, too. It’s a bigger fight 
financially [than Brook]. It’s not only a big fight in England, it’s a big 
fight worldwide, and that’s one of the reasons I took it, because it’s global. 
It will be massive for my profile in America, as well as England. No one ever 
expected this, and the shock just makes the fight bigger.

“I’m very big at my weight [147lb], he’s not a big middleweight [160lb], but 
nobody will know when I get into the ring with him how I will do. I’ve seen his 
fights and guys who move well give him big problems. If I was a flat‑footed 
fighter and just standing there, that would be the worst style for me [to 
employ]. Because I’m a mover, I think it’s one of the best fights out there for 
me.”

De La Hoya, who has worked with Khan many times, has him back in the fold 
after the Bolton boxer flirted with the Al Haymon promotional machine, only to 
belet down by Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/05/amir-khan-floyd-mayweather-fight>
, and then get thecold shoulder from Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/03/amir-khan-manny-pacquiao-agreement-las-vegas>
. “When I presented this fight to Amir Khan, I did not once think he would 
decline, because of who he is,” the Golden Boy said. “He is willing to take on 
everybody. He deserves the big fights. There is a reason Mayweather and 
Pacquiao didn’t want to fight him. Whether he’s come out on top or on the 
losing end, he’s been in great fights.

Canelo Alvarez is now boxing's biggest star as Gennady Golovkin looms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/23/canelo-alvarez-assumes-role-as-boxings-biggest-star-as-gennady-golovkin-looms>
“If Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> beats Canelo, we’ll 
obviously do the rematch. But I’m looking forward to working with him once 
again. We built him, we drove his career to new heights, we got him the big 
fights and now we’re getting him the megafight, which he deserves.”

De La Hoya, though, is unequivocally in the Canelo business. A Khan victory 
would only make life complicated. The promoter is adamant his fighter will 
fight Golovkin, perhaps after beating Khan. “I’m very confident,” De La Hoya 
said. “I like Golovkin, he has a great style, he’s a real fighter and he has 
created a mystique that I love. It’s just a matter of time. Believe me it will 
happen very soon.”

Álvarez said he would enter the ring at 165lb, fully 10lb above the agreed 
weigh-in limit of the day before. Khan says he has gone to the ring as heavy as 
162lb, so there ought not be as large a disparity in size as some fear. 
Nevertheless, the Mexican, speaking through an interpreter, said: “It was a 
little bit surprising for me that he accepted the fight. He said, ‘I’m willing 
to fight anybody’. He’s definitely one of the top fighters in the world, a 
great fighter. He’s very fast, his boxing ability is unmatched.

“It’s going to be a great event, a challenge for me. But I’ve faced pretty 
much every style there is. I’m capable against someone like Amir.”
 