
Amir Khan is reported to have signed an agreement to fight Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> next year, which sets pulses 
and alarm bells ringing simultaneously.

A report by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/boxing/article-3302438/Amir-Khan-signs-deal-fight-Manny-Pacquiao-April-9-Las-Vegas.html>
 stated the former world champion “has agreed terms in every last detail” for a 
fight against the eight-division champion on 9 April in Las Vegas. The document 
has apparently reached Pacquiao’s promoter, Bob Arum, althoughhe told Yahoo 
Sports 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/boxing/no-deal-for-pacquiao-khan-fight-despite-daily-mail-report-224122756.html?soc_src=mediacontentstory&soc_trk=tw>
 that those claims were “bullshit”.

“It’s total bullshit. It’s complete bullshit,” he said.

“I’m sitting here trying to figure a way to sell tickets to my fight [between 
Timothy Bradley and Brandon Rios on Saturday] and now my phone is ringing off 
the hook because this lunatic made some shit up.”

If it does happen, it is a fight with plenty of history, given the fighters 
were once training partners at Freddie Roach’s Wild Card gym in Hollywood and 
then grew apart when Khan fell out with Roach before joining Andre Ward’s 
mentor, Virgil Hunter.

“Our paperwork went off to Arum on Friday and every point is covered,” Khan’s 
father and chief adviser, Shah Khan, said.

Pacquiao is in rehabilitation after injuring a shoulder last year on the eve of
his defeat by Floyd Mayweather Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/02/floyd-mayweather-v-manny-pacquiao-mgm-las-vegas-live>
, a fight that proved to be one of boxing’s great delayed let-downs.

He has been pencilled in for an April return with no fixed opponent, although 
Khan’s name was in the mix, along with those of Tim Bradley and Terence 
Crawford, the latter an attractive but extremely dangerous match-up, the former 
not exactly blinding box-office. So Khan was a logical banker for Arum to 
maximise Pacquiao’s return.

However Khan has been down this road before, with no result at the end of it. 
In December 2013 he signed an agreement to fightFloyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>. The only problem was 
Mayweather had signed nothing – and dodged Khan to fight Marcos Maidana, whom 
Khan had already beaten.

There were further reports at about that time that Khan might also fight 
Pacquaio, feeding on the animosity between him and Roach, but that is pretty 
much a dead issue now.

Of more concern to supporters of the British fighter is his seeming trust in 
the promises of the business’s main movers and shakers. He signed with 
Mayweather’s behind-the-scenes mastermind, Al Haymon, specifically to get a 
fight with the champion, and was sadly let down three times: twice because 
Maidana got the biggest gig in boxing against Mayweather, then when his own gym 
mate, Andre Berto, became Floyd’s 49th and supposedly last opponent.

“We have been here before with Mayweather,” Shah Khan admitted, “so, while we 
are confident the contract will be back with us in the next few days, we are 
holding the second Saturday in January as a fall-back date for an alternative 
fight.”

That seems a far more likely route to follow, and his opponent then will 
probably be Danny Garcia, who ripped away his light-welterweight title in 2012 
to instigate the messiest passage of Khan’s career.

He has done tremendously well to rebuild from that disappointment. He could do 
without any more false promises.

If he does get the fight with Pacquiao, it will be deserved. He might also win 
it, given the Filipino’s gradual decline over the past few years and his 
increasing involvement in his country’s politics as a serving congressmen. If 
Pacquiao were in anyway distracted in a fight against Khan, he could be leaving 
the sport a loser at the end of a glorious career.
 