
It is authentically ancient rather than merely old, this wandering way through 
Wales called Sarn Helen.Edward Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edward-thomas> loved it, brought it into his 
poems and prose time and again. I love it too. Some stretches are bronze age or 
earlier in origin. The Romans subsumed these into their web of communications, 
subtly.

I turned off from the high way before the climb to the Hobgoblin's Stone and 
took a lane without motorable exit, heading east. It burrowed between cloddiau 
– the characteristic stone-and-earth dykes that are boundary markers throughout 
Wales – and immersed itself in the deep shadow of a beech avenue. Each tree was 
50 or 60 feet high, straight-boled, the bark a browny-silver badged with 
lichen. A few sprays of foliage were infused with the coming fire-tone. There 
was even something still present of the translucent green vernal leaf-delicacy 
– though on close inspection they are blotched, ragged, time-worn.

What astounds me about this avenue is its sculpturesque quality. Each trunk is 
five or six feet in circumference, and only adjusts itself to soar vertically 
after the same length of horizontal growth. The roots delve deep into the 
cloddiau on top of which the saplings were planted perhaps a century ago. They 
continue on, spreading into good earth beneath. The hedger's craft interwove 
the young trees' pliable branches, laid them into a tight barrier against 
roving stock. When the way fell into disuse and its hedges were no longer 
trimmed, aspiring shoots seized the opportunity neglect affords and grew 
skywards. Now the stock from which they grew tall has the appearance of some 
mighty recumbent creature, stretched out along the dyke, a writhing glimmer of 
form in the shade, like some great work of art that transfiguring imagination 
has filled out from the mere exercise of country craft.
 