
More than 25 years ago Janet Malcolm outraged journalists by suggesting that 
they were engaged in a “morally indefensible” trade.

They preyed on their sources, she wrote. Having gained their confidence they 
went on to betray them “without remorse” and then justified having done so by 
claiming to have acted in the wider public interest.

Her book, The Journalist and the Murderer, gradually gained a measure of 
acceptance and her thesis features in many courses about journalistic ethics.

I found myself mentioning it during a discussion on BBC Radio Scotland today  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b083w3ps#play>about the media revelations of 
child abuse by football coaches. The question posed by the presenter, Kaye 
Adams, was whether the coverage had been sensationalist.

Accusations of sensationalism (a supposedly bad thing) are knee-jerk stuff and 
are a regular topic on radio phone-ins. So I usually pass when asked to speak 
because I hear myself saying the same thing time after time. There is no 
winning. We, the mainstream media, are routinely damned if we do and damned if 
we don’t.

I note, of course, the irony of such programmes being part of the very media 
brouhaha that they affect to discuss “impartially.”

But I decided to take part this time because I wanted to hear what possible 
criticisms there might be about the coverage. I couldn’t see how a story of 
such significance, which had remained hidden for so long and was, in at least 
two instances, subject to a cover-up, had been sensationalised.

To recap, the story was broken by the Guardian on 16 November when Andy 
Woodward, a former Bury and Sheffield United player,told how he was sexually 
abused by a former football coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> while at Crewe 
Alexandra between the ages of 11 and 15.


By any standards, this was a shocking and, yes, a sensational story. 
Unsurprisingly, it was followed up by other newspapers, on TV and radio, and 
there was plenty of mentions on social media too.

Six days’ later, another Crewe player, Steve Walters, spoke to the Guardian 
and made similar allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
. And the following day, a former England and Tottenham footballer, Paul 
Stewart, told the Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/paul-stewart-sexually-abused-coach-9313094>
 he had been sexually abused as a youth player.

In the subsequent days and weeks, there were more revelations. Two players 
spoke on BBC TV’sVictoria Derbyshire programme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05qqk5c> about being abused. The Football 
Association launched an inquiry.

By 1 December, according to a Daily Telegraph article 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/01/football-child-sex-abuse-350-victims-come-forward-say-police/>
 which cited the National Police Chiefs’ Council, 350 victims had come forward 
to report child sexual abuse within football clubs.

And the latest twist in the story, reported on the Guardian’s front page today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/dario-gradi-suspended-fa-sexual-abuse-scandal>
, was the suspension by the FA of Dario Gradi, Crewe’s director of football, 
pending a top-level investigation.

Having looked back over the national press coverage I cannot detect that it 
was unduly sensationalised. Nor, indeed, could the other three people on the 
programme, all of whom deal with child abuse survivors.

In spite of Kaye Adams clearly prompting them to complain, they were not 
tempted to do so. It transpired that they were not upset by the coverage. 
Indeed, two of them saw it in largely positive terms.

The third spokesman - Paul Roffey, director of RWA child protection services - 
did point to the central dilemma: publicity is important in order to advance 
investigations because people come forward, but it also has the effect of 
creating anxiety for those suddenly cast into the media spotlight.

My concern, he said, is that “journalism doesn’t understand that tension. We 
don’t know what the impact is on someone seeing themselves spread across the 
news.

“It is done for good reasons... but there should be a level of discretion and 
caution.”

Roffey’s point about the personal effect on someone who “goes public” is one 
that too few journalists think about: the consequences on the individual (hence 
my reference to Janet Malcolm’s book).

We all tend to cite “the public’s right to know” as a mantra, implying that 
the individual’s suffering is for the greater good. Only on those occasions 
when journalists themselves become the story do they realise just how tough it 
is to be the central figure in a national story.

Although we are not nearly as cavalier as many critics suggest (and the 
largely sensitive coverage of football child abuse is a case in point), we 
cannot deny that a trade based on the disclosure of secrets does have a 
downside.
 