
The bird ledges on Mowing Word, a cock’s spur of a limestone point on the 
south Pembrokeshire coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/23/pembrokeshire-coast-national-park-rangers-guide>
, are empty now. The guillemots and razorbills that jostle, cackle and croon 
here through the spring months, their single eggs perilously free from nests’ 
constraints, are far out to sea, searching for food.

The cliff on wild days is storm-watchers’ domain. To stand on top as green 
combers thud into the walls beneath, roar into the cave and recoil in white 
chaos is to become aware of even rock’s fragility. Sometimes the whole narrow 
headland shakes beneath your feet, and white spume that looks so light lashes 
the skin.

On fine days the climbers congregate. From by the rusted smugglers’ rings on 
Gun Cliff <http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/crag.php?id=793>, through a glass 
I watch a team tussling with one of my own routes. Their progress brings back 
to me all the thrill of fingertip pioneering on unknown and vertiginous rock in 
the lithe strength of youth.

Crowds of birds make an uplifting sight in an era of long-term decline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/crowds-birds-uplifting-sight-era-decline-country-diary>
The summary tease, too, of names we bestowed: Charenton Crack, after the 
lunatic asylum where De Sade was incarcerated 
<http://www.charentonmacerations.com/2010/11/15/thename/>, for the razor 
calcite edge of its impendent fissure that drew my blood; Heart of Darkness, 
for the hanging traverse above the black cave where waves sucked and roared; 
New Morning for that soaring crack that cleaves the golden wall above. The crux 
pitches of these last two, which I first linked 45 years ago, is now a classic 
in the British sea-cliff repertoire.

The last time I climbed it was in 2002, coaxed up it by my son Will. I recall 
his languid elegance on that glowing wall, so beautiful, like some great bird 
about to take flight. As soon he did.His going 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/sep/02/guardianobituaries> broke my 
heart. Now all that’s left is the wonder of the natural world, its surviving 
splendour, and to see into people’s souls, where sometimes there is good.

A fulmar drifts past on pale grey wings 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/f/fulmar/index.aspx>
. The old mariners held them to be spirit-birds. Soughing waves beneath, a soft 
wind, the ache of absence here all reiterate presence of the elemental in our 
lives.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frock-climbing-pembrokeshire-cliff-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0370bb4bd4ac7cca0e432b0549203e823d4084%2F0_0_2120_1414%2F2120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20elemental%20challenge%20for%20climbers%20and%20storm-watchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frock-climbing-pembrokeshire-cliff-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20elemental%20challenge%20for%20climbers%20and%20storm-watchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frock-climbing-pembrokeshire-cliff-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0370bb4bd4ac7cca0e432b0549203e823d4084%2F0_0_2120_1414%2F2120.jpg>
 Northern fulmar in flight. Photograph: James Warwick/Getty Images  