
The Guardian’s latest ICM poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/are-you-worried-about-labours-polling-figures>
 makes grim reading for Labour; but might there be a silver lining for Corbyn 
supporters? Could an election defeat result in aparliamentary Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/29/labour-mps-vs-corbyn-war-party-members-tories-brexit>
 that would be more Corbyn-friendly than is currently the case?

Are you worried about Labour's polling figures?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/are-you-worried-about-labours-polling-figures>
Back in March, the media had a great deal of fun with a leaked list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/labour-mps-hostile-corbyn-leaked-party-document>
 put together by a Corbyn staffer that categorised Labour MPs according to 
their perceived loyalty to the leadership. The smallest group, made up of 
Corbyn himself and the 18 MPs most loyal to him, was designated the Core Group, 
while there were 56 MPs labelled Core Group Plus. The largest group, called 
Neutral But Not Hostile, was made up of 71 MPs. Core Group Negative contained 
49 MPs and Hostile Group 36. Some 17 MPs weren’t included in any of the 
categories – and a couple of them appeared in more than one group.

One way of answering the question, then (presuming for the sake of argument 
that the leaked list was reasonably accurate), is to compare the safety or 
otherwise of the seats occupied by MPs in the list’s different groups.

Doing this reveals that there isn’t much difference in the majorities on which 
MPs loyal to Corbyn are sitting and those won by his detractors. There isn’t 
any obvious sense in which Core Group (average majority 12,194) and Core Group 
Plus (average majority 9,412) are much more likely to survive a cull ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs at the next election than 
Core Group Negative (average majority 11,656) or Hostile Group (average 
majority 9,941) – or for that matter, Neutral But Not Hostile (10,067).

Another approach is to take a guess at the vote share that parties might get 
at the next election, convert that to the seats they are likely to win and lose 
on that share, and see whether that makes a difference to the ideological 
composition of the PLP.

Activists longing for a more pro-Corbyn parliamentary Labour party will have 
to rely on their own efforts to get one

Now clearly, caveats apply: we’re assuming once again that the leaked list’s 
designation of Labour MPs is reasonably accurate; we’re assuming that the next 
election will take place on current boundaries; and we’re using one poll’s 
results and relying on the educated guesses built into vote-seat calculators. 
But we believe it’s worth our while.

If ICM’s latest results were repeated at a general election, the Conservatives 
would win 43% of the vote and Labour 27%, with the Liberal Democrats on 8%, 
Ukip 12%, Greens 5%, and the SNP 4%. This would result in the Conservatives 
gaining nearly 50 seats, bringing their total to 379 – a majority of 108. 
Labour would lose just over 40 seats, leaving them with just 190, although 
since 10 of the expected survivors were not included on the loyalty list, we’ve 
had to leave them out of our calculations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Felection-labour-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fded1b446d7489aad22810b39fc34a0f3e7df69e3%2F1_8_787_472%2F787.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20election%20now%20would%20be%20crushing%20for%20Labour%20%E2%80%93%20and%20for%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20%7C%20Tim%20Bale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Felection-labour-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20election%20now%20would%20be%20crushing%20for%20Labour%20%E2%80%93%20and%20for%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20%7C%20Tim%20Bale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Felection-labour-jeremy-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fded1b446d7489aad22810b39fc34a0f3e7df69e3%2F1_8_787_472%2F787.png>
This projection – illustrated in two pie charts above (the first of which 
excludes MPs who were double counted or have died since the list was leaked) – 
likewise suggests that a defeat at the next election will not materially alter 
the balance of pro- and anti-Corbyn MPs in the PLP. Anyone supportive of the 
current leadership, then, who believes that Corbyn and those around him will 
benefit from some sort of clear out of his opponents by the voters, is likely 
to be seriously disappointed.

Corbyn urges May to see I, Daniel Blake to gain insight to life on welfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/corbyn-urges-may-to-see-i-daniel-blake-to-gain-insight-on-life-on-welfare>
Just as importantly, should Corbyn step down in the wake of a defeat, there is 
no guarantee that a Corbynista successor will make it on to the ballot, thus 
ensuring that Labour’s currently pro-Corbyn grassroots members and supporters 
can pick someone to carry on where he leaves off. If Labour is left with 190 
MPs, then said candidate will need 29 nominations to go forward for 
consideration to the members and registered supporters. With the Core Group 
reduced to just 17 MPs, the Corbynistas are going to need to recruit another 12 
MPs from a Core Group Plus who, after the election, might not be feeling quite 
as positive about a leftwing leader as they may be now.

Given that voters don’t seem likely to deliver up a noticeably more pro-Corbyn 
PLP, Labour activists longing for one are going to have to rely on their own 
efforts instead. If the election doesn’t happen until 2020, perhaps they still 
have time to alter the composition of the Labour benches at Westminster by 
deselecting sitting MPs in favour of more ideologically congenial candidates. 
And, as an insurance policy, they can also press for the reduction in the 
proportion of Labour MPs needed to nominate a leadership contender.

But any such moves are bound to encounter fierce resistance from Corbyn’s 
opponents. As a result, things could get even bloodier for the Labour party in 
the next year or two than they have been already – unless, of course, Theresa 
May decides to put it out of its misery by going to the country sooner rather 
than later.

• This piece was co-authored by David Jeffery, @DavidJeffery_ 
 