
Cronulla’s Andrew Fifita has been hit with a breach notice by the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> over his support for convicted killer 
Kieran Loveridge.

After meeting with the integrity unit, Fifita has been given five days to 
respond. The NRL said it had concluded its investigations into the Sharks’ 
grand final hero who scrawled “FKL” on his wrist strapping.

Related: Sydney Roosters star Dylan Napa reportedly knocked out at charity 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/sydney-roosters-star-dylan-napa-reportedly-knocked-out-at-charity-party>

On seven occasions Fifita was photographed playing with the message on his 
wrist during the Sharks’ premiership drought-breaking campaign. It has been 
variously claimed that “FKR” stood for “Free Kieran Loveridge”, “For Kieran 
Loveridge” or “Forgive Kieran Loveridge”.

The 27-year-old has been the subject of a lengthy integrity unit investigation 
over his relationship with Loveridge, a childhood friend from western Sydney.

He was earlier this year given a warning by police about consorting with known 
criminals. Loveridge was sentenced to 10 years’ jail for the unprovoked, 
drunken one-punch killing of Thomas Kelly in Kings Cross in 2012.

The NRL would not comment on possible sanctions until Fifita has been given 
his say. It came after the NRL last week received documents from NSW Police 
regarding Fifita and Loveridge. Loveridge had refused to speak to the NRL about 
the matter.

Fifita was snubbed for a Australian Kangaroos jumper on the end-of-season Four 
Nations tour and he was also overlooked for the Clive Churchill Medal, despite 
a barnstorming display in the grand final that included the winning try.

NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg said Fifita had been denied national 
selection because he had failed to live up to standards set by the side.

It led to Fifita threatening to walk out on the code to join rugby union. 
Fifita had said the NRL was trying to “make a fool” of him and he was 
investigating overseas playing opportunities.

The NSW State of Origin prop has a chequered history in the code and was last 
year suspended for six games and fined $30,000 for abusing a referee at a 
junior game.

In 2014 he was questioned by police over an alleged road rage incident after 
he was accused of abusing a motorist and kicking his car however no action was 
taken.
 