
At the world premiere of Martin Scorsese’s new film, Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>, held at the Vatican, Pope Francis 
joked that its star,Andrew Garfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield>, deserved to be ordained. It 
was high praise indeed for the actor formerly best known asThe Amazing 
Spider-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/04/the-amazing-spiderman-review>, 
this time channelling a Jesuit missionary in 17th-century Japan. Better than an 
Oscar nomination? Garfield has been hotly tipped. He dodges the question. “I 
love the pope – he’s a really progressive guy. He’s talking progressively about 
the LGBTQ community. He’s turning the dial up slowly, by however much he can. 
He’s doing that ‘slow work of God’ stuff.” Garfield pauses, realising this 
might sound self-congratulatory. “But I loved the pope before he was even aware 
of my existence.”

We are sitting in a booth in a Tarantino-esque diner in Los Angeles, hipster 
tinsel lining the windows. Aptly,Tim Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tim-roth> strolls past and Garfield mouths, 
“I fuckinglove Tim Roth” at me, before making a sign of the cross. Today 
Garfield is elfin-lank in grey sweater and jeans, unevenly stubbled, with an 
upwards sweep of hair that looks as if it’s held up by sheer enthusiasm rather 
than hair gel. His simpatico grin exposes what look like baby teeth; at 33, he 
could pass for 22.

There are two Garfields: a playful one who swears a lot and worries about 
“sounding like a pretentious fucker” (let’s call him Andy); and a sincere, 
serious one, who answers in fully formed thoughts and likes his devotional 
metaphors (more of an Andrew). The effect is rather like talking to a sweet but 
potty-mouthed choirboy who, without warning, turns into the impassioned 
debating team captain.

“Andrew” describes Scorsese’s new film as “a meditation and a prayer”, an 
experience that is still “reverberating” for him. An immersive preparer, 
Garfield studied to be a Jesuit priest for a year, practising St Ignatius of 
Loyola’s prescribed meditations on Christ’s life, visualising every gospel one 
by one, including his journeyfrom Via Dolorosa to Calvary. He rented a spartan 
room in New York, and went on a silent Jesuit retreat in Wales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69919d68b2a3ea74122d0fbb879d5660e82e92fc%2F116_5_4329_2597%2F4329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69919d68b2a3ea74122d0fbb879d5660e82e92fc%2F116_5_4329_2597%2F4329.jpg>
 Garfield with Shinya Tsukamoto in Martin Scorsese’s new film Silence. 
Photograph: Kerry Brown/Paramount 
Garfield’s New York-based coach, Father James Martin, continues to be his 
spiritual adviser, guiding the actor in his own “very specific relationship 
with Jesus” – a kind of hipster, leftwing reading of him. “I had no 
relationship to [Jesus] beforehand,” Garfield says. “He was just the frontman 
for Christianity.” Before working on the film, he was “pantheist, agnostic, 
occasionally atheist and a little bit Jewish, but mostly confused”.

I remind him of America’s president-elect waving a Bible on the campaign 
trail, urging evangelical Christians to see him as the God-appointed candidate, 
and Garfield almost spits out his runny egg and grits. “It’s all a ruse. How 
can that not be clear to everybody? When the pope says that Jesus Christ was 
about building bridges, not building walls. And then Donald Trump bashes the 
pope – in effect, he bashes Jesus Christ.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Silence, adapted from the 1966 novel by Shūsaku Endō 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview15>
, had been in development since 1990, and was originally intended as Scorsese’s 
follow-up to The Last Temptation Of Christ (1988). But the director kept 
delaying, most recently in favour of The Wolf Of Wall Street. The finished film 
is the Temptation story cut to the bone and stripped of theological baggage: 
the tale of two callow Portuguese Jesuit priests, Fathers Rodrigues (Garfield) 
and Francisco Garrpe (Adam Driver), who travel to Japan on a mission to prove 
the innocence of their mentor, who is rumoured to have gone over to the brutal 
Buddhist regime.

People who are certain are terrifying to me

A compelling meditation on personal faith, Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> at times breaks through into 
masterpiece territory; Rodrigo Prieto’s painterly cinematography turns some 
chiaroscuro frames into pure Caravaggio. There is a sense of a 74-year-old man 
staring down the barrel of his own mortality, and Garfield recalls the 
“devotion” on Scorsese’s face throughout production: “How amazing [it was] to 
hang out with him when he was figuring all this stuff out.”

They filmed from January 2015 on a minimal budget in Taiwan: an arduous four 
months during which Garfield slept three hours a night, trekked mountainous 
terrain, endured typhoons, and fasted enough to lose 40 pounds (he remembers 
vivid nightly dreams about food). It sounds like the perfect antidote to the 
commercial juggernaut ofThe Amazing Spider-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man> franchise which, I 
had read, triggered a crisis in Garfield’s faith in his industry. “I wouldn’t 
say I had a crisis of faith,” he says, and then qualifies: “I’m always having a 
crisis of faith, with everything. People who are certain are terrifying to me. 
That’s how religious wars get started.”

In November 2014, two months before Garfield started shooting Silence, Mel 
Gibson approached him about a role inHacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hacksaw-ridge>. The film is a 
mighty-is-the-lamb true story about Seventh Day Adventist Desmond T Doss who, 
while serving as a military medic, evacuated 75 wounded men from the Battle of 
Okinawa in 1945 without picking up a weapon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6533bc4b0a4c5a413cdf6c0c18770c027447a3f7%2F113_12_3411_2046%2F3411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6533bc4b0a4c5a413cdf6c0c18770c027447a3f7%2F113_12_3411_2046%2F3411.jpg>
 Garfield in Hacksaw Ridge. Photograph: Mark Rogers/AP 
Gibson’s first film since Apocalypto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/05/actionandadventure.drama> a 
decade ago, it is not hard to read Hacksaw Ridge as a two-hour-and-20-minute 
plea for forgiveness. A conservative Christian, the director was arrested in 
2006 for drink-driving and launched into a racist attack on his Jewish 
arresting officer. He apologised, but it was too late; Hollywood turned its 
back. “I think everyone can relate to that feeling of exile,” says Garfield, 
who plays Doss. “That feeling of being misunderstood, not being seen in a deep 
way. Kind of kept out of the inner circle.”

If Garfield is choosing his words carefully, it is partly because his paternal 
grandfather, Samuel Garfinkel, was a Jewish émigré to London (although Garfield 
was brought up in a secular household). “I read the script and I heard Mel was 
directing it, and I felt excitement about him as a film-maker. But I needed to 
sit with him to get to know him, as a person, because no one can avoid the news 
and celebrity gossip. When we met, I got to know the real Mel, the 
six-years-sober Mel, and I experienced a good soul, a man who has done a lot of 
work on himself.”

So he thinks Gibson should be shown more compassion? “Alcoholism is a disease. 
I’ve known alcoholics and I’ve known addicts. And thankfully I have a lot of 
compassion around that.” Garfield’s friendHeath Ledger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2008/jan/24/mainsection.obituaries> died from 
a prescription drug overdose while they were both shooting Terry Gilliam’sThe 
Imaginarium Of Doctor Parnassus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/15/imaginarium-dr-parnassus-review>; 
Garfield also starred opposite the latePhilip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/03/philip-seymour-hoffman> in Mike 
Nichols’ Broadway production of Death Of A Salesman in 2012.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50278e42c81121eb85001c87f684829a99fb4b07%2F196_8_2756_1654%2F2756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50278e42c81121eb85001c87f684829a99fb4b07%2F196_8_2756_1654%2F2756.jpg>
 Garfield in The Amazing Spider-Man (2012). 
For the past four years, Garfield has been largely defined by Spider-Man. He 
and his co-star (and then girlfriend)Emma Stone  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone>were for a time the hot Hollywood 
power couple; but Garfield’s success followed years of high-calibre work in the 
UK, from television dramaBoy A <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1078188/> (2007), 
in which he played a child killer released back into the world (the role won 
him a Bafta), to the eerie innocence of his human-donor clone child inNever Let 
Me Go <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/10/never-let-me-go-review> 
(2010). He has a knack of upping a film’s emotional ante: Garfield brought the 
heart and moral compass to David Fincher’sThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/the-social-network-review> 
(2010), playing Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin (a role that won him a 
Golden Globe nomination).

Born in Los Angeles, Garfield has British and American citizenship. His family 
moved from his father’s native California, where his parents ran a designer 
lampshade business, to Epsom in Surrey when he was three. His mother Lynne, who 
is from Essex, found a job as a nursery schoolteacher and his father as a coach 
at Guildford swimming club. Garfield went to school in Banstead, where he says 
he was bullied for being small and slight. He was a natural gymnast, but also 
an emotional, sensitive soul (“a navel gazer in the extreme”) who liked to 
watch Michael J Fox films. “I was a monkey child. I was like a clown. My 
grandmother said, ‘You’re going to go to clown college’ and I was like, ‘OK, 
that sounds good.’

“I was raised with the idea that the arts were a doss – but the arts are 
vital,” he continues. “If you seeMark Rylance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-rylance> perform Shakespeare at the 
Globe, you know it’s a spiritual act. And it’s not reflected in the way the 
Conservative government is trying to cut funding in England. The [British] 
government doesn’t value the arts. And the fact that the American 
president-elect is in a feud with the greatest musical of the last few decades 
[Hamilton, whichTrump denounced on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/trump-vs-hamilton-actors-rejects-claim-mike-pence-was-harassed>
 after the cast were “very rude” to his vice-president-elect] – well, it’s an 
example of how the arts are treated in both countries.”

He hopes that his and Gibson’s Desmond Doss can reach out from beyond the 
grave into the liberal bubble, as a positive portrayal of a midwestern man at a 
time of global condescension towards white, American Christians. (The role has 
already earned Garfield a Golden Globe nomination.)

Does he think Doss would have voted Trump? “Hell, no! He was treating Japanese 
soldiers in the middle of a war. He doesn’t see skin colour. He doesn’t see an 
enemy. He sees humanity. He is the opposite of values that I believe the future 
president inhabits and symbolises. Trump is a man who is interested only in 
himself – narcissistic, grandiose and toxic. He’s a tyrant king whom we’ve just 
given all our power to and applauded for embodying the modern value system of 
narcissism and self-absorption. He’s the richest man in the graveyard.”

It was a performance in Kes at Manchester’s Royal Exchange theatre in 2004, 
after graduating from the Central School of Speech and Drama, that set the 
politically engaged tone of Garfield’s career. Two years later, he was invited 
to screen-test for Stephen Daldry and the tape found its way to Robert Redford, 
who cast him inLions For Lambs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/09/thriller.tomcruise> (2007) 
alongside Meryl Streep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6556c41573a76fa583dc2af2c3780934c2c33740%2F71_250_3407_4259%2F3407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6556c41573a76fa583dc2af2c3780934c2c33740%2F71_250_3407_4259%2F3407.jpg>
 Photograph: Brian W Ferry for Mrporter.com 
When The Amazing Spider-Man came calling, Garfield endowed the superhero with 
both an ordinariness and a human complexity. The Guardian described him as “
definitive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/04/the-amazing-spiderman-review>”, 
but the sequel proved a box-office disappointment. By now, three or four 
spin-offs were planned, with ever more overpopulated and ludicrous plots. Then, 
fearing audience superhero ennui, Sony got cold feet.

The publication of a hacked Sony email in May 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/14/sony-pictures-email-hack-greed-racism-sexism>
 implied that Garfield, who had spoken openly about his disappointment with the 
films, was “let go” after failing to turn up to an event in Brazil where Sony 
boss Kaz Hirai was due to announce The Amazing Spider-Man 3, set for release in 
July 2017. Garfield cited sickness caused by jetlag, and the studioannounced 
the casting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/tom-holland-spider-man-marvel-sony>
 of 19-year-old Tom Holland.

Did Garfield deliberately self-sabotage? “No, I don’t think so.” He laughs. 
Was there a row with the studio? “What I’ll proudly say is that I didn’t 
compromise who I was, I was only ever myself. And that might have been 
difficult for some people.”

People are rewarded with money and fame, and ultimately the correct amount of 
emptiness for an egocentric life

At the time, he had a little rant about the studio wanting to pluck his 
eyebrows “just so”. Was that a metaphor or an actual incident? “Both. They 
wanted to thin them out.” And it profoundly affected him? “Oh no. But I learned 
so much about what feels good and what doesn’t.”

He says he always saw Spider-Man as a modern myth, and in retrospect might 
have been overthinking it. “I’d been reading the mythologists Joseph Campbell 
and James Hillman. And when I took on Spider-Man, I thought, ‘Holy shit! This 
is exquisite and terrifying and incredible. I have been given the 
responsibility of reaching my hand out from the big screen and putting it on 
[young boys’] shoulders. That is a gift for me and a big burden to carry. And 
I’m so up for it.’

“I thought, if I can infuse all this ancient knowledge and wisdom into 
[Spider-Man], it could be profoundly affecting for young people in the 
audience. That was always my intention and what I tried to do.” He laughs. 
Wasn’t that naive? “Yes, of course! I was 25 and I was naive – not because of 
that, but because I was naive to the whole process of making one of those 
big-budget films.”

He seemed to have felt a profound discomfort with participating in celebrity 
culture, looking mortified on press tours with Stone by his side, desperately 
trying to loosen her boyfriend up, ribbing him into his “Andy” incarnation. 
(The two remain close since they split last year, and Garfield is generous 
about the ex now tipped to win the best actress Oscar forLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
. “I’m always cheering Emma on, in all ways. I’m one of the millions who is 
grateful that she exists.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4961ca881b0772692bd762e9f3eea15df8c91f%2F367_17_3065_1839%2F3065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Garfield%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20compromised%20who%20I%20was%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fandrew-garfield-never-compromised-who-was-spider-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4961ca881b0772692bd762e9f3eea15df8c91f%2F367_17_3065_1839%2F3065.jpg>
 Andrew Garfield, left, and Jesse Eisenberg in The Social Network. Photograph: 
Merrick Morton 
That discomfort with fame is still there. “The poison in the water started a 
long time ago,” Garfield says, “with the birth of Hollywood and Edward Bernays 
[the American pioneer of public relations], propaganda and PR. We’re all in the 
same position now, because we all have the ability to self-promote. People are 
rewarded with money and fame, and ultimately the correct amount of emptiness 
for an egocentric life. There’s part of me that will always want to shed all 
that.”

Garfield will start the new year at the National Theatre in London, rehearsing 
Tony Kushner’s Pulitzer prize-winning Angels In America 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/angels-in-america>, in which he’ll 
play Prior Walter, the HIV-positive New Yorker who receives angelic 
visitations. He doesn’t own a home, either in the UK or the US, and stores his 
belongings between his parents’ home in Surrey and a storage depot in New York; 
he hasn’t really had time to house-hunt. Next up, he will star opposite Claire 
Foy (The Crown <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>) as Robin 
Cavendish, a man who was paralysed by polio at 28, in Andy Serkis’s biopic
Breathe <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5716464/>.

Most of the time, Garfield tells me, he doesn’t really “fit in” with his 
generation. He doesn’t have a Twitter or Instagram account. He talks about the 
dehumanising effects of the digital world (in 2010, he appeared in Spike 
Jonze’s short filmI’m Here <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1571404/>, about two 
robots in love).

He recalls the time a seven-year-old boy who recognised him as Spider-Man 
filmed him playing basketball in New York.

“I was horrible and sweaty. I thought to myself, ‘I’m not very good at 
basketball, I don’t really want that.’ See? The ego crept in. I started running 
towards him like I was going to tackle him, just joking around with him. But 
he’s not moving. He was just looking at the screen, slack-jawed. Until I’m 
right in front of him. I said, ‘Hello!’ and he pulled the phone down for a 
second and freaked out. It was so dissociative. I was scared for him. I could 
have been a really bad dude and I could have hurt him. I mean, go and climb a 
tree!”•

• Silence is released on 1 January; Hacksaw Ridge is released on 27 January.

 * This article was amended on 31 December 2016 to correct a detail about an 
award. Andrew Garfield was nominated for but did not win a Golden Globe award 
for his performance in The Social Network.  