
André Schürrle came off the bench to snatch a late equaliser and earn a 
deserved point forBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> as they twice came from 
behind to earn a draw withthe Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> holders Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> in a compelling Group F game.

The Germany international lashed high into the net from inside the penalty 
area in the 87th minute after Raphaël Varane had restored Real’s advantage in 
the 68th.

Champions League roundup: Glik’s Monaco screamer thwarts Leverkusen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/champions-league-round-up-glik-monaco-leverkusen>
The France defender’s goal made up for an earlier slip that allowed 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang to cancel outCristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>’s 17th-minute opener towards the 
end of the first half.

Dortmund and Real each have four points with the Germans top of Group F on 
goal difference, while Sporting Lisbon are third on three points after a 2-0 
home win over Legia Warsaw.

The hosts made an electric start at the Westfalenstadion after Ronaldo had 
tested Dortmund goalkeeper Roman Bürki with an early free-kick, with Gonzalo 
Castro and Aubameyang each firing at Real keeper Keylor Navas and Ousmane 
Dembélé shooting over.

Real were also let off the hook when the referee, Mark Clattenburg, failed to 
spot a clear handball by Ronaldo in the area while defending a free-kick.

Just as a Dortmund opener looked inevitable, Real struck first with a 
perfectly executed counter-attack.

Karim Benzema began the move with a dart down the left before finding support 
in Toni Kroos, who worked the ball towardsGareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale>. He then teed up Ronaldo to 
arrow a shot into the far corner.

Ronaldo raced to the sidelines to salute Portuguese compatriots Pepe and Fábio 
Coentrão and coach Zinedine Zidane, signalling that Saturday’s disagreement 
over his substitution in the 2-2 draw at Las Palmas in La Liga had been quickly 
forgotten.

Pep Guardiola tells Manchester City to ignore ‘little record’ at Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-record-celtic-champions-league>
Thomas Tuchel’s side stuck with their game plan of pressing Real high and 
attacking at speed, although their equaliser came from a free-kick.

Navas, making his first appearance of the season, could only weakly punch 
Raphaël Guerreiro’s shot at Varane and the ball trickled towards the goalline, 
helped across by Aubameyang.

Dembélé, who impressed on the wing for Dortmund, spurned a second clear chance 
of the game in the second half as the home side retained their tempo, although 
Real grew in confidence.

Bale and Benzema wasted chances before Varane put Zidane’s side ahead again, 
tapping home after Benzema had crashed a shot against the bar.

Dortmund again raised their game, though. Navas turned away two shots from 
lively substitute Emre Mor as the Germans sought an equaliser, urged on by a 
fervent home support, but was powerless to keep out the rocket from Schürrle.
 