
The Cronulla Sharks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cronulla-sharks> prop, 
Andrew Fifita, could be hauled before the NRL integrity unit after getting a 
police warning for visiting one-punch killer Kieran Loveridge in jail and 
wearing a wristband with the initials FKL during matches.

Loveridge was responsible for the manslaughter of 18-year-old Thomas Kelly in 
2012 during a night out in Kings Cross, and is serving a minimum 10-year 
sentence.

Kelly was killed in a random assault by Loveridge while walking with his 
girlfriend, an event that helped prompt the New South Wales government to 
introducelockout laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/lockouts-have-hurt-sydneys-cultural-life-we-have-to-improve-our-night-time-economy>
 in the city and Kings Cross.

Cronulla Sharks captain Paul Gallen to continue NRL career in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/cronulla-sharks-captain-paul-gallen-to-continue-nrl-career-in-2017>
Kelly’s brother Stuart, 17, who had been involved in work with the foundation 
set up by Kelly’s parents after Thomas’s death,died in July this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/thomas-kellys-father-writes-of-grief-over-death-of-his-other-son-stuart>
.


NSW police had visited Fifita’s home on Wednesday to warn him to stop 
consorting with a convicted criminal,the ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-01/cronulla-sharks-andrew-fifita-warned-over-criminal-association/7804686>
.

The NRL’s integrity unit is expected to call the player in for questioning 
after the wristband, believed to stand for “For Kieran Loveridge” or “Free 
Kieran Loveridge”, was worn numerous times during matches.

The NRL chief executive, Todd Greenberg, on Thursday repeated that the warning 
issued to Fifita was another indication thatNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> players needed to be careful of the 
company they keep.

“I am using it as another opportunity to remind players and everyone involved 
in the game that you need to make sure you choose your company wisely,” he 
said. “There can’t be any more of a stark reminder than that today.”

Asked about the matter on Friday morning, the federal opposition leader, Bill 
Shorten, said he felt for Thomas Kelly’s family.


Thomas Kelly's father writes of grief over death of his other son, Stuart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/thomas-kellys-father-writes-of-grief-over-death-of-his-other-son-stuart>
“I can’t imagine what the Kelly family’s gone through,” he said. “It’s been a 
shocking time.”

He said the NRL needed to take action over Fifita’s display of support for 
Loveridge. “I think the NRL needs to counsel this player,” he said.

“In terms of the family, my thoughts go out to them … I cannot imagine what it 
would be like to be reminded on a weekly basis at a football game of your loss. 
I really think it’s a mistake, a grave error of judgment, and the NRL need to 
sort it out quickly.”


Fifita is expected to line up for the Sharks on Saturday against the Melbourne 
Storm in a match that will decide the NRL minor premiership.
 