
A Labour internal investigation has found that Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> received hundreds of 
“abusive, homophobic and frightening” messages from party members.

It also concluded that it was “highly likely” that a window vandalised at her 
office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
 building – with a brick, according to the report – was related to her
short-lived leadership challenge to Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/eagle-and-smith-reach-a-deal-to-allow-single-corbyn-challenger-labour-leadership>
.


The investigation was conducted following complaints and counter-complaints 
about events in her local constituency party in Wallasey. It was carried out by 
officials and upheld by a subcommittee of the party’s ruling body.

Eagle said she was grateful that Corbyn had attended the meeting and expressed 
sympathy for her and staff over the abuse they had received.

The report found there had been a “high level of inter-member abuse in 
Wallasey” and that it was not possible for the local party to meet safely at 
the moment.

Officials recommended a suspension of the party pending a review in the 
spring, because the culture had become so toxic and divided in the extreme. It 
will receive support from the party’s regional office to move forward with a 
code of conduct and training.

Angela Eagle was subject to homophobic abuse after Corbyn challenge, inquiry 
finds - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/19/pmqs-may-corbyn-hammond-angela-eagle-was-subect-to-homophobic-abuse-after-challenging-corbyn-labour-inquiry-finds-politics-live>
The investigation also looked at abuse suffered by Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/01/angela-eagle-was-target-of-homophobic-abuse-claim-labour-members>
, both before and after she launched a challenge to Corbyn’s leadership. “It’s 
highly likely that thebrick thrown through the window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
 of Angela Eagle’s office was related to her leadership challenge,” the report 
found. “The position of the window made itvery unlikely that this was a random 
passerby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/29/angela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership>
. The window was directly between two Labour offices.

“Untrue rumours were subsequently spread that the building was occupied by 
many companies and the window was in an unrelated stairwell. This was based on 
a Companies House search which found that the landlord had a number of 
companies registered there; in fact the only other occupant is the landlord on 
the upper floor. Once this incorrect rumour was spread, members repeated it as 
clear evidence that Angela Eagle was lying. This is categorically untrue.”

It said Eagle’s office had endured a “significant amount of abuse”, including 
intimidating phone calls that led staff to unplug the phone, a death threat 
towards her and what appeared to be coordinated denial of service attacks on 
her internet.

In relation to an annual meeting of Wallasey constituency Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, it said some members had 
truthfully claimed that homophobic instances occurred, while others truthfully 
said they were not aware of those instances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-abusive-homophobic-messages-labour-members%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13e026917e781a3f8ab517a6ec99fdf7df25f44a%2F0_91_4877_2926%2F4877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%20received%20hundreds%20of%20homophobic%20messages%20from%20Labour%20members&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-abusive-homophobic-messages-labour-members%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Eagle%20received%20hundreds%20of%20homophobic%20messages%20from%20Labour%20members&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fangela-eagle-abusive-homophobic-messages-labour-members%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13e026917e781a3f8ab517a6ec99fdf7df25f44a%2F0_91_4877_2926%2F4877.jpg>
 Angela Eagle said she was grateful Jeremy Corbyn, right, had expressed sincere 
sympathy for her and staff over the abuse. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Paul Davies, the vice-chair of the Wallasey CLP, said the suspension should be 
lifted as nothing had been found to prove the involvement of local members in 
abuse.


“The abuse towards Angela from people should be dealt with by police, never 
mind the Labour party. There is no evidence I have seen that members of the 
Labour party or Wallasey Labour party have been involved. If they were they 
should be expelled and prosecuted.”


He said it was “rather strange” that the report could conclude that both those 
who heard and did not hear homophobic abuse in Wallasey’s annual general 
meeting were telling the truth.


On the issue of the vandalism of Eagle’s office building, he said: “Whoever 
broke the window should be dealt with by police, whether they are a member of 
Labour or not. There is no proof it was a member of the Labour party. What I 
can’t understand in all of the accusations is there is nothing to suggest the 
Labour party in Wallasey can’t meet.


“My view is Angela had every right to stand as leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/19/owen-smith-angela-eagle-theresa-may-brexit-trident-politics-live>
 but we’ve also got the right to meet. That’s democracy. Both democratic 
principles should apply and I can’t see why we can’t meet with the regional 
Labour party overseeing the meetings … There is no toxicity. There is a number 
of people who lost their positions at the annual meeting and those people who 
lost have put in the complaints, simple as that.”


The investigation, which anonymised all complaints and took about 100 
statements, said some members were angry about the action taken in Wallasey, 
and about the leadership election. “This has resulted in genuine fear and 
intimidation of a small number of other members,” it said. “This creates an 
environment in which some members are fearful to take part in the party or 
raise their voice about any issue, as they see that meetings have become 
hostile and sometimes aggressive.”

The report said one member in particular had endured a significant level of 
personal abuse and a hashtag was created to encourage people to “shame” him 
publicly and his home address and personal details were published online.

Angela Eagle accuses Jeremy Corbyn of allowing abuse to flourish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/22/angela-eagle-accuses-jeremy-corbyn-allowing-abuse-flourish>
The report said it could not substantiate a claim that one member had breached 
data protection by using a membership list to promote a public meeting to 
discuss concerns about the suspension of Wallasey CLP.

Davies, who helped organise the public meeting, said it had been proved that 
no data protection laws had been breached and other people who made the 
complaint had lied about him.

In response to the report, Eagle said she was “proud to have been the MP for 
Wallasey for 24 years and to have had a good relationship with most local 
Labour activists for all of that time”.

“I am grateful that Jeremy took the unusual step of both attending and 
speaking in the meeting and that he expressed sincere sympathy for both me and 
for my staff,” she said. “It is now clear and accepted by the NEC [national 
executive committee] that homophobic abuse was perpetrated by some members of 
the local party; I will simply not tolerate it, and I know I have the backing 
of both Jeremy and union leaders when I say that there is no place for it in 
the Labour movement either.

“As regards the vandalism of my office, I am grateful to both the internal 
investigators and the NEC for making clear both the facts of the matter and for 
the support of members up and down the country, including the leader of the 
Labour party, that such abuse both happened and is intolerable.”

Separately, the Liverpool Echo reported 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/man-admits-sending-sickening-death-12048741>
 that a 45-year-old man, Stephen King, of Mirin Wynd, Paisley, Scotland, had 
pleaded guilty to sending a grossly offensive, indecent, obscene or menacing 
message by a public communications network to Eagle.

According to the report, he told police he had been venting his anger about 
Eagle’s challenge to Corbyn and never intended to act upon it.


King told Eagle to leave the UK, said she would “never be safe” and threatened 
an “IRA sniper or bomb on you the day you steal the leadership of the Labour 
party.”

A spokesman for Eagle said: “The death threat received by Angela’s office was 
credible and frightening. It led staff to fear for their and Angela’s safety, 
especially coming weeks after our friend and colleague Jo Cox’s murder.


“Despite all this having been upsetting, Angela has always remained upbeat and 
focused on the important work of holding this rotten Tory government to 
account, most importantly on their chaotic approach to Britain leaving the 
European Union and investment into the Wirral.”
 