
As the police officers looked at the body on Piazza I Maggio, they could have 
had no idea they had just fatally shot Europe’s most wanted man.

To them he was someone who had been acting suspiciously outside a train 
station in Milan in the early hours of the morning, and had shot at them with a 
22-calibre pistol when questioned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0876a576368ee782264ad38d8a4ab3dacf822b15%2F0_0_3200_3800%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anis%20Amri%3A%20from%20young%20drifter%20to%20Europe's%20most%20wanted%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anis%20Amri%3A%20from%20young%20drifter%20to%20Europe%27s%20most%20wanted%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0876a576368ee782264ad38d8a4ab3dacf822b15%2F0_0_3200_3800%2F3200.jpg>
 Different portraits of Anis Amri. Photograph: German federal police/AFP/Getty 
Images 
It was only once the officers had taken his fingerprints and compared them 
with those of Anis Amri, the man suspected of killing 12 people at a Christmas 
market in Berlin on Monday, thatthey knew for sure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
. The Tunisian lying on the street in the Sesto San Giovanni district had a 
€100,000 (£85,000) bounty on his head.

It remains unclear why Amri, 24, embarked on a 1,000-mile journey from Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> to Italy in the days after the 
murderous truck attack.

Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> was the first European country 
in which he had set foot when he arrived on the continent six years ago. But if 
he had nurtured any hopes of it providing him with an escape route, he was 
quickly to be proved wrong. Just hours after arriving at Milan’s central train 
station, he was dead.

Amri was born in 1992 in the central Tunisian town of Oueslatia, in one of the 
country’s poorest regions. During his drifting youth, he became known to 
Tunisian law enforcement agencies for his drug use and later for stealing a 
truck.

He was, admitted his sister Najoua this week, “no angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/ill-renounce-him-before-god-berlin-suspects-mother-pleads-for-news-of-son>
”, even if he had nothing to do with terrorism. At the age of 17 or 18, in the 
chaotic days following the 2011 revolution, he did what many other African 
teenagers have done, and decided to leave.

“His father and I are disabled,” his mother, Nour el Houda Hassani, told 
Associated Press this week. “So he was forced to steal to emigrate and get … 
goods that young people dream of.”


With a five-year prison sentence hanging over him for the theft of the truck, 
Amri paid for an illegal boat journey toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. He travelled to Lampedusa, 
Italy, promising his his parents, four sisters and brother that he would make 
money and send it home.

Arriving on Sicily, having deliberately discarded his personal documents, he 
pretended to be an underage refugee. At the school he attended in Catania, Amri 
drew attention to himself for repeated incidents of petty theft and physical 
abuse.

He had also set fire to his housing on Lampedusa in an apparent protest over 
the authorities’ slowness in dealing with his asylum application. He received a 
four-year prison sentence.

According to various sources, it could be that Amri began to be radicalised 
during his time in prison on Sicily. He was certainly not a model detainee. 
Exhibiting threatening behaviour and appearing to want to stir rebellion, he 
spent three and a half years inside, being transferred between six different 
institutions in Catania and Palermo during that time.

“He was very aggressive and violent,” an official of the prison in Palermo 
where Amri was detained told the Guardian. “He tried to fight prison guards and 
other detainees. We registered all these act of violence while in prison and 
sent them to the police.”

After Amri’s release he was due to be deported to Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>. But the deportation failed because 
he had no documents. After a few weeks in detention in Caltanissetta pending 
deportation, he was released and made use of a legal loophole to leave Italy.

“When he got out, he called us to say that he could not find work, and he was 
leaving for another country,” his mother said, speaking from Oueslatia. That 
country was Germany.

European far right calls for end to open borders after Berlin suspect shot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/european-far-right-end-to-open-borders-schengen-berlin-le-pen>
Amri arrived in Germany in July 2015, reportedly claiming to be a politically 
persecuted Egyptian, according to Ralf Jäger, the interior minister of the 
western German state of North Rhine-Westphalia. After that he lived between 
that state, Baden-Württemberg and Berlin, though since February he had mainly 
resided in the capital.

A short piece of mobile phone footage posted on Amri’s Facebook page showed 
him on the banks of the river Spree, looking carefree and appearing to enjoy 
Berlin like any other young newcomer might.

His asylum application was rejected this summer, stamped with the explanation 
that it was “offensichtlich unbegründet”, or obviously groundless, because of 
his inability to prove to the authorities that he was Egyptian.

Yet again, however, his deportation could not be carried out because he 
possessed no valid personal documents. He denied being Tunisian, and the 
Tunisian authorities initially refused to accept he was one of their citizens.

Eventually, in August, after much bureaucratic to-ing and fro-ing, the 
Tunisian authorities agreed to send him a replacement passport. The papers from 
Tunis that would have validated his deportation arrived in Germany two days 
after the Berlin attack. Under normal circumstances, he would have been 
extradited before the end of the year.

While in Germany, Amri had come to the attention of the intelligence agencies 
in various German states, according to Jäger. They had classified him as a “
gefährder”, a person likely to threaten public safety, because of his links to 
the radical Islamist scene.

Luca Scatà: rookie police officer who shot Berlin attack suspect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/luca-scata-the-rookie-police-officer-who-shot-berlin-attack-suspect>
Connections included the network that centred on a 32-year-old German Iraqi 
Salafist, Ahmad Abdulaziz Abdullah A, also known as Abu Walaa or “the preacher 
without a face”, who was arrested in November and denies charges he helped 
recruit for Islamic State. Amri also had contact with a known Turkish Islamic 
fundamentalist, Hasan C, who is believed to have radicalised young Muslims in 
the back of the Duisburg travel agency where he worked. Another contact was 
Boban S, a hate preacher from Dortmund.

For months, Amri was under investigation by German intelligence over 
suspicions he was planning a serious crime against the state. He was believed 
to have been organising a break-in to gain funds to help him buy automatic 
weapons, so that “very possibly he could commit an attack later on, together 
with accomplices which he intended to recruit”, according to Berlin’s 
department of public prosecution. There is also evidence he researched 
bomb-making techniques on the internet.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20police%20kill%20Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20in%20shootout%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20police%20kill%20Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20in%20shootout%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report&media=>
Milan police kill Berlin attack suspect in shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/23/milan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report>
Months before that, according to the phone records of some of the Salafist 
preachers being monitored by German authorities, Amri is believed to have 
offered himself as a suicide bomber. But what they managed to catch him saying 
during tapped phone calls was apparently so encoded there was not enough 
evidence on which to base an arrest.

In conjunction with this investigation, Berlin’s justice department had 
monitored his movements between March and September, when the decision was made 
to halt the surveillance because it had produced no evidence other than that 
Amri was a small-time drug dealer in Görlitzer Park, southern Berlin’s 
notorious magnet for dealers and users.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e45a60f861c25303dbcebc51fb7fea1b46749a%2F1003_133_3147_3147%2F3147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anis%20Amri%3A%20from%20young%20drifter%20to%20Europe's%20most%20wanted%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anis%20Amri%3A%20from%20young%20drifter%20to%20Europe%27s%20most%20wanted%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fanis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e45a60f861c25303dbcebc51fb7fea1b46749a%2F1003_133_3147_3147%2F3147.jpg>
 Amri’s mother, Nour el-Houda Hassani. Photograph: Fethi Belaid/AFP/Getty Images
In July he was involved in a knife attack in a row over drugs. But he went 
underground when police tried to question him.

On Friday it materialised he had still been under some form of surveillance 
just days before the attack, as footage came to light of him emerging in the 
central Berlin district of Moabit, from a mosque known to intelligence agents 
as a focal point of the radical Islamist scene.

A video in which Amri claims responsibility for the attack and pledges his 
allegiance to Isis was published on Friday afternoon. In it he called his 
attack vengeance for airstrikes against Muslims and said he wished to become a 
martyr.

For his family, it is likely to have come as a huge shock. “When I saw the 
picture of my brother in the media I couldn’t believe my eyes. I am in shock 
and can’t believe it’s him who committed this crime,” his brother Abdelkader 
said. His sister Najoua said that in his Facebook messages he was “always 
smiling and cheerful”.

His mother told Associated Press she had not seen any evidence during Amri’s 
phone calls that her son had become radicalised. She last spoke to him on 
Friday. But despite her belief in his innocence she was adamant that, if his 
role in Monday’s attack was confirmed, she would “renounce him before God”.

Additional reporting by Lorenzo Tondo in Palermo
 