
The time when you don’t need hope is when your hopes have been fulfilled. Hope 
is for when you don’t have what you need and for when things are not OK. It is 
the belief that liberation might be possible that motivates you to make it more 
possible, and pursuing hope even when it doesn’t lead to the ultimate goal can 
generate changes that matter along the way, including in yourself.

A dozen years ago I talked about hope to a roomful of working-class community 
college students in Washington,citing the German philosopher Ernst Bloch 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/bloch/hope/introduction.htm> to the effect 
that without hope there is no action but without action there is no hope. A 
woman said in a clear voice that she agreed, because if she had not hoped she 
would not have struggled and if she had not struggled she would not have 
survived Pol Pot and theCambodian genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/16/forty-years-after-genocide-cambodia-finds-complicated-truth-hard-to-bear>
.

Progressives see a leader in Bernie Sanders as they prepare to fight back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/bernie-sanders-progressive-movement-2017>
That floored me. Sometimes hope is just that you will survive, or that you 
will escape. Then you can hope for more. I wish I knew her story, but that she 
was in North America, alive and well and confident enough to speak out, told me 
something of it. Even despotic regimes end, though it’s important to remember 
that not everyone and everything survives; you can be devastated for what won’t 
and hopeful for what will at the same time.

In the United States we are probably headed for a very grim phase of uncertain 
duration. We will see much that we love under attack – but it’s worth 
remembering that a lot of this is nothing new. From oil pipelines to human 
rights, there have been massive incursions over the past 16 years against 
nature, against equality, against governmental transparency. We are not exiting 
a utopia, and human rights organisations that are currently rising to a greater 
challenge have not been idle for lack of work in the Obama era.

The Bush years are not far behind us, and though more predictable, it was 
plenty brutal. May Boeve, executive director of350.org <https://350.org/>, told 
me that after the recent US presidential election, her colleagues in Turkey 
sent their sympathy and said they got good work done on climate change, even 
under authoritarianism. We will have much work to do and we will still have the 
capacity to do it. It will matter more than ever that we do.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmichelle-obama-oprah-interview-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%20speaks%20with%20Oprah%3A%20hope%20is%20more%20than%20'a%20nice%20slogan'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmichelle-obama-oprah-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%20speaks%20with%20Oprah%3A%20hope%20is%20more%20than%20%27a%20nice%20slogan%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmichelle-obama-oprah-interview-video&media=>
Michelle Obama speaks with Oprah: hope is more than ‘a nice slogan’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/20/michelle-obama-oprah-interview-video>
We would do well to study the countries that have sunk into tyranny or 
despotism and survived. To discover how Argentina and Chile and Brazil went 
through an era of dictators and death squads and emerged, in part because 
people like the Argentinian women in las Madres de la Plaza de Mayo stood up to 
their fears and their regime. El Salvador isnow governed by the FMLN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/mar/16/el-salvador>, which 
fought against the death squads in the 1980s, and Chile’s current president is 
Michelle Bachelet, who was kidnapped and tortured under the Pinochet regime. 
Most of the countries in our hemisphere besides Canada have gone into horror 
and emerged, many more than once.

The difference is one of scale. A Filipino climate activist friend of mine 
begged Americans to stopDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on the grounds that the 
tinpot despot in charge of his country has a largely local impact but the 
president of the US has a global impact on everything from human rights to 
climate policy around the world. We have a responsibility not just to our 
country but to the world to contain and weaken and try to defeat Trump and 
Trumpism to the best of our abilities. Those of us who are not in immediate 
peril have a grave responsibility to those who are.

But in the wake of this terrible election, much of my hope has rested not on 
what could or should happen, and not what the historical record tells us has 
happened, but what is happening now. There is another America rising and taking 
action, and it is beautiful. I’m thinking of the many stories of people 
standing up for the vulnerable, directly when they intervene in confrontations 
with haters. Or indirectly, as with the young woman I know who co-organised the 
creation ofNeveragain.tech <http://neveragain.tech/>, a public oath people 
working in tech can take to refuse to create Muslim registries, turn over 
people’s private data, or otherwise cooperate with state persecution.

They give me hope, in some portion of humanity, the portion that will resist 
Trump and defend our ideals

Of the California state senate, which immediately after the election issued a 
manifesto of defiance 
<http://sd24.senate.ca.gov/news/2016-11-09-joint-statement-california-legislative-leaders-result-presidential-election>
: “California will defend its people and our progress. We are not going to 
allow one election to reverse generations of progress at the height of our 
historic diversity, scientific advancement, economic output, and sense of 
global responsibility. We will lead the resistance to any effort that would 
shred our social fabric or our constitution.”

I’m thinking of the many action groups and coalitions that came together in 
the wake of the election determined to stop Trump, defend civil liberties and 
address the illegitimacy of the election, and of the candidate. The Harvard 
lawyers laying the case for impeachment on the grounds of the“emoluments” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>
 or profits from overseas that would fatally compromise a Trump regime.

Many people are still trying to figure out what to do; others are doing it. 
They give me hope, in some portion of humanity, the portion that will resist 
Trump and defend our ideals. It will be hard. It will be ugly. Our job will be 
to be embody and protect all of those things most antithetical to 
authoritarianism, racism, misogyny, kleptocracy, an atmosphere of lies and 
indifference to science, fact and truth.

In easy times, we grow slack; this will require us each to find our capacity 
for heroism. Some will, and my hope lies with them. Or us.
 