
Anthony Joshua <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> is preparing 
to announce himself in the United States after signing a multi-fight deal with 
Showtime before his maiden IBF world heavyweight title defence against the 
unbeaten Dominic Breazeale. The pair meet at the O2 Arena on 25 June, with 
Breazeale returning to London for the first time since his first-round defeat 
at the 2012 Olympic Games.

Anthony Joshua beats Charles Martin in two to take IBF world heavyweight title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
The 30-year-old from Los Angeles has won all 17 of his professional contests, 
with 15 stoppages, while Joshua has a 100% knockout record after 16 bouts in 
the paid ranks.

Following the securing of his television deal with the American network, 
Joshua said he is ready for what will be a level fight between two unbeaten 
combatants. “I know there are a lot of positive things happening in boxing and 
around my career, you see my reaction when these things happen and you’re only 
good when you’re winning,” he said. “Every fight could be your last fight, that 
is why I’m serious and I don’t let success go to my head. Me and Dominic are 
very equal, 17 fights, 16 fights, turned professional around the same time.

“It is a very equal fight, he is my fourth undefeated fighter I’ve been 
fighting. He gets to announce himself in the UK and I can announce myself in 
America and the best man will come out on top. May the best man win.”

Showtime has shown Floyd Mayweather’s past six fights and works with WBC 
heavyweight champion Deontay Wilder, a fighter on Joshua’s radar. Sports 
executive for Showtime Stephen Espinoza said the signing of Joshua proves the 
strength currently in the British boxing scene.

“British Boxing is at an all-time high,” he said. “There are more UK champions 
that at any point in history.Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
is such a global sport. Joshua has global potential. We have featured Kell 
Brook, George Groves, Billy Joe Saunders.”

This will be Joshua’s first defence since he took the title from Charles Martin
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 with a second-round stoppage on 9 April. Breazeale insists he will not make 
the same mistake as his compatriot having questioned Martin’s approach to his 
own bout with Joshua.

“It is a pleasure to be back in London,” he said. “I couldn’t care less about 
the deals AJ has going on with Sky or Showtime, all I can do is prepare for 25 
June. I wish it was this weekend.

“Charles Martin came over here and dropped the ball, he wasn’t prepared for 
it. I’m hoping Anthony Joshua is preparing to be in a war and a dog fight 
because that is what I’m bringing.

“We are both Olympians and we represented our countries for a reason. I’m not 
coming here to hear the final bell or the judges scores, I’m coming all guns 
blazing and to knock Anthony Joshua out.”
 