
Anthony Joshua’s proposed world heavyweight title fight with Wladimir Klitschko
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> on 10 December will not 
go ahead.

The promoter Eddie Hearn said on Monday that with the Ukrainian sustaining an 
injury and no decision over whether the WBA title would be on the line the 
fight could not happen on the date suggested. Hearn hopes the fight could take 
place in the spring.

Hearn told Sky Sports: “We’ve been in deep negotiations for a few weeks now, 
waiting on the decision from the WBA.

Heavyweight boxing enters its pantomime season, and no one’s laughing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/24/heavyweight-pantomime-wladimir-klitschko-tyson-fury-anthony-joshua>
“I was made aware that Wladimir picked up a minor injury late last week but 
regardless of that, with just over six weeks to go it’s unrealistic to put 
together a fight of this magnitude and give it the full build-up it deserves.

“There will be an official announcement on Joshua v Klitschko coming very 
soon, but for now we are seeking a new foe for 10 December and building a huge 
card for Manchester.”

Hearn said just over a week ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-joshua-wladimir-klitschko-boxing>
 that “terms are virtually there” for the fight, only for the wait for WBA 
sanctioning to delay the deal.

Klitschko lost the WBA belt to Tyson Fury last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
, along with the IBF title. The latter sanctioning body insisted on a rematch, 
leading Fury to vacate that belt that was won byJoshua against Charles Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 in April. He then defended itagainst Dominic Breazeale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
.

Fury relinquished his remaining WBA, WBO and IBO titles  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tyson-fury-vacated-wbo-wba-world-heavyweight-titles-treatment>
this month and stepped away from the sport to deal with mental health issues.He 
also admitted regularly using cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 and wasstripped of his licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/tyson-fury-licence-suspended-british-boxing>
 by the British Boxing Board of Control.

Klitschko appeared unwilling to fight Joshua without the WBA belt being on the 
line and is reportedly poised to fight Australia’s Lucas Browne for that title.

Joshua’s opponent in December could now be the IBF mandatory challenger, 
Joseph Parker, Bulgaria’s Kubrat Pulev or the fellow British Olympian David 
Price. Parker has indicated he is more likely to fight Andy Ruiz Jr for the WBO 
title in his native New Zealand.
 