
Anthony Joshua is ready and willing to take on Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> this year if Tyson Fury 
is stripped of his title belts, his promoter, Eddie Hearn, has said.

The heavyweight title rematch between Fury and Klitschko was cancelled for a 
second time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-called-off>
 on Friday night after the Briton was declared “medically unfit to fight”.

That bout had been due to take place in Manchester on 29 October but Fury, 
whose previous attempt at a rematch with Klitschko in July was abandoned after 
the WBA and WBO champion sustained an ankle injury, will now undergo treatment 
on his condition.

Tyson Fury v Wladimir Klitschko rematch set to be called off again – reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-called-off>
It is not known how long Fury will be out, but Joshua, the undefeated IBF 
champion, who is in line to make the second defence of his title in Manchester 
on 26 November, is ready to fight the Ukrainian.

However, Hearn insists their primary goal is still an all-British showdown 
against Fury and hopes the Mancunian does not end up having his crowns taken 
away by the governing bodies.

Hearn told Sky Sports News: “From our side, if Wladimir Klitschko against 
Anthony Joshua <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> can be made 
for the WBA and the IBF belts, for 26 November, we are taking that fight, no 
question.

“But, as always in boxing, it’s a very complicated process. There’s so much 
that needs to happen and I don’t feel like they’ll stripTyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> just yet. I hope they don’t 
because we want the winner of that fight, Fury against Klitschko.

“We want to fight Tyson Fury really, that’s a unification fight between two 
Brits in the heavyweight division. That’s never happened before and it’ll never 
again.”

Hearn said the 2012 Olympic champion is not the only boxer who will be looking 
to push their case in Fury’s absence, though. “We hope he gets better soon but 
all these other contenders are going to be like piranhas, biting at the 
governing body saying, ‘We want to have our shot’, ‘We’ve been waiting too 
long’. Klitschko will turn around and say, ‘Hang about, for 12 months I’ve been 
waiting for my rematch and now it hasn’t happened’,” he said.

Hearn expects to know more in the coming week and believes the next few days 
could be interesting. He said: “I think there’s going to be a statement on 
Tuesday from team Fury to see how long he’s going to be out for and that’s 
going to be one of the defining factors in terms of the governing body making 
their decision on whether Fury keeps the belts.

“So hopefully he can get back in the ring soon, fight Klitschko. If not I 
spoke to AJ [Joshua] last night and said ‘You know, you could jump in and fight 
Klitschko’, and he said ‘Let’s do it’.

“I think he believes that Klitschko is certainly there for the taking. We’ve 
got Joseph Parker, who is Anthony’s mandatory, that’s a great fight, which 
could be made for November.

“These next three or four days are going to be really interesting, breaking 
down the jigsaw, planning Anthony Joshua’s next move, but the heavyweight 
division is non-stop action, non-stop news and non-stop drama. That’s boxing 
all over.”
 