
Anthony Joshua wants it all. If Tyson Fury’s latest travails bring him down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/tyson-fury-heavyweight-champion-baffled-drugs-test-nandrolone>
, the Watford heavyweight with the spotless record, winning smile, an IBF belt 
and a queue of contenders as long as that gathering outside Wimbledon for 
tickets to the tennis might very well end up the all-conquering king of boxing.

It is a leap to make that call on the evidence so far, however impressive he 
was in clinically dismantling the determined but doomed challenge of Dominic 
Breazeale, a former college quarterback whose ambitions in the ringcrumbled a 
minute into the seventh round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
 of their brutal encounter in Greenwich on Saturday night.

Anthony Joshua knocks out Dominic Breazeale in seventh to retain world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
Joshua clubbed him to the floor twice and, for all his defiance, Breazeale had 
resignation stretched across his bruised features as he peered up from the 
canvas towards his corner across the ring. He must have realised at that moment 
the 17-0 undefeated CV he brought to London had been exposed as tissue-thin.

Breazeale, who swung with intent and missed just as convincingly, was at least 
a tougher proposition than was another 30-year-old dreamer from California,
Charles Martin, who surrendered his IBF title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-v-charles-martin-world-heavyweight-boxing-live>
 to Joshua inside two rounds in the same ring only two months earlier. That’s 
quite enough American horizontal heavyweights for one summer.

Joshua will now look way beyond the O2, where he has destroyed seven of his 17 
opponents, all early: to Africa, the Middle East and, of course, the United 
States. Whether he will first get a shot at the version of the title Fury has 
held after the Mancunian’s injury and subsequent embarrassment over
yet-to-be-proven allegations of doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/tyson-fury-heavyweight-champion-baffled-drugs-test-nandrolone>
, his promoter Eddie Hearn will work out in the weeks to come.

Wladimir Klitschko might be handed back his crown, but it does not sit easy. 
He is an ageing monarch. Joshua is the prince with fire in his eyes.

Hearn revealed of Joshua: “He won’t say but he had a virus for a couple of 
weeks. There were times when we were considering to take the fight or not. And 
after the Martin fight, because of the commercial deals, he’s just been 
non-stop [promoting], with broadcasters, sponsors. He’s been absolutely 
relentless, with hundreds of people chasing him down the road, camping outside 
the hotel in Canary Wharf.

“It takes a lot out of our boy. He needs a long rest now, to just go and sit 
on the beach with his mates and mess around.”

Dominic Breazeale acts as stepping stone on Anthony Joshua’s path to top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/dominic-breazeale-anthony-joshua-ibf-world-champion>
To that end Joshua will be going to Rio in support of the 12-man Great Britain 
team at the Olympics. “I’ve got a good relationship with the boys,” he said. 
“I’ve known them for years. It will be good to speak with them first-hand, 
behind closed doors. But the main thing is I want to catch up with my family, 
spend some nights at home.”

Then it will be back to business – and business is looking good. “We don’t 
know the ins and outs [of the Fury case],” Hearn said, “but our conversations 
with Peter Fury [Tyson’s uncle and trainer] were to look at the fight for 
November, December this year, or spring, summer of next year.

“But you never know with Tyson Fury, how long someone like that’s going to be 
in the game – not because of what we’ve seen in the papers, but because he’s a 
little bit out of it – and how long he’ll keep winning.

“The injury has sort of made up our mind for us. But we want to get all the 
belts,” Hearn said.

“I see Deontay Wilder calling out AJ’s name tonight – because everyone’s 
calling him out. Oscar De La Hoya just tweeted, ‘Luis Ortiz is the best 
heavyweight in the world. Let’s fight now.’

“There’s not a heavyweight in the world who doesn’t want to fight Anthony 
Joshua <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> – because Charles 
Martin has obviously told them there’s a few quid on the table. We like the 
Joseph Parker fight. That’s a mandatory. We’ll have to deal with that at some 
point, whether that’s in November, December or March or April. That’s a good 
fight against a hungry, undefeated fighter.”

What is encouraging in the eye of this promotional storm is Joshua’s 
willingness to fight any and all of them. This is a dramatic shift in his 
thinking since before he won the title. He is now carrying himself like a 
genuine champion, someone who might actually go on to dominate the division for 
as long as he wants.

It is a heartwarming prospect.
 