
Anthony Joshua’s next opponent is a tall, unbeaten 30-year-old American with a 
padded knockout record, rudimentary skills and, to quote a dead poetcelebrated 
at length over the weekend <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>, 
possessed of, “vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself”.

Sound familiar? Dominic Breazeale, identified here last week as one of three 
potential challengers for Joshua’s IBF title, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/anthony-joshua-tyson-fury-title-defence>
 is a virtual clone of the manthe Watford fighter ripped the belt away from 
only two Saturdays ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 in the O2 Arena in Greenwich, Charles Martin. The fear among fans getting 
ready to buy their tickets for same venue, or pay Sky for the privilege, must 
surely be that the script will be much the same.

Gennady Golovkin proves he is the genuine draw in the post-Mayweather world | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/25/gennady-golovkin-pound-for-pound-post-mayweather>
Breazeale’s last visit to London was for the USA Olympic team in 2012, when he 
went out in the first round to the Russian Magomed Omarov 19-8, and Joshua 
survived a first-round scare against the Cuban Erislandy Savón,going on to win 
gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/team-gb-medal-success-anthony-joshua>
.

The Californian stands 6ft 7in to Martin’s 6ft 5in. He returns with 17 
professional wins against largely anonymous opponents, 15 going home early (an 
88% stoppage count); Martin came with 22 wins over similar hopefuls, stopping 
21 of them (95%).

These are regulation statistics for modern heavyweights of even moderate 
ambition and, at a glance, tell us little about their pedigree – apart from the 
fact they can punch if the target is slow, unthreatening and resigned to his 
fate.

So it will be a major surprise if Breazeale lasts much longer than the two 
rounds his compatriot managed. This is world heavyweight boxing – but not as 
traditionalists know it.

Joshua’s defenders would say it is no particular fault of the new champion; he 
can only beat what is put in front of him. However, when he took to social 
media on Monday tomake the announcement himself 
<https://twitter.com/anthonyfjoshua/status/724519726249066496>, the choice of 
opponent had his fingerprints all over it.

In Joshua’s defence, he is not dodging any dangerous contenders because there 
are not any available on the IBF’s top 15 list – a key factor in the original 
decision to fight Martin. It was by far the safest route to serious riches.

And a glance at Breazeale’s most recent performance makes it clear why Joshua 
and his promoter, Eddie Hearn, had no qualms about selecting him as the next 
American offering.

The 17th bout of Breazeale’s professional career, against squat, wide-swinging 
Amir Mansour in Los Angeles in January, wasnot so much a boxing match as a 
leather-throwing competition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T85cNnyHcJc>.

Scheduled for 10 rounds for the WBC’s Intercontinental Americas title, it 
lasted five rounds and, if it were staged in a car park outside a pub in 
Ilford, it would have been received with mild approval. There were more swings 
than there are roundabouts in Essex, more misses than in a Southend nightclub.

Any claims Breazeale had to be considered a world-class fighter were exposed 
from ugly start, through an embarrassing, painful visit to the canvas in the 
third round, to an inconclusive and quite bizarre ending.

Mansour, whose own 22-1-1 (16 stoppages) record was respectable by modern 
standards, won all five completed rounds on each judge’s card – but he had 
nothing going for him. He entered the ring with a heavy cold, wore an 
ill-fitting mouthguard that protected his upper teeth only, bit halfway through 
his tongue in the second round and, struggling to breathe through his mouth or 
nose, quit on his stool. It took five hours of surgery and 36 stitches to save 
his tongue.

It was not one of Breazeale’s finest evenings in a boxing ring, either.

Like Martin, he hits square-on, a cardinal sin in boxing, especially for a 
heavyweight, he dropped his gloves after jabbing, was easily hit by Mansour’s 
southpaw right hooks and generally operated like an off-duty bouncer.

Yet here he is, a validated challenger. Like Martin, he will be dangerous – 
but not for long.

He will no doubt talk a better fight than he produces – as Martin did. They 
were in fact due to meet last year – which would have been a decent contest 
between fighters of a similar level.

As it is, Joshua is again left to expose the limitations of a sub-standard 
opponent and trust that he does so in style to keep faith with his expanding 
army of admirers.

He made the regulation noises on Monday – revealing, however, that he is 
already looking past Breazeale.

“My coaches have watched Breazeale for a long time and they knew he was going 
to be a player in the division and now we get the chance to go to war on 25 
June,” he said. “It’s sure to be explosive. Both of us like to let our hands go 
and score knockouts. We are both undefeated and both have Olympic pedigree.

“I am looking to get past Breazeale in style and continue moving towards the 
unification fight everybody is waiting for. I’m looking forward to being part 
of a stacked night of boxing and defending my title in style.”

He presumably did not mean “stacked” in the pejorative sense – and Hearn does 
promise to provide a good undercard – with Martin Murray against George Groves 
confirmed. These two excellent super-middleweights should considerably lift the 
tone if Joshua-Breazeale disappoints.
 