
Eddie Hearn insists a deal has “virtually” been agreed for Anthony Joshua to 
fightWladimir Klitschko <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko>. 
He has revealed, however, a concern it is not the right fight for Joshua to be 
taking at this stage of his career.

It is understood that an announcement will be made in the coming days to 
confirm the IBF heavyweight champion is making the second defence of his title 
against Klitschko at the Manchester Arena on 10 December.

Tony Bellew retains cruiserweight title with third-round stoppage of BJ Flores
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/tony-bellew-retains-cruiserweight-stoppage-bj-flores>
The former IBF, WBO and WBA champion Klitschko would represent the most 
difficult fight of Joshua’s professional career, and a significantly greater 
challenge than any other previous opponent.

There remains a risk Joshua could lose his undefeated status and title to a 
heavyweight considered among the finest in history and that Matchroom’s Hearn 
will be accused of making the fight too soon. The promoter is instead aware 
that is the chance they are taking.

“Terms are virtually there between the two now, there are plenty of things 
that have got to fall into place,” the 37-year-old told BBC Radio 5 Live. “
Tyson Fury’s vacated the [WBA and WBO] belts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tyson-fury-vacated-wbo-wba-world-heavyweight-titles-treatment>
; the governing bodies would love Anthony Joshua v Wladimir Klitschko to have 
the belt on the line.

“I don’t think it is the right fight for Anthony Joshua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua>, but isn’t that what’s 
exciting about it? You can’t really win as a promoter because on one hand 
people are saying, ‘You’re putting him in too easy [past] fights’, and then 
they’re saying: ‘That’s a bit early for him isn’t it? What are you doing?’

“It’s a complete 50-50 fight. Freshness, sharpness leads you to Anthony 
Joshua, and then the experience says Anthony hasn’t got a chance. It’s 
definitely a jump too early, it’s his 17th pro fight, he’s never been in with 
anyone like Wladimir Klitschko, anyone with his experience. But I also believe 
Wladimir Klitschko has never been in with anyone like Anthony Joshua.”

There had been concerns that Joshua’s television deal with the American 
network Showtime, and Klitschko’s with rivals HBO, may prove too big a problem 
to overcome.

Similar circumstances had contributed to delaying the fights that eventually 
took place between Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather and Mike Tyson and 
Lennox Lewis, but Hearn said: “It’s a case of going through the sanctioning 
requests. The deal between the fighters: that’s there. The financial terms are 
agreed.

“We had a problem with US broadcasters because they’re both with different 
networks: that’s sorted out. It’s a case of getting the paperwork in order, the 
sanctioning in order. Hopefully in a couple of days we’ll have an announcement. 
It looks like Manchester. It’s a huge event.”
 