
It is as well for those who find swearing tough on the ears that Joe Joyce, 
all 91-plus kilograms of him, is as gentle a giant as amateur boxing can ever 
have had, because the Londoner had good cause to follow the expletive-filled 
example ofIreland’s Michael Conlan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/michael-conlan-boxing-black-eye-rio-olympic-games>
.

Joyce – who is considering turning professional at 30, and who could blame 
him? – got silver in the super-heavyweight final and, beyond doubt,he deserved 
gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/britain-joe-joyce-misses-out-olympic-super-heavyweight-gold-medal-silver-tony-yoka>
 to burnish a career that seemed to be heading like a runaway truck towards the 
sport’s ultimate honour.

Rio Olympics: Brazil win men's volleyball gold, GB's Joyce takes boxing silver 
– live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/21/rio-2016-olympics-day-16-mo-farah-joe-joyce-basketball-marathon-live>
Yet Joyce – unlike Conlan after his surprise bantamweight quarter-final defeat 
to Russia’s Vladimir Nikitin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
 – was the acme of politeness and diplomacy when asked if the split decision in 
favour of his long-time rival, Tony Yoka, fitted a pattern of dubious decisions 
at this tournament.

“Possibly,” the normally loquacious fighter said. He had no doubt he had won, 
though; in fact he was amazed that one of the judges – Emre Aydin, of Turkey – 
did not give him even one of the three rounds. That revelation at least 
produced a raised eyebrow on the kindly features of the man from Putney.

“What does that say?” he said rhetorically. “I don’t know. You can make your 
own decision.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fjoe-joyce-wins-silver-boxing-team-gb-67th-medal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Joyce%20wins%20silver%20in%20boxing%20and%20Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2067th%20medal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fjoe-joyce-wins-silver-boxing-team-gb-67th-medal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Joyce%20wins%20silver%20in%20boxing%20and%20Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2067th%20medal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fjoe-joyce-wins-silver-boxing-team-gb-67th-medal-video&media=>
Joe Joyce wins silver in boxing and Team GB’s 67th medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/joe-joyce-wins-silver-boxing-team-gb-67th-medal-video>
He added: “I thought I was working him to the body, working him to his head, 
penetrating his guard. I mean, maybe towards the end of the end of the rounds 
he nicked a few shots, but the predominant work was done by me working to the 
head and body.”

Told that his friend, sparring partner, Olympic gold medallist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/anthony-joshua-wins-gold-boxing> 
and world heavyweight champion Anthony Joshua thought he had won decisively, 
Joyce said: “It’s a bit of consolation, but I’d prefer to be the Olympic 
champion.”

Joshua, here working with the BBC, said: “I have never seen a lightweight, let 
alone a heavyweight, throw so many punches in a fight before. We talked about 
counterpunching and being aggressive. Joe was aggressive, making the fight. The 
power that he possesses, there is no way that you can block those shots. He is 
penetrating gloves, penetrating the body. For me, he’s Olympic champion. 
Everyone is here cheering him on. In spirit, he’s the champion. He has done so 
well. As much I want him to have the medal, I am so proud of what he has 
achieved. The sky is the limit for him. He is credit to the sport, in and out 
of the ring.

“I was praying that he would catch him with that one shot, so he could knock 
him out. He is a phenomenal fighter and I would have been so happy for him to 
be the Olympic champion. He has made his family proud.”

Britain’s Joe Joyce misses out on Olympic super-heavyweight gold medal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/britain-joe-joyce-misses-out-olympic-super-heavyweight-gold-medal-silver-tony-yoka>
Joyce added: “I thought it was close against Yoka in the worlds as well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/12/joe-joyce-rio-olympics-world-championships-loss>
 [where Joyce lost to the eventual champion in the semi-finals]. I wasn’t as 
fit that time, but this time I was ready, put more than 100% in and didn’t come 
away with the gold.

“I was landing lots of shots long range, then going in and hitting him close 
too. I felt I won all the rounds, I dominated enough. I need to watch it back 
and get a clearer opinion, but I thought I did enough to win the gold medal.

“I really thought I’d be coming back to talk to you guys over the moon. I was 
landing shots on him all that last round, maybe two eye-catching shots.

“People remember a gold medal more than a silver. It makes me feel good to be 
the last Great Britain medallist. We’ve beaten our target, we’ve beaten the 
total from London, so in that respect it’s been a great Games. I look forward 
to the next one – though I’ll probably just be watching. I’d love to be there 
in Tokyo to see it.

“Many thanks to Frazer Clarke [the rival he beat to make the team], for coming 
out here to help me spar. I wouldn’t be as sharp without him. Being with big 
Josh [Joshua] helps.”

Conlan, the London gold medallist Luke Campbell and the promoter Eddie Hearn 
were among several admittedly partial observers who thought Joyce had won the 
bout easily.
 