
Eric “Drummer Boy” Molina, a 34-year-old Texan of quiet disposition and scant 
achievement, said before he stepped into the ring withAnthony Joshua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> here on Saturday night that 
he considered the WBC champion, Deontay Wilder – who stopped him in nine rounds 
– to be the best heavyweight in the world. As he sank towards the canvas here 
in round three, he was probably reassessing that judgment.

On a night that threatened to test boxing’s capacity to accommodate bad 
behaviour on the undercard, two gentleman heavyweights did their thing in the 
main event with all the quietude of a Sunday church service until Joshua 
exploded a venomous right on Molina’s chin in the third round. One more assault 
forced the American to spin into his own corner and he was taking further 
punishment when the referee called a merciful halt.

Dillian Whyte beats Dereck Chisora on split decision after epic fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/dillian-whyte-beats-dereck-chisora-heavyweight-boxing>
Molina more timid, even, than Charles Martin, the American from whom the 
Londoner ripped away the IBF title in April, and someway short in ability of 
another horizontal heavyweight from across the seas, Dominic Breazeale, who at 
least lasted into the seventh round two months later.

Now Joshua has to step up. There will be no more soft touches, no more 
learning fights with a world title belt around his waist. The promoter Eddie 
Hearn, grabbed to microphone to tell the 21,000 fans who had stayed after 
midnight: “I’d like now to bring Wladimir Klitschko to the ring, and I’m 
officially announcing the fight against Anthony Joshua at Wembley Stadium on 29 
April.”

Klitschko asked the audience: “Do you want to see a big fight? Do you want to 
see two Olympic champions in there? You got it.” The reception was rapturous.

There was heavyweight royalty everywhere in the house: Klitschko and Tyson 
Fury – one waiting for a last hurrah with Joshua, the other maybe already 
having bid us adieu – as well as the ever-loved Frank Bruno. David Haye was 
here for Sky, his loud irritant, Tony Bellew, about 10 yards away for the BBC; 
they kept their distance. In America, Wilder manned the Showtime microphone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fanthony-joshua-eric-molina-third-round-wladimir-klitschko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a8319161abd95ed9c06a50810d7502f972d1e2%2F0_68_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Joshua%20dominates%20Eric%20Molina%20to%20set%20up%20Wladimir%20Klitschko%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fanthony-joshua-eric-molina-third-round-wladimir-klitschko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Joshua%20dominates%20Eric%20Molina%20to%20set%20up%20Wladimir%20Klitschko%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fanthony-joshua-eric-molina-third-round-wladimir-klitschko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a8319161abd95ed9c06a50810d7502f972d1e2%2F0_68_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Anthony Joshua and Wladimir Klitschko face each other down in the ring after 
Joshua’s victory. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
The champion, the owner of a perfect 18-0 record, all of them by stoppage, 
said of his public spar with Molina: “I just had to be patient.” It was a job 
of work safely completed – at odds with the excitement that followed.

Katie Taylor, the decorated Irish amateur in her second professional bout, had 
the experienced Brazilian lightweight Viviane Obenauf blinking and blowing. She 
put Obenauf down in the second and won comfortably on points over six rounds.

British boxing is enjoying a long and glittering run, with 12 world champions 
of varying status. Khalid Yafai became the latest – and Birmingham’s first – 
when he outclassed Luis Concepcion 120-108, 119-108, 117-112 to send the 
31-year-old Panamanian home without the WBA super-fly belt he had surrendered 
on the scales on Friday. A neat left hook put the exasperated visitor over in 
the 10th for a quick count, and Yafai controlled nearly every exchange in the 
bout with crisp counters and superb movement.

Scott Quigg, a super-bantam champion until he lost to Carl Frampton in this 
ring in February, showed the benefit of moving up to featherweight, and stopped 
the difficult Jose Cayetono in the ninth round. The Mexican is another of those 
little man who have struggled to make weight, hitting the limit at the second 
attempt, yet Quigg looked bigger and stronger, finishing his comeback with a 
well-weighted shot to the chin in a neutral corner. His own jaw, broken in the 
Frampton fight, seemed to hold up nicely.

Just about any of the score of right-hand bombs Hosea Burton landed on Frank 
Buglioni’s chin from the first round to the 12th might have taken out his 
challenger for the British light-heavyweight title. Instead, Buglioni, 
rebuilding his career under the guidance of Chisora’s former trainer, Don 
Charles, soaked it up and, bleeding heavily from midway, rumbled through the 
storm to wreck the Mancunian’s unbeaten record and leave him battered on the 
ropes for a last-gasp stoppage, with 64 seconds left.
 