
Anthony Joshua <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> will make 
the second defence of his IBF heavyweight title at the Manchester Arena on 26 
November.

The undefeated 26-year-old last fought when he stopped Dominic Breazeale in 
seven rounds in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-v-dominic-breazeale-ibf-heavyweight-world-title-live>
. His next challenger is to be announced by the end of September.

Joshua’s last fight away from London’s O2 Arena was in May 2015 when he 
defeated Raphael Zumbano Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/anthony-joshua-raphael-zumbano-love>
 at the Barclaycard Arena in Birmingham. The change of location is a 
demonstration of promoter Eddie Hearn’s desire to continue to build his profile 
throughout the country.

Details of the November fight were announced by Matchroom Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing>, run by Hearn.

The promoter spoke earlier in the week of a three-fight plan for Joshua that 
begins on 26 November, is followed by a further defence against mandatory 
challenger Joseph Parker in March, and then concludes with a voluntary defence 
at Wembley stadium against one of the division’s biggest names.

To maximise the success of such a plan and of pay-per-view sales throughout 
that period, it may be necessary to continue to build the heavyweight’s 
reputation beyond the capital. New Zealand’s Parker is also in contention to 
appear on the 26 November undercard.

“When I first started my professional career I travelled all round the country 
fighting, which I loved, so this is taking me back to the grass roots,” said 
Joshua, a 2012 Olympic gold medallist who went to Rio to support Team GB’s 
boxers this summer.

“I can’t wait to get back up north and show the people of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> how much I have improved since the 
last time I was there. I have been inspired over the summer by the fighters in 
the Olympics; it has given me a new perspective and huge hunger to get back in 
the ring.”

“It has taken a bit of time to officially announce the fight, we want this to 
be a spectacular show, all the way up the card and it takes time to get these 
things right.”

November’s fight will end a five-month absence from the ring for Joshua, after 
a demanding run of seven fights in 15 months.
 