
A knockout machine in the ring, Anthony Joshua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> has developed a reputation 
as one of boxing’s more genial figures out of it. So it came as a surprise to 
hear the heavyweight express his desire to make the Mexican American Eric 
Molina “look like shit” when the pair square up next month.

Joshua faces the 34-year-old at the Manchester Arena on 10 December in what 
will be the second defence of his IBF title and Friday saw the beginning of 
promotional duties for both fighters, which to a large extent explains Joshua’s 
attention-grabbing remark, because this is a fight that needs a fair amount of 
promoting. Molina, after all, is the replacement for Wladimir Klitschko, whom 
Joshua was set to meet in a little over a month’s time before the Ukrainian 
picked up a “minor injury” in training. Molina is a game opponent and has an 
interesting story but he is no Klitschko. The sense of anticlimax is tangible.

Joshua admitted as much when he described himself as a “little bit” 
disappointed not to be taking on the 40-year-old former three-belt holder next. 
But with the pair expected tofight next spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/wladimir-klitschko-anthony-joshua-world-heavyweigh-boxing-title-fight-wba>
 after the WBA finally agreed to the “super” version of their world heavyweight 
title also being up for grabs – a major stipulation for Klitschko – the 
27-year-old insists he is fully focused on Molina and putting on a show against 
a man who has vowed to provide the 2012 Olympic champion with the toughest 
fight he has been in since turning professional.

“They [opposition fighters] say they’re going to give me the toughest fight of 
my life and if that’s their mentality, I’ll reverse it and make them look like 
shit,” said Joshua, who has stopped each of the 17 men he has faced since 
winning gold in London, including Charles Martin, who heknocked out inside two 
rounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 to become world champion seven months ago. “If I took him [Molina] 12 rounds 
but played with him, that would say I have a better skill set. If I knock him 
out early, that says I have better punching power. As long as I win in a good 
fashion I can tick a good box.”

Anthony Joshua’s IBF title defence is a Christmas present of limited appeal | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/anthony-joshua-face-eric-molina-world-heavyweight-boxing-title>
Joshua was in noticeably relaxed mood as he spoke and put that down to having 
taken the longest break of his professional career following his seventh-round 
stoppage of Dominic Breazeale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
 in June. That was the joint furthest anyone had taken Joshua and by the 
Briton’s own admission he was not at his best going into what was his first 
defence of the IBF title, after a disrupted training camp and glandular fever. 
“The break after was a godsend,” he said. “Me and the lads had an unbelievable 
holiday – to Koh Samui in Thailand – and I only started getting back into 
boxing when I went to Rio [Olympics] to watch the fights out there. I came back 
a week or so later and have been back in the gym since.”

Joshua admitted he was preparing for Klitschko until two weeks ago but insists 
switching focus to Molina has not been problematic. “These things happen,” he 
said. “I just crack on and keep the ball rolling.” That is also the case for 
Joshua’s promoter, Eddie Hearn, who was at his hard-selling best at the press 
conference, hailing the quick sale of tickets for this fight (15,000 in five 
minutes, apparently). But there is no doubt he faces a challenge persuading the 
usual number of people to take up pay-per-view subscriptions now it is Molina 
and not Klitschko who is on the bill. The Texas-born fighter arrives in England 
having won 25 of his 28 professional bouts, 19 by knockout. But it says much 
about Molina’s record that the most notable fight was a defeat to WBC champion 
Deontay Wilder in June last year. Molina rocked the undefeated 31-year-old with 
a left hook in the third round before Wilder recovered and finished off the job 
in trademark powerful fashion in the ninth.

Molina believes that display, along with his most recent – the 10-round 
stoppage of two division world champion Tomasz Adamek in Poland on 2 April – 
shows he has the physical capabilities and mental strength to overcome Joshua, 
with the latter attribute backed up by the fact he has up until now combined 
boxing with being a full-time special-needs teacher in the Texan city of 
Edinburg.

“I’ve no amateur experience but I’m getting better in every fight,” Molina 
said. “I’m here to make history.”
 