
Chelsea closed their tour of the United States with a 3-1 win over Milan in 
Minneapolis as their managerAntonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> prepared to clear out the 
players he no longer wants.

Chelsea 3-1 Milan: International Champions Cup – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/03/chelsea-milan-international-champions-cup-live>
Bertrand Traoré opened the scoring for Conte’s side, while Oscar’s double 
sealed the victory after Giacomo Bonaventura had drawnMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> level.

Traoré stooped with a low header to give the Premier League side the lead 
early on but Bonaventura curled in a superb free-kick to equalise shortly 
before the break before a crowd of 64,000, the largest for a football match in 
Minnesota. Each time a goal was scored the PA played Let’s Go Crazy by 
Minneapolis’s favourite son Prince.

After N’Gole Kanté 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/chelsea-confirm-signing-ngolo-kante-leicester-city>
 came on for his first Blues appearance in the second half, Chelsea began to 
take control and Oscar’s penalty restored their lead. His second three minutes 
from time sealed the victory when he found the bottom corner.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> now return across the 
Atlantic before a final friendly with Werder Bremen to close their pre-season 
schedule on Sunday.

Conte admitted to being impressed by Oscar’s performance, telling the Chelsea 
website 
<https://www.chelseafc.com/news/latest-news/2016/08/conte--a-clear-idea.html>: 
“Oscar is an important player and I think the season when Chelsea won the 
title, he played a fantastic season.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fantonio-conte-player-clearout-chelsea-milan-friendly-minneapolis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaac2c1702146f8a4b4a4585a40969a212df1dec%2F0_0_4328_2597%2F4328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antonio%20Conte%20set%20for%20player%20clearout%20after%20Chelsea%20see%20off%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fantonio-conte-player-clearout-chelsea-milan-friendly-minneapolis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antonio%20Conte%20set%20for%20player%20clearout%20after%20Chelsea%20see%20off%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fantonio-conte-player-clearout-chelsea-milan-friendly-minneapolis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaac2c1702146f8a4b4a4585a40969a212df1dec%2F0_0_4328_2597%2F4328.jpg>
 Antonio Conte has one more friendly against Werder Bremen in which to assess 
his squad. Photograph: Darren Walsh/Chelsea FC via Getty Images 
He added: “Last season was bad for all the players, not only for Oscar or for 
another player, for all. I think Oscar is a good player with a great talent and 
he can improve a lot. I am seeing in him a good attitude and a good will.

“I think this match told me a lot – about the players who keep and who can go 
on loan or we can sell. Today, it was important because I have a more clear 
idea than before.

“Now we go back to London and it’s important for me, for the club, to talk and 
take the decision about all the players. In this pre-season we work with 30 
players, four goalkeepers and 26 players. A lot of players. Now remains one 
game against Werder Bremen and then we must take the decision.

“We hope to take the best decision for the club and the players also. The 
ideas are very clear, but it’s important for me to speak about this topic with 
the club.”
 