
The jury is out: is it the best or the worst time to be building a career in 
journalism? Some say that journalism has never been more vibrant with 
possibilities; othersmourn its demise 
<http://www.christinapatterson.co.uk/blog/index.php?id=26> and the crisis this 
can pose for journalists.

This is the paradox we face and the blame for this can be laid almost entirely 
at the internet’s door. The world wide web has singlehandedly undermined the 
traditional financial model that the media industry was founded on: print.

Mainstream media organisations no longer have the monopoly on news they used 
to. Anybody with access to broadband can now report events or broadcast their 
opinion to the world. The story of Edward Snowden’s intelligence leaks can be 
told froma one man retreat in the Brazilian rainforest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/12/glenn-greenwald-uk-arrest-me-edward-snowden-nsa>
 and the terror of Syrian arms trafficking can be investigated from a front 
room in a Leicester suburb. ButBrown Moses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/21/frontroom-blogger-analyses-weapons-syria-frontline>
, and many like him, has been largely unpaid and ran his blog as a hobby, at 
least initially. What journalists are paid to do, many are now willing to do 
for free.

But for us fresh-faced journalists on the digital trainee scheme, the prospect 
of journalism as a product of the world wide web is also tremendously exciting.

Words are no longer the only way to tell a story. Don’t get me wrong – I love 
language and the elegant nuances it brings to the table. Long may it be the 
bread and butter of solid reporting. But the tools available on the world wide 
web mean there are now so many more exciting ways to tell a story. A beautiful 
data visualisation means I can dissecthow the treasury spend my hard earned 
taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2012/dec/04/government-spending-department-2011-12>
, a live Q & A means I canput my own questions to Edward Snowden  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/17/edward-snowden-nsa-files-whistleblower?commentpage=1>
and the development of podcasts means I can reflect on thecomplexity of 
transgender sexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/19/young-trans-people-sexuality-sex-relationships-podcast>
 on my commute home.

Having come from a few years spent in local activism and international 
communications, the prospect is wonderful. There has never been a better time 
to promote a campaign or hear unsung voices. Now that we live in a world wherea 
single hashtag can catapult a story to the front pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/07/twitter-hashtag-bringbackourgirls-nigeria-mass-kidnapping>
, it is hard to believe that eight years ago, Twitter did not exist. While 
previously the only tool available to the disgruntled reader was a laborious 
letter to the editor; now thousands of commenters wait below the line to have 
their say – and often come above the line too.

Social media is also changing the way news can be transmitted. At the moment 
I’m based on the newsdesk as part of the community team. Our job is to find 
ways to bring the audience into our journalism. The nature of journalism means 
there is almost always somebody in a location, industry or situation who 
understands the complexities of a story better than the media can. With the 
internet and web of social media at our fingertips, it is much easier to ask a 
pilot to explain the theories onwhy Malaysian Airlines flight 370 went missing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/21/what-happened-to-flight-mh370-missing-plane>
, start a public debate on the potential impact of renting reforms or allow 
readers to share the joy of theirpolitical selfies 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/536cbccde4b0f622341da659>.

So the jury may still be out, but the real question is: what do you think?
 