
As the sun begins its seasonal descent in the Arctic sky and temperatures 
drop, the summer melt of sea ice is slowing down. In the next few weeks, the 
span of theArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> Ocean covered by 
ice will reach its annual low.

But despite beginning the summer at unprecedentedly low levels, this year’s 
minimum won’t break the stunning record of 2012 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/storm-accelerated-arctic-sea-ice-loss-in-2012-study-finds-15542>
, experts say, thanks to cloudy weather that slowed the rate of melt. 

Depending on how the weather plays out over the next few weeks, that minimum 
is likely to fall somewhere between second and fifth place, they estimate — 
still a remarkably low level that shows how precipitously sea ice has declined 
in recent decades.

“There hasn’t been any recovery in any ice at all,” Julienne Stroeve, a senior 
scientist at the National Snow & Ice Data Center <http://nsidc.org/>, said.

The area of the Arctic Ocean covered by sea ice naturally waxes and wanes with 
the seasons, reaching its peak at the end of winter and its nadir at the end of 
summer, usually in mid-September.


Arctic sea ice crashes to record low for June
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/07/arctic-sea-ice-crashes-to-record-low-for-june>
But the steady increase in heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the Earth’s 
atmosphere has fueled an intense warming of the Arctic region 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/arctic-temperature-highest-on-record-19820>
; temperatures there are rising at twice the rate as the global average. That 
has caused a dramatic melting of the sea ice 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/watch-old-arctic-ice-disappear-18563> that 
floats atop the frigid ocean waters.

Since the beginning of satellite records in 1979, the winter peak has declined 
by 3.2 percent per decade, while the summer minimum has declined by 13.7 
percent per decade.

That loss of ice has significant ramifications for the animals that depend on 
it for access to food and coastal communities that need it for protection from 
intense Arctic storms. The loss of ice has also fueled interest in opening 
shipping routes 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/ice-free-northwest-passage-20624> through 
the region, as well as exploiting natural resources, such as oil, found beneath 
the seafloor.

But the effects of melt aren’t confined to the Arctic: Ice reflects the sun’s 
rays, so as it disappears, more ocean waters, which absorb those rays, are 
exposed, intensifying regional and global warming. Some research also suggests 
that the loss of ice could be impacting extreme weather in Europe, Asia and 
North America.

This winter, Arctic weather stayed remarkably warm, to the extent that it 
surprised even veteran sea ice researchers. That balmy weather stymied sea ice 
growth and caused sea ice extent to hit a record low winter peak 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/arctic-sea-ice-peak-record-low-again-20183>
 for the second year in a row.

As the sun rose with the coming of spring, that meant more open ocean was 
exposed and ready to absorb the sun’s rays, fueling an early start to the melt 
season. By May, the melt season was two to four weeks ahead of schedule andfar 
below the previous record low 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/arctic-sea-ice-breaks-may-record-20415> for 
the month.

But even such a huge head start didn’t guarantee a record low come summer’s 
end, because weather plays a key role in summer melt. Beginning in June and 
lasting through July — the peak months of sun exposure — Arctic weather turned 
cloudy and somewhat cooler.

“So that dropped us off the pace pretty quickly,” Walt Meier 
<http://science.gsfc.nasa.gov/sed/bio/walter.n.meier>, a NASA sea ice 
scientist, said.

Exactly where this summer’s minimum falls depends on what the weather does 
over the next few weeks. For example, winds could influence where sea ice 
flows, potentially compacting what is left, or further breaking up already 
tenuous chunks.


With the sun dropping ever lower in the sky, it has less influence over that 
melt, but the warmth retained in the ocean will continue to eat away at the ice 
for a few weeks.

A record low is virtually out of the question, though.

“I don’t see how we could catch 2012,” Meier said. “There’s not enough time 
left in the season.”

He does think it’s possible that this year could overtake 2007’s low, the 
second lowest extent on record.

The potential to take the second place spot, despite the fact that “the summer 
was just not really conducive to extreme melt” shows just how far sea ice has 
fallen, Meier said. “That’s just in a lot of ways kind of remarkable.”

Sea ice <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/sea-ice> levels as low as 
current ones would have stunned scientists even a decade ago. Now it has 
effectively become a new normal.

“Things have really changed,” Meier said. “The Arctic is very different.”

In a recent study in the journal Geographical Review, researchers compiled 
historical records of sea ice from ships’ logs and other sources and found that 
sea ice hasn’t been this low in at least the last 150 years 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/guest-post-piecing-together-arctic-sea-ice-history-1850?utm_content=buffer489fd&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
. The rate that sea ice is declining is also unprecedented over that timespan.

However, despite some recent reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/21/arctic-will-be-ice-free-in-summer-next-year>
 that the Arctic would be ice-free in the summer in the next year or two, that 
is not the case, Stroeve said. Most projections suggest that that point will be 
reached sometime in the middle of the century, and, as another recent paper 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/guest-post-predictable-first-ice-free-arctic-summer>
 found, scientists’ ability to pin down that date is limited by the natural 
variability of the sea ice system to within a couple of decades.

Any prediction of ice-free conditions in the next few years doesn’t take into 
account the physics of the system, Stroeve said.

“I agree it’s going to go away eventually,” she said. “But it’s not there yet.”



 