
Arctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> scientists have warned that 
the increasingly rapid melting of the ice cap risks triggering 19 “tipping 
points” in the region that could have catastrophic consequences around the 
globe.

The Arctic Resilience Report 
<https://www.sei-international.org/publications?pid=3047> found that the 
effects of Arctic warming could be felt as far away as the Indian Ocean, in a 
stark warning that changes in the region could cause uncontrollable climate 
change at a global level.

Temperatures in the Arctic are currently about 20C above what would be 
expected for the time of year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
, which scientists describe as “off the charts”. Sea ice is at the lowest 
extent ever recorded for the time of year.

“The warning signals are getting louder,” said Marcus Carson of the Stockholm 
Environment Institute and one of the lead authors of the report. “[These 
developments] also make the potential for triggering [tipping points] and 
feedback loops much larger.”
Arctic sea ice extent graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-22T11:07:25/embed.html>
Climate tipping points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/26/climate-change-tipping-points-are-not-just-symbolic>
 occur when a natural system, such as the polar ice cap, undergoes sudden or 
overwhelming change that has a profound effect on surrounding ecosystems, often 
irreversible.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one's%20an%20exception'%3A%20toll%20of%20climate%20change%2C%20from%20US%20to%20the%20Marshall%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%27s%20an%20exception%27%3A%20toll%20of%20climate%20change%2C%20from%20US%20to%20the%20Marshall%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming&media=>
‘No one’s an exception’: toll of climate change, from US to the Marshall 
Islands – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/sep/15/climate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming>
In the Arctic, the tipping points identified in the new report, published on 
Friday, include: growth in vegetation on tundra, which replaces reflective snow 
and ice with darker vegetation, thus absorbing more heat;higher releases of 
methane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/13/methane-release-from-melting-permafrost-could-trigger-dangerous-global-warming>
, a potent greenhouse gas, from the tundra as it warms; shifts in snow 
distribution that warm the ocean, resulting in altered climate patterns as far 
away as Asia, where the monsoon could be effected; and the collapse of some key 
Arctic fisheries, with knock-on effects on ocean ecosystems around the globe.

The research, compiled by 11 organisations including the Arctic Council and 
six universities, comes at a critical time, not only because of the current 
Arctic temperature rises but in political terms.

Aides to the US president-elect, Donald Trump, this week unveiled plans to 
remove the budget for climate change science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
currently used by Nasa and other US federal agencies for projects such as 
examining Arctic changes, and to spend it instead on space exploration.

“That would be a huge mistake,” said Carson, noting that much more research 
needs to be done on polar tipping points before we can understand the true 
dangers, let alone hope to tackle them. “It would be like ripping out the 
aeroplane’s cockpit instruments while you are in mid-flight.”

Arctic sea ice shrinks to second lowest level ever recorded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
He added: “These are very serious problems, very serious changes are 
happening, but they are still poorly understood. We need more research to 
understand them. A lot of the major science is done by the US.”

Scientists have speculated for some years that so-called feedback mechanisms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jan/05/climate-change-feedback-loops>
 – by which the warming of one area or type of landscape has knock-on effects 
for whole ecosystems – could suddenly take hold and change the dynamics of 
Arctic ice melting from a relatively slow to a fast-moving phenomenon with 
unpredictable and potentially irreversible consequences for global warming. For 
instance, when sea ice shrinks it leaves areas of dark ocean that absorb more 
heat than the reflective ice, which in turn causes further shrinkage, and so on 
in a spiral.

The Arctic ice cap helps to cool sea and air temperatures, by reflecting much 
of the sun’s radiation back into space, and acting as a global cooler when 
winds and ocean currents swirl over and under it. It has long been known to 
play a key part of the global climate system, but the difficulty and expense of 
close monitoring have meant that scientists have only in recent years been able 
to make detailed assessments.

The report, billed as the first comprehensive study of ecosystems and 
societies in the region, found: “The potential effects of Arctic regime shifts 
[or tipping points] on the rest of the world are substantial, yet poorly 
understood. Human-driven climate change greatly increases the risk of Arctic 
regime shifts, so reducing global greenhouse gas emissions is crucial to 
reducing this risk.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&media=>
150 years of global warming in a minute-long symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/18/150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
The authors also warned that people living in and near the Arctic would be 
badly affected, and called for communities to be provided with equipment and 
skills to survive. They took evidence from a variety of settlements in the 
region, finding many signs of stark changes already under way.

Joel Clement, co-chair of the project and director of the office of policy 
analysis at the US Department of the Interior, said: “This groundbreaking 
report is an unprecedented effort to gain insight from what is happening on the 
ground. The findings are foundational to a more informed, coordinated response 
to building resilience across the region.”
 