
Promoting its review of the new movie version of Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/macbeth-review-fassbender-and-cotillard-full-of-sound-and-fury-in-significant-shakespeare-adaptation>
, the Daily Telegraph asked, on its front page: “Has Shakespeare ever been 
better on the big screen?”

Such a question is clearly intended to provoke a response, and the gist of 
mine, revealed in the personal Top 10 below, would be: yes, but not very often. 
In the arbitrary rules to which such surveys are prone, I have decided that a 
play can only be represented once (which turns out to be especially foul and 
unfair for Macbeth) and that directors are restricted to a single entry, in 
order to prevent the list being dominated by multiple cinematic Bardists such as
Kenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/08/kenneth-branagh-star-west-end-theatre-season-laurence-olivier>
,Julie Taymor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/19/lion-king-director-julie-taymor-women-opportunity>
,Orson Welles <https://www.theguardian.com/film/orsonwelles> and Laurence 
Olivier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/06/laurence-olivier-in-the-entertainer-great-performances>
, although the last has the bigger problem of having been omitted completely.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442418984733%2FKP_475917_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20in%20Macbeth%3A%20watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20of%20the%20new%20Shakespeare%20adaptation%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20in%20Macbeth%3A%20watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20of%20the%20new%20Shakespeare%20adaptation%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442418984733%2FKP_475917_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Macbeth (2015) 
I appreciate that this decision is controversial but my conclusion, after 
literally re-viewing the work, is that Olivier’s filmed Shakespeares have 
suffered from either changes in taste – which now rightly questions white 
actors making up for Othello – or by a subsequent superior piece: Branagh, 
though sometimes criticised for shadowing Olivier’s career, overshadowed him 
with movies of both Hamlet and Henry V.

The endurance of Shakespeare in theatre is mainly attributable to the 
magnificence of his language and the talent-defining roles offered to 
performers. But while the latter factor also applies to the cinematic versions 
– the desire of actors to record great stage roles is one reason that the shows 
have been filmed so often – the poetic speech can become problematic on screen, 
with the success of movie versions greatly depending on how they deal with the 
verse and soliloquies.

Conversely, though, the playwright’s structural decisions anticipated by three 
centuries many standard elements of film’s visual grammar – such as 
cross-cutting and location-hopping – and the Stratford dramatist’s frequent use 
of 17th-century special effects, such as ghosts and magic, has become 
progressively more appealing to a medium which, through digital technology, is 
ever more suited to illusion.

After which prologue, comes the countdown.

10. The Tempest (2010) 

Among the visualisations of the island-exiled magician Prospero, I struggled 
to separate two finalists. In his magnificently wacky 1979 punk version, Derek 
Jarman applied casting (poet Heathcote Williams, singer Toyah Willcox) and 
soundtrack (Stormy Weather) unlikely to be found at the National Theatre, at 
least at that time. In contrast, Taymor made only one radical alteration for 
the 2010 version – Prospero becoming Prospera, played by Helen Mirren – 
otherwise offeringa classically well-spoken and artily filmed account of the 
play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/06/the-tempest-helen-mirren-review> 
which showcases Mirren’s vocal colours and Taymor’s visual panache and places 
it above the director’s other Shakespeare-based works, Titus (1999) and A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream (2014).


9. Othello (2001) 


With the screen portrayals of the persecuted moor of Venice by Olivier (1965), 
Welles (1952) and Anthony Hopkins (1981), all disqualified by my law against 
cosmetic assistance, the bench-mark for naturalistic Othellos was Laurence 
Fishburne, opposite Kenneth Branagh as the scheming lieutenant Iago, in Oliver 
Parker’s Othello (1995). But, while that is the strongest account of the 
recognised text, the themes and implications of the play are most powerfully 
expressed for me in two modern-day updates both first seen in 2001: the 
Hollywood teen-flick O, which shifts the action to a high-school basketball 
team, and an adaptation made for ITV television under the original title, 
scripted by Andrew Davies. In the latter, Commander Othello is the first black 
leader of the London police force and Iago the frustrated deputy who connives 
against the boss and his wife, Desdemona. Powerfully acted by Eamonn Walker, 
Christopher Eccleston and Keeley Hawes,this is the Othello that most makes the 
play live for today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/nov/25/features.review17>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15n1T7AqJZ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15n1T7AqJZ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15n1T7AqJZ0&media=>
8. Julius Caesar (1953) 

US actors often draw a blank with iambic pentameters (with the recent 
exception of Kevin Spacey on stage) butMarlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando>, in the days when he was still 
taking acting seriously, is an impressive Mark Antony in Joseph Mankiewicz’s 
vision of the Shakespeare work that has always spoken powerfully to the US, 
thanks to that country’s history of assassinations. A bonus is that the cast 
also includes John Gielgud as Cassius and James Mason as Brutus.

7. Chimes at Midnight (1965) 

Although vulnerable to a stewards’ inquiry from purists on the grounds that it 
is not a Shakespeare play as such,Orson Welles’s anthology of scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/chimes-at-midnight-review-orson-welles-falstaff-messy-masterpiece>
 from four plays featuring Sir John Falstaff, with himself as the gluttonous 
knight, achieves the unlikely paradox of being a scholarly romp. It just edges, 
in the specialised category of history play mashups,The Hollow Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jun/29/the-hollow-crown-shakespeare-bbc2>
 (2012), the BBC’s medley of the Henries and Richards, with Simon Russell Beale 
a tremendous Falstaff.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjan%2F18%2Fralph-fiennes-coriolanus-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Fiennes%20on%20Coriolanus%3A%20'A%20collision%20between%20leadership%20and%20people'%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjan%2F18%2Fralph-fiennes-coriolanus-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Fiennes%20on%20Coriolanus%3A%20%27A%20collision%20between%20leadership%20and%20people%27%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjan%2F18%2Fralph-fiennes-coriolanus-video&media=>
6. Coriolanus (2011) 

The recent popularity of filmed Shakespeare has been encouraged by the 
prevalence of English classic actors who also have Hollywood heft: Branagh, 
Mirren, Ian McKellen and, in this case,Ralph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/15/ralph-fiennes-coriolanus-film-review>
, who chose to make his movie-directing debut by filming himself in a version 
of a play (WS’s second-best Roman political tragedy after Julius Caesar) in 
which he had appeared on stage. Cannily adapted by screenwriter John Logan, 
this Coriolanus, set in a present-day Italian state, is spoken with great 
clarity by a cast that also includes Vanessa Redgrave, and the battles are 
viscerally thrilling, with the presence of Gerard Butler from the 300 franchise 
acknowledging that the more combative plays in the canon may draw in some 
action-movie 15-24 audiences.


The 10 best modern takes on Shakespeare – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2013/jun/01/the-10-best-modern-takes-shakespeare-film>
5. Macbeth (2015) 

In answer to the Telegraph question: not, in my opinion, the best filmed 
Shakespeare ever, but impressively straight in at No 5 on release. While thewar 
sequences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/macbeth-review-blood-spattered-adaptation>
 nod vigorously (as with No 6) to the blood-thirsty younger audience, director 
Justin Kurzel also intelligently develops themes in the text of bereavement, 
trauma and faith, although relocating several interior scenes outdoors in order 
to show off the Scottish landscape. Michael Fassbender’s Macbeth achieves the 
perfect combination of clout and doubt, while Marion Cotillard is clear and 
moving despite the decision to downgrade the role of Lady Macbeth, possibly 
from a misguided fear of perpetuating a stereotype of the controlling wife. 
Though last to the party, this account easily takes the prize from the Orson 
Welles version of 1948 and Roman Polanski’s splatter-movie adaptation of 1971.


4. 10 Things I Hate About You (1999) 

Super-purists might object to the inclusion of projects that replace the 
original text and even the title with contemporary language. This Gil Junger 
romcom, though, is a brilliantly original re-imagining of The Taming of The 
Shrew, as Heath Ledger’s Patrick Verona reluctantly woos the Kat Stratford of 
Julia Stiles in a story that miraculously transfers to a US high school the 
courtship conventions and contests of the original.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rd74Gniz-A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rd74Gniz-A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rd74Gniz-A&media=>
3. Hamlet (1996) 

Teachers and students of A-level English must annually give thanks to Branagh 
for a screen Hamlet that is unusually complete (justifying its four-hour 
length) and delivers narrative and language with immaculate classical clarity, 
not least in the director’s own handsome, haunted performance in the title 
role. Able to call in favours from all parts of the showbiz spectrum, Branagh 
casts actors you might expect (Derek Jacobi, Judi Dench) alongside many you 
wouldn’t: Jack Lemmon, Robin Williams, Ken Dodd. The great US novelist John 
Updike credited this film with inspiring his Elsinore-sequel novel, Gertrude 
and Claudius.


2. Romeo and Juliet (1996) 

Among productions that modernise the setting but preserve the original words, 
Joss Whedon’s low-budget Much Ado About Nothing (2012) is easily beaten in the 
final runoff byBaz Luhrmann 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/reviews/william-shakespeares-romeo-juliet-19961101>
’s invigorating shifting of the story of the Montagues and Capulets to the gang 
wars of Venice Beach, California. It can be argued that the Australian director 
had the advantages of a recognisable cinematic genre (teen tragedy) and the 
example of West Side Story, but his consistent finding of plausible modern 
interpretations for both story and speech manages to be simultaneously radical 
and respectful.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwysi0MMX54&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwysi0MMX54>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwysi0MMX54&media=>
1. King Lear (1971) 

The biggest loser from the stipulation that each play is represented only once 
is Akira Kurosawa, whose 1985 film Ran enthrallingly exported King Lear to the 
world of Japanese warlords. However, the clear victor in this category – and 
the whole competition – is Peter Brook’s magnificent black-and-white film 
adaptation of his 1962 RSC staging, with Paul Scofield as the king whose regime 
is ended by Daughtergate. Nine years closer to Lear’s likely real age than when 
he played the role on stage at 40, Scofield brings a musicality and depth of 
meaning to every line and also scores points between the words with scorched or 
scorching glances and grimaces. Fassbender, in the new Macbeth, looks to have 
learned from Scofield’s stillness and chilly diction.
 