
Arsène Wenger believes Nicklas Bendtner has a point to prove at Nottingham 
Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> as the former 
Arsenal striker faces his old club on Tuesday in the third round of the EFL Cup.

Bendtner spent nine years at Arsenal, during which time his reputation as one 
of the best young strikers in Europe consistently diminished. Following loan 
spells at Birmingham City, Sunderland and Juventus, he joined Wolfsburg in 2014 
having scored 45 goals in 171 appearances forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>.

The joke has been on Nicklas Bendtner for far too long | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/nicklas-bendtner-ego-nottingham-forest>
His time in Germany was mixed and after his contract was terminated in April 
he joined Forest this month on a free transfer. Representing a club who sit 
13th in the Championship is not how Bendtner would have imagined his career 
panning out when he was declaring himself as having the potential to become of 
the greatest forwards in the world and that is why Wenger feels the 28-year-old 
will want to give his all for Forest.

“Of course he has a point to prove – he’s playing at a level where he is not 
used to,” the Frenchman said. “But he did start his career at this level at 
Birmingham City with Steve Bruce, where he did very well. Nicklas is focused 
enough to show he can fight again.

“It was a surprise to me that Nicklas signed for Nottingham Forest, but at 
some stage Nicklas needs to restart his career.

“You have to adapt and we are in a job when we have to show we are able to put 
our effort in everywhere and compete. Sometimes when you are a player of his 
quality, you just need an opportunity. We know his qualities and he is a top 
quality player, but he needs to play.”

Nottingham Forest sign Nicklas Bendtner on two-year contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/nottingham-forest-sign-nicklas-bendtner-on-two-year-contract>
Bendtner’s high regard for himself is such that Emmanuel Frimpong, a former 
team-mate at Arsenal, once superimposed the Dane’s head on a photograph of 
Lionel Messi winning the Ballon d’Or and posted it on social media. Then there 
is the Lord Bendtner nickname. Wenger is adamant such characterisations of the 
player are unfair. “The perceptions people have of him is that he is 
overconfident but I don’t think so,” he said. “He was sometimes impatient when 
he was with us. He was disappointed not to get the chance and you can 
understand that.

“I am not here to judge people. Sometimes you manage to get it and sometimes 
we do not find the key. Then you have to leave the key to someone else who has 
the potential to find it. Nicklas could explain much better than I can about 
his career.”

Bendtner has made two appearances for Forest but is yet to score for Philippe 
Montanier’s side. Asked if he will celebrate should he find the back of the net 
against his former employer at the City Ground, Bendtner said he would. “But I 
won’t go crazy,” he added. “I have a lot of love and respect for Arsenal as a 
club.”
 