
Arsenal remain in negotiations with Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> over their No1 central 
defensive target, Shkodran Mustafi, but there was no sign of an imminent 
breakthrough on Thursday night.

The temperature had been turned up earlier in the day when Ali Bulut, who has 
a connection to Mustafi, said that the 24-year-old Germany international had 
agreed terms withArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and all 
that remained to be done was for the clubs to resolve the transfer fee.

Arsène Wenger admits ‘regret and guilt’ that Arsenal lost out to Leicester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/arsenal-arsene-wenger-leicester-regret-guilt>
There was bemusement at Arsenal and Valencia, however, with both clubs 
indicating that they did not believe Bulut to be Mustafi’s official agent. 
Valencia said the player worked only with his father and they made it clear 
they expected to present him at the Mestalla stadium night before their final 
pre-season friendly against Fiorentina.

The presentation is something of a tradition. Before the game the name of each 
player is announced before he emerges from the tunnel to the applause of the 
crowd. Valencia kick off their league season at home to Las Palmas on Monday 
week.

There is a quiet confidence at Arsenal that they will be able to get the deal 
for Mustafi over the line but it will not be in time for their Premier League 
season-opener at home to Liverpool on Sunday, in whichArsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> faces a selection dilemma 
in central defence.

Valencia appear to be in a strong negotiating position. The Spanish club know 
Arsenal’s need is great; that they have a vast amount of money in the bank and 
that time is against them. Valencia have made it plain that they value Mustafi 
at upwards of £25m and it is clear he is a fundamental part of their team – one 
that they are loth to sell.

Arsenal’s Gabriel facing six to eight weeks out with ankle injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/arsenal-gabriel-injured-six-eight-weeks>
When they lost Nicolas Otamendi to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/20/nicolas-otamendi-completes-transfer-manchester-city-valencia-argentina-34m>
 in the summer of 2015, they replaced him with Aymen Abdennour and he has 
struggled to find his feet. Mustafi’s importance to them has, consequently, 
increased.

Wenger has lost Per Mertesacker and Gabriel to long-term knee and ankle 
injuries respectively and his other established centre-half, Laurent Koscielny, 
is not yet match fit after being granted an extended break following Euro 2016. 
Koscielny was a part of the France team that lost to Portugal in the final.

Wenger will play Calum Chambers in central defence against Liverpool, 
alongside either Rob Holding, the 20-year-old new signing from Bolton 
Wanderers, or Nacho Monreal, the regular left-back. Chambers played alongside 
Holding in pre-season.
 