
It was left to the matchwinner, Olivier Giroud, to say what everyone was 
thinking. “At home you have to win and even more so after two disappointing 
results,” said the France forward. “It is a big relief.”

Of all those of an Arsenal persuasion, however, there was no one more relieved 
than the manager. As the clock ticked towards full-time and the first 
supporters began to drift away, one dreaded to think how Arsène Wenger would 
recover from a third game without a victory after the disappointment of 
successive defeatsat Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 andManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.

As he acknowledged, West Brom are not the opponents anyone would pick in such 
circumstances, given their reputation for dogged resilience, and it looked as 
though an inspired performance from their goalkeeper, Ben Foster, would be how 
this game was remembered until Giroud’s late header following an inch-perfect 
cross from Mesut Özil.

“With 10 minutes to go I thought we could play a draw or maybe, if we were not 
intelligent, even lose the game,” Wenger said.

“We kept going and in the end, whenwe couldn’t make a difference on the 
ground, we made it in the air, with maybe the only player in our team who can 
do that.”

Given the season he has endured, there was a certain irony that it was Giroud 
who found the breakthrough. Alexis Sánchez has enjoyed such success playing 
through the middle that this was the Frenchman’s firstPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> start of the season, in 
the absence of the injured Theo Walcott, and for the majority of the afternoon 
it was easy to see why as he struggled to make an impact.

He had skied his only opportunity in the first half, then picked up a yellow 
card and another foul on Claudio Yacob less than three seconds after the 
restart may have hinted that this was not going to be Giroud’s day.

Yet his perseverance was rewarded in fine style as he won the physical battle 
with Gareth McAuley to meet Özil’s cross with a looping header that left Foster 
with no chance.

“He put his hand across him early and outmuscled him,” said the West Brom 
manager, Tony Pulis, almost in admiration. “I think if Gareth takes a step 
forward, then he stops Giroud pinninghim. Once he pinned him he is so strong 
and overpowers him. I’ve got no complaints.”

West Brom have faltered recently, suffering defeats at Chelsea and Manchester 
United, but they remain a difficult team to break down.

Had Yacob shown more composure when the ball fell to him after Petr Cech’s 
fumble following a corner midway through the second half, then they could 
easily have snatched three points against anArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> side who looked there for the 
taking at times. But that escape seemed to spark the hosts into action, with 
Özil finally waking from his slumber to provide the one moment of real quality 
that ultimately proved decisive.

As ever, it was not for the want of trying from Sánchez, who could consider 
himself unlucky to be denied twice by Foster and between times by a post in a 
matter of minutes after the break.

As it was, Giroud’s goal threatened to open the floodgates and the substitute 
Aaron Ramsey could easily have added some gloss to the scoreline late on. But 
any more than a 1-0 victory would have flattered the home team.

“The confidence is swinging and depending highly on the result,” said Wenger. 
“We have lost two on the trot so of course the confidence has been hit. But 
it’s a good test for the team. There is no season without disappointment, so it 
was interesting to see how they responded to disappointment.”

With matches between now and the end of January against Crystal Palace, 
Bournemouth, Swansea City, Burnley and Watford, there should be optimism that 
Arsenal’s title challenge may not be over just yet and this was exactly the 
kind of result that could spark another run of victories.

But Wenger will know his hopes of overhauling a Chelsea side who have won all 
12 of their matches since the 3-0 defeat here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 at the end of September are now out of their hands.

“Maybe, yes,” he replied when asked whether this team is more resilient than 
it has been in recent years. “It’s normal to say yes but we have to show that 
for the whole season to maintain that resilience.

“ We are quite a big distance behind Chelsea and we will need a special 
resilience to come back.

“But I hope that the other teams will have their moments of weakness as well. 
We can only take advantage if we continue like that.”

Manchester United’s Mkhitaryan rounds off easy win over Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Farsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4aac7c14a62882c7141c127a320c00c30e4d59%2F192_88_4374_2624%2F4374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20Olivier%20Giroud%20snatches%20late%20win%20against%20West%20Brom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Farsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20Olivier%20Giroud%20snatches%20late%20win%20against%20West%20Brom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Farsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4aac7c14a62882c7141c127a320c00c30e4d59%2F192_88_4374_2624%2F4374.jpg>
 Alexis Sánchez cut a frustrated figure as Arsenal struggled to break down the 
West Brom defence. Photograph: Ian Kington/AFP/Getty Images 
West Ham’s Andy Carroll twists the knife into Bob Bradley and Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report> 