
Arsenal have confirmed the arrival of Granit Xhaka 
<http://www.arsenal.com/news/news-archive/20160523/arsenal-agree-deal-with-granit-xhaka>
 from Borussia Mönchengladbach as their first major signing of the summer, with 
the Switzerland international having signed for an undisclosed fee believed to 
be an initial £25m.

Negotiations with the Bundesliga club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/arsenal-close-granit-xhaka-signing>
 have been on-going over the last few weeks and Mönchengladbach have accepted a 
fee that could rise in future.

The 23-year-old, who made his name at FC Basel before moving to Germany four 
years ago, had indicated a desire to move to England withArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> looking to bolster their central 
midfield ranks with both Mikel Arteta and Mathieu Flamini to be released when 
their contracts expire at the Emirates Stadium this summer.

Football rumours: Ryan Giggs set to be named Everton manager?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/football-rumours-ryan-giggs-set-to-be-named-everton-manager>
The Swiss passed his medical at London Colney last week and has now finalised 
personal terms. “I’m very proud to be joining Arsenal,” said Xhaka in a 
statement on Arsenal’s website. “I cannot wait to move to London, represent 
this special club and play in the Premier League. I will give everything to 
help Arsenal win trophies and make the fans happy.”

He later added: “I like the style of football in the Premier League. It’s 
aggressive and I like the way Arsenal play football. It’s not like other 
countries. In Germany you can play aggressively but the referee will always 
blow his whistle, but in England that’s not the case. That’s better for me. I’m 
an aggressive player and also a leader. I’m only 23 but I captained a good team 
in Germany.

“When I was younger, even though I had a big brother, my parents would give me 
the house key every day. It’s in my head that I am a leader and captaining 
Mönchengladbach was very good for me.”

Arsène Wenger, the Arsenal manager, said: “Granit Xhaka is an exciting young 
player, already with good Champions League and Bundesliga experience. We have 
been watching him for a long time now and he is a player who will add quality 
to our squad. We wish Granit a good Euro 2016 with Switzerland and look forward 
to welcoming him to Arsenal ahead of next season.”

Xhaka had indicated he wanted his future clarified before the European 
Championship finals and was granted a standing ovation by Borussia’s supporters 
in his final appearance for the club, a 2-0 victory at Darmstadt which secured 
a fourth-placed finish, last week.

The midfielder has been capped 40 times and will play against his parents’ 
homeland, Albania, in the opening group game at Euro 2016. His older brother, 
Taulant Xhaka, will represent Albania.
 