
Arsenal have announced the signing of striker Lucas Pérez from Deportivo La 
Coruña <https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> for an 
undisclosed fee believed to be around £17m.

Transfer news live: Hart to Torino, Barcelona sign Alcácer, Rémy joins Palace 
and more!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/30/transfer-window-live-wilshere-hart-chambers-berahino-and-more>
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> said: “He’s 
not only a goalscorer, he’s a guy who combines well with partners, who can give 
a final ball and makes good runs. He’s got a good eye for goal and had an 
outstanding season last year.”

Lucas scored 19 goals in all competitions and 17 in LaLiga last season. He 
also scored in seven successive games.

He began his career with Atlético Madrid C and then moved to Rayo Vallecano 
before spells with Ukraine’s Karpaty Lviv and PAOK in Greece. He joined 
Deportivo in 2014, initially on loan.

Lucas becomes Wenger’s third summer signing – after midfielder Granit Xhaka 
from Borussia Monchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 andRob Holding from Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/arsenal-2m-bolton-england-u21-rob-holding>
 – but more could follow, taking the Gunners’ spending close to £100m.

Valencia’s Germany defender Shkodran Mustafi is a summer-long target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/arsene-wenger-panic-buying-shkodran-mustafi-lucas-perez>
 and a £30m deal is close.

Meanwhile, Werder Bremen are on the verge of completing the signing of Serge 
Gnabry fromArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, according to 
the Bundesliga club’s director of sport Frank Baumann.

The 21-year-old German midfielder, who scored six goals for his country as 
they clinched a silver medal at the Olympic Games, is out of contract next 
summer and set to return to Germany.

Baumann said he expects Gnabry to arrive in northern Germany on Wednesday and 
dismissed reports that Bayern Munich would participate in the transfer by 
buying the player and loaning him to Bremen.

“We’ve got an agreement with the player and we’re confident it will go 
through,” he said on Tuesday. “We have reached a fundamental agreement with 
Arsenal, but nothing is signed yet. Bayern have no influence on the potential 
transfer.

“It could all go through by lunchtime tomorrow. We’ve gathered information on 
him from Per Mertesacker, who was full of praise for him.”
 