
Arsenal are set to trump Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>
 by signing the Deportivo la Coruña forward Lucas Pérez.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive>
Lucas, who scored 17 goals last season and opened his account for this season 
with the winner against Elbar last Friday, has a buyout clause of around £17m. 
Everton had been prepared to meet that amount and had even agreed personal 
terms in principle with the 27-year-old, only forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> to emerge as suitors.

Negotiations between the clubs and player are understood to be under way in 
Spain, with Arsenal confident the move will be confirmed before the weekend. 
Arsène Wenger had been targeting a central defender but moved for Lucas after 
Saturday’sgoalless draw at Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/leicester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, having seeninterest in Jamie Vardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/jamie-vardy-rejects-arsenal-leicester-city>
 and Alexandre Lacazette come to nothing earlier in the summer.

Lucas, who began his career at Atlético Madrid, can operate through the centre 
or on the flank havingestablished his credentials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/21/lucas-perez-deportivo-de-la-coruna-bebeto-record>
 during spells at Rayo Vallecano, Karpaty Lviv in Ukraine, PAOK Salonika in 
Greece and, initially on loan in 2014, at Deportivo la Coruña. He signed a 
fone-year deal at the Spanish club last summer.

Confirmation that Arsenal, who can offer Champions League football, have edged 
out Everton for Lucas represents a blow to the Merseyside club, whose recently 
appointed director of football, Steve Walsh, had earmarked the forward while at 
his previous club Leicester.

Ronald Koeman is still searching for a player to operate alongside Romelu 
Lukaku, who hasagreed to remain at Goodison Park for at least another season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/west-bromwich-albion-everton-premier-league-match-report>
. Oumar Niasse,a £13.5m signing from Lokomotiv Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/everton-oumar-niasse-lokomotiv-moscow>
 in February, is still expected to join Hull City on loan in search of 
first-team football.

Everton could yet sell James McCarthy before next week’s deadline, with 
Crystal Palace, Southampton and Stoke City having all expressed an interest in 
the 25-year-old Republic of Ireland midfielder, who would cost around £18m.

Arsenal hope to add a centre-half to their squad before the deadline, with 
Valencia’s Shkodran Mustafi still their first choice. The 24-year-old German is 
priced at around £26m.
 