
Online fashion retailer Asos has unveiled plans to hire 1,500 staff at its 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> headquarters and to double 
domestic manufacturing of its own-brand clothing.

The company, which employs 2,500 people at the site in Camden, north London, 
said it expected to spend about £38m on additional specialists in technology, 
marketing, editorial content and retail as it aims to double sales over the 
next five years.

It is investing another £40m in building an additional 40,000 sq ft (3,700 sq 
metres) at its base at the art deco Greater London House, formerly the Carreras 
cigarette factory, to house the extra workers.

Nick Beighton, the chief executive, said Asos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> expected to open several more 
manufacturing facilities in the UK over the next three to four years, in order 
to double capacity from the two factories which make about 4% of its own-label 
products at present.

The move is good news for UK fashion manufacturing, which was decimated in the 
1990s when work moving abroad but has begun to see a renaissance in recent 
years amid rising costs in China and increasing demand for high fashion made 
quickly.

Asos has been investing in training workers in the capital for more than five 
years at a factory in Haringey, north London, which employs about 100 people, 
40 of whom are stitching dresses for Asos, Marks & Spencer and online 
specialist Finery.

Asos’s UK investment is the latest financial commitment to the UK by a major 
digital business. It follows significant investment announcements from Facebook 
and Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/facebook-hire-500-uk-workers-opens-london-hq-fitzrvovia>
, whichplan to increase their staff numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/google-facebook-brexit-uk-technology-sector-skills>
 in the UK, despite fears that Brexit would make the country a less attractive 
place to invest.

Alongside a number of British online retailers, Asos has benefited from the 
drop in the value of the pound, because almost 60% of its sales are outside the 
UK.

Asos said the renovation of its HQ would include new staircases and light 
wells, a health club, training academy and “quiet zone library”, plus a tech 
bar and concierge service for staff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fasos-plans-london-expansion-with-1500-new-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413799685399d1273470a97e716d541b19fefefd%2F121_0_3246_1948%2F3246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asos%20plans%20London%20expansion%20with%201%2C500%20extra%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fasos-plans-london-expansion-with-1500-new-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asos%20plans%20London%20expansion%20with%201%2C500%20extra%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fasos-plans-london-expansion-with-1500-new-staff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413799685399d1273470a97e716d541b19fefefd%2F121_0_3246_1948%2F3246.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of the planned Asos auditorium at Greater London House, 
which will be part of a £40m expansion. Photograph: Asos 
Beighton said: “Our people are what make Asos special. We are creating a 
workspace that fosters creativity, where they can enjoy what they do.”

Asos is one of the companies that have come under scrutiny over working 
practices at their warehouses in recent months, after the Guardian’s disclosure 
last year that temporary workers at Sports Direct were beingpaid less than the 
minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

Neil Derrick, the Yorkshire regional secretary of the GMB union which has led 
protests against conditions at a warehouse near Barnsley which handles 
distribution for Asos, said: “We welcome the announcement of 1,500 new jobs at 
Asos but not when GMB’s concerns for the workers in Yorkshire have been 
completely ignored.

“The company’s growth is on back of workers in their Yorkshire warehouse, yet 
there seems to be a huge disparity between how Asos staff in London and workers 
in Yorkshire are treated. Conditions in Barnsley are frankly shocking and have 
caused the GMB grave concern over the past two years.

“If Asos want to provide ‘fashion with integrity’ as they claim, working with 
us to make their Yorkshire site a decent place to work would be a start.”
 