
Gore Vidal, who had a good line about most things, was famously droll on the 
subject of US presidential candidates. “Any American who is prepared to run for 
president should automatically be disqualified from ever doing so,” Vidal 
observed, with his usual pitch of skewed, drawling hyper-irony.

It is a point that might equally have applied down the years to anyone wanting 
to own an English football club. As high-risk commercial ambitions go this one 
has never really made much sense. Outside the real elite, football clubs are 
still right up there with airlines or a particularly decadent 1970s record 
label when it comes to mechanisms for losing lots of money very quickly. The 
puzzle remains. Why would any non-mad, non-corrupt business person actually 
want to do this?

It is a question that might seem particularly poignant to fans of Charlton 
Athletic and Aston Villa as the season thrashes towards its end point. Both 
clubs wererelegated this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/aston-villa-relegated-defeat-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
. Both are contorted by supporter unrest. Both face major losses. Both give the 
impression of having been hollowed out from the inside, one in a rush, one over 
time, by a new style of disastrous, long-range speculative ownership.

Football never stands still. New forms, new tropes emerge. There have been 
shadier, more abusive owners than the wretched Roland Duchâtelet and the decent 
but distant Randy Lerner. But the fact remains, even as Lerner creeps closer to 
finally selling Villa, that here English football has found a pair of owners 
who aren’t just bad judged against the traditional sweaty incompetents, or the 
standards of someimpossibly virtuous fan-collective ideal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/swansea-city-owners-sale-takeover-us-investors>
. But bad instead in new and innovative ways; bad in a way that frankly makes 
no real sense for anyone.

Aston Villa’s Randy Lerner says blame for relegation rests solely with him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/22/aston-villa-randy-lerner-blame-relegation>
Consider for a moment Duchâtelet’s progress at Charlton. Has there ever been a 
more chaotic, self-destructive two-year spell of ownership? It really shouldn’t 
be that hard to make Charlton work, a homely old suburban club that was fanned 
into life by the late-Victorian spread of prosperity east along the railway 
lines, and which in the golden years either side of the second world war could 
draw the biggest crowds in the country.

Hard times have come and gone. By the mid-1980s The Valley was a concrete 
ruin, with weeds blooming up between your feet through the cracks on the 
terraces. But jump to 2004 and Charlton were finishing seventh in the Premier 
League, hovering around the Champions League spots right up until the moment 
Chelsea decided to put a stop to all that by plucking out Scott Parker.

Duchâtelet bought the club in January 2014 through Staprix NV, “an investment 
vehicle with several football-related interests”. An entrepreneur, populist 
politician and mild oddball, he owns a syndicate of smallish clubs across 
Europe. Clearly he made some kind of sense to Richard Murray, the club’s 
longstanding chairman.

At which point: enter sandman. In 28 months of Duchâtelet-flavoured weirdness 
Charlton haveburned through five managers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/charlton-reappoint-jose-riga-head-coach>
. The current braying-donkey regime, with its cast of pressed men and 
passers-by has won 18 of 70 matches played. Last month Duchâtelet released a 
statement defending the club’s chief executive, Katrien Meire, who had compared 
the club’s fans with cinema viewers and restaurant goers, who don’t “scream to 
the people in charge” if they’re unhappy with the customer service.

The home defeat by Derby County last weekend brought huge protests outside the 
ground, with people dressed as Bedouin holding inflatable palm trees, a 
slightly confusing reference to the chief exec’s recent 10-day holiday in 
Dubai. The Coalition Against Roland Duchâtelet is planning another massive 
turnout around Saturday’s home game against Brighton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Faston-villa-charlton-athletic-owners-relegated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61e069e0923f6a49927e810728f87e64c304a926%2F0_36_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aston%20Villa%20and%20Charlton%3A%20two%20clubs%20contorted%20by%20a%20new%20style%20of%20disastrous%20ownership%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Faston-villa-charlton-athletic-owners-relegated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aston%20Villa%20and%20Charlton%3A%20two%20clubs%20contorted%20by%20a%20new%20style%20of%20disastrous%20ownership%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Faston-villa-charlton-athletic-owners-relegated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61e069e0923f6a49927e810728f87e64c304a926%2F0_36_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Charlton fans protest against Roland Duchâtelet during a season of turmoil 
which is ending with relegation. Photograph: Martin Dalton/REX/Shutterstock 
More than anything else, it is all bafflingly pointless, good news for nobody. 
Not least the owner who has scarcely been glimpsed on club property, and who 
has through a combination of basic mistakes – alienating supporters, enacting 
some half-baked inter-league player franchise plan – transformed a happy south 
London middleweight into a wild, miserable place desperate to free itself from 
the grip of a semi-detached speculator.

Which brings us back to Lerner, an equally confusing if much more sympathetic 
figure. Lerner’s real failing appears to be naivety. He got into this for the 
right reason. He backed his managers, in the early years at least. And yet he 
remains arguably the least successful owner in Premier League history. Lerner 
bought Villa with his own money. Ten years down the line the club has cost him 
£350m, in return for which he’s been relegated, seen his fortune drained and 
generally been portrayed as a mysterious, sulky overseas refusenik.

And so here we are: job losses, a crippling Championship wage bill, a club 
captain who raises the question of what exactly a footballer has to do to get 
sacked around here. Someone’s not really been paying attention here, have they 
Randy old boy?

Lerner is not a bad man. Personally I hope he gets a good price for the club, 
moves on, salvages some happy memories and never goes near a sports “franchise” 
again. He is simply bad at being a tycoon, and bad at runningAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>.

This is the real nub. You get the owners you deserve. As a society we have 
made the decision to submit to the market, to say that pretty much anyone can 
own pretty much anything, the only regulating forces being demand, supply and 
finance. This argument says that football clubs are not in any real sense 
community assets (communities themselves are old hat), but commodities like 
anything else. To complain that we’re not happy that unregulated markets 
attract both desirable investors and incompetent chancers is a bit like leaving 
the doors and windows open and then bursting into tears when someone walks off 
with your television. This is the problem with neoliberal economics. Lerner may 
have come to Villa as a rich kid born with a silver sports franchise in his 
mouth, unloved at the Cleveland Browns, an investor with the slightly unnerving 
air of a 1980s digital watch tycoon who wants to talk to you about his aura. 
His failure at Villa may have been hugely damaging. Duchâtelet may, in 
retrospect, look like a rather dangerous entrepreneurial ubercapitalist with 
some funny ideas.

But there is nothing in English law or in football regulation to stop any of 
these people buying up that embedded infrastructure of clubs and grounds and 
generational ties and acting as they will. To offer protection, in the style of 
the German league, would be to perform some unacceptable act, the ultimate 
crime of corrupting or perverting the market. And so here we are, two grand old 
clubs thrashing about hoping for the right kind of buyout next time, the right 
kind of gambler, the right kind of monied weirdo.

As ever it will be supporters, those whose lives are bound up in that funny 
old unconditional love who will fight the worst of it. Perhaps with some proper 
regulation, a little unashamed protectionism, we could all decide to give them 
a hand one of these days.
 