
Steve Bruce has called for supporters of Birmingham and Aston Villa to make 
this weekend’s second-city derby “the spectacle everyone wants to see” and 
avoid scenes like those thatunfolded at the London Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/fa-west-ham-chelsea-crowd-trouble-investigation>
 on Wednesday night.

The Villa manager was speaking before the first Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> derby in the league for five years, 
a match that pits Bruce against a club he managed for six years. While the 
55-year-old encouraged supporters to be vocal he also asked them to stay on the 
right side of the line.

Chelsea fans give accounts of being hit by coins at West Ham as FA investigates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/fa-west-ham-chelsea-crowd-trouble-investigation>
“It’s our second city so Villa versus Blues is always going to be right up 
there in terms of derbies,” Bruce said. “But we don’t want a repeat of what we 
saw on Wednesday night. They were horrible, ugly scenes. Yes, shout loud and 
make your feelings known. But we don’t want a repeat of last night, we want the 
spectacle everyone’s keen to see.”

Bruce knows he is likely to face a vocal reception from the home crowd when 
the game kicks off at St Andrew’s on Sunday lunchtime. “I’m sure it’s going to 
be a wonderful welcome,” he joked. “I’m sure they’ll be singing my name from 
the rafters. But I’m used to a bit of stick. I’ve had it all the way through my 
career and as long as it’s good-hearted banter then that’s what football is all 
about.

“I like to think that deep down there’ll be a bit of respect. I’ve been in 
football 40 years and 10 of those were with Blues [as a player and manager]. So 
I’m expecting stick but I challenge them to come up with something original. 
Potato head is not enough.”

Bruce said he had been instilling in his players, many of whom arrived at the 
club in the summer transfer window, the importance of the derby match. “All 
week I’ve reminded them what to expect,” he said. “I’ve been prepping since 
last Monday. They all know what to expect and the match won’t catch them 
unawares.

“You can’t ever play down the significance of a match like this. One thing you 
have to be as a player is fully committed. Supporters demand that. But at the 
same time you have to remember to play the game. If you don’t, before you know 
it, it can pass you by and you won’t have taken part in it. Let’s hope one of 
our players can seize the moment and make a name for himself.”

“I’ve got friends who are big Blues and I’ve got a lot of friends who are 
Villa too,” he added. “[Villa player] Gary Gardner says his dad would take him 
one week to Villa and one week to Blues and that’s how it should be. It should 
be a joy for the right reasons. We realise what a great derby game it is. Even 
though it hasn’t gone on for five years you will only have to turn up to the 
stadium to realise it’s a big derby. Up there with all big fixtures: it’s the 
Midlands derby and it’s a big, big occasion for both clubs.”

Football League your thoughts: Aston Villa on rise but Norwich slip up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/22/football-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich>
Bruce is unbeaten as Villa manager  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/22/football-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich>
since hejoined at the beginning of the month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/aston-villa-appoint-steve-bruce>
 with the club sitting in the bottom three of the Championship table. He comes 
into the derby on the back of two consecutive wins. Gary Rowett’s Birmingham, 
meanwhile, sit just outside the play-offs in seventh.

“They’re going to be tough, uncompromising and resilient,” Bruce said of his 
opponents. “Gary’s done a smashing job in difficult circumstances and I expect 
them to be ready for the challenge.

“What we talk about in games like this are small details. It’s mistakes, a 
bounce of ball, a touch of genius, a bit of indiscipline. You have to go and 
perform on the day and who performs when under pressure – and they’re going to 
be under severe pressure – has the chance to succeed. I’m quietly confident we 
can do that.”
 