
You wonder how it’s possible to find the humour in the news at a time when the 
western world is starting to pivot towards an awkward dystopia and after a week 
when hostility and hate are no longer simmering just below the surface but are 
suddenly emboldened by Donald Trump’s election victory.

The sketch show Saturday Night Live gave up on comedy entirely, sitting Kate 
McKinnon as Hillary Clinton at a piano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BG-_ZDrypec>, performing a version of Leonard 
Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary>’s 
Hallelujah. Rarely has the traditional “Live from New York, it’s Saturday 
night!” intro been delivered with such raw hurt and defiance. It was powerful. 
It was deeply emotional. But it wasn’t funny.

It’s hard to find much humour, either, in the picture of Donald Trump and 
Nigel Farage grinning as they meet at Trump Tower, the interim Ukip leader 
having secured a meeting with the president-elect ahead of any British 
politician. It might have seemed comical a week ago, but now nothing is the 
same. Faragetweeted the image 
<https://twitter.com/nigel_farage/status/797584449047265281> with some 
razor-sharp political insight into Trump’s impending term of office: “He was 
relaxed and full of good ideas. I am confident he will be a good President.” He 
used “good” twice, as if it’s all he’s got.

Last week, if the politics of the two men in the picture repulsed you as much 
as they have repulsed roughly half of their respective nations, you might have 
said: look at the pair of clowns. Here’s Farage, usually pictured clasping a 
pint – your dad’s mate down the pub, the one who tells a rum gag through a haze 
of Embassy smoke that makes his friends laugh because someone else is the butt 
of the joke. And now he stands next to the president-elect of the United 
States, a man who got the job apparently because he wasn’t part of the 
establishment, because he wasn’t a politician, because he promised to break the 
system rather than play it.

Yet here they stand, a reality-TV star turning it on for the camera, his 
unnaturally white teeth bearing a smile – or is it a grimace? – and the man who 
looks as though he could be chairman of Trump’s fan club, typing up newsletters 
once a month, quoting everything he’s ever said back to him with exact dates 
and times, just six months away from a restraining order. Farage’s statement 
afterwards said they discussed “freedom and winning”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%3A%20'I'll%20tell%20Donald%20Trump%20not%20to%20touch%20Theresa%20May'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%3A%20%27I%27ll%20tell%20Donald%20Trump%20not%20to%20touch%20Theresa%20May%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video&media=>
Nigel Farage: ‘I’ll tell Donald Trump not to touch Theresa May’ – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/nigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video>
It should be ridiculous. The irony is too obvious. The image shows them 
flanked by the marble walls and glistening golden doors of Trump’s penthouse 
palace. Farage, a man who uses “political class” as an insult, despite striving 
so hard to be part of that political class that he has failed seven times to be 
elected to the House of Commons, is slick with privilege. And now, as he basks 
in Trump’s reflected glory, he’s not pretending to be anything else. Why would 
he? He’s bigger than Brexit now.

In time it might be funny that two men who claim they stand “for the people” 
are so quick to remind the people that they exist in a different world 
entirely. Today, though, we are beyond sense, beyond irony. These two men 
champion ideologies that purport to be a rejection of elitism. The only thing 
that’s laughable is how little they themselves even attempt to hold that to be 
true.
 