
It feels less cold, but the grass is still hard, smooth and slippery 
underfoot. The channels and small pools of water are almost completely frozen 
over, their surfaces patterned like frosted glass where the water has thawed 
and frozen again. A grey mist is starting to rise from the ground. In the 
distance, the red sun is sinking behind the South Downs and the sky glows with 
ember streaks of orange and red.


From the reeds along the river’s edge, water rails are calling 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/w/waterrail/>
. Familiar but always unnerving, their grunts and cries – often compared to the 
squeals of piglets – are known as “sharming”. I count at least four separate 
birds’ voices. They seem more eerie in the cold and dark. As I walk along the 
river bank, a moorhen and three water rail fly, one by one, across the river to 
the other side and into cover. The squealing sounds become a cacophony.

Birdwatch: Water rail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/19/birdwatch-water-rail-somerset>
More often heard than seen, water rails are smaller and slimmer than the 
similar moorhen, with a mottled brown back, grey underparts, and black and 
white striped flanks, with a longer, narrow red bill. Not that it’s possible to 
see these colours in this light. The black silhouette of a rail creeps along 
the white frozen edge of the water, its upward-pointing tail twitching, and 
disappears into the reed. The sharming subsides.

A ghostly pale barn owl 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/b/barnowl/>
 flies towards me, flapping its wings in soft, effortless movements, paddling 
the air like a large butterfly. It passes within feet of me, throwing me a 
casual glance, but its attention is on hunting.

The owl bounces and turns, all the while watching the grass, or rather 
listening with its facial discs, channelling every tiny sound into the ear 
apertures on the sides of its head. It drops to the ground, but lifts up again 
almost immediately, dangling talons empty. The barn owl flies away, towards 
Greatham Bridge and over the trees, to try another field.

I walk back to the road and over the bridge. In the darkness, I can hear the 
soft honkingcalls of Canada geese <http://www.xeno-canto.org/294852> on the 
flooded brooks up-river.






 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsundown-sussex-skies-come-alive-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e06946dfdf2eb8ccff85fc01456711b04e006f5%2F0_0_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20sundown%2C%20the%20Sussex%20skies%20come%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsundown-sussex-skies-come-alive-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20sundown%2C%20the%20Sussex%20skies%20come%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsundown-sussex-skies-come-alive-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e06946dfdf2eb8ccff85fc01456711b04e006f5%2F0_0_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
 A barn owl in flight. Photograph: Richard Bedford/Alamy 
Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 