
Japan cannot unilaterally decide to start whaling in Antarctica again against 
the advice of scientists, says the environment minister, Greg Hunt.


Japan is set to ignore an international court of justice ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 that last year prompted Tokyo to cancel the bulk of its whaling for the 
2014-15 season.


Australian court fines Japanese whaling company $1m for 'intentional' breaches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/18/australian-court-fines-japanese-whaling-company-1m-for-intentional-breaches>
The Japanese Fisheries Agency has notified the International Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Commission that it will 
resume whaling in the 2015-16 season under a revised plan.


“Australia strongly opposes the decision by Japan to resuming whaling in the 
Southern Ocean this summer,” Hunt said.


The commission is reviewing the science behind Japan’s revised plan and has 
raised serious concerns.


“Japan cannot unilaterally decide whether it has adequately addressed the 
scientific committee’s questions,” Hunt said.


The plan, which calls for cutting annual minke whale catches by two-thirds to 
333, is scientifically reasonable, Japan says in a document filed with the IWC.


Hunt said the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and the foreign minister, 
Julie Bishop, have also directly told Japan that Australia does not support 
whaling.


“Australia will continue to pursue the issue through the International Whaling 
Commission and in direct discussions with Japan,” he said.


Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson said the government has gone silent on 
Japan’s whaling.


“Time and time again the Greens have told them simply relying on the 
International Court of Justice result will not be sufficient to put an end to 
illegal Japanese commercial whaling,” Whish-Wilson said.


“But the government ignored our warnings and now we are back where we started.”


Japan began what it calls scientific whaling in 1987, a year after an 
international whaling moratorium took effect. Japan has long maintained that 
most whale species are not endangered and that eating whale is part of its food 
culture.

Campaigners try to halt Japan whale hunt in last-ditch legal fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/17/campaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight>
Labor’s environment spokesman, Mark Butler, condemned Japan’s “disgraceful” 
decision.


“These whales are not being killed for scientific purposes and Japan’s 
activities should cease immediately,” he said.


Butler said Japan’s decision to ignore Australia’s concerns reflected poorly 
on the government’s diplomatic efforts.


“Japan is a friend of Australia and the government should be taking every 
reasonable step to make Australia’s strong views on this matter known,” he said.

Director of the Australian Marine Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society, Darren 
Kindleysides, called on Turnbull to stand up to Japan.

“Not only are the whalers breaching international law, the whaling will take 
place in the Southern Ocean whale sanctuary,” Kindleysides said.

“Once again, the Australian government must step up and challenge the Japanese 
government’s illegal whaling. Japan’s Antarctic whaling has failed the test of 
international law, and the test of science, yet the hunt could resume within 
weeks.

“With time is running, [Turnbull] must tell the Japanese prime minister in no 
uncertain terms to keep their whaling fleet in port.”
 