
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia will pore over 
its high performance systems in a “meaty” review following the 3-0 Test series 
whitewash to Sri Lanka, chief executive James Sutherland has said.

 Australia lost their world No1 ranking in Tests due to the series defeat and 
burnished their reputation as home-track bullies after their batsmen again 
proved hapless against spin bowling on turning wickets.

Aaron Finch fires Australia to ODI series victory over Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/aaron-finch-fires-australia-to-odi-series-victory-over-sri-lanka>
 With a huge challenge in the subcontinent looming against India in less than 
six months, Sutherland said probing questions were being asked of the national 
set-up.

 “Are some of the fundamental things that we are doing to prepare our players 
to perform well and be highly competitive in subcontinental conditions passing 
the test?” Sutherland said in comments published by Fairfax Media.

 “I think that’s where the review gets a little bit more meaty and challenging 
and more fundamental, going right down into questioning our high performance 
systems as well.”

 Sutherland’s comments come days after former Australia batsman Matthew Hayden 
slammed the high performance unit for having too much power over the team and 
selections.

 Hayden claimed head coach and selector Darren Lehmann and the high 
performance unit headed by former rugby international Pat Howard were 
undermining the players’ ability to build a strong culture.

 “The players have got to actually wrestle back some of their own power from 
within rather than listening to your physios, your strength and conditioning 
coaches, your high performance manager and even your coach for that matter and 
actually dig in as a group and build the culture,” Hayden, a former team-mate 
of Lehmann, fumed on radio station Triple M.

David Squires on ... Australia's disastrous Test cricket tour of Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/aug/25/david-squires-on-australias-disastrous-test-cricket-tour-of-sri-lanka>
 Australia hired Sri Lanka spin great Muttiah Muralitharan as a coaching 
consultant to help their batsmen prepare for the South Asian nation’s pitches 
but many appeared clueless when facing veteran left-arm spinner Rangana Herath, 
who took 28 wickets and was named man-of-the-series.

 Cricket Australia also regularly sends A and youth teams to the subcontinent 
but some were failing to adapt, Sutherland said.

 “To be a bona fide international cricketer in this day and age you need to be 
able to adapt to conditions in Australia, conditions in England, conditions in 
the subcontinent ... wherever you play,” he said.

 “And that adaptability is something that needs to be reviewed because some 
are adapting and some aren’t.”

 Australia gained some consolation from the Sri Lanka tour on Wednesday, with 
the one-day side winning the fourth match to take an unassailable 3-1 lead in 
the series.
 