
It’s the hope that hurts the most. The anticipation and the creeping belief 
that England can finally knock off Australia, rugby league’s answer to the 
all-conquering All Blacks.

Even with the return of the talismanic Sam Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/sam-burgess-rugby-union-league-england-world-cup>
 andthe appointment of the master coach Wayne Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/02/steve-mcnamara-england-wayne-bennett>
, with nearly half of their team now playing in the elite NRL competition and 
not on home shores in Super League, they have again fallen agonisingly short.

Australia simply too good as England denied place in Four Nations final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/england-australia-four-nations-match-report>
England last beat the Kangaroos in 1995, while for Great Britain it has been a 
decade since they beat the men in green and gold. Neither England nor Great 
Britain have defeated Australia in a series almost since television was in 
black and white .

That drought continues after another anticlimax at the London Stadium. In a 
game they needed to win to keep their slim Four Nations hopes alive, when even 
a draw would have been enoughafter Scotland’s miracle against New Zealand in 
Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
, the hosts were strangled, suffocated and ground down.

Australia were their usual self – efficient, methodical, patient. There was 
little pure brilliance, little that was substantial or elaborate but just 
smarts, strength and skill at the key moments.

The Kangaroos do the little things well, execute and complete, and back their 
experience and superior depth to get the job done. It’s a formula that is tried 
and tested, based around a winning culture of professionalism and success.

The Queensland State of Origin spine, transplanted into the Australia side 
once more, seem to play on ESP. Such is their connection that Cameron Smith, 
Johnathan Thurston and Cooper Cronk mesh with a powerful precision that is near 
impossible to stop.

At the London Stadium, England started with fire and brimstone. They got three 
and four men into the tackle early to drive the Aussies backs.

They even took the lead, a Gareth Widdop penalty putting them 2-0 ahead in the 
11th minute.

Thurston soon evened it up but then England regained the lead through Jermaine 
McGillvary. Jonny Lomax found the Huddersfield flyer in space to touch down. 
The hope grew, but that was as good as it got.

Mark Percival ran off his line and the Kangaroos exploited the space, Blake 
Ferguson scoring out wide.

With England imploding with errors and failing to find touch with penalty 
kicks twice, Australia struck again in the second half.

Three tries flowed in a dynamic and destructive spell. From 6-6 England were 
now staring down the barrel of a 28-6 scoreline. More penalties rained in. It’s 
the hope that kills you.

England fired a few more shots at their opponents in the final 20 minutes, 
scoring two tries with Burgess landing an Anthony Joshua style punch on his 
rival forward David Klemmer. The captain escaped the sin-bin, the most luck 
England enjoyed all match.

But Australia managed another two four-pointers in the same period, showing 
that anything England could do they could do better.

The attention of the rugby league world now heads to Anfield, where Australia 
face their neighbours from across the Tasman. For the Kangaroos they will be 
confident of wrestling theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> trophy and the No1 world 
ranking back, as they seek to notch their fourth straight victory over the 
Kiwis in 2016.

For England it’s more post-mortems, more examinations and reviews to see what 
went wrong. Another chance gone. It’s sadly familiar territory.
 