
This was the year when voters around the world declined, en masse, to be 
polite.Britons Brexited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/brexit-disaster-decades-in-the-making>
, in the United StatesDonald Trump sailed like a battleship into the White House
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-victory-us-election-result-revolution>
 while the world quivered and, in Australia,Malcolm Turnbull almost lost the 
federal election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
 that was supposed to deliver him personal vindication and an emphatic mandate 
to govern.


It was the year of disruption and disaffection, and Australia’s major parties 
struggled to define and articulate the new normal, as truthiness reigned and 
populist and protectionist insurgencies loomed like rising and relentless 
tides, lapping the fortified parliamentary precinct in Canberra.

The prelude to Australia’s interminable winter election was a jumble of prime 
ministerial miscalculations.A GST debate was invoked, then dumped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/08/malcolm-turnbulls-gst-retreat-exposes-ideological-divisions-over-fiscal-cliff>
. Turnbull wondered out loud in a park in Penrithwhether the states might raise 
income taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/turnbull-confirms-state-income-tax-plan-and-says-it-will-fix-core-problem-of-federation>
 – whimsy with the potential to radically reshape the federation – before 
crashing his own thought bubble.The Senate voting rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/senate-voting-rules-government-to-push-ahead-with-changes>
 were overhauled to clear out the non-cooperative upper houseand a double 
dissolution promptly called 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/08/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-opens-the-contest-politics-live>
, which only encouraged the public tovote 1 “feral” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/18/tony-abbott-possible-double-dissolution-election-liberals>
.

Pauline Hanson returned triumphantly to the federal scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/australias-double-dissolution-election-backfires-badly-with-likely-senate-makeup>
 after a long absence, with a small One Nation Senate posse of permanently 
irritated outsiders.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pauline%20Hanson%3A%20Australia%20%E2%80%98in%20danger%20of%20being%20swamped%20by%20Muslims%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pauline%20Hanson%3A%20Australia%20%E2%80%98in%20danger%20of%20being%20swamped%20by%20Muslims%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fpauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video&media=>
Pauline Hanson: Australia ‘in danger of being swamped by Muslims’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video>
South Australia delivered its own upset, sending Nick Xenophon back to Canberra
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/nick-xenophon-the-anti-politician-poised-to-cause-headaches-whoever-wins-election>
 with two extra senators and a lower-house MP – in the process, writing a new 
chapter in the state’s history of hosting political schisms within Australian 
centre-right politics.

Voters were mulish. Just after the election, they told researchers at the 
Australian National Universitythey no longer trusted governments to act in the 
interests of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/trump-style-political-disaffection-taking-hold-in-australia-review-says>
. Only 26% said they had trust in government – the lowest figure recorded in 
the Australian Election Study since 1969. Two in five professed dissatisfaction 
with democracy in Australia, the lowest ebb since the period in the 1970safter 
the dismissal of Gough Whitlam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/oct/31/gough-whitlam-40-years-on-the-dismissals-bastardry-still-intrigues>
.

Turnbull’s shock at his near-death experience rang out on election night when 
he hectored and lectured the voters

And the campaign itself – eight weeks of sloganeering and slog – gave voters 
little incentive to resist their creeping inclination to send Canberra a 
message. The government was whacked and Turnbull’s profound shock at his 
near-death experiencerang out on election night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/tale-two-speeches-frustration-boiled-over-wait-for-testy-turnbull>
 when he hectored and lectured the voters – they just needed to mind their 
manners, take their lumps and understand the government’s roadmap for the 
future was the first, best and last offer.

“The circumstances of Australia cannot be changed by a lying campaign from the 
Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>,” Turnbull 
thundered to supporters, who had waited until after midnight for the prime 
minister to appear. “The challenges, the fact that we live in times of rapid 
economic change, of enormous opportunity, enormous challenges, a time when we 
need to be innovative, when we need to be competitive, when we need to be able 
to seize those opportunities – those times are there.”

Turnbull’s display of unchecked defiance on election night was something of a 
last hurrah for a prime minister who has been forced by events and the sum of 
his political circumstances to bargain for survival: his own, and that of the 
government.

The prime minister can claim an election win as an achievement in a political 
year littered with spectacular upsets. In politics, a win is a win. But all 
Turnbull’s victories in contemporary times seem to come at considerable cost.

He bowed his head to wrest the leadership from Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/18/australia-plumbed-new-depths-in-year-of-fearful-politics-but-ends-on-hopeful-note?CMP=soc_567>
 in late 2015, resolving to lead in a way that would try to placate the 
government’s roiling conservatives and bind the disparate groupings of the 
government together. The crash-through-or-crash Malcolm of old – the one voters 
warmed to – was consigned to history.

The instinct was Howardesque – John Howard always extolled the virtues of 
managing the Liberal party’s “broad church” by calibrating the interests of 
moderates and conservatives, a bit like tuning a temperamental instrument – but 
Howard had the internal clout to insist on collegiality, predicated on the 
notion that, at the cabinet table, it was the boss in the prime ministerial 
suite who was first among equals.

The check on Turnbull’s authority was obvious from the outset, but the 
election was supposed to reset the balance. Turnbull’s failure to win the 
emphatic majority he soughthas forced the prime minister to continue the cycle 
of internal appeasement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/one-year-on-malcolm-turnbulls-brutal-reality-is-theres-no-time-like-the-present>
, which keeps the government on task and inching forward but has damaged his 
connection with the voting public.

Yes, Malcolm Turnbull, you've Got Things Done. You've tidied your sock drawer 
| Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/yes-malcolm-turnbull-youve-got-things-done-youve-tidied-your-sock-drawer>
The public, and his popularity, was always Turnbull’s faction in conservative 
politics. He’s a man without a base in a party that has become tribal and 
hostile to outsiders.But, over the course of 2016, the public deserted the 
people’s prime minister. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/malcolm-turnbulls-net-approval-rating-falls-to-zero-in-latest-poll>


Turnbull’s standing as measured in Newspoll’s better prime minister rating 
plunged 18 points over the course of 2016. An Essential poll published at the 
close of 2016 showed his approval rating at its lowest level since assuming the 
prime ministership. In that poll, published in mid-December, 46% of voters 
disapproved of Turnbull, compared with 34% of people who approved of his 
performance.

Abbott remains defiantly in the parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/gunslinger-tony-abbott-tries-another-ambush-but-shoots-himself-in-the-foot>
 and continues to spoil. He has largely annoyed colleagues with his theatrics 
rather than fashioning any convincing case for his return, but the pattern of 
disruption damages the government. It underscores the fact that everything is 
permeable and contestable, when voters have had a gutful of permeable and 
contestable.


Adding to the atmosphere of permanent contest, the Liberal senator Cory 
Bernardi continues to contemplate jumping off the government bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/christensen-threatens-to-leave-coalition-amid-fears-bernardi-may-form-own-party>
 to make Australia great again.

The rolling contention has distracted from the modest progress of the newly 
elected Turnbull’s government’s first six months.

Much of the progress doesn’t matter to anyone outside the conservative base 
and the Master Builders Association but the government did emerge from the 
parliament at the end of the year witha couple of heavily amended legacies from 
the Abbott era – the restoration of the Australian Building and Construction 
Commission and a bill regulating registered organisations. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/year-ends-with-senate-roulette-and-deals-spun-as-grand-bargains-and-cunning-plans>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33522419dc6f816b9f7197c57637e8fe2ec0e073%2F0_0_3696_2456%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33522419dc6f816b9f7197c57637e8fe2ec0e073%2F0_0_3696_2456%2F3696.jpg>
 A candlelight vigil in April in Sydney for an Iranian refugee who died after 
setting himself on fire on Nauru. The government later agreed a deal to 
transfer some refugees to the US, as allegations of abuse continued to emerge 
from Nauru and Manus. Photograph: Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
Apart from the legacy caseload, there are some achievements Turnbull and the 
government can call their own. They managed to steera package of superannuation 
reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/superannuation-backflip-on-500000-cap-wins-over-coalition-conservatives>
 through parliament – less ambitious than the changes the government had 
floated at budget time but ones that will make the system fairer.

The prime minister also managed to thread a couple of other complicated 
needles. He ratified the Paris climate agreement, which is an achievement, 
given that the Coalition remains studded with climate sceptics spoiling for 
confrontations.He also managed to secure US agreement to take some of the 
wretched souls indefinitely detained in offshore immigration detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/refugees-held-in-australian-offshore-detention-to-be-resettled-in-us>
, which is a step change from the moronic and amoral political drumbeat of 
“stop the boats” – never mind the cost to human rights.

But, as seems usual with the government, it is one step forward and one step 
back.In December Turnbull ruled out policies that would allow Australia to 
comply with the Paris agreement at least cost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/on-climate-policy-and-power-prices-turnbull-is-talking-rubbish-here-are-some-facts>
 to taxpayersand it is not yet clear whether Trump will honour the Obama 
administration’s undertaking on the refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/trump-tear-up-australia-refugee-deal-us-expert-warns>
.


Turnbull will enter 2017 under acute internal and external pressure – pressure 
to draw a line under a less than compelling 12 months of electioneering and 
governing, and pressure to articulate what he and his government stand for, 
which remains, frankly, mysterious.

Labor and Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> have spent the past 
year trying to maximise the discomfort of the prime minister, while setting out 
some bold economic policies, such as reducing negative gearing and capital 
gains tax concessions, and campaigning on the party’s traditional areas of 
social policy strength – health and education.

Comprehending Pauline is not the challenge. Engaging constructively with 
Hansonism is | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/comprehending-pauline-is-not-the-challenge-engaging-constructively-with-hansonism-is>
Shorten got through the midyear election loss without having to face a 
challenge to his leadership but, behind the scenes in Labor, there has been 
turbulence. The national left – of which Anthony Albanese is the key figure –
came after one of Shorten’s key institutional backers in Victoria’s Kim Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/push-to-dump-kim-carr-from-labor-frontbench-in-favour-of-linda-burney>
, and Stephen Conroy, an influential rightwing powerbroker and Shorten 
supporter,quit politics abruptly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/stephen-conroy-resigns-from-the-senate>
, catching colleagues on the hop and creating instability in Shorten’s home 
state.

Internal controversy deepened when Shorten chose to replace Conroy with 
Kimberley Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
, a long-time rightwing factional ally but a controversial figure in Labor 
ranks.The trade union royal commission in 2014 
<https://www.tradeunionroyalcommission.gov.au/reports/Documents/InterimReportVol2.pdf>
 made adverse findings against Kitching and referred her for possible 
prosecution, and already Labor’s new senator is a target of government attacks 
in parliament.

How these internal tensions play out will be a story to watch in 2017.

The Greens are recalibrating after a less than stellar election in which the 
party lost a senator. Factional tensions were also on display over the course 
of 2016. The party’s former leader Bob Brownproposed a clean-out of the NSW 
Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/greens-acrimony-bob-brown-unloads-on-lee-rhiannon-and-nsw-party>
 after the disappointing federal election performance.


Economic uncertainty

The Australian economy struggled in 2016. In seasonally adjusted terms, it 
shrank 0.5% in the September quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/australian-economy-shrinks-by-05-in-september-quarter>
, which was the second-biggest drop in 25 years. Measured on an annual basis, 
Australia has chalked up the weakest growth we’ve seen since the global 
financial crisis.


Falls in public expenditure, net exports, private investment in new buildings, 
new engineering and new and used dwellings all detracted significantly from 
growth in the September quarter. Mining investment fell for the 12th 
consecutive quarter (down 10.6%), while non-mining investment rose by 4.8% – a 
metric underscoring the difficult transition the economy is making since the 
mining boom.

Interest rates hit historic lows. Budget reform remained as difficult as 
budget reform always is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/australias-budget-deficit-hit-by-weaker-wage-and-profit-growth-myefo-reveals>
. With deficits blowing out, the ratings agencies hovered, eyeing Australia’s 
AAA rating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc185bb652f8a476a0d87b933d0f9f5a307034dd4%2F0_0_1920_1123%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc185bb652f8a476a0d87b933d0f9f5a307034dd4%2F0_0_1920_1123%2F1920.jpg>
 Footage obtained by the ABC of Dylan Voller being hooded and restrained at the 
Don Dale juvenile detention centre in the Northern Territory led immediately to 
a royal commission. Photograph: ABC Four Corners 
In national affairs more broadly defined, abuses in juvenile detention in the 
Northern Territoryprompted a fresh royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
 after the ABC broadcast confronting footage of a teenager Dylan Voller’s 
treatmentin the Don Dale detention centre; and the Catholic church faced the
full glare of a separate royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/cardinal-george-pell-catholic-church-evidence-royal-commission-abuse>
 – an inquiry that put George Pell in the hot seat.

Guardian Australia published a cache of documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 documenting the scale of abuse in immigration detention on Nauru andinquests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
 into the deaths of asylum seekers fuelled further anxiety about the treatment 
of boat arrivals.

The terrible cases of Ms Dhu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/weve-got-to-put-our-story-out-there-ms-dhus-family-prepare-for-verdict-on-death-in-custody>
 in South Hedland andEjijah Doughty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/tell-the-worldwe-want-justice-elijah-doughtys-death-exposes-kalgoorlies-racial-faultline>
 in Kalgoorlie kicked along the debate about Indigenous people and law 
enforcement that has simmered, unresolved, for decades.

The annual Closing the Gap report for 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/closing-the-gap-2016-report-indigenous-infant-mortality-down-but-no-change-in-most-targets>
 found the infant mortality rate for Indigenous children had dropped 
drastically but Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders were still more likely 
to be unemployed and die younger than the rest of the population.


Australia debated whether a treaty with Indigenous people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/labors-patrick-dodson-says-indigenous-treaty-should-be-an-option>
 or constitutional recognition was the most appropriate way forward to promote 
reconciliation and justice for the first Australians. The Indigenous leader and 
activist dubbed the father of reconciliation, Pat Dodson,left Indigenous 
politics for the federal political arena. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/bill-shorten-asks-labor-to-endorse-patrick-dodson-for-vacant-senate-seat>

I could not live with myself if I didn’t use this opportunity to speak up 
nationally and internationally
Gillian Triggs 
Racial issues were threaded throughout 2016. A poll from Essential found that 
49% of Australians supported One Nation’s call for a ban on Muslim immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/race-discrimination-commissioner-criticises-pauline-hanson-for-stoking-division>
. The poll found 41% of the sample believed Muslims did not integrate into 
Australian society. Some people were also worried about the threat of terrorism 
(27%) and agreed with the proposition “they do not share our values” (22%).

A number of Liberal senators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/cory-bernardis-racial-discrimination-revolt-supported-by-up-to-20-senators>
 and the Australian newspaper launched a concerted campaign to overhaul the 
Racial Discrimination Act, and the president of the human rights commission, 
Gillian Triggs, found herself again in the centre of a political stormas a 
controversial 18C case involving students from QUT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
 became a cause celebre.

The lady herself was not for turning. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/gillian-triggs-i-wont-be-cowered-by-political-attacks>
 “I believe I could not live with myself if I didn’t use this opportunity to 
speak up nationally and internationally,” Triggs told a welfare conference in 
late November. “When my term is up and I’m digging in my garden, hopefully 
smelling a rose or two, I couldn’t live with any failure on my part to raise 
the critical human rights of the day – whether it’s the use of steel restraint 
chairs in juvenile detention centres, the indefinite detention in dangerous 
conditions of children, indefinite detention of those with cognitive 
disabilities, the world’s worst levels of detention of Indigenous people and 
the failure to respond adequately to the deaths of women, children and some men 
in domestic violence, and of course the growing problem of homelessness.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ca66a9f0e9ece365a7c54b66624775a0d06477%2F0_0_625_703%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ca66a9f0e9ece365a7c54b66624775a0d06477%2F0_0_625_703%2F625.jpg>
 Ms Dhu, who died in police custody in Port Hedland in August 2014. The inquest 
into her death ‘kicked along the debate about Indigenous people and law 
enforcement that has simmered, unresolved for decades’. Photograph: supplied by 
Ms Dhu's family 
While Triggs battled political headwinds, another prominent lawyer, Susan 
Kiefel, was appointed chief justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/susan-kiefel-becomes-first-woman-appointed-as-high-court-chief-justice>
 of the high court – becoming the first woman to lead it.

Kiefel, who began her career in the law as a secretary after leaving school at 
15, will replace Robert French, who retires from the bench in January.

Marriage equality loomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/most-lgbti-australians-oppose-plebiscite-on-marriage-equality-survey>
. The government tried and failed to legislate for a plebiscite to determine 
whether or not the Marriage Act should be amended to allow same-sex marriage, 
so the debate will now enter a new round in 2017. Advocates will push for a 
parliamentary vote.

As the planet continued to warm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
, scientific experts and citizens continued to worry about whetherclimate 
change would destroy Australian icons such as the Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
. Naomi Klein donned a wetsuit andmade the case for climate action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/07/naomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
.


BP dropped plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/bp-ditches-plans-to-drill-for-oil-in-the-great-australian-bight>
 to drill for oil in the commonwealth marine reserve in the Great Australian 
Bightbut the Adani Group continued to make the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/adani-carmichael-coalmine-faces-new-legal-challenge-from-conservation-foundation>
 for a giant new coal project in Queensland, helped by two governments – a 
Labor government in the sunshine state and a federal government in Canberra – 
who both want to hold off a One Nation insurgency up north.

Australians worried about sharks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/shark-nets-to-be-trialled-at-five-beaches-after-surge-in-northern-nsw-attacks>
 andbattled bushfires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/07/homes-and-lives-in-danger-as-western-australia-bushfire-spreads-further#comments>
, and South Australia was plunged intoa statewide blackout in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/south-australia-braces-for-storm-that-could-be-most-severe-in-50-years>
. That event prompted a round of largely unedifying finger pointing among the 
political class about windfarms and intermittency problems associated with some 
low-emissions energy technologies – an argument that will continue into 2017.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Naomi%20Klein%20at%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20what%20have%20we%20left%20for%20our%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Naomi%20Klein%20at%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20what%20have%20we%20left%20for%20our%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface&media=>
Naomi Klein at the Great Barrier Reef: what have we left for our children? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/07/naomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
The war of the smashed avocado

In New South Wales, Mike Baird, a politician voters initially warmed to, found 
himself in a game of snakes and ladders, under political siege over greyhound 
racing and Sydney’s lockout laws.

The Australian media had an interesting year. Journalists battled to define 
their role in a post-truth world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/comprehending-pauline-is-not-the-challenge-engaging-constructively-with-hansonism-is>
.

Nine Network employees found themselves in seriously hot water in Beirut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/sally-faulkner-and-ali-al-amin-reach-deal-before-beirut-court-hearing>
. The ABC got a new managing director. Thejury is still ou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/25/meet-fran-kelly-disc-jockey-abc-bosses-defend-their-music-cuts>
t on Michelle Guthrie, but her opening phase in the Australian media’s toughest 
jobhas been bumpy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/she-doesnt-get-what-we-do-has-abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-got-the-insiders-on-her-side>
.

Baby boomers have already taken all the houses, now they're coming for our 
brunch | Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/baby-boomers-have-already-taken-all-the-houses-now-theyre-coming-for-our-brunch>
Smashed avocados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/baby-boomers-have-already-taken-all-the-houses-now-theyre-coming-for-our-brunch>
 became a thing, a totem in the great cultural debate of 2016 – “millennials 
versus the oldies intent on stealing their future”. Demographer Bernard Salt 
thought ifmillennials just stopped going to “hipster cafes” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/moralisers-we-need-you/news-story/6bdb24f77572be68330bd306c14ee8a3#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C1%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CBernard_Salt%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1476657066628>
, and eating avo on toast, they too could buy a house – an observation that 
opened a floodgate of feelings.


In sport, Australia, as always, dreamed of a record gold haul in Rio, but the 
performance, as is often the case, wasnot so great at the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/australias-well-planned-well-funded-olympic-over-achievement-is-finished>
. Cricket wasa bit meh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/australias-cricket-cull-a-genuine-new-era-or-merely-another-short-term-fix>
, according to a bunch of people who speak fluent cricket. In the AFL and the 
NFL, mighty underdogs ruled,as did Tim Cahill on the football pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/the-year-of-the-cahill-love-him-or-loathe-him-2016-has-been-tims-year>
.

Rounding out 2016 with culture, Crowded House rolled back the years at the 
Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/24/crowded-house-review-what-a-glorious-night-to-be-alive-on-the-planet>
 and, in what seemed a tiny pre-Christmas miracle, created the conditions where 
people used social media to be nice to one another and share happy thought, for 
a number of hours in succession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3592a041f072c2121dd5f4d5f6895f36882a510e%2F0_0_2954_1969%2F2954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3592a041f072c2121dd5f4d5f6895f36882a510e%2F0_0_2954_1969%2F2954.jpg>
 Crowded House performed to ecstatic crowds for four nights on the steps of 
Sydney Opera House, 20 years after they gave a farewell concert in the same 
place. Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
Political tragics in Canberra got their own noir fix with the Foxtel series 
Secret City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/06/secret-city-review-all-the-ingredients-for-a-first-rate-australian-political-thriller>
 – and presumably I wasn’t the only person scratching my head on my couch 
trying to fathomThe Kettering Incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/10/the-kettering-incident-review-tasmanian-gothic-thriller-par-excellence>
 – or declaring Sabine was robbed in the latest season of Australia’s Next Top 
Model.

In the world of books, Stan Grant went big 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/extract-from-stan-grants-new-book-talking-to-my-country>
, Charlotte Wood’s The Natural Way of Things got the nod from the prize givers, 
and Helen Garner found$200,000 in her junk mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/02/helen-garner-learns-of-207000-literary-prize-win-after-checking-junk-email>
.

It seems appropriate to give the final word on 2016 to Garner, who told the 
Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/windhamcampbell-prize-for-nonfiction-gives-helen-garner-validation-and-us150000-20160301-gn7arq.html>
 that when she read an email from someone at Yale University who had “good 
news” and wanted her phone number, she thought it was a hoax.

Only after checking with her publisher and contacting the university was she 
able to confirm she had, indeed, won the Windham-Campbell prize for writers.

“I nearly keeled over,” Garner said. “I’m staggered. I feel thrilled and 
validated.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d368ddf69903aef7d0eb882abddbbef6c573910%2F0_0_2291_2362%2F2291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20in%202016%3A%20the%20year%20leaders%20flailed%20as%20populism%20sailed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Faustralia-in-2016-the-year-leaders-flailed-as-populism-sailed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d368ddf69903aef7d0eb882abddbbef6c573910%2F0_0_2291_2362%2F2291.jpg>
 Helen Garner found a $200,000 prize in her junk mail. Photograph: Nicholas 
Purcell  