
The Australian government is examining its legal options after Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> opted to snub an international ruling 
that condemned its plan to resume whaling in Antarctic waters.

Japan accused of falsifying whaling data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/japan-accused-of-falsifying-whaling-data>
Last year, the International Court of Justice ruled Japan’s whaling program was
not scientific research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
, as it claimed, and ordered it to revoke scientific permits for the cull.

But the Japanese government has now told the UN the court’s jurisdiction will 
not apply to any “research on, or conservation, management or exploitation of, 
living resources of the sea”.

The ICJ case, brought by Australia, appeared to curb Japan’s whaling ambitions 
but Tokyo unveiled a revised whaling plan, known as Newrep-A, earlier this year.

The new plan stipulates 333 minke whales will be killed each year between 2015 
and 2027, about one-third of what it previously targeted.

An expert panel for the International Whaling Commission, which banned 
commercial whale slaughter in 1986 but exempted killing for scientific 
research, concluded Japan’s new planhad no basis in science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/14/experts-reject-japans-new-whaling-plan>
.

Japan now appears set to unilaterally resume Antarctic whaling later this 
year, after suspending the practice in 2014.

Australia’s environment minister, Greg Hunt, said the government met Japanese 
counterparts to discuss the bypassing of the ICJ judgment.

“Australia has successfully brought action in the International Court of 
Justice to stop Japan’s whaling program,” Hunt said. “Japan has previously said 
it would abide by the ruling. We are taking legal advice on the implications of 
Japan’s actions.

Sea Shepherd anti-whaling ship Bob Barker refused entry to Faroe Islands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/25/sea-shepherd-anti-whaling-ship-bob-barker-refused-entry-to-faroe-islands>
“We are disappointed by Japan’s decision and we hope that Japan does not 
undertake so-called ‘scientific’ whaling this [southern] summer in the Southern 
Ocean.”

Hunt said Australia remained staunchly opposed to whaling and pointed to 
various scientific techniques, such as the removing of small amounts of live 
whale tissue for analysis, that negate the need to kill whales in order to 
study them.

The popularity of whale meat as food has declined sharply in Japan in recent 
years. But the practice remains culturally important to many Japanese and the 
meat of the cetaceans waspresented to tourists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/whale-meat-on-the-menu-at-japanese-food-festival>
 at a major food festival that ended last week.

The Australian Marine Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society said Japan’s 
snub of the ICJ was a “wake-up call” to other nations.

 “Countries should not be allowed to pick and choose which bits of 
international law they are bound by,” said Darren Kindleysides, director of the 
conservation group. “This is a deeply cynical move showing utter contempt for 
the rule of international law.

“Japan’s Antarctic whaling has failed the test of international law, and the 
test of science, yet the hunt could resume within weeks. The Australian 
government must once again stand up to Japan.”
 