
Kim Brennan has won a gold medal in the women’s single sculls to break 
Australia’s eight-year drought at Olympic level at Lagoa Rodrigo de Freitas. It 
gave Australia its second ever women’s Olympic rowing gold medal. The 
31-year-old veteran led the race from start to finish from lane three, holding 
off fellow favourites Jingli Duan of China and Emma Twigg of New Zealand.

Brennan had claimed bronze in the same event at the London 2012 Games, 
starting strongly to establish an early lead and never relinquishing it. It is 
the first time an Australian woman has won an Olympic rowing gold medal since 
1996, when Kate Allen (nee Slatter) and Megan Marcks (nee Still) won gold at 
the AtlantaOlympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>.

“It’s one of those things that your do so much visualisation and you imagine 
that moment so many times, but just crossing the line, I couldn’t work out 
whether that was actually it or whether that was my imagination. Again, I can’t 
really believe it,” said Brennan. She paid tribute to her coach Lyall McCarthy 
and said that the time he’d devoted to Brennan’s campaign “can’t put into 
numbers.”

For the remarkable Katie Ledecky, the future appears limitless | Bryan Armen 
Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/katie-ledecky-swimming-2016-dominant-athlete>
One of Brennan’s primary concerns after the race was not her medal but the 
wherabouts of her dog Ernie, who was with Brennan’s husband, 2008 Olympic gold 
medallist Scott. “Scott said he was very proud of me,” said Brennan, “but I 
wanted to see how Ernie was doing but he wasn’t too interested in watching my 
race, he wanted the attention to himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Faustralias-kim-brennan-wins-gold-in-rowing-as-meares-takes-keirin-bronze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6889a5bfeaecfe2ed481b3087987fc4d3718520f%2F0_15_4388_2634%2F4388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20Kim%20Brennan%20wins%20gold%20in%20rowing%20as%20Meares%20takes%20keirin%20bronze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Faustralias-kim-brennan-wins-gold-in-rowing-as-meares-takes-keirin-bronze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20Kim%20Brennan%20wins%20gold%20in%20rowing%20as%20Meares%20takes%20keirin%20bronze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Faustralias-kim-brennan-wins-gold-in-rowing-as-meares-takes-keirin-bronze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6889a5bfeaecfe2ed481b3087987fc4d3718520f%2F0_15_4388_2634%2F4388.jpg>
 Australian cyclist Anna Meares has taken out the bronze medal in the women’s 
keirin in Rio. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
With a bronze medal in the women’s Keirin in Rio, Anna Meares has become 
Australia’s most decorated cyclist at Olympic medal by pushing her career tally 
to six medals.


Finishing behind Dutch gold medalist Elis Ligtlee and Great Britain’s Rebecca 
James, Meares also became the only woman to have claimed medals in all four 
sprint events – the keirin, sprint, team sprint and 500m time trial. Meares now 
has two gold, one silver and three bronze from her four Olympic campaigns 
stretching back to Athens 2004.

“I knew it was going to be a really, really, really hard final,” Meares said 
afterwards. “The girls are very strong, very fast and it’s been a big shift 
from the Olympics in London to the Olympics now. My coach (Gary West) asked me 
earlier what were my goals for this meet and that’s two of the boxes checked 
right there: place better than I did in London in kierin and win a medal.”

Having lead the field after the second round of the inaugral golf competition, 
Australia’s Marcus Fraser finished the third day one over for an overall score 
of nine under, which places him third behind Team GB’s Justin Rose and Swede 
Henrik Stenson.

Australia’s women’s water polo team won a tough final pool encounter against 
Brazil, overcoming a rusty start to take the game 10-3 and advance to a 
quarter-final against Hungary. The Opals basketballers needed a similar 
comeback, overturning a 13-point deficit against Belarus to clinch a 74-66 win 
as Liz Cambage put up 17 points. The win sets up a knockout quarter-final 
against Serbia.

In sailing, Australia’s Tom Burton has guaranteed he will win a medal by 
overcoming a shaky start to build enough points to progress to Monday’s 
double-point medal race in the Laser event.
 