
The heatwave along the east cost of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> continues with the temperature 
staying above 30 degrees throughout the night.

In Sydney temperatures hovered around 30C on Tuesday night while in Brisbane 
there is no predicted relief until Saturday. A Bureau of Meteorology 
spokesperson predicted the weather inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> on Friday and Saturday 
would be particularly “yuck”.

In Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/sydney> on Wednesday the 
temperature is forecast to be 35C in the city and 42C in the west but a cool 
southerly change will begin to pass through the city about midday.

Sydney mother to face court after four children found in car in heatwave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/sydney-mother-to-face-court-after-four-children-found-in-car-in-heatwave>
“We do have a southerly change on the way, so we’ll see cooler conditions for 
southern parts of the state [on Wednesday],” BoM spokeswoman Sarah Chadwick 
said on Tuesday.

Milder conditions will give Sydney residents some relief on Thursday, with a 
maximum of 25C in the city and 27C in the west, but the temperature is due to 
climb back up again on Friday.

A hot air mass lurking over central Australia is heating up most of the 
country’s south-east and delivering the heatwave to NSW, Queensland and South 
Australia. Similar conditions are expected next week, with experts warning no 
lasting relief is in sight any time soon.


In south-east Queensland the nights will be warm and the days even hotter as 
maximum temperatures range from the low to high 30s.

The temperature on Wednesday will soar to 39C in Beaudesert, Gatton, Laidley 
and Esk on Wednesday, while a sunny top of 35C is forecast in Brisbane.

Bureau of Meteorology forecaster Michael Knepp said temperatures would remain 
high until Saturday. There will be no respite from the heat overnight either, 
with minimum temperatures to remain in the mid 20s.

“It’s not record breaking in terms of extremes, it’s a prolonged period of hot 
weather,” Knepp said.

He said the bureau was not expecting any storms but there was an increased 
chance on Friday and Saturday, days which he said would feel particularly 
“yuck”.

The blistering conditions come after a prolonged heatwave last week, during 
which a 30-year-old man died of heatstroke while out dirt biking.

Knepp said heatwaves were the most fatal weather phenomenon and urged people 
to turn on their air-conditioning, stay indoors or visit the pool to cool down.
 