
Australia has thrown its weight behind a bid to outlaw large-scale commercial 
and so-called “scientific” whaling at a summit next week.

The International Whaling Commission meeting in Slovenia follows Japan’s 
recent slaughter of more than 300 minke whales, many of them pregnant, when 
they resumed so-called scientific whaling after a hiatus because the
International Court of Justice ruled the hunts were not scientific and should 
cease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
.

Australia has put forward a resolution 
<http://uk.whales.org/sites/default/files/iwc6611_dr_on_improving_the_review_process_for_whaling_under_special_permit.pdf>
 to the conference that would require Japan to get approval from the IWC for 
its “scientific” quotas.

Japan is also expected to again face criticism from other countries for its 
whaling in the Southern Ocean, in defiance of the court ruling.

Japan told to halt Antarctic whaling by international court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
On Friday the federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, said he would 
call for global protection of whales, saying the government “strongly supports 
the global moratorium and will continue to work towards a permanent end to all 
forms of commercial and so-called ‘scientific’ whaling”.

“For too long, the commission has deferred responsibility for so-called 
‘scientific’ whaling to its scientific committee,” Frydenberg said. “The 
commission must be more engaged on this important and divisive issue and form 
its own conclusions.”

This year marks the 30th anniversary of the global moratorium on commercial 
whaling and 70 years since the International Convention for the Regulation of
Whaling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> was made.

In 2008 the Australian federal court found Japanese whaling in the Australian 
Whale Sanctuary to be in breach of Australian law and Japanese whaling company 
Kyodo was fined $1m in 2015. Attempts to recover the money have so far failed.

Kitty Block, the vice-president of the Humane Society International, which was 
part of the Australian legal action, said: “Japan’s unilateral resumption of 
its so-called ‘scientific’ hunt in the Southern Ocean last year is a slap in 
the face not just for the International Whaling Commission but also for the 
rule of law, as the international court of justice clearly ruled Japan’s 
previous Antarctic ‘research’ program to be illegal.”

Humane Society International program manager Alexia Wellbelove said: “With 
both the international courts and Australia’s federal court condemning Japan’s 
actions, it is time the international community at IWC strongly criticise Japan 
for its so-called ‘scientific’ whaling program.”
 