
Darren Rogers’s living room is full of surfboards, but it is all he can do to 
get back in the water. The first time he tried, he looked down at his submerged 
legs and had a flashback of fellow surfer Tadashi Nakahara’s horrific injuries.

Rogers is haunted by his final moments with the man he tried to keep alive 
after a catastrophic encounter with agreat white shark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2014/nov/26/-sp-great-white-sharks-10-myths-debunked>
. It severed both of Nakahara’s legs, the kind of injury that Rogers knew could 
only be inflicted by the ocean’s apex predator, “as big as your car, weighing 
almost as much … I do have vivid images of his injuries but because I was so 
close to his face, his eyes are the things that get me … just wishing I could 
make him alive again”, he says.

Rogers did not know Nakahara, a Japanese surfer who had been living in Ballina 
for a year, before the attack – “but we’re bonded permanently now. I breathed 
his last breaths”.

Nakahara’s death in February  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/09/man-dies-shark-attack-ballina-nsw-north-coast>
heralded a series of shark attacks that have cast a pall over Ballina, a 
coastal town popular with surfers in New South Wales, 740km north of Sydney. 
The latest shark attack, just two weeks ago at Lighthouse Beach in East 
Ballina, left 20-year-old champion surferSam Morgan with serious leg injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/10/surfer-injured-in-suspected-shark-attack-on-nsw-north-coast>
.

The dramatic spike in shark attacks along the northern New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> coast comes as 
great whites have been seen lingering ever closer to shore in largely 
unexplained numbers. Unprovoked shark attacks were, until now, relatively rare 
in Australia – in the past century they averaged just over five a year. This 
year, however, there have already been 14 attacks along this stretch of coast – 
five at Ballina’s Shelly and Lighthouse beaches. A further 14 close encounters 
with sharks have been reported in these waters.

Great white sharks: 10 myths debunked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2014/nov/26/-sp-great-white-sharks-10-myths-debunked>
Now one of the country’s most idyllic surfing spots is all but deserted. 
Schools, families and surfer clubs are cancelling trips to the tourist town. 
Some local surfers have gone to the Gold Coast, a further 120km north in 
Queensland, or to the nearby busy resort of Byron Bay where – despitethe 
mauling to death of a British man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/09/byron-bay-shark-attack-victim-british-expat>
 by a great white there in September last year– there is “safety in numbers”. 
Those who do summon the courage to brave the waves at Ballina stay in 
tight-knit “pods”. Some have adopted boards and wetsuits with bold stripes 
which are said to confuse and repel sharks. But all of them are nervous.

“Sometimes you last only 15 minutes,” says David Hall, owner of the Flat Rock 
tent park. “If the sun’s not out and the water’s murky, it plays on your mind.” 
His wife, Kellie, says watching children surf is nerve-racking. “You stand on 
the beach and you just panic.” Jeff Templeton, owner of surf shop Beachworkz, 
says sales of “anything to do with getting in the water – boards, wetsuits, 
flippers – are as dead as dead. I’ve lived here all my life and I’ve never seen 
anything like it. There’s still a lot of people out there, but they’re just 
sitting on the beach, there’s not a soul in the water”.

The now routine sight of a helicopter carrying out shark surveillance flights 
is a source of comfort. The mayor of Ballina shire, David Wright, says the 
helicopter has been “the best thing for us so we can see [the sharks] and get 
people out of the water”. In an attempt to find a solution to the attacks, 
Wright has held countless meetings this year with New South Wales officials, 
surf lifesavers, environmentalists and shark experts, and attended the“world’s 
first” shark summit in Sydney 
<https://lifeguards.com.au/NSW/the-great-shark-summit-of-sydney/> where they 
examined “technology after technology” for dealing with the problem.

“The only thing that’s going to protect the whole beach is a barrier,” he 
says. Before the surge in attacks, moves were already afoot in the state to 
stop the use of traditional shark nets in Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong 
because of their lethal impact on sharks, whales and other marine life.

Thanks to Wright’s advocacy, the state government has agreed to make Ballina 
the focal point of a new shark mitigation trial which has funding ofA$16m 
(£7.6m) over five years. 
<http://www.ballina.info/blog/2015/10/25/nsw-government-announces-16-million-shark-strategy/>
 The programme is aimed at improving shark surveillance and warning systems, 
with helicopters, drones and buoys detecting sharks using sonar and satellite, 
as well as shark tagging, phone app alerts and beach sirens.

But the cornerstone of the trial is a new form of shark net  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mjEf_Y4h-9s>already in use in Western 
Australia, which features rigid plastic loops that retain their size, thereby 
reducing the risk of entangling fish, dolphins and turtles. These “eco-nets”, 
which are expensive to make, install and maintain, are destined for only two 
north coast beaches, including an 800-metre stretch along Lighthouse beach, the 
site of Nakahara’s fatal attack. But that is not expected to be in place until 
after Christmas, the peak holiday season. Surfers such as Darren Rogers, 
however, consider the installation of the new nets to be a “huge” advance to 
protect the large numbers of whales, dolphins and other marine life that pass 
so close to the shores of Ballina.

There’s still a lot of people out there, but they’re just sitting on the 
beach, there’s not a soul in the water
Jeff Templeton, surf shop owner 
Notably absent from the discussion in New South Wales is any serious 
consideration of culling, a traditional kneejerk response to rises in shark 
attacks elsewhere,including in Western Australia last year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/24/wa-abandons-shark-culling-program-but-reserves-right-to-kill-again>
 Culls are widely seen as futile because of the itinerant nature of the great 
white, although tagging of a dozen great whites has produced a mixed picture of 
their movements, says marine ecologist Daniel Bucher, of Southern Cross 
University. Half of the tagged sharks travelled as far as Bass Strait, near 
Tasmania, while the other half have remained just off the 120km stretch from 
Ballina to the Gold Coast. “Still, the shark you see this week is a different 
shark to the one you see next week,” Bucher says.

Bucher is pleased that community opposition to culling is shared by 
politicians and officials in the state’s department of primary industries, “who 
are certainly saying we’ve gone beyond killing animals for our own convenience. 
I’ve likened it to saying: ‘It’s my right to go walking naked through the 
African savannah – can you kill all the lions because I’m scared of them?’,” he 
says. “From Australia’s point of view, as a conservation-minded nation trying 
to convince other nations not to kill whales, it doesn’t do a lot for our 
credibility when you’re doing that in your own backyard.”

As to why there have been so many shark attacks at Ballina, Bucher says there 
are “many theories, none proven”. One of the most plausible is the lure of 
unusually high numbers of “bait fish” close to shore, a factor of warmer waters 
and more nutrients. “The fact that sharks, being at the top of the food chain, 
are around means the bigger marine ecosystem is functioning well and is quite 
healthy,” Bucher says. The bait fish will move on and with them the sharks, he 
says. What is not certain is when. Bucher says the “eco-net” is likely to prove 
safe for marine life, but he notes the expense and wonders if the money would 
not be better spent on things that could bring safety to more areas – including 
a boost to the surf lifesaving service, with its “faultless record over 150 
years” of never allowing a person under its watch to be taken by a shark.

In the meantime, the recent spate of attacks may drive usage of fledgling 
shark-repelling technology, which could change the future of surfing. The 
current market leader, an electromagnetic cable bySharkShield called a “Surf7” 
<https://sharkshield.com/shop/surf7/>, has been shown in testing to have had a 
“significant” deterrent effect on great white shark attacks on tuna bait, 
Bucher says.

While these could be eventually developed on a larger scale as a virtual 
shield for entire beaches, Bucher says it could be “more cost-effective to 
subsidise uptake among individual surfers, who are the ones who choose to take 
the risk”. Mayor Wright has paid A$900 of his own money to order one for 
Rogers. “When I get that,” Rogers says, “I’ll get out and go for it. I’ve got 
to win. I’ve got to get back in the water – properly.”

A day after we spoke, Rogers returned to the water at Lighthouse, the scene of 
Nakahara’s death, and noticed a large rock under the water. “I looked down and 
I saw a four-metre great white”; he steeled himself for a moment and looked 
down again. “Then I saw a rock.”
 