
Australia have clawed their way back to the top of the rugby league tree with 
an utterly dominant demolition of the Kiwis.

Record-breaking, historic, embarrassing. Choose your adjective, depending on 
your national persuasion. Wherever you come from, the facts are simple: the 
Kangarooscrushed New Zealand 34-8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/australia-beat-new-zealand-four-nations-title>
 at Anfield on Sunday to regain the Four Nations title they lost to the same 
opponent two years ago.

It was a result that emphasises the gulf Australia once again enjoys over the 
rest of the rugby league world, and underlines the sport’s biggest problem at 
international level: competitiveness. Once, it was a “big three” at the top of 
the international game in the shape of England, New Zealand and Australia. Now 
it is just the Kangaroos who reign supreme.

Australia comfortably beat New Zealand to seal Four Nations title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/australia-beat-new-zealand-four-nations-title>
Australia have beaten the Kiwis four times this year, with three of those 
victories completely convincing. England have not defeated Australia for 21 
years, and not for a decade as Great Britain. While the likes of Scotland, 
Samoa and Fiji are undoubtedly improving, the green and gold remain eerily 
distant at the top. It is an ominous sign a year out from a World Cup that will 
be held mostly in their own country.

The final was over at half-time, New Zealand staring down the barrel of a 24-0 
scoreline. Their brittle defence conceded four tries in the first half and most 
were incredibly soft. Australia’s opener, off the back of a scrum 10 metres 
from the try-line as Darius Boyd fed Blake Ferguson, was like a training move.

Australia could do no wrong and New Zealand were the architects of their own 
downfall. The Kangaroos were near-perfect and punished every mistake, big or 
small, made by the Kiwis. And the men from the Land of the Long White Cloud 
were in a generous mood, gifting the Aussies plenty of possession and scoring 
chances. There was seven errors in the first 20 minutes alone. The last thing 
Australia needed was a helping hand, but time and time again that is what they 
got.

In the second half New Zealand had a dig, Jordan Kahu bagging two tries. Kahu, 
standing in for the injured Roger Tuivasa-Sheck, has made a fist of his time in 
the full-back jumper. But you cannot give Australia a 28-0 lead and expect to 
win the game.

Serious questions need to be asked about David Kidwell’s tenure as New Zealand 
coach. He only got the job right before the Four Nations tournament, but he has 
now won just once in five games. Theyscraped by against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-new-zealand-four-nations-match-report>
 and wereheld to a draw with Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
, a result that made the history books.

You can’t see Kidwell being replaced 12 months out from a World Cup, but 
stranger things have happened. The Kiwis have surrendered theirFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> title and No1 world ranking 
ever so meekly. The decision to appoint a rookie coach who had never led an 
NRL, Super League or first-grade team before is a curious one. Yes, Kidwell 
learned under the likes of Craig Bellamy and Stephen Kearney, but the step up 
to Test level is huge.

New Zealand will be better, especially with several key players returning from 
injury. But their pride took a big hit at Anfield. A period of introspection is 
needed.

Australia, meanwhile, are harking back to their golden age, to the days of 
Lewis, Sterling, Langer, Johns, Tallis, Lockyer and the rest. This team are 
frighteningly good, playing with power and execution that is breathtaking. When 
they perform like this, and their opponents are so error-prone, there is only 
one outcome. Sadly, the 2017 World Cup is already looking like it could be a 
foregone conclusion.
 