
The Australian government should urgently review the Border Force Act’s 
secrecy provisions and improve protections for whistleblowers in the 
immigration detention system, aUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> special rapporteur has said.

The UN independent expert Michel Forst made the recommendation while launching 
a report that concludes that Australian governments have effectively gagged 
civil society advocates with secrecy laws, funding cuts and restrictive 
contracts that prevent them speaking up about human rights abuses.

Civil society groups including Save the Children have welcomed the preliminary 
findings, which Forst presented in Canberra on Tuesday after a two-week visit 
meeting human rights defenders.

Offshore detention whistleblower loses job after condemning 'atrocity' of camps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/offshore-detention-whistleblower-loses-job-after-condemning-atrocity-of-camps>
Forst said Australia had “hundreds of secrecy laws that unnecessarily restrict 
access to government information”, including the Border Force Act and state 
anti-protest laws. These formed part of “mounting evidence of a range of 
cumulative measures” putting pressure on civil society groups and increasing 
the disparity between Australia’s commitments to the rule of law and its 
practice.

In particular, Forst singled out secrecy in the immigration portfolio, changes 
denying environmental advocates legal standing, cuts to community legal centres 
and gag clauses preventing advocacy by non-government organisations receiving 
grants.


“The immigration department has gone to extraordinary lengths to curb 
whistleblowers, public servants or contractors, to share information in the 
public domain about serious human rights abuses in offshore detention centres,” 
he said.

The Border Force Act contains a section criminalising the making of an 
“unauthorised disclosure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/immigration-detention-doctors-challenge-border-force-acts-secrecy-clause-in-court>
 about conditions in detention camps, punishable by two years in prison.

Forst said aspects of the law that related to freedom of expression should be 
reviewed and the public interest disclosure framework “substantially 
strengthened … to ensure effective protection to whistleblowers”.

He said he was “astounded” at “frequent public vilification of rights 
defenders by senior government officials” to discredit and intimidate them. 
Media and businesspeople had “contributed to stigmatisation”, he said.

“Even the president of the Australian Human Rights Commission, Prof Gillian 
Triggs, faced government intimidation and public questioning of her integrity, 
impartiality and judgment afterthe commission’s inquiry into the child harm in 
immigration detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/01/human-rights-commission-president-gillian-triggs-hits-back-at-the-critics>
.”

It forces staff to face an invidious choice: to face prosecution, or speak out 
about egregious child rights violations
Mat Tinkler, Save the Children 
High-profile whistleblowers such as Dr Peter Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/05/-sp-australias-detention-regime-sets-out-to-make-asylum-seekers-suffer-says-chief-immigration-psychiatrist>
, the former head of mental health for International Health and Medical 
Services, andPaul Stevenson, a traumatologist who worked on Nauru and Manus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/20/the-worst-ive-seen-trauma-expert-lifts-lid-on-atrocity-of-australias-detention-regime>
, have faced heavy recriminations for speaking out about abuses in offshore 
detention.

They, and others, have lost jobs, been publicly vilified and, in some cases, 
had their communications monitored, and police investigations launched into 
their activities. Friends and colleagues have been telephoned and harassed by 
police, seeking information about private conversations.

Wilson Security even took the extraordinary step of hiring a private 
investigator to “aggressively” pursue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/wilson-security-hired-investigator-to-find-sources-of-stories-about-detention-centres>
 the sources of stories in the Guardian and other media outlets.

Forst said contractors such as Save the Children had been subjected to raids 
and egregious allegations of misconduct,removed from operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/15/save-the-children-workers-unfairly-fired-on-nauru-for-political-reasons-report>
 and had theirpersonal and professional reputations targeted by politicians and 
media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/peter-dutton-says-he-wont-be-defamed-by-guardian-and-abc-over-nauru-files>
.


He said many activists spoke of an atmosphere of fear and censorship, and 
several defenders preferred not to meet with him for fear of retaliation.

Access to justice was restricted by clauses preventing appeal against 
immigration decisions, and reported attempts by the government to grant 
officers in detention centres immunity from criminal and civil liability.

The head of policy and public advocacy at Save the Children Australia, Mat 
Tinkler, told Guardian Australia Forst’s conclusions were “absolutely right”.

“The regime of secrecy on offshore processing means Australian taxpayers don’t 
have the opportunity to judge [its] merits ... they don’t have all the facts on 
the table,” he said.

“It forces staff to face an invidious choice: to face prosecution, or speak 
out about egregious child rights violations when nothing is being done to 
remedy them.”


Tinkler welcomed the recommendation to review the Border Force Act, noting 
that although there had been no prosecutions Forst found it had a chilling 
effect.

He said Save the Children had “a well-documented history of being attacked for 
being the messenger of bad news”. It had resulted in the “absence of a 
rights-based organisation providing support to vulnerable people in detention”, 
Tinkler said.

Forst noted that the government had introduced a bill to prevent individuals 
or organisations that have engaged in environmental activities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/18/coalition-unexpectedly-pushes-on-with-green-lawfare-legislation-plan>
 in the past two years from challenging decisions under the Environment 
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act.

The government had used “vitriolic language” to describe those bringing legal 
challenges, calling them “radical green activists” engaged in “vigilante 
litigation”.

Forst complained of “drastic defunding of peak bodies” including the total 
defunding of the Environmental Defenders Offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/31/environmental-defenders-office-lashes-out-at-george-brandis-over-funding-cuts>
 and the National Congress of Australia’s First Peoples.

Gagging clauses prevented organisations that received government funding from 
“doing any form of advocacy, which is contrary to the principle of a free and 
democratic society”, he said.

An Australian Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Foundation campaigner, 
Basha Stasak, welcomed the UN rapporteur’s findings that environmental 
campaigners had been “vilified” for legitimate legal action.

She called on the government to “take on board the recommendations that 
environmental groups have a legitimate interest in decision making and in the 
courts” and withdraw amendments to deny them standing and deprive them of 
tax-deductible status.

Coalition to restrict green groups' right to challenge after Carmichael setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/18/coalition-to-remove-green-groups-right-to-challenge-after-carmichael-setback>
On Tuesday, Triggs told the Senate legal and constitutional affairs 
legislation committee that there had been “a real slipping back in our 
commitment to the rule of law and fundamental freedoms” in Australia.

Forst said the degradation of protections for civil society could be “reversed 
and improved” and called on the government to adopt a national action plan on 
human rights.

He will present a final report with his findings and recommendations to the UN 
human rights council in 2017. The government will be given an opportunity to 
comment on the factual aspects of the draft report before its final submission.

Forst’s visit will be followed by a visit from a special rapporteur on the 
human rights of migrants in November and in 2017, who will report on conditions 
in offshore detention on Manus Island and Nauru.
 