
An Australian court has found a Japanese whaling company guilty of “wilful 
contempt” of court for breaching an order to stop killing whales, and has fined 
it $1m.

On Wednesday, the Australian federal court heard an application by Humane 
Society International (HSI)as part of a decade-long legal battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/17/campaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight>
 against the company Kyodo Senpaku to stop Japan killing whales within 
Australia’s Antarctic whale sanctuary.

 HSI alleged that the company had several times breached a 2008 injunction to 
stop taking whales in the sanctuary.

It is the first finding of contempt of Australia’s Environment Protection and 
BiodiversityConservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> 
Act.

Campaigners try to halt Japan whale hunt in last-ditch legal fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/17/campaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight>
Federal court judge Jayne Jagot found Kyodo had engaged in all the alleged 
breaches.

“I accept in effect all of the written and oral submissions of the applicant 
which have been put before me today,” Jagot said.

“It is unnecessary for me to do more than provide a brief outline of the 
reasons why I am satisfied that the applicant has made out its case to the 
requisite standard of proof, being beyond reasonable doubt, that Kyodo has 
committed contempt of court as identified in the statement of charge.”

She said the public interest in the 2008 injunction, the need to deter Kyodo 
and others, and the fact there was some evidence the company “sought general 
commercial revenue” from the whaling had all contributed to the penalty.

“I am satisfied that a penalty of not less than $250,000 for each of the four 
whaling seasons should be imposed on Kyodo,” Jagot said, adding that the 
breaches were not merely technical, but were intentional and wilful acts.

“I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the actions of Kyodo fall 
within the category at least of wilful contempt. That is, there is no possible 
basis upon which an inference could be drawn that the breaches of the 2008 
injunctions were casual, accidental and unintentional,” she said.

“They were wilful actions of Kyodo, done I am satisfied in circumstances where 
Kyodo had knowledge of the orders and what they required.”

 Barrister Jeremy Kirk SC, appearing for HSI, told the court Kyodo committed 
“serious offences” by flouting the court order and should be fined “at least 
six figures”.

Kyodo has not appeared in any of the proceedings. 

The action was launched following indications that Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> – which does not recognise 
Australia’s sanctuary – would continue whaling operations in the Antarctic this 
year.

The HSI’s Australia director, Michael Kennedy, urged the Australian government 
to put pressure on Japan to comply with the order.

New legal move to prevent Japan from whale hunting in the Antarctic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/new-legal-move-to-prevent-japan-from-whale-hunting-in-antarctic>
“If whaling in Antarctic waters does resume this year, as we fear it will, and 
Kyodo continues to ignore the injunction, we ask that the Australian government 
raises this with the Japanese government to ensure that Australian laws for the 
protection of whales are observed.”

The executive director of the UK branch of HSI, Claire Bass, said: “The 
British government committed itself to opposing commercial whaling and now, as 
we enter high-level negotiations over trade deals and the UN, is the chance to 
prove it. Blatant defiance of international sanctions against whaling must be a 
political deal-breaker.”

In 2014, the International Court of Justice ruled that Japan must halt whaling 
in the Antarctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 after finding it was not conducted for scientific purposes.
 