
A 3km protection zone has been placed around a Welsh village after a backyard 
flock of chickens and ducks was found to have avian flu.

The birds were infected by avian influenza H5N8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/bird-flu-warning-keepers-told-to-keep-poultry-inside>
, which has previously been discovered on a turkey farm in Lincolnshire and a 
wild duck in Llanelli, south Wales.

Christianne Glossop, the chief veterinary officer for Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, said the small flock at a property in 
the village of Pontyberem, Carmarthenshire, had been culled.

Restrictions were already in place to try to stop the spread of avian flu 
across mainland Britain, with keepers ranging from large-scale farmers to those 
with a few chickens or ducks in their garden instructed to keep them away from 
wild birds.

The imposition of a protection zone around Pontyberem  
<http://gov.wales/docs/drah/publications/170103-avian-influenza-protection-zone-en.pdf>
means keepers will additionally have to keep records of visitors and of the 
movement of all poultry and eggs. A 10km surveillance zone has also been 
introduced.

Glossop said: “It is extremely important that birdkeepers practise the very 
highest levels of biosecurity. Even when birds are housed there remains a risk 
of infection and keepers of poultry and other captive birds should ensure every 
effort is made to prevent contact with wild birds. The movement of poultry 
should be minimised, and clothing and equipment should always be disinfected.”

She added: “If you are concerned about the health of your birds you should 
seek advice from your veterinary surgeon. If you suspect that your birds are 
showing signs of the disease, you should immediately report it to your local 
animal and plant health agency office.”

The Welsh government’s cabinet secretary for the environment and rural 
affairs, Lesley Griffiths, said: “This case ofavian influenza H5N8 
<http://gov.wales/topics/environmentcountryside/ahw/disease/avianflu/?lang=en> 
in a backyard flock near Pontyberem in Carmarthenshire follows the findings of 
infection in wild birds and a confirmed case in Lincolnshire.

“It serves to reinforce the need for all birdkeepers, particularly backyard 
flock keepers, to adhere to the requirements set out in the prevention zone, 
remain vigilant for signs of disease and practise good biosecurity at all 
times.”

The Welsh government said the advice from Public Health Wales (PHW) was that 
the risk to public health from the virus was very low and the Food Standards 
Agency had made clear that avian flu did not pose a food safety risk for UK 
consumers. It said thoroughly cooked poultry and poultry products, including 
eggs, were safe to eat.

 * Members of the public are encouraged to report dead wild waterfowl (swans, 
geese or ducks) or gulls, or five or more dead wild birds of other species in 
the same location, to the Defra helpline on 03459 335577.  