
Joseph Parker is in danger of being upstaged at his own weigh-in. 
Six-foot-four and 108kg of muscle with boxing skills and knockout power to 
match, the 23-year-old heavyweight has the boxing world at his feet. Already a 
huge star in his native New Zealand, he’s not used to sharing the limelight.

Still, when it comes to public speaking he’s no match for the Hon. Tuilaepa 
Fatialofa Lupesoliai Dr Sailele Malielegaoi, Samoa’s prime minister, foreign 
minister and minister of tourism (and Parker’s cousin).

The PM, Parker, his entourage, his opponent, the Samoan police band, Miss 
Samoa, the Samoan AmateurBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
Association, the boys of Avele and Don Bosco Colleges, 13 heavily tattooed 
ceremonial guards in traditional uniform, a scattering of journalists from New 
Zealand and several dozen members of the public are here in the Samoan capital 
Apia on the day before the improbably named Burger King Rumble in Paradise (as 
yet there are no Burger King franchises in Samoa).

The fight, due to take place at the Faleata Sports Complex, will be the 
biggest boxing match Samoa has ever hosted. The stated aim of the promotion is 
to celebrate Parker’s Samoan heritage, though of course the exotic locale is a 
handy selling point for a bout he’s expected to win easily.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85995bf977b5fa6a31094ba7e7e48a446bab5282%2F107_0_2773_1666%2F2773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker's%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker%27s%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85995bf977b5fa6a31094ba7e7e48a446bab5282%2F107_0_2773_1666%2F2773.jpg>
 Ceremonial guards parade through Apia ahead of Parker during the build up to 
the fight. Photograph: Alex McClintock 
Parker’s opponent is Jason Bergman, a bulky Pennsylvanian southpaw with big, 
slate blue eyes and a slight stutter. He’s won 15 of his last 17 fights, and 
says his 11 losses are the result of being mismanaged early in his career. He’s 
back on track with a new trainer, he says, and considers himself as much of a 
prospect as Parker. Being a lefty could help: Parker has never faced one 
before. Still, it’s the kind of fight the young man from South Auckland needs 
to win if he’s to achieve the kind of success many believe he’s capable of.

Whatever the merits of the bout itself, Samoa is in the grips of Parker mania. 
The country normally has two religions – rugby and, well, religion – but boxing 
seems to have displaced the game they play in heaven for the week.

The Samoa Observer is basically wall-to-wall Parker coverage (‘Hyundai Backs 
Rumble In Paradise!’), and stepping off the plane 12 hours before the weigh-in, 
the first question I’m asked by a smiling immigration official is whether I’m 
here for the fight. At customs it’s the same drill, with an added “maybe see 
you there!”

George Groves: ‘My biological clock is ticking – I need to win a world title’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/george-groves-boxing-world-title-fights>
The weigh-in begins with a parade through Apia, and now the visitors sit on 
stage in front of the Government Buildings, which, excluding dozens of church 
spires, are the only structures in Apia that rise above three or four storeys.

After a long prayer led by a white-shirted reverend of the Congregational 
church, the PM begins his remarks: “Members of the diplomatic corps, 
distinguished guests, Buttabean and The Batman…”

The Buttabean in question is “The Brown Buttabean”, AKA David Letele, a former 
supermarket owner turned warm-up act for Parker who has lost 88kg during his 
less-than-fully-serious 11-bout boxing career. He sits a few seats down from 
Parker on stage, dressed as if he’s the star of the show, sneering away behind 
aviator sunglasses. The Batman is Silivelio Pekepo-Tevagaa, a father of seven 
who called out Buttabean on Facebook.

The prime minister presses on, and an umbrella is brought in to protect 
Bergman’s shaved head as the tropical sun rises in the morning sky. “The nation 
will be watching the match tomorrow with much excitement and also hoping that 
it will not be too cruel for Mr Jason Bergman,” says Tuilaepa, who while still 
PM represented Samoa in archery at the 2007 Pacific Games, winning a silver 
medal.

“We are most grateful for Jason Bergman for agreeing to come to the only 
paradise in the Pacific for a holiday.”

The entire speech is then delivered in Samoan, receiving a suspiciously 
greater number of laughs than it did in English. Parker performs translation 
services for his team and later the media: the PM claims “carrying lots of 
coconuts” is the secret behind Parker’s impressive jab.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc07aaeb651fef98530c1d8d63f002657c2e5e00b%2F0_9_1024_751%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker's%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker%27s%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc07aaeb651fef98530c1d8d63f002657c2e5e00b%2F0_9_1024_751%2F1024.jpg>
 Parker (topless, right) and Bergman (topless, left) are joined after the 
weigh-in by Kevin Barry (far right) pose with the Samoan prime minister 
(centre). Photograph: Alex McClintock 
Next up is Parker’s effusive trainer Kevin Barry, who controversially defeated 
Evander Holyfield at the 1984 Olympics and at 56 retains the physique of a 
light heavyweight. Uncharacteristically, he stumbles and accidentally refers to 
the fight as the Rumble in the Jungle.

The impression of a cheerfully ersatz version of heavyweight battles past is 
reinforced by the presence of the improbably dark-haired commentator Bob “The 
Colonel” Sheridan, who called both the Rumble in the Jungle and the Thrilla in 
Manila. “Parker is one of the great young heavyweights I’ve ever seen, and I’ve 
seen ’em all: Foreman, Norton, Holmes, and of course Muhammad Ali,” he spruiks.

The weigh-in itself is largely ceremonial since heavyweight is a division with 
no upper limit (perhaps fortuitously: in this instance the actual weighing is 
done on nothing more precise than a set of bathroom scales). Parker and Bergman 
weigh in at 108 and 116kg respectively. Bergman, dressed in a purple shirt and 
cargo shorts, says he’s going shock the nation.

As the ceremony concludes, Parker is pulled into a whirling mob of children 
set on selfies with the champ. At one stage the stairs onto the stage are in 
danger of collapsing. Eventually Parker, still bare-chested from the weigh-in, 
extricates himself and pulls on a polo shirt. His huge hands and broad neck 
belie a polite, shy and at times goofily enthusiastic manner that’s a little 
hard to reconcile with the poise and destructive force he exhibits in the ring.

“That was so cool! I was in the pickup, listening to everything that was 
happening and seeing it all, I had to take a moment just to absorb it all,” he 
says. “It was sort of unreal, it was crazy. The prime minister was speaking, 
but you could see all the eyes looking over every time he said my name so I 
decided to put on glasses.”

Parker might be needing those sunnies; his backers hope he will fight for a 
world title this year or next. But if he feels the weight of the hopes pinned 
on his muscular shoulders, he doesn’t show it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86de8433cc57053fef7905614737c10140acddf%2F0_118_2695_1625%2F2695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker's%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker%27s%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86de8433cc57053fef7905614737c10140acddf%2F0_118_2695_1625%2F2695.jpg>
 Parker poses for photos with local kids during the build up to the fight. 
Photograph: Alex McClintock 
With 36 hours to kill before the fight, everyone retreats to the Parker camp’s 
base of operations, a luxury hotel 45 minutes out of town. The lobby is 
dominated by a ring made from slinging rope around the roof pillars, but with 
no more training to do it lies empty.

Almost everyone at the sprawling, low-slung resort is there for the fight: 
boxers, trainers, officials, Parker’s friends and family, unidentified boxing 
types and a New Zealand socialite with long turquoise nails. The hotel’s other 
guests regard the fight crowd with quiet bewilderment.

It’s 30C and so humid your glasses fog up instantly when you leave your room. 
There’s nothing to do but lie by the pool, so that’s what everyone does. Parker 
talks with his cousins and friends in the shade of a large tree nearby. On the 
day of the fight he gets an outdoor haircut.

I decide to rent a car and drive around Upolu, the island we’re on. Even with 
the speed limit set at 50km/h, it only takes a few hours to travel the length 
of the island.

Wherever space allows there’s a football field (sometimes bisected by a road 
where it doesn’t), often with goals made of stripped tree trunks. “David Lemi’s 
House” proclaims a small billboard out the front of a home presumably owned by 
the national team winger.

It’s not all rugby, though. Yellow signs declare Faleatiu “David Tua Village” 
in honour of the former heavyweight title contender, who grew up there before 
leaving for NZ. Another village, Nofoalii, is lined with Samoan and All Black 
flags in honour of Parker. They’ve erected a ring in themalae, or village 
common, complete with a cardboard cut-out of Parker having his hand raised in 
victory.

I stop to take a photo, but when I return to the car it won’t start. The 
engine doesn’t even turn over. The fights start in an hour and I’m starting to 
sweat. Much to my embarrassment, a crowd begins to gather – first small 
children, then men and women. Though I’m bright red, everyone introduces 
themselves and wants to know where I’m from and if I’m there for the fight.

Two big dudes ask me to pop the hood. Within a minute they deduce that the 
battery has a loose coupling. Ten seconds later I turn the key and the car 
starts. More handshakes, more smiles and waves goodbye. Generally you’re meant 
to avoid stereotypes, but in the case of Samoans being extraordinarily friendly 
I guess I’ll have to make an exception.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36b55b30c4e07f7d9448ca83a19eba3b85125bd9%2F0_0_2394_1596%2F2394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker's%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20boxer%20Joseph%20Parker%27s%20Rumble%20in%20Paradise%20thrills%20Samoa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Faway-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36b55b30c4e07f7d9448ca83a19eba3b85125bd9%2F0_0_2394_1596%2F2394.jpg>
 Cardboard cut-outs seen en route from Parker’s hotel to the arena. Photograph: 
Alex McClintock 
So I actually make it to the Faleata Sports Complex, a besser block box 
nestled beneath the wet volcanic hills that rise into the clouds south of Apia. 
Inside, 2,000 bodies add to the heat of the tropical evening while a few 
household air-conditioning units sigh impotently.

The ring announcer, dressed in a velvet smoking jacket, must suffer terribly. 
So too Miss Samoa, who tonight is the sole ring card girl, a job often reserved 
for local strippers in less religious parts of the world. Dressed in a 
full-length white and blue dress and wedges, she heroically climbs the stairs 
to the ring and struggles between the ropes dozens of times. By the end of the 
night she may as well have gone 12 rounds.

Former All Black Inga Tuigamala’s sons win two of the warm-up bouts. Lika, 15, 
is six-foot-three and weighs 117kg. He comes up into the stands to chat to the 
girls sitting in front of me. I shake his hand, which is like a joint of lamb. 
Bubba, 23, is even bigger.

The crowd seem to enjoy the undercard, though laughter is their main way of 
showing appreciation. Sometimes they chuckle when a boxer misses a punch, but 
for the most part it’s not entirely clear to me what the joke is, at least 
until the chief supporting bout.

Introduced as “the sexiest man in the world”, The Brown Buttabean initially 
struggles to adjust to The Batman’s tactic of running at him chest-first, 
windmilling. He gets used to it in round two, though, and proceeds to nail the 
caped crusader for the rest of the fight, winning a decision. Frankly it’s 
amazing The Batman managed to stay upright. “I’ve got a coconut head, bro,” he 
says later.

After the anthems (a stunning duet featuring Parker’s uncle), Bergman jogs out 
to the strains of There’s No Easy Way Out from the soundtrack toRocky IV, 
receiving scattered boos. Whatever song Parker comes out to, it’s not audible. 
The crowd goes berserk. He stands atop the ramp that leads from the dressing 
rooms and shadowboxes, soaking it up, pumping his fist and walking to the ring.

Then, with all the formalities out of the way, the instructions given, the 
seconds out of the ring and the bell rung, Parker begins to stalk his foe. 
Bergman circles clockwise, going against the traditional wisdom that a southpaw 
should keep his right foot on the outside of his opponent’s left.

Parker flicks his jab, Bergman pats it down with his right. Bergman moves, 
Parker follows. For 30 seconds they circle each other like this until Parker 
traps Bergman in a neutral corner and lunges – straight into a big left hand. 
It’s hard to tell who’s more stunned, Parker, Bergman or the crowd. The New 
Zealander pauses for a second and smiles bashfully. The American puffs out his 
chest.

But that punch turns out to be the high water mark for Bergman. He quickly 
goes into a shell, gloves up around his ears. In round two Parker slices a left 
hook between his gloves, sending him to the canvas, but is too cautious to 
close the show right there.

Bergman wants to move with a grace that his hulking body won’t allow. He eats 
more and more shots as the rounds progress. When he can’t find a target 
upstairs, Parker batters his body mercilessly. The crowd chants Parker’s name.

By the seventh round Bergman has a mouse under his left eye. Parker 
impatiently rips a left hook into his flank, dropping him to a knee. The 
American looks to his corner – but they’re either braver than he is or don’t 
get the hint.

Parker, now in full flight, repeats the trick in the eighth. Bergman falls to 
all fours but again gets up when no white towel is forthcoming. The referee has 
seen enough, though, and waves it off.

The cardboard cut-out was right: Parker’s hand gets raised. Two thousand 
Samoans applaud and begin to file out into the warm night. “He was the better 
fighter tonight,” says Bergman, forlorn but obviously getting the hand of 
athlete-speak. “I’ll be back. I’ll definitely be back. The boxing world has not 
seen the end of Jason Bergman.”

Samoa has, though. He leaves straight from the dressing room to the airport 
for a 4am flight.

Parker, meanwhile, turns 24 today and is keen to unwind. “I’m going to get a 
tan. I was working on my tan earlier in the week and I got a bit red. I have to 
put on some lotion before I get back in the sun,” he says cheerfully, and 
seemingly for his own amusement.

 The rest won’t last long, though. Parker already has a fight booked for April 
in Christchurch. The Burger King Road To The Title™ continues.

Alex McClintock travelled to Samoa courtesy of Duco Events, Joseph Parker’s 
promoter.
 