
The first colony of wild beavers to inhabit an English river for around 400 
years has expanded.

One of the female beavers on the River Otter in Devon has given birth to at 
least two – and possibly as many as four – kits.

Retired environmental scientist and keen beaver watcher Tom Buckley captured 
the vivid footage of two kits possibly taking their first swim. In one clip the 
mother beaver appears to be giving the kit a tour of the river, holding the 
young animal carefully in her jaws. In a second, a young beaver appears not to 
be too keen on swimming and heads speedily back to the bank.

Wild beavers seen in England for first time in centuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
Buckley said: “When I saw these new born baby beavers I was totally 
overwhelmed and thought it must be a miracle. My first sighting of this year’s 
new born kits was when I saw their mother swimming with one of them in her 
mouth to an area nearby where their father was waiting to greet them.

“One of the kits, however, seemed extremely unhappy to be out in the big wide 
world and as soon as its mother let it go it rushed back to its burrow. Not 
surprising really – the world can be a very scary place. This was possibly 
their first experience of what lies outside of their burrow.”

A population of beavers was first confirmed on the River Otter in February 2014
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
. This was the first time that breeding beavers were known to be living in the 
English countryside in as much as 400 years.

In summer 2014 the department for environment, food and rural affairs 
expressed its intention to remove the animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/30/first-england-beavers-in-centuries-captured>
, citing fears that they might be carrying a disease.

Devon Wildlife Trust  <http://www.devonwildlifetrust.org>built a partnership 
of supportive local landowners, academic institutions and beaver veterinary and 
management experts to suggest creating a wild beaver monitoring project.

It captured the beavers to check if they were healthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/11/beavers-allowed-to-live-wild-in-england-after-being-confirmed-disease-free>
 and re-released them into the wild. The trust now believes there are at least 
11 beavers in the river – including the two babies – but believes there could 
be as many as 15.

Devon Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust’s Mark 
Elliott said: “We are thrilled that the beavers have bred. The baby kits appear 
fit and healthy and the adults seem as if they are taking their parenting 
responsibilities very seriously. It tells us that the beavers are very much at 
home in this corner of Devon.

“The slowly expanding population of these wild animals will help us to gain 
valuable insights into beavers and their environment – both in terms of animal 
behaviour and any benefits and effects on the surrounding river system.”

Rewilding Britain: bringing wolves, bears and beavers back to the land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/19/-sp-rewilding-large-species-britain-wolves-bears>
Elliott also asked people not to disturb the beavers. “The beavers have proved 
enormously popular with local people and we understand that many will now want 
to see the kits for themselves. But like all new parents, the beavers will need 
a bit of space and peace at this time. So we ask that visitors take care not to 
disturb them. This means remaining on public footpaths, keeping a respectful 
distance from them, and keeping dogs under close control, especially when near 
the river.”

He said that beavers give birth to an average of three kits and not all kits 
would make it to adulthood, so an expansion of the River Otter beaver 
population would be steady rather than rapid.
 