
An international award for emerging artists has been launched by the Baltic 
Gateshead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/the-northerner/2011/oct/20/baltic-sage-gateshead-angel-of-the-north>
, offering four artists a £30,000 commission and a 13-week exhibition.

There are a lot of arts prizes in the UK but Sarah Munro, the Baltic’s director
 <http://www.balticmill.com/>, said its biennial award offered something 
different, not least that it would be the first in the country selected solely 
by artists.

The idea is that four internationally established artists each choose an 
emerging artist who will be then mentored as they create new work for an 
exhibition opening on 30 June 2017.

They will be chosen with no restrictions on age, nationality or what media 
they work in. Each will then be given £25,000 to create the work and a £5,000 
artist fee. Significantly, there will be no winner or awards ceremony.

“There will be a commitment to talent development and a dialogue with our 
audiences at a local, national and international level,” said Munro. “Although 
people say there are more prizes there do seem to be fewer opportunities for 
really significantly supporting artists at that emerging stage.”

The judges for the first year are Monica Bonvicini 
<http://monicabonvicini.net/>, Lorna Simpson <http://www.lsimpsonstudio.com/>, 
Pedro Cabrita Reis <http://palazzofalier.pedrocabritareis.com/> and Mike Nelson 
<http://www.nelsonfinearts.com/>.

Nelson said it felt like there were fewer nurturing and mentoring 
opportunities for emerging artists. “Opportunities for less well-known artists 
to develop and execute a significant commission are rare,” he said. “Especially 
for those not within a certain accepted and validated grouping.”

Bonvicini, who opens her new exhibition at Baltic next week 
<http://www.balticmill.com/whats-on/exhibitions/monica-bonvicini>, said the 
award was about providing support at an often crucial stage of an artist’s 
career. “The opportunity for a rising artist to create a commission for an 
international institution makes this an exceptional programme,” she added.

The Baltic announced the prize along with a 2017-18 programme, which will 
include solo exhibitions for Rodney Graham, Holly Hendry, Jasmina Cibic and 
Serena Korda. There will also be a group exhibition exploring the continuing 
migrant crisis called Disappearance at Sea (Mare Nostrum). It opens in January.
 