
So has the glamour really gone? Last week the hallowed French film star 
Catherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/13/catherine-deneuve-social-media-has-stopped-people-dreaming-about-stars>
 claimed it was not possible for modern audiences “to dream any more” about the 
stars on the screen. “Being a star entails glamour and secrecy,” she said in 
Cannes. “You have to keep something for yourself. You shouldn’t display 
everything of your private life. You see so many pictures, so many images – 
it’s hard to keep some degree of mystery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431794104798%2Ffcba94c6-faa0-468e-a581-0f133c7d628c-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ban%20on%20selfies%20helps%20Cannes%20hold%20on%20to%20that%20traditional%20mystique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ban%20on%20selfies%20helps%20Cannes%20hold%20on%20to%20that%20traditional%20mystique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431794104798%2Ffcba94c6-faa0-468e-a581-0f133c7d628c-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Cate Blanchett caused a sensation at Cannes. Photograph: Gabriel 
Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
Cate Blanchett probably has some sympathy with Deneuve’s lament. Her new film 
Carol, a lesbian love story based on the 1952 Patricia Highsmith novelThe Price 
of Salt <http://www.amazon.co.uk/books/dp/1469971879>, has its premiere on 
Sunday night and the Oscar-winning actress, who stars alongside Rooney Mara, is 
due to make her appearance in front of the Palais du Festival with her co-star.

According to the film’s director, Todd Haynes, having both actresses together 
on the red carpet for the launch is of “huge value” to his film – a difficult 
sell to wider audiences because of the lesbian theme. But for Blanchett the 
association with Carol may have already become uncomfortably close. In the 
runup to the festival, when Blanchett was asked if she had had same-sex 
relationships before, the married mother of four simply replied: “Yes, many 
times.” Cue a media feeding frenzy.

But for one of the film’s producers, Briton Stephen Woolley, the focus on the 
stars is wholly positive. “Stars have always had enormous influence. People can 
be snobbish about them, but it is what we all love really. And Cate is 
fantastic because she makes indie films and big Hollywood productions. Having 
her here means that the film will reach a wider audience.”

Deneuve identified the rise of social media as one of the prime reasons for 
the loss of mystique. For Gavin Smith, editor of New York’s Film Comment, the 
proliferation of stories, blogs, images and tweets is altering the equilibrium 
of the star system, but it still exists.

“Some stars keep quiet and others, like James Franco, tweet a lot. Twitter and 
the internet have created a lot of micro-stars,” he said. “They are still 
there, though the constellation is more populous and some may not last as long. 
Careers are measured by the number of followers they have.”

As the star debate swept the Croisette, festival director Thierry Frémaux 
decreed an impromptu ban on “selfies”, arguing: “You never look as ugly as you 
do in a selfie.”

Perhaps more than anywhere, Cannes thrives in direct relation to the amount of 
old world glamour it can summon up against the forces of the modern world.

Luckily for Frémaux, the public is still under Cannes’s spell, with tourists 
snapping themselves in front of the festival’s Palme d’Or logo and even taking 
screen grabs inside the cinemas. Even in the first few days of the festival, 
female Hollywood stars have shone on the red carpet as much, if not more, than 
they have on screen, making the most of their moment of self-promotion and 
glamour.

Emma Stone, who has a lead role in Woody Allen’s new film Irrational Man 
<http://www.hitfix.com/in-contention/review-emma-stone-does-her-best-to-bring-woody-allens-irrational-man-to-life>
, andRachel Weisz, whose new film, The Lobster 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/festivals/the-lobster-review-colin-farrell-rachel-weisz-1201496633/>
, also had its premiere on Friday, both knew how to play their press 
conferences. A touch of stylish reserve, coupled with a flash of wit – Stone 
teased Allen about his lack of guidance on the last scene of the film and Weisz 
teased her director, Yorgos Lanthimos, about the suggestion that his 
inspiration came from an episode of the sitcomFriends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431794251244%2Fec29e631-dffa-4f40-85d5-f3abb597393e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ban%20on%20selfies%20helps%20Cannes%20hold%20on%20to%20that%20traditional%20mystique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ban%20on%20selfies%20helps%20Cannes%20hold%20on%20to%20that%20traditional%20mystique&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ffilm-star-glamour-cannes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431794251244%2Fec29e631-dffa-4f40-85d5-f3abb597393e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Catherine Deneuve and Roman Polanski at Cannes Film Festival in 1965. 
Photograph: Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images 
The glamour quotient on the Cannes jury this year is filled by British actress 
Sienna Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sienna-miller>. She has 
expressed her honour at getting the prestigious role, but her weight as a 
creative expert was undermined at a press conference when a fellow juror, 
musician Rokia Traoré, was described as “beautiful enough to be an actress”.

Looks clearly remain a central part of the job description of a star at Cannes 
2015, whether it is themodel Miranda Kerr 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3081772/Miranda-Kerr-laps-attention-showcases-supermodel-figure-glitzy-black-skirt-ice-cream-launch-Cannes-Film-Festival.html>
 launching a new ice-cream on the beach or Isabella Rossellini, star of 
independent foreign cinema, being brought up short by the huge image of her 
mother, Ingrid Bergman, on this year’s festival poster. “Yesterday, as I was 
walking up the red carpet, with Mama enormous, I got up to Thierry Frémaux. I 
said ‘Thierry, I don’t miss her any more. Thirty years since she died, she’s so 
present. It’s wonderful,’” she said.

Other screen idols are doing a clever job in avoiding the over-exposure of 
which Deneuve warns. A leading Hollywood producer spoke admiringly of the way 
Leonardo DiCaprio handles his image. “The thing is not to do too much in the 
public eye and Leo understands this. He keeps himself private and then suddenly 
he is everywhere when he needs to be,” he said.

He didn’t think the selfie had changed things, but rather TV shows and 
websites devoted to unbuttoning the stars in public. Casting directors still 
need A-listers to open films: these are actors whom “the screen loves” and who 
have a professional approach to fame.

With the timing of the premiere of The Lobster reportedly dictated by the 
availability of its French star, Léa Seydoux – shortly after Charlize Theron, 
in town for Mad Max, chose the Cannes red carpet to appear arm in arm with Sean 
Penn – both the personal and professional power of stardom is clearly in 
evidence. Pace Deneuve, reports of the death of the film star may have been 
exaggerated.
 