
There was fist-pumping and toothpick-grinning, accusations of diving and 
declarations of loyalty, while in the background shady businessmen looked on 
with bulging pockets. No, not the highlights ofKate Winslet's Oscars party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, but this weekend's Ligue 1 action, 
as Lyon extended their lead at the top to six points afterbeating Nancy 2-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKp0Jo5Gkw8> and Paris Saint-Germain, Bordeaux 
and Marseille all failed to win.

As a supporting cast, those three are turning into a rum bunch, not that Lyon 
coachClaude Puel 
<http://images.askmen.com/specials/2007_top_49/men/steve_carell.jpg> seems too 
bothered. He was able to rest Fabio Grosso, Juninho, Ederson and Karim Benzema 
before Barcelona come to Stade Gerland on Tuesday night, and after goalkeeper 
Hugo Lloris saved Youssouf Hadji's second-half penalty, substitute Benzema 
secured the win with a neat feint and shot late on. Cue Puel's pumped-fist 
celebration.

The Barcelona game has come at a good time for the champions. The 
dressing-room problems revealed by Cris, Juninho and Sidney Govou, who said 
that team spirit was poor and the side lacked leaders (at least they could 
agree on something), have passed after the players and Puel had it out 
together. The team are no longer as reliant on Juninho and Benzema as they 
were, and other players, such as Jean II Makoun and Ederson, have become more 
influential.

Ederson 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090220_085648_ederson-a-trouve-sa-place.html>
, a summer signing from Nice, has scored three in his last five games, compared 
to one in his first 19. "I wasn't bad in my first six months here but I lacked 
belief and I have that now. Everyone says I'm here to succeed Juni but I'm 
not," said the Brazilian.

"I won't think about my future until after the game but I think we can pull 
off a surprise against Barcelona," said Benzema, who explained that his 12 
goals this season (as opposed to 16 this time last year) are down to Puel's 
more defensive tactics. He is pretty much on his own with that view, given 
Lyon's continuing problems at full-back, where John Mensah (a centre-back 
playing at right-back) and Grosso (well, he's just Grosso) will be up against 
Thierry Henry and Lionel Messi.

"It's one thing keeping clean sheets against Nancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> and Grenoble but against 
Barcelona, it's a different matter," said Xavier Cerf of Lyon's official 
magazine Allez Lyon. "It will be impossible for Lyon to get past Barcelona." 
France Football's Marc Beaugé is a bit more positive. "Lyon are in better form 
than Barcelona, but have a much weaker team, so you have to ask what's more 
important in a match: form, or quality?

"I think it's quality. Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> 
players are not blind: they know it will be hard, but they have a confidence 
that was not there a month ago, so it might be close."

Lyon's best chance might be if Benzema played up front alongside Fred (the 
pair have scored seven goals between them in Europe this season) but that's not 
going to happen: Lyon were meant to terminate the Brazilian's contract at the 
weekend to allow him to move to Fluminense, but Fred, still demanding that he 
is paid his bonuses in full, did not turn up to sign the papers. "It's unreal, 
it goes beyond human behaviour, how he's treating the club and his team-mates," 
fumed president Jean-Michel Aulas.

At least Aulas would have been cheered by the failures of the chasing pack: 
Marseille were booed off following agoalless draw at home to Le Mans 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFgc88AkJ1Y>, as Eric Gerets's failure with 
Hatem Ben Arfa, still on the bench, overshadows their season. This was their 
fifth clean sheet in six, and the return of Julien Rodriguez, described by one 
local reporter as "like Nemanja Vidic but with bigger thighs", has bolstered 
the defence. Now it's the attack that needs help, although at least Mamadou 
Niang is now back from injury. Mathieu Valbuena annoyed visiting coach Daniel 
Jeandupeux with his diving. "If a player dives five times outside the box and 
no foul is given," said Jeandupeux, "he loses credibility when he goes down in 
the area looking for a penalty."

Bordeaux needed a last-minute equaliser to save their blushes in the 1-1 draw 
at Alain Perrin's improving Saint-Etienne 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UWXyinC6l8o> – cue Laurent Blanc with the 
toothpick cameo – while PSG's goalless game with Grenoble was notable for 
Stéphane Sessegnon, the head-butting villain last week, being on the 
receiving-end of similar treatment from Serbian defender Milivoje Vitakic. Both 
men will be up before the disciplinary committee next week.Le Journal du 
Dimanche 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/cmc/sport/200908/psg-la-mission-secrete-de-villeneuve_189400.html>
, meanwhile, reported that PSG's former chairman Charles Villeneuve still owns 
the mandate to sell the club to investors in the Middle East, and that he spoke 
to Abu Dhabi United Group before they bought Manchester City.

Lille continued their impressive rise up the table after beating Monaco 2-1 
<http://soccernewsdaily.blogspot.com/2009/02/lille-1-0-monaco-video-highlights-ligue.html>
 and are now just three points behind PSG in second. Coach Rudi Garcia, in his 
first season there, has a dominant midfield marshalled by Rio Mavuba, back from 
his disastrous spell at Villarreal. "This move has re-started my career," said 
Mavuba. On either side of him, Michel Bastos and Ludovic Obraniak have shared 
17 goals between them and it's just as well that Lille have one of the best 
midfields in France, given that their four strikers have managed a combined 
seven goals.

The next problem for the coach will be how to keep those outstanding 
midfielders next season. "At the moment, we're just happy to stay in the 
background as let's be honest, Lyon are on a different level to us," said 
Garcia, once named by Raymond Domenech as his favouriteLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> boss (but don't hold that 
against him).

Lille may not be as good as Lyon but on current form they're not far behind 
Marseille and Bordeaux, and could yet sneak into third place. With movie mogul
Michel Seydoux 
<http://www.losc.fr/~loscv2/users/organigramme/Biographie_de_Michel_Seydoux/Biographie_de_Michel_Seydoux.inc/070619MichelSeydoux3.jpg>
, producer ofCyrano de Bergerac 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099334/plotsummary>, still pulling the strings in 
the background, it would be his perfect season finale.

But could even a Seydoux script have Lyon beat Barcelona tonight? "We have 
been preparing for Barcelona for a long time, it's not like the game has just 
come into view," said Puel. Whether his team can overcome the odds to become 
the latest successfulSlumdog Mill-Lyon-aires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/11/slumdog-millionaire-review-danny-boyle>
 remains to be seen.

Results, Week 25: Nancy 0-2 Lyon, Grenoble 0-0 PSG, Toulouse 0-0 Valenciennes, 
Lorient 1-2 Sochaux, Le Havre 1-2 Auxerre, Nantes 1-1 Caen, Nice 0-1 Rennes,
Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> 0-0 Le Mans, 
Saint-Etienne 1-1 Bordeaux, Lille 2-1 Monaco
 