
China’s leaders have been accused of delivering a calculated diplomatic snub to
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> after the US 
president was not provided with a staircase to leave his plane during his 
chaotic arrival in Hangzhou before the start of the G20.

Chinese authorities have rolled out the red carpet for leaders including 
India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://twitter.com/G20_China/status/772124305970913280>, the Russian 
president, Vladimir Putin 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-09/03/c_135658107.htm>, the South 
Korean president, Park Geun-hye 
<https://twitter.com/G20_China/status/772121087840747520>, Brazil’s president, 
Michel Temer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ConMzKNYuN4>, and the British 
prime minister, Theresa May 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/photo/2016-09/04/c_135658722_2.htm>, who 
touched down on Sunday morning.


But the leader of the world’s largest economy, who is on his final tour of 
Asia, was forced to disembark from Air Force One through a little-used exit in 
the plane’s belly after no rolling staircase was provided when he landed in the 
eastern Chinese city on Saturday afternoon.

Breakthrough as US and China agree to ratify Paris climate deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
When Obama did find his way on to a red carpet on the tarmac below there were 
heated altercations between US and Chinese officials 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-g20-china-hangzhou-usa-idUSKCN1190AT>, with 
one Chinese official caught on video shouting: “This is our country! This is 
our airport!”

“The reception that President Obama and his staff got when they arrived here 
Saturday afternoon was bruising, even by Chinese standards,”the New York Times 
reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/04/world/asia/obama-xi-staff-shouting-match.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
.

Jorge Guajardo, Mexico’s former ambassador to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, said he was convinced Obama’s 
treatment was part of a calculated snub.

“These things do not happen by mistake. Not with the Chinese,” Guajardo, who 
hosted presidents Enrique Peña Nieto and Felipe Calderón during his time in 
Beijing, told the Guardian.

“I’ve dealt with the Chinese for six years. I’ve done these visits. I took Xi 
Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> to Mexico. I received 
two Mexican presidents in China. I know exactly how these things get worked 
out. It’s down to the last detail in everything. It’s not a mistake. It’s not.”

Guajardo added: “It’s a snub. It’s a way of saying: ‘You know, you’re not that 
special to us.’ It’s part of the new Chinese arrogance. It’s part of stirring 
up Chinese nationalism. It’s part of saying: ‘China stands up to the 
superpower.’ It’s part of saying: ‘And by the way, you’re just someone else to 
us.’ It works very well with the local audience.

“Why [did it happen]?” the former diplomat, who was ambassador from 2007 until 
2013, added. “I guess it is part of Xi Jinping playing the nationalist card. 
That’s my guess.”

Bill Bishop, a China expert whose Sinocism newsletter <https://sinocism.com/> 
tracks the country’s political scene, agreed that Obama’s welcome looked 
suspiciously like a deliberate slight intended “to make the Americans look 
diminished and weak”.


“It sure looks like a straight-up snub,” Bishop said. “This clearly plays very 
much into the [idea]: ‘Look, we can make the American president go out of the 
ass of the plane.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13476ea2748fda3cf0b71497bd882ec365e50218%2F0_78_3203_1922%2F3203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20'deliberately%20snubbed'%20by%20Chinese%20in%20chaotic%20arrival%20at%20G20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20%27deliberately%20snubbed%27%20by%20Chinese%20in%20chaotic%20arrival%20at%20G20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13476ea2748fda3cf0b71497bd882ec365e50218%2F0_78_3203_1922%2F3203.jpg>
 Obama exits Air Force One from the usual top door on Midway Atoll two days 
before his arrival in China. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Bishop added: “We’ve no proof. It could clearly just be a cock-up but it would 
be a stunningly large cock-up given how well these people plan for all these 
events and especially for something like the G20. The idea that they have been 
preparing for well over a year for theG20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> but suddenly there be a malfunction 
with the ramp just for one president … that really strains credulity.”

A Chinese foreign ministry official involved in the visit denied it had been a 
snub,telling the South China Morning Post 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2014484/staircase-snub-obama-was-united-states-decision-reveals>
 the US delegation had declined to use the usual rolling red-carpet staircase.

“It would do China no good in treating Obama rudely,” the official, who 
declined to be named, was quoted as saying.

“China provides a rolling staircase for every arriving state leader, but the 
US side complained that the driver doesn’t speak English and can’t understand 
security instructions from the United States; so China proposed that we could 
assign a translator to sit beside the driver, but the US side turned down the 
proposal and insisted that they didn’t need the staircase provided by the 
airport,” the official added.

The US president offered a diplomatic reply when asked to comment on the 
airport “kerfuffle” on Sunday during a joint press conference with Theresa May.

“I wouldn’t over-crank the significance of it because, as I said, this is not 
the first time that these things happen and it doesn’t just happen here. It 
happens in a lot of places including, by the way, sometimes our allies,” Obama 
said, adding that “none of this detracts from the broader scope of the 
relationship”.

Obama suggested his Chinese hosts might have found the size of the US 
delegation “a little overwhelming”.

“We’ve got a lot of planes, a lot of helicopters, a lot of cars and a lot of 
guys. If you are a host country, sometimes it may feel a little bit much.”


Susan Rice, the US national security adviser, admitted she had been surprised 
by the handling of the president’s arrival. “They did things that weren’t 
anticipated,”she told reporters 
<http://staging.hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/A/AS_OBAMA_CHINA_TARMAC_TENSIONS?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT&CTIME=2016-09-03-15-07-10>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7e8bdf43b97a3954cf855e8f7552eb5719d4ee5%2F0_0_1368_1621%2F1368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20'deliberately%20snubbed'%20by%20Chinese%20in%20chaotic%20arrival%20at%20G20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20%27deliberately%20snubbed%27%20by%20Chinese%20in%20chaotic%20arrival%20at%20G20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-deliberately-snubbed-by-chinese-in-chaotic-arrival-at-g20%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7e8bdf43b97a3954cf855e8f7552eb5719d4ee5%2F0_0_1368_1621%2F1368.jpg>
 British prime minister Theresa May and chancellor Philip Hammond are given the 
full red carpet treatment on arrival in Hangzhou on Sunday. Photograph: 
Xinhua/Barcroft Images 
The New York Times said Rice had appeared “baffled and annoyed” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/04/world/asia/obama-xi-staff-shouting-match.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0>
 that the president had been forced to leave Air Force One through a door 
normally reserved for high-security trips to places such as Afghanistan.


In the lead-up to the final meeting between Obama and Xi, experts had 
predicted the pair would seek to part ways on a positive note with the 
announcement that the world’s two largest polluters wouldratify the Paris 
climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
.

However, Obama’s unconventional welcome – and a series of subsequent 
skirmishes and quarrels 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/obamas-china-visit-gets-off-to-rocky-start/2016/09/03/a188b2c6-71df-11e6-b786-19d0cb1ed06c_story.html>
 between Chinese and US officials and journalists – were a reminder of the 
underlying tensions.

The Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/obamas-china-visit-gets-off-to-rocky-start/2016/09/03/a188b2c6-71df-11e6-b786-19d0cb1ed06c_story.html>
 said Obama’s bumpy landing in China was “a fitting reflection of how the 
relationship between these two world powers has become frayed and fraught with 
frustration”.


“I think this time … maybe the seams were showing a little more than usual in 
terms of some of the negotiations and jostling that takes place behind the 
scenes,” Obama admitted on Sunday.


Official statements issued by both sides on Saturday, as the pair held more 
than four hours of bilateral meetings, hinted at some of the disagreements 
between the world’s two largest economies.

According to a White House statement 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/09/03/readout-presidents-meeting-president-xi-jinping-china>
, Obama told Xi of “America’s unwavering support for upholding human rights”.

“China opposes any other country interfering in its internal affairs in the 
name of human rights issues,”Xi told Obama in response 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-09/03/c_135658102.htm>, according to 
Xinhua, Beijing’s official news wire.

In an interview with CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/tv/2016/09/02/exp-gps-obama-sot-south-china-sea.cnn>
, Obama warned Beijing against muscle-flexing in the South China Sea. Xi told 
Obama his country would“unswervingly safeguard” 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-09/04/c_135658206.htm> its claims in 
the region.

Bishop said: “Other than in climate, in most areas of the US-China 
relationship there is increasing amounts of friction and some actually 
increasingly quite hot friction around the South China Sea and some of these 
military [interactions] in the region.”

“The US is looking a little weak and a little tired and I think [Beijing is] 
happy to put anybody in their place when they can. I think they see the 
opportunity to make Obama look weak,” he added.


Both Bishop and Guajardo said the reported confrontations 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/04/world/asia/obama-xi-staff-shouting-match.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0>
 between Chinese and US officials and journalists following Obama’s arrival in 
Hangzhou were par for the course in China. “That is just typical China. I 
remember when my president came, one of the Mexican press corps came out of it 
with stitches,” Guajardo recalled.

But Obama’s unceremonious arrival was unusual and surely deliberate, the 
former Mexican ambassador added. “Just as the Chinese are about giving face 
they are also about not giving it and letting you know that they are not giving 
it to you … They don’t overlook these things by mistake. It’s not who they are. 
It’s not the way they do these things,” he said.
 