
Lionel Messi scored a stunning hat-trick in Barcelona’s 4-0 romp at Deportivo 
La Coruña <https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> to prove 
once again he is not letting speculation about his future distract him from 
what he does best.

Messi followed up a brilliant showing in last weekend’s 3-1 La Liga win at 
home to the champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/11/atletico-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
, Atlético Madrid, with a treble which keeps Barça hard on the heels of Real 
Madrid at the top.

The Argentinian tormented Deportivo from the kick-off, drawing a save from 
Fabricio Agosto seconds before Ivan Rakitic found Messi’s run with a lobbed 
pass over the defence that he headed over the goalkeeper. Messi got his second 
in the 33rd minute by chipping the ball over Agosto when Neymar’s pass for Luis 
Suárez fell to him in the six-yard box. His third came in the 62nd after he 
waltzed into the penalty area and fired an unstoppable left-footed shot inside 
the far post.
 Lionel Messi fires in an unstoppable left-footed shot to complete his 
hat-trick for Barcelona and leave Deportivo la Coruña shellshocked. Photograph: 
Lalo R. Villar/AP 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> were handed their 
fourth by the hapless Deportivo defence in the closing stages when Alberto 
Lopo’s clearance hit his team-mate Sidnei and bounced in.

Messi’s hat-trick was his 22nd in La Liga, one fewer than Real Madrid’s 
Portugal forward Cristiano Ronaldo, whobeat Messi into second place to win a 
third Fifa Ballon d’Or award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/12/cristiano-ronaldo-ballon-dor-lionel-messi>
 on Monday andscored two in Real Madrid’s 3-0 win at Getafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/18/real-madrid-getafe-la-liga-match-report-cristiano-ronaldo>
 earlier on Sunday. Messi, voted the world’s best player four times between 
2009 and 2012, has hit 30 hat-tricks for Barça in all competitions and three 
for Argentina.

Real, who have a game in hand, top La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> on 45 points at the 
halfway point of the season, with Barça second on 44 and Atlético, who won 2-0 
at home to Granada, third on 41.
 