
Ivan Rakitic scored in the first half to help Barcelona win 1-0 at Athletic 
Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> on Sunday for a 
second straight victory at the start of the La Liga season. The Croatia 
midfielder headed in a well-placed cross by Arda Turan to cap a quick attack 
that broke down Bilbao’s high defensive line in the 21st minute.

Lionel Messi and Luis Suárez were both off target with a handful of 
opportunities to seal the victory at San Mamés Stadium but Barcelona’s dominant 
possession game never let Bilbao mount a serious challenge.

The defending champions joined Real Madrid and the surprise package, Las 
Palmas, as the only teams to have taken all six points.

Pep Guardiola’s tactical nous upstaged by Manchester City’s sheer will to win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/28/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-west-ham>
“The matches here are always like this, intense and attractive. We played a 
good match,” Rakitic said. “This shows that we are already in form even at this 
stage of the season.”

As usual, the match at San Mamés was an entertaining, up-tempo contest of two 
contrasting styles.

Once Rakitic, Messi and the rest of Luis Enrique’s side got their collective 
passing game going, they had little trouble transforming Bilbao’s pressure into 
a fruitless pursuit of the ball. Barcelona’s biggest scare came from a poor 
pass by their goalkeeper Marc-André ter Stegen, who took over as first-choice 
in the league after Claudio Bravo moved to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/25/goalkeeper-claudio-bravo-completes-move-to-manchester-city-video-report>
. But Ter Stegen made up for his pass directly to Beñat Etxebarria by blocking 
his resulting shot with his face.

Besides Rakitic’s excellent overall performance the coach, Luis Enrique, can 
also be pleased with the new centre-back Samuel Umtiti, as well as the 
continued form of Turan and Sergi Roberto. Turan had another convincing match 
in place of Neymar, who will return from Brazil after the international break, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/brazil-germany-rio-2016-mens-football-olympic-final-match-report>
 delivering the pin-point pass for what proved to be Rakitic’s winner.

Roberto, besides being solid in defence at right-back, led a rapid 
counterattack that was spoiled when Suárez volleyed Rakitic’s cross wide in the 
57th minute. Suárez had a golden chance to grab a goal in the dying seconds of 
the match when Messi laid the ball off for him with the goalkeeper, Gorka 
Iraizoz, off his line but the striker’s shot was cleared by Eneko Bóveda.
 