
Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> scored a 
second goal with a stoppage-time penalty to give Barcelona a 3-2 victory at 
Valencia on Saturday that was overshadowed by a serious knee injury to Andrés 
Iniesta.

Messi opened the scoring and had the last word when he beat Diego Alves with a 
well-taken penalty that slid just between the diving goalkeeper and the post.

Steven Gerrard suggests he's finished with LA Galaxy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/steven-gerrard-instagram-la-galaxy-mls>
The hotly contested game was marred both by Enzo Pérez’s tackle that forced 
Iniesta off on a stretcher and a fan throwing a water bottle at Barcelona’s 
players while they celebrated Messi’s winner. The bottle appeared to strike 
Neymar’s head and hit otherBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> players when it was tossed 
into their huddle.

The win lifted the champions to the top of La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>. Barcelona are one point 
ahead of Atlético Madrid and Real Madrid before they both play their matches, 
against Sevilla and Athletic Bilbao respectively, on Sunday.

After Pérez’s challenge in the 12th minute Iniesta clutched his right knee and 
called out for help. The Spain midfielder’s knee appeared to buckle from under 
him. He was clearly in pain and held a hand over his face when he was put on a 
stretcher and carried off. The club issued a report saying Iniesta had injured 
a ligament and part of his right knee. The 32-year-old will undergo further 
tests when he returns to Barcelona.

“The worst news is Iniesta’s injury,” Barcelona coach, Luis Enrique, said. 
“But the team showed the desire it has. How we won says a lot about the spirit 
and character of this team.”

Enrique was also furious that Pérez was not booked for the tackle on 
Iniesta.“It was a clear action in which we saw a player injured and yet there 
was no yellow card,” he said. “Tomorrow, we will see how bad the injury is, but 
yes, he will be out for weeks. It’s a serious injury.”

Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> rallied to take the 
lead through goals by Munir El Haddadi and Rodrigo Moreno early in the second 
half before Luis Suárez scored to make it 2-2. Messi snatched the win from the 
penalty spot after he passed the ball to Suárez, who was fouled by Aymen 
Abdennour in the box.

Messi’s goals took his league-leading tally to eight. They were his fifth and 
sixth goals in three matches since recovering from a right groin strain that 
sidelined him for three weeks. He scored a hat-trick tolead a 4-0 victory over 
Manchester City on Wednesday in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-messi>
.

Troubled Espanyol produced a stirring second-half comeback to draw 3-3 at home 
to Eibar and ease the pressure on Quique Sánchez Flores.

China appoint Marcello Lippi as new manager of national team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/china-appoint-marcello-lippi-manager-national-football-team>
An own goal by Diego Reyes and simple tap-ins from Sergi Enrich and Kike 
García put the visiting side 3-0 up before half-time. Hernán Pérez put Espanyol 
back in contention in the 67th minute, while Pablo Piatti pulled another goal 
back.

Espanyol’s hard work at getting back into the game risked being undone when 
the striker Felipe Caicedo was sent off for a double booking but Léo Baptistão 
grabbed a point with a thumping low finish from outside the box in stoppage 
time.
 