
Barcelona’s stuttering title bid suffered another setback when they lost 2-1 
at home toValencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> on Sunday, 
while Atlético Madrid moved level on points with the La Liga leaders after a 
comfortable win over Granada.

Shell-shocked Barça have 76 points along with Atlético, who knocked the 
holders out of the Champions League in midweek, and remain top only due to a 
superior head-to-head record.

Atlético earlier eased to a 3-0 home win over Granada after Fernando Torres 
grabbed his fourth goal in as many games with Koke and substitute Angel Correa 
also on the scoresheet.

Real Madrid keep pressure on leaders Barcelona with easy win at Getafe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/getafe-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Real Madrid, whose coach Zinedine Zidane said in February that the title race 
was over, thrashed Getafe 5-1 away on Saturday and stand just one point behind 
the leading pair.

An own goal by Barça midfielder Ivan Rakitic put Valencia ahead after 27 
minutes at the Camp Nou and Santi Mina added a second just before half-time to 
stun the Barça supporters.

Lionel Messi scored his 500th career goal to reduce the deficit after 64 
minutes but the struggling hosts, who have squandered a nine-point lead, could 
not find an equaliser.

Despite Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> registering 
a third successive league defeat for the first time since 2003, Luis Enrique 
remained upbeat about his team’s chances of winning the title. “We’ve got a 
marvellous challenge, if we win the five games remaining we will be champions,” 
he said.

“Of course, our credit has run out and we are aware of the challenge. We’re 
going to approach it like a Barça player always does, with our heads held high.”

Barça humiliated a Valencia side coached by Gary Neville 7-0 in the Copa del 
Rey in February but had a much tougher time against successor Pako Ayesteran’s 
side and went behind when Guilherme Siqueira’s cross bounced off Rakitic and 
beyond Claudio Bravo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbarcelona-valencia-la-liga-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bb44f3e5592d33904fea1652b3118598652d7c%2F0_0_3500_2410%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%20lose%20to%20Valencia%20to%20blow%20La%20Liga%20title%20race%20wide%20open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbarcelona-valencia-la-liga-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%20lose%20to%20Valencia%20to%20blow%20La%20Liga%20title%20race%20wide%20open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbarcelona-valencia-la-liga-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bb44f3e5592d33904fea1652b3118598652d7c%2F0_0_3500_2410%2F3500.jpg>
 Valencia’s players celebrate their victory. Photograph: Albert Gea/Reuters 
Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar each had efforts saved by the impressive Diego 
Alves, but Valencia continued to cause the home side problems on the break.

Santi Mina increased the visiting side’s advantage just before half-time, 
receiving a pass from Dani Parejo and beating Bravo at the far post with a 
powerful driven effort.

Messi turned in a low cross from Jordi Alba to end a drought of five games 
without scoring and net his 500th career goal, but a second proved elusive for 
the hosts.

Valencia’s Alves produced a spectacular save to deny Rakitic late on and 
Gerard Piquee agonisingly missed the target at the near post in stoppage time. 
“We were better than Valencia in every aspect apart from effectiveness. We’ve 
dropped three points that we could have taken fairly but football is like 
that,” added Luis Enrique.
 