
Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> have sacked their 
assistant head coach Tommy Wright after reports that he took a £5,000 payment 
from undercover reporters posing as football agents.

Chris Coleman demands life bans for those found guilty of football corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/chris-coleman-life-bans-guilty-football-corruption>
The 50-year-old Scot, who has denied wrongdoing, was suspended immediately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-denies-55000-fee-allegation>
 after theallegations in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/28/exclusive-the-corruption-at-the-top-of-the-championship/>
 came to light on Wednesday but the Championship club have terminated his 
contract with immediate effect.

A statement published on the Barnsley website 
<http://www.barnsleyfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/club-statement-tommy-wright.-3336867.aspx>
 said: “A meeting between the club and Mr Wright was held this morning attended 
by club chief executive Linton Brown. After considering Mr Wright’s response to 
allegations in today’s Daily Telegraph about breaching FA rules over player 
transfers, Mr Wright was dismissed.

“The club was unaware of such matters nor was it involved in any wrongdoing. 
The club will continue to fully investigate the issues at hand and will 
cooperate with the regulatory authorities as necessary.”

A spokesman for Wright was quoted as saying after the allegations surfaced: 
“Any suggested acts contrary to criminal law or those of the FA and Fifa are 
categorically denied.”

The former Leeds, Leicester and Oldham winger was filmed by the newspaper 
apparently telling reporters posing as representatives of a bogus Asian 
investment firm that he could place players at the Championship club in return 
for illicit payments.

“I can just recommend players to you … that I’ve gone and seen, and then 
you’ll have to do your spicy dealing, whatever you do,” he is filmed saying.

According to the newspaper, when Wright was offered at a subsequent meeting an 
envelope which it claims contained banknotes, he said “cheers, just put it 
there”, indicating an adjacent seat.

Barnsley’s swift response to the Telegraph’s report came within an hour of the 
League Managers Associationsaying it was frustrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/managers-demand-full-disclosure-football-corruption>
 with the newspaper for failing to hand over all of its evidence to the 
football authorities.

Queens Park Rangers said on Wednesday that they were continuing an internal 
investigation into the conduct of their manager, Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, after 
he was named by the Telegraph in its investigation. The newspaper alleged the 
Dutchman requested a fee of £55,000 to work for a fake Far Eastern firm seeking 
to sell players to the club. Hasselbaink has denied wrongdoing.

“The club reiterates that we take these allegations very seriously,” a 
statement said. “As part of the investigation, CEO Lee Hoos and director of 
football Les Ferdinand both met with Hasselbaink this morning to interview him 
regarding his version of events.

“Thereafter, a meeting took place at our Harlington training ground, whereby 
all players and staff were addressed by Hoos to explain the club’s stance. As 
part of the ongoing investigation, the club will need to view an unedited 
version of the video footage and full transcript of the discussions that took 
place.

“We appreciate the QPR fans want this issue dealt with as quickly as possible, 
and that is the club’s intention. In the meantime, Hasselbaink and his staff 
are continuing to prepare the team for our Championship fixture against Fulham 
this weekend.”
 