
Barry Fry’s first taste of the FA Cup fourth round, back in 1997, was an 
eventful one. Then the newly-appointed joint owner-manager of Peterborough 
United, he hurdled the advertising hoardings and set off on a José 
Mourinho-esque touchline run when his side opened the scoring against Wrexham, 
nearly head-butted defender Simon Clark at half-time in afoul-mouthed team talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hMx6LDc4-Nw&feature=youtu.be&t=27m2s> and at 
full-time, Peterborough having lost 4-2, declared: “I fucking hate cup 
competitions, waste of fucking time.”

You might have thought that as a man now in his 70s who has had two heart 
attacks, Fry should be taking it a little easier. But, now as Peterborough’s 
director of football – “in charge of all the transfer deals, in and out” – he 
remains at the centre of things as the club prepare for their FA Cup
fourth-round replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/west-brom-peterborough-fa-cup-match-report>
 against West Brom on Wednesday.

Saido Berahino bags brace but Posh secure replay with late equaliser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/west-brom-peterborough-fa-cup-match-report>
Fry will welcome Jeff Astle’s widow and daughters to Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> for the match, his 
connections with the West Brom legend stretching back to the early 1970s, when 
he made the striker one of his first ever signings as manager of Dunstable Town.

“Jeff had had two operations at West Brom, and they said he was finished,” 
says Fry. “We were part-time, training two nights a week, but he came and 
scored 34 goals in the first season when we got promoted. We signed George Best 
for a bit as well. But Jeff was brilliant – he’d go into pubs and sell tickets 
for me. He’d sit down and play dominos and darts with the punters. Everybody 
loved him because he was just one of the lads. The whole team loved him because 
on the coach he was always cracking jokes, if we won he would be leading the 
sing-song on the way back. He was a larger-than-life character, an absolute 
hero both on and off the field.”

Fry can take pride in what he has bought and sold over the years. When he 
joined Peterborough as the first owner-manager in England, 20 years ago, he 
bought a “POSH” number plate, which he still has on his car today. He describes 
his wife as “his best ever signing”. Since leaving the dugout in 2005, he has 
proved a master wheeler-dealer, unearthing lower league stars for next to 
nothing, polishing them up and selling them for a relative fortune: the sales 
of Dwight Gayle, Britt Assombalonga, Craig Mackail-Smith (Fry’s son-in-law), 
Ryan Bennett, George Boyd, Aaron McLean, Paul Taylor and most recently, Conor 
Washington, have made the League One side over £25m.

These figures are a far cry from the dark days in the mid-1990s when Fry was 
forced to take on crippling club debts and even put his own home (and his 
mother-in-law’s) up as security to secure a £210,000 loan to keep Peterborough 
afloat. He did the same with money from his pension and the £200,000 earned 
from his own testimonial against Manchester United in 2005. Nowadays things are 
different: money brought in from player sales, gate receipts, sponsorship 
(London Road was renamed the Abax Stadium in 2014) andFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> runs can be reinvested back into 
the squad.

“We’ll have 10,000 people plus down for West Brom,” insists Fry. “With the 
gate receipts, television money and advertising, we’re looking at £350,000. It 
could be £450,000 if we win the tie with the prize money at stake.”

Some of the Washington cash has been spent on striker Tom Nichols, who scored 
the winner on his debut for nine-man Peterborough at Chesterfield on Saturday 
but is cup-tied for Wednesday afterstarring and scoring for Exeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 against Liverpool in the third round. Peterborough have a number of absentees 
for Wednesday: injuries and suspensions have left Graham Westley short of his 
best squad but Fry has every confidence in his manager, who enjoyed 
back-to-back promotions with Stevenage but also had an uncomfortable spell at 
Preston.

“I’ve known Graham a long time,, he used to play for me at Barnet,” says Fry. 
“He really wants to get to the top of management. When he came here [in 
September] we were 18th in the league, really struggling but he’s changed the 
whole fortunes of the club [Peterborough are three points off the play-off 
places]. As a manager you make mistakes, and I think he’s learnt from his 
mistakes and he’s putting them right. The players will run through a brick wall 
for him though, as they did on Saturday. Our players love him and so do our 
fans.”

Never was this more evident than against West Brom last month, the players 
mobbing Westley after scoring the late equaliser which set up Wednesday’s 
replay, and fans delighting in Peterborough’s manager pretending to be knocked 
out by the burst match ball. “Graham should get an Oscar for his acting when 
that ball burst,” Fry laughs. “I stood up in the directors’ box and applauded 
him, I thought it was hilarious.”
 