
Tyson Fury will be praying that whoever Anthony Joshua chooses for the first 
defence of his world heavyweight title at the O2 Arena on 25 June, the 
challenger brings no more ambition than did Charles Martin at the same venue 
two weekends ago, when the Americansurrendered the IBF belt with a minimum of 
credible resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
.

Fury, who defends his WBA and WBO world titles in a rematch with Wladimir 
Klitschko two weeks after Joshua’s fight in London, does not want the Watford 
fighter beaten when they are a couple of fights away from what would be an 
all-British world title event to rival that between Carl Froch and George 
Groves, whofought front of 80,000 fans at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/carl-froch-beats-george-groves-wembley>
 nearly two years ago.

That is the real prize in this dance, which Joshua announced on Twitter  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/anthony-joshua-first-defence-world-heavweight-title-25-june-london>
on Thursday. (It saves on sandwiches and coffee at press conferences). His most 
saleable opponent is the unbeaten Californian Dominic “Trouble” Breazeale, who 
has been carefully managed after a late start in the business but, like Martin, 
can punch, having put away 15 nondescript opponents in 17 outings.

“Trouble” is marginally more credible than “Drummer Boy”, otherwise known as 
the Texan Eric Molina. At 33 and the owner of an up-and-down CV, he has a 68% 
stoppage record, and would be acceptable. Just.

However, the standby choice, according to Joshua’s promoter, Eddie Hearn, is 
the Frenchman Johann Duhaupas, and he really does not cut it if Joshua is to 
convince a sceptical boxing fraternity he is about to mix with what passes for 
the heavyweight elite.

Duhaupas has had one shot at the world title, lasting into the 11th round 
against the overrated Deontay Wilder, but he is 35 years old and eminently 
hittable.

He did have what looked like a decent result a few weeks ago, stopping Robert 
Helenius in peculiar circumstances, the unbeaten Finngetting up at nine but 
unable to stay upright without the help of the ropes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GNkHolZClKM#t=1m20s>, which he found with a 
senses-free stagger across the ring eight seconds after the end of the sixth 
round. It is a clip the promoters could run to enhance the Frenchman’s 
credentials.

So, on the face of it, Joshua might have the easier assignment against 
whichever of the three contenders he and Hearn settle on. Every fight the 
champion has from now on will carry the same baggage of anxiety for the 
promoter, because the champion is – as Hearn himself describes him – “a global 
sporting superstar”.

Hearn’s supposed gamble bringing the powerful but naive Martin across the 
Atlantic with his belt there to be lifted was an inspired move. It was a 
head-scratcher for Showtime, who offered the one-fight champion $250,000 for a 
much safer defence at home – but Martin cashed in, took his licks, made a few 
friends and went home to be shuffled down the IBF list like a joker in the pack.

In a crowded field, it turned out to be one of the smartest piece of 
matchmaking in a world heavyweight title fight since Cus D’Amato invitedPete 
Rademacher to make his professional debut 
<http://ringtv.craveonline.com/news/181277-pete-rademacher-the-most-ambitious-pro-debut-of-all>
 against Floyd Patterson in 1957.
 