
Bayer Leverkusen’s coach, Roger Schmidt, made a trip to London to watch 
Tuesday’s Champions League opponents, Tottenham Hotspur, take on Manchester 
City at White Hart Lane this month. He scouts all of his opponents but he was 
particularly looking forward to this one as he would see a coach very similar 
to himself,Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino>, take on someone 
whom he had faced many times – and for whom he made life very difficult – in 
the Bundesliga, Pep Guardiola.

Over the course of seven matches, Schmidt’s side took points off Bayern on 
four occasions. In a league that appreciates any team that makes life difficult 
for Bayern Munich, Schmidt was quickly heralded as an exceptional coach and it 
was even suggested that he may be the long-term successor to Guardiola at the 
Allianz Arena.

Son Heung-min became a global brand at Leverkusen but still faces difficult 
return | David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/tottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league>
Yet on a cold, Sunday afternoon in north London he witnessed Spurs not only 
take points off Guardiola, but alsoout-press them in a 2-0 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. “I know Pep Guardiola’s football from his three years in Germany very well 
and how he likes to play,” Schmidt tells the Guardian. “But Tottenham made sure 
the game was played their way – it was a super game.”

It is no surprise that Schmidt took delight in watching Pochettino’s side 
play. Attacking, aggressive football with a high defensive line and a clear 
desire for a quick transition from defence to attack sums up both Spurs and 
Leverkusen under their current coaches. Two teams, two coaches but an almost 
identical way of playing.

Since taking over from the coaching duo Sami Hyypia and Sascha Lewandowski in 
the summer of 2014, Schmidt has turned Bayer from a functional team of 
traditional, physical players into something that best resembles a mix of 
Jürgen Klopp’s Borussia Dortmund side of the not‑too‑distant past and what 
Guardiola implemented at Bayern.

Rather than give a flashy name to his style of play, Schmidt laughs and simply 
suggests that his side are at their best when the other team are uncomfortable. 
Rather than tweak his tactics for each match, he believes his team should play 
in a way that demands their opponents play Leverkusen’s kind of football. Not 
the other way round.

“We’re happy when the game is intense,” Schmidt says with a confident smile. 
“Even against teams that are supposedly better than us, like Bayern Munichor 
Barcelona last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/bayer-leverkusen-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 in the Champions League, we try and make them play our football – that’s what 
we demand of our opponents, and if it works we normally win the game.

“I look at teams and I know what the manager is like and what kind of football 
they like to play. I’m excited about the comparison and I’m looking forward to 
seeing how we handle the situation. These two games against Tottenham will be a 
huge challenge for us.”

Schmidt – unlike Pochettino – did not have a very successful playing career. 
He was an attacking midfielder who spent a large chunk of his days in the 
regional semi-professional leagues of Germany’s north Rhine-Westphalia while 
also working as an engineer. “I never wanted to be a football manager,” he says 
when asked to recount the early days of his career. “It was a hobby to begin 
with.”

Yet while that hobby may have began as a coach at the age of 37 at Delbrücker 
SC, it quickly developed into a full coaching role at Preussen Münster, 
Paderborn and then Red Bull Salzburg. Within eight years Schmidt went from 
part-time player-coach to full-time leader of a side expected to win the 
Austrian Bundesliga.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbayer-leverkusen-roger-schmidt-tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc824bf63b91d73c99fcfdd7b46dfb4f8cdca45a%2F0_0_5484_3605%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bayer%20Leverkusen%E2%80%99s%20Roger%20Schmidt%3A%20'I%20never%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20football%20manager'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbayer-leverkusen-roger-schmidt-tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bayer%20Leverkusen%E2%80%99s%20Roger%20Schmidt%3A%20%27I%20never%20wanted%20to%20be%20a%20football%20manager%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbayer-leverkusen-roger-schmidt-tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-champions-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc824bf63b91d73c99fcfdd7b46dfb4f8cdca45a%2F0_0_5484_3605%2F5484.jpg>
 Roger Schmidt talks to his squad during training on Monday. Photograph: Martin 
Meissner/AP 
At Salzburg he met the sporting director Ralf Rangnick, who shared Schmidt’s 
love for attacking football. “We exchanged a lot of ideas and worked well 
together for two years,” Schmidt says as he looks back on the league title the 
side won only one year after his arrival. “At the end of it, a football that 
was even more extreme than what Ralf knew from Hoffenheim was born.”

Mauricio Pochettino confident Toby Alderweireld injury ‘not a big issue’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/tottenham-manager-confident-toby-alderweirelds-injury-not-a-big-issue>
His impressive work in Austria did not go unnoticed and after only two seasons 
Schmidt was packing his bags for Leverkusen. There he finished fourth in this 
first season, third in his second and is widely expected to challenge Thomas 
Tuchel’s Borussia Dortmund for second place this time. Bayer have had an uneven 
start to the season and are currently 10th in the Bundesliga but they did beat 
Dortmund 2-0 at the start of October. “The way we’ve played has been a huge 
boost to our confidence,” Schmidt says when asked about the consequences of the 
results. “Very important, not just that we won but how we won. I think it was a 
deserved win against a very strong team and we played like people know 
Leverkusen can play.”

It is this insistence on the way his team play almost irrespective of the 
result that makes Schmidt stand out. Rather than become a product of their 
league, Leverkusen are playing the 49-year-old’s style of football in every 
game and competition. This is something Schmidt also sees in Tottenham. “Every 
country has its own culture, but all teams have become a bit more international 
recently,” the German coach suggests. “Many of Tottenham’s players are 
international, so is their manager. I think it’s more fluid. I don’t think you 
can say this is English football, this is Italian football. Instead this is 
Tottenham football.”

It will be a fascinating clash of philosophies at the BayArena on Tuesday. 
Both sides are desperate for a win with only a point separating them in second 
and third place of Group E and both will be confident of winning. Only one 
thing is guaranteed: it will be frenetic.
 