
The Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
traditionally starts with the champions taking on another top team at home on 
Friday night. But for the 53rd instalment of the competition, the bosses at 
Frankfurt HQ have come up with a radically different idea. They’re sending 
Hamburg to Munich instead.

It must be a practical joke of some sort. Or perhaps an ironic, self-effacing 
comment on Bayern’s over-bearing dominance: “Uncompetitive, shmuncompetitive. 
It’s not as if it’ll be double figures at the Allianz Arena”. Alternatively, 
the consultancy that was recently used to research the appeal of the Bundesliga 
brand might have advised that religious minorities getting eaten alive by wild 
beasts/Bavarians was still the most popular form of stadium entertainment. The 
visitors, believers in the messianic powers of Bruno Labbadia to deliver them 
from another season in relegation purgatory, blameless men and women whose only 
misfortune is to carry “the diamond [badge] in their hearts”, as the Nordic 
article of faith demands, have been cruelly cast as the hors d’oeuvre for the 
red monster.

Any club in need of a goalkeeper should look to Germany and the Bundesliga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2015/jul/31/goalkeeper-germany-bundesliga-manuel-neuer-ter-stegen>
HSV have conceded six goals in their last five trips to Fröttmaning. Not in 
total, on average. 8-0 to Bayern it finished last year; 9-2 in 2013. While none 
of these disasters happened during the Life of Bruno – the 49-year-old was 
indeed in charge at HSV the last time the “Bundesliga dino” beat the 
Southerners in 2009 – a demoralising defeat on match-day one will see the club 
snap back into despair, merely two months after the euphoria of a second 
consecutive last-minute reprieve in the relegation play-off. “It’s happening 
again,” the German newspaper Hamburger Abendblatt wrote ominously on Tuesday.

But the prospect of a poor opening performance in 2015-16 is not even the 
worst of it. After valiant attempts to clear out a truck-load of non-performers 
and perennial crocks (Rafael van der Vaart, Heiko Westermann, Slobodan Rajkovic,
Valon Behrami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/11/valon-behrami-watford-hamburg-three-year-deal>
 andMarcell Jansen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/08/marcell-jansen-hamburg-retires-29>
) from the expensively assembled bric-a-brac squad, and a relatively positive 
pre-season, Hamburg instantly resumed their role as everybody’s favourite 
object of ridicule by crashing out 3-2 away to the fourth division side FC Carl 
Zeiss Jena in the DFB Cup last weekend.

A few days later, details of players’ contracts and other sensitive club 
papers, as well as credit cards and a personal ID card belonging to the 
sporting director, Peter Knäbel, were found discarded in a public park. A woman 
found the material but her attempts to return them to HSV proved abortive at 
first, as neither the club nor Knäbel realised that a rucksack containing said 
contents had actually gone missing. “I’m putting on my steel helmet and the 
police will investigate,” Knäbel said, in anticipation of the embarrassing 
fallout. The only good news for HSV was that acute Schadenfreude fatigue had 
developed by the time it was revealed that the merchandising department had 
used the picture of a Hertha BSC fans choreography on a T-shirt celebrating 
their continued stay in the top flight on Wednesday.

“We had won back some credit [by winning the relegation] but the game v Jena 
has given people the possibility to hit back at us with criticism and malice. 
That hurts,” Labbadia acknowledged before the game in Munich. “Uhrensöhne”, the 
website of news channel n-tv called the team earlier in the summer, a harsh pun 
best translated as “clock suckers”. HSV’s famous stadium clock counting the 
hours and seconds of their top-flight existence has become sadly symbolic of a 
club that has little more than nostalgia to look forward to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fbundesliga-bayern-munich-hamburg-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7b3eeed406135e2823a9daf506c2d2b1379f08%2F0_0_2885_2058%2F2885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bayern%20set%20to%20kick%20off%20Bundesliga%20by%20adding%20to%20Hamburg%E2%80%99s%20comedy%20of%20errors%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fbundesliga-bayern-munich-hamburg-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bayern%20set%20to%20kick%20off%20Bundesliga%20by%20adding%20to%20Hamburg%E2%80%99s%20comedy%20of%20errors%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fbundesliga-bayern-munich-hamburg-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7b3eeed406135e2823a9daf506c2d2b1379f08%2F0_0_2885_2058%2F2885.jpg>
 Hamburg CEO Dietmar Beiersdorfer talking at a press conference earlier this 
week. Photograph: Daniel Bockwoldt/dpa/Corbis 
More people than ever before will get a chance to experience the travails of 
the former blue chip side, thanks to a new multi-territory TV deal with Fox 
Sport that will also bring important visibility in the US for the German 
league. One year on from the warm post-World Cup glow, there has been much 
anguished hand-wringing about the Premier League’s media rights income blowing 
that of the Bundesliga out of the water.

“The English are overtaking us, left and right,” warned Bayern’s CEO, 
Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. But without a second bidder for the domestic live 
matches, the situation is unlikely to change. Whereas smaller clubs like 
Augsburg (Baba Rahman to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/10/chelsea-agree-fee-augsburg-baba-rahman>
) and Mainz (Shinji Okazaki to Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/26/leicester-shinji-okazaki-mainz>
) welcome the opportunity to sell on cheap imports at exorbitant mark-ups to 
the Premier League, sides with European ambitions will have a harder time 
holding on to their star players. Borussia Dortmund not losing any of their 
regulars is encouraging in that context. But it remains to be seen if 
Wolfsburg, the club best-placed, financially, to challenge Bayern,will 
withstand the pressure from Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/13/kevin-de-bruyne-wolfsburg-manchester-city-wont-force-move>
 to part with Kevin De Bruyne, last season’s player of the year in Germany. The 
loss of the Belgian would be keenly felt beyond Lower Saxony.

Pep Guardiola and his obscenely deep squad, with the new arrivals Arturo Vidal 
and Douglas Costa, out to win a historic fourth consecutive title, will 
nevertheless not have it all their own way. Roger Schmidt’s Bayer Leverkusen 
look an enticing proposition after their addition of André Ramalho from 
Salzburg and Charles Aránguiz from Internacional. BVB will put the squeeze on 
the Champions League places, Wolfsburg are solid, Borussia Mönchengladbach will 
be hard to shift and Schalke should bounce back, too, now that Madame Tussaud’s 
Roberto Di Matteo has given way for the prodigious André Breitenreiter. In 
fact, there is a case to be made that the general level of coaching – and thus, 
football – will be higher than ever before.

Add the old school, first-time-back-in-the-big-time-since-1982 charm of SV 
Darmstadt’s Böllenfalltor, a 16,000 capacity stadium that looks exactly as the 
name suggests to the mix and you should have a season that will be pretty 
compelling, the one-sided nature of Friday’s fixture notwithstanding.
 