
If you’re starting a family, there’s a lot to think about in terms of your job 
and career. How long should you break for and what happens when you return – 
should you work part-time and choose a nursery? Or work full-time and opt for 
childcare?

Julianne Miles, co-founder of career consultancy Women Returners 
<http://womenreturners.com/>, recommends taking some time to consider where the 
right balance lies between family and career. “Give yourselves some flexibility 
to work out the best work-home balance solution for you once you’ve had some 
time at home with the baby, as your feelings may change during that time.”

There’s also the issue of parental leave: what are you legally entitled to as 
an employee? And what about if you’re self-employed or on a temporary contract?

If you’re planning to return to work, childcare costs are also something to 
consider. Over 29% of mothers and 14% of fathers findworking too expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/05/childcare-expensive-mothers-want-work-trapped-home>
, as nursery places in the UK can cost up to £14,750 a year.

So whether you’re expecting a child, intending to start a family or want 
advice on balancing life as a working parent, join us onWednesday 3 August from 
1–2.30pm BSTfor a live chat with our expert panel. We’ll be discussing:

 * Juggling a young family with job commitments. 
 * Taking a career break and returning to work. 
 * Advice on managing working while pregnant. 
 * Flexible working options. 
 * Parental leave rights. 
The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link> or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profile to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet 
us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Panel

Katie Wood is legal officer for Maternity Action 
<http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/wp/>, a charity that provides free advice on 
maternity and parental rights and benefits to parents, health professionals and 
employers. She has contributed to numerous guides on maternity and 
discrimination law and wrote Maternity and Parental Rights - a guide for 
parents.

Louise Webster is founder of Beyondtheschoolrun.com 
<http://beyondtheschoolrun.com/>, a place to inspire and connect parents with 
the working world. A commentator on the subject of parents and work, Louise has 
been invited to 10 Downing Street and the Cabinet Office to discuss her 
enterprise. Webster is also writing a book supporting mothers to be published 
in the USA in 2017.

Juliet Turnbull is founder and chief executive of 2to3days.com 
<https://www.2to3days.com/>, an online platform that matches and recruiters 
with parents who want to do stimulating work on a part-time, flexible basis so 
that they can also raise their children.

Catherine Rogan is a rights adviser for Working Families’ 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/advice-information/> charity legal advice 
service and has over 12 years’ experience advising parents and carers on their 
parental rights at work.

Danielle Ayres is a solicitor at Gorvins Solicitors <http://www.gorvins.com/> 
who specialises in pregnancy and maternity cases. Ayres has been involved in a 
large number of Tribunal cases and runs her own legal clinic. She also 
volunteers for Maternity Action, Working Mums and assists on the Pregnant Then 
Screwed legal helpline.

Dr Joanna Martin is a coach who has been working with women business leaders 
<http://joannamartin.com> for over 13 years, reaching over 70,000 people. She 
has three companies and specialises in helping women handle the day to day so 
they can be more effective and impactful.

Sarah Archer is a qualified career coach and co founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. She specialises in career change and has 
supported many women through the challenge of juggling a career and family.

Lisa Barnwell is the founder of Bumps and the Boardroom 
<http://www.lisabarnwell.co.uk/founder-membership-sign-up/>, an online platform 
to support those combining parenthood with an upward career trajectory. Founder 
of Me & My Baby Therapy Rooms and Clinic, Barnwell coaches both individuals and 
corporations on how to enjoy the pregnancy advantages for business.

Julianne Miles is managing director of Women Returners 
<http://womenreturners.com/>, experts in enabling professional women to return 
to fulfilling work after a long career break and the champions of returnships. 
Miles is also a chartered psychologist and career coach who regularly presents 
workshops on returning to work and work-family balance.

Kate Headley is development director at diversity consultancy, The Clear 
Company <http://www.theclearcompany.co.uk/>. She has over 15 years’ experience 
in diversity and talent management and is known for her passion and expertise 
in the development of inclusive talent solutions.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 