
Beijing has urged Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
 to make “wise” choices that help write “a new chapter” of UK-China relations 
when she flies into Hangzhou later this week for the G20 summit amid tensions 
over the controversial Hinkley Point C nuclear project.


The so-called “golden era” of UK-China ties - sealed under her predecessor, 
David Cameron -has threatened to unravel 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d087a126-572d-11e6-9f70-badea1b336d4.html> since May 
took power in July.

Shortly after taking office the British Prime Minister angered Beijing by 
announcing that approval of the £18bn ($23.5bn) nuclear plant, in which China 
was to hold a one-third stake,would be delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
, apparently as a result of security concerns over Chinese involvement.

Beijing decries 'China-phobia' after Britain cools on Hinkley Point nuclear 
deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/beijing-decries-china-phobia-after-britain-cools-on-hinkley-point-nuclear-deal>
The simmering Hinkley row will be hanging over May’s first trip to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for the two-day gathering of the 
world’s major economies, which begins on Sunday.

In a prominent opinion piece 
<http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/opinion/2016-09/01/content_26662427.htm> 
published in the state-run China Daily newspaper on Thursday, ahead of her 
arrival, China’s ambassador to London urged the Prime Minister to make “wise 
strategic choices” over Britain’s future relationship with China.

Liu Xiaoming made no direct reference to Hinkley but said “a number of steps 
need to be taken in order to maintain the momentum in the relationship” between 
London and Beijing.

The diplomat said those steps included building “stronger political mutual 
trust” and increased cooperation. “In today’s world, no country can develop by 
itself behind closed doors,” Liu argued.

Noting that the G20 would see May’s first “face-to-face communication with 
Chinese leaders”, Beijing’s ambassador added: “I hope both sides will seize 
this opportunity to forge stronger trust and closer friendship”.

Whether the Prime Minister’s first encounter with Chinese President Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> will prove so friendly remains 
to be seen.

Nick Timothy, May’s influential joint chief of staff 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21703391-theresa-mays-pugnacious-chief-staff-prescribes-new-direction-conservative-party>
, lambasted the “golden” relationship with China last year inan article for 
Conservative Home website 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2015/10/nick-timothy-the-government-is-selling-our-national-security-to-china.html>
.

Timothy argued that Beijing had tried to buy British silence on its human 
rights abuses “with their gold”. “And [David Cameron’s] government has been 
only too happy to oblige.”

Timothy also questioned the wisdom of allowing Chinese involvement in 
sensitive sectors such as nuclear power, arguing there was no justification for 
giving “a hostile state easy access to the country’s critical national 
infrastructure”.

Reports emerged earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/29/uk-government-could-approve-hinkley-point-delay-essex-project-bradwell-china>
 that May was considering a proposal to detach the development of the Hinkley 
Point C nuclear power station from an agreement allowing China to builda 
nuclear reactor in Bradwell, Essex. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/19/chinese-built-reactor-bradwell-impact-essex-estuary-plant-nuclear>

That decision would be likely to infuriate Beijing which saw the Bradwell 
plant as a means of showcasing its nuclear technology to the rest of the world.

“[The] Chinese would never agree to it,” Paul Dorfman, a former government 
adviser on nuclear power,told the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/may-threatens-hinkley-deal-lgr73pw0q>, 
which reported the proposal on Monday.

Dorfman suggested Downing Street’s attempt to separate the projects could in 
fact be “a strategy to torpedo the whole thing”.
 