
A coalition of sports organisations, NGOs and trade unionists has raised 
concerns about the 2019 European Games in Minsk because of Belarus’s human 
rights record – and called on the European Olympic Committees to speak out 
“with immediate effect”.

In a letter to the acting EOC president, Janez Kocijancic, the Sports and 
Rights Alliance warned that Belarus failed to uphold basic standards on the 
right to protest, press freedom and workers’ rights – and reminded him this was 
in contrast to the Olympic charter, which calls for the respect “for human 
dignity … and universal fundamental principles”.

The letter also called for independent outside monitors to receive and act on 
complaints of human rights abuses, labour standards violations and incidents of 
corruption linked to Games and urged EOC to address its concerns as quickly as 
possible. “The governance and responsibilities of international sport are 
receiving unprecedented global attention, and the international demand for 
urgent action will persist,” it added.

Sylvia Schenk, of Transparency International Germany, said the EOCs were 
failing in their duty by not making a stand “on human rights, media freedom, 
labour standards, children’s rights, and anti-corruption”.

The first European Games in Azerbaijan last year were dominated by questions 
about the country’s human rights record, with the Guardian – along with a 
number of other media outlets and activists – barred from entering the country 
to cover the event.Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> 
activists, lawyers and journalists were also harassed, arrested and jailed in 
the run-up to the Games. The British Olympic Association sent a team of 160 
athletes to Baku, with the two-times Olympic gold medallist Nicola Adams the 
flag bearer at the opening ceremony.

“After the human rights debacle that ensued when Azerbaijan hosted the 2015 
Baku Games, the European Olympic Committees need to put in place safeguards to 
ensure the Minsk Games are not a replay of the rights abuses that have 
characterised so many recent mega-sporting events,” said Minky Worden, the 
director of global initiatives at Human Rights Watch.
 