
It’s an odd feeling, not being able to say your name. Not being able to say 
what you want to say is odd enough, but your name? You’ve been asked for it 
since you can remember being asked for anything. It’s precious; it’s you. It’s 
presented no difficulties before. And yet there it is, stuck somewhere, 
somewhere in your brain, somewhere in your throat, stubbornly lodged. It just 
won’t come out.

Do stammerers like me a favour - don’t finish my sentences | Ben Cooke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/22/stammerer-international-stammering-awareness-day>
And you know it’s not going to come out, and the person you’re trying to speak 
to knows it’s not going to come out, which just makes it harder to make it come 
out. Usually when your vocal organs seize up like this, you reach for a 
synonym. There will be a word somewhere that means pretty much the same thing 
and starts with an unproblematic sound, and your mind has become skilled at 
this task. But your name has no synonym. It’s precious; it’s you.

So you have to try to force it out. You’re already flushed, perhaps acquiring 
a patina of perspiration, and this is just going to make it worse. And then:
bang!, out it explodes, with the force and subtlety of a bullet, the first 
phoneme blurted deafeningly, and you try to say your first name and surname as 
if they’re one, which sounds unintelligible but removes a dangerous pause. The 
process has taken perhaps 15 clock seconds, but it’s 20 head minutes. A 
conversation may then break out, but it never really flows, never really 
recovers from the false start.

You wouldn’t have thought we needed a Stammering Awareness Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/22/stammerer-international-stammering-awareness-day>
, but that’s whattoday is 
<https://www.stammering.org/get-involved/help-us-raise-awareness/international-stammering-awareness-day-22nd-october>
. Everyone’s fully aware of stammering; they know a stammer when they hear one. 
And yet the condition remains widely misunderstood. Facts about stammering 
cannot be repeated enough: people who stammer are not allArkwrights 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGOCFpzt6BQ> or Kens 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0F6Ilu4LJio>, although some of us may be; 
stammers come and go; stammers disappear when singing or talking in unison (so 
church services are typically stammer-free zones); stammers tell you nothing 
about the stammerer (the condition is surely the only thing Gareth Gates has in 
common with Ludwig Wittgenstein); stammering is the same as stuttering. 
Stammerers, as a rule, would prefer their well-meaning listeners not to finish 
words or sentences for them (although I happen not to mind). The 
characteristics of the stammer will vary from stammerer to stammerer. People 
who consider themselves fluent speakers often stammer more than they think they 
do. Stammerers can feel socially isolated, reluctant to join in with group 
conversations, and school can be miserable for them.

Those are some of the things about stammering of which the public could be 
more aware. But there’s another form of awareness, too, and it’s the awareness 
that stammerers have of their own condition. Because I’ve come to see mine not 
as something that limits my life, but as something that is integral to it. More 
than that: it can almost be seen as a gift.

Stuttering mouse experiment sheds light on common human speech disorder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/14/stuttering-mouse-experiment-sheds-light-on-common-human-speech-disorder>
My stammer helps me appreciate what I might otherwise take for granted: the 
freedom of writing. When I write, I can say whatever I want, whenever I want. 
Writing brings me a sense of liberation. Words hold no fear; they return to 
their proper state, to be deployed at will.

Indeed, I’m convinced that my stammer is why I do what I do. While speaking 
sometimes feels like hurtling into one brick wall after another, writing feels 
like bathing in a lagoon. All the colours and textures of language are there to 
be plucked like fruit. I’m certainly not saying that I make the most of that 
freedom, but I doubt that the pleasure I derive from it would be quite so sweet 
were my speech more silken.

And it helps that stammerers have a new hero: Ed Balls. The man previously 
best known forTwitter-based vanity <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36158172> and 
political bullishness has now danced into the nation’s affections, and is 
displaying a certain pride in his impediment as he does so. Atweet 
<https://twitter.com/edballs/status/786191720438439936> aimed at the unkind 
remarks of a newspaper columnist pinpoints adroitly the prejudice that still 
lingers, and strikes a blow for those of us who have suffered jeers and 
derision because our voices have refused to do what we want them to.

There are of course times when I would rather not have a stammer. I would 
certainly like it to be more predictable; as it is, I have no idea when or how 
it will strike. Conversations with strangers can be smooth as caramel; chats 
with family members can be juddering and faltering. There will be people 
reading this who know me and won’t know of my stammer; there will be others who 
know little else about me. It’s frustrating, yes. But it also holds for me a 
sort of mystery, and it has shaped my life, who I am. For better or for worse, 
I wouldn’t be me without it. And it’s deep in that name of mine.
 