
The latest incident in Ben Barba’s chequered NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> career has left the fullback without a 
playing contract, undergoing intensive rehabilitation in an overseas facility 
and facing a difficult road back to professional rugby league fields in 
Australia.

The former Dally M medal winner was released by Cronulla after testing 
positive for cocaine in the wake of the Sharks’ grand final victory last month 
and was handed a mandatory 12-match suspension by the NRL for contravening the 
league’s illicit substance policy.

Sam Burgess: ‘The bottom line is that my heart didn’t lie in union’ | Donald 
McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/sam-burgess-rugby-union-league-england-world-cup>
It is the second time Barba has returned a positive illicit drugs sample – the 
first came in November 2015 – and the ban will come into effect should he 
return to the NRL to continue his career.

Whether he does so is now likely to be the source of much conjecture over the 
off-season as the most recent in a string of controversial incidents threatens 
to derail his career.

“I know and accept I need to take some time away from the game to deal with 
some personal issues,” Barba said in a statement. “I am accountable for myself 
and my actions and if I don’t address them now I will certainly ruin my career 
and more importantly my life and that of my family.

“I hope to return to the game at some stage and am very grateful for the 
support of theCronulla Sharks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cronulla-sharks> and I hope that one day I 
can again play beside this terrific bunch of guys.”

Sharks CEO Lyall Gorman said on Tuesday there was no indication of how long 
Barba’s involvement in the rehabilitation program would last.

“Over time we hope we can work with Ben to get him back into the game he 
loves,” Gorman said, before adding the player’s welfare, and that of his wife 
and children, was their main priority for the moment.

The NRL’s head of integrity, Nick Weeks, said the league will continue to 
extend support to Barba but the failed test “should serve as a warning to all 
players of one of the potential consequences of using illicit drugs”.

The Sharks may yet impose their own sanctions on Barba, who has not appealed 
the initial punishment handed down by the NRL.

Barba’s see-sawing career, which at times has promised great things, has often 
been set back by issues encountered away from the field.

After making his NRL debut for Canterbury in 2008, he was dropped to reserve 
grade 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/nrl/nrl-premiership/idris-and-barba-suspended/story-e6frf3pu-1225699595617>
 the following year for allegedly getting into a fight with Bulldogs team-mates 
Jamal Idris and Lee Te Maari.

A brilliant season in 2012, during which he scored 22 tries and helped the 
Bulldogs to the grand final, saw him take out the Dally M medal but in 2013he 
was stood down by the club 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-02-25/barba-stood-down-by-bulldogs/4537862> 
and entered rehabilitation for gambling and alcohol issues.

A move to Brisbane followed but he failed to impress for the Broncos and an 
underwhelming 2014 season led to another move, to Cronulla, where he initially 
struggled but finally approached some of his best form on his way to claiming 
the premiership last season.

Barba becomes the third NRL player to be handed a suspension for contravening 
the league’s illicit drugs policy, joining former South Sydney centre Kirisome 
Auva’a and Cronulla Under-20s player Jayden Walker.

“There’s no one more disappointed than me,” Gorman said, who had worked 
closely with Barba after the first positive test. “I’ve spent a lot of time 
with Benny. I’m very close to him. To say that I’m personally distressed about 
this would be an under-statement.

“He’s made a poor choice on a poor day. Whether he’s got carried away with the 
celebration, I don’t know the exact circumstances of when this occurred. But 
obviously a poor choice.”
 