What proportion of total benefits spending goes to unemployment benefits, 
according to data from the Office for National Statistics?  1% In 2014-15, the 
Office for National Statistics calculated that £44bn was spent on working age 
people, through family benefits, income support and tax credits; this includes 
benefits such as child benefit and support for people on low income. £108bn was 
spent on pensions, £27bn on housing benefit and £41bn on incapacity and 
disability benefits. Just £3bn went to the unemployed. In 2015-16, this dropped 
to £2bn.  11%  21%  41% According to research by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
in 2015, how many people classed as “in poverty” were from a working family?  
2.4m  4.6m  6.8m The Rowntree Foundation suggests that 3.8 million people 
living in poverty live in families where all adults work, and another 3.1 
million live in families where one adult works and one does not. Less than half 
of people in poverty live in workless or retired families  7.2m Unclaimed 
benefits amount to £13.2bn each year, according to figures by the Department 
for Work and Pensions. How much more is this than the amount lost to fraud?  
Five times  10 times In 2013-14, the Department for Work and Pensions declared 
the total amount unclaimed by people who would be entitled to benefits is 
likely to be between £11.6-13.23bn a year, 10 times the amount lost due to 
fraud (£1.2bn). Meanwhile, government losses through tax avoidance reached 
£5bn. In 2016, the charity Turn2Us found that low-income families were among 
those missing out the most from unclaimed benefits.  15 times  Roughly the same 
amount According to an estimate from the New Statesman, how many of the DWP’s 
own staff may be eligible to apply for in-work universal credits themselves due 
to low pay?  Up to 15%  Up to 25%  Up to 30%  Up to 40% The figure was 
suggested in an article by Mark Serwotka, general secretary of the public and 
commercial services union. In response to a freedom of information request in 
early 2016, the DWP did not dispute the possibility that its own jobcentre 
staff may become claimants, though they maintained that employees “have the 
right to request to be seen by a work coach from another job centre to respect 
their privacy”. From April 2016, all workers aged 25 or over are entitled to a 
"national living wage". What is it, per hour?  £5.30  £6.70  £7.20 The first 
two figures refer to the hourly rate for the national minimum wage, which was 
£5.30 for workers aged 18-20 and £6.70 for those 21 and over in 2015. The 
national living wage is to rise to £9 per hour by 2020.  £9.00 How many British 
nationals are claiming unemployment benefit in countries around the EU?  At 
least 12,000  At least 30,000 More than four times as many Britons obtain 
unemployment benefits in Germany as Germans do in the UK, while the number of 
jobless Britons receiving benefits in Ireland exceeds their Irish counterparts 
in the UK by a ratio of 5:1. Having said that, of those 30,000 Britons claiming 
unemployment benefit in the EU, only 62 are living in the 10 countries that 
have joined since 2004.  At least 50,000  At least 100,000 How many claimants 
of jobseeker’s allowance claim for more than a year?  70%  55%  34%  10% 
According to Poverty and Social Exclusion, fewer than half of jobseeker’s 
allowance claimants claim for more than 13 weeks at a time, and fewer than 10% 
for more than a year. A freedom of information request to the DWP in 2013 
revealed that of 1.5 million people claiming jobseeker’s allowance, only 1,070 
had a continuous claim of over 10 years. On this evidence, unemployment 
benefits lead to neither dependency nor long-term unemployment. In 2014 what 
percentage of housing benefits were paid to people in work?  1%  11%  21% 
Official DWP figures shows that in-work claimants make up 21% of all housing 
benefit claims – compared to 11% five years earlier. It is said that just one 
in eight people who receive housing benefit are unemployed; and though it is 
difficult to ascertain exactly how many housing benefit claimants are 
unemployed, it is clear that the majority of claimants are pensioners, carers, 
people with a disability and people on low incomes.  31% According to 2013 
figures, what percentage of the UK’s adult population is dependent on the 
welfare state?  14%  34%  54%  64% 20.3m families receive at least one form of 
benefit (64% of all families). For 9.6m benefits make up more than half of 
their income, and that takes account of the fact that the number of families 
receiving benefits is 1-2m fewer than previous years because changes to child 
tax credits mean some working families who previously got a small amount now 
get nothing. How much better off a week would an adult be working a full-time 
minimum wage job than on benefits?  £98.77  £62.37 In 2014 the Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation estimated that an unemployed person aged over 25 could receive a 
total weekly disposable income of £70.47, compared to a full-time job on 
minimum wage earning you disposable income of £132.84. For a family of four 
with two unemployed parents, that rises to a benefits-based weekly disposable 
income of £259.28 versus £332.82 if one parent works full-time on minimum wage. 
These figures will be different now that the living wage has come into effect.  
£34.21  -£4.86  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  