
The quietly devastating National Audit Office (NAO) report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/benefit-sanctions/> shreds five years of 
ministerial bluster, misinformation and spin about the purported virtues of 
benefit sanctions, arguably one of the most brutal, controversial and 
ineffectual social policies of recent times.

Sanctions are a punishment applied to benefit claimants adjudged to have 
infringed jobcentre rules. If claimants fail to turn up for appointments or to 
apply for enough jobs, officials effectively fine them by stopping their 
benefit payments for a minimum of four weeks (around £300). Between 2011 and 
2015, almost one in four of all jobseeker’s allowance claimants were 
sanctioned. In 2015 alone, sanctions led to an estimated £132m in benefits 
being withheld from some of the UK’s poorest citizens.

No evidence welfare sanctions work, says National Audit Office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
Anti-poverty campaigners, food banks, academics and MPs have warned for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2014/oct/24/benefit-sanctions-unfair-consequences-clapson>
 that sanctions weredangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/jan/23/mps-inquiry-five-things-weve-learned-about-benefit-sanctions>
: they can lead to debt and rent arrears,depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/03/benefits-sanctions-leading-suicides-dwp-depression>
, hunger,food bank use 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/dwp-minister-denies-that-stopping-someones-benefits-could-force-them-to-use-food-banks-10337495.html>
,survival crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2013/jun/24/food-poverty-growth-in-shoplifting-groceries>
, destitution and worse. Sanctions, they have pointed out, can be handed out
capriciously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2014/oct/24/benefit-sanctions-unfair-consequences-clapson>
 or cynically to meet jobcentre targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/20/jobcentre-hit-squads-benefit-claimants-sanctions>
. In some cases, such as that of diabetic former soldierDavid Clapson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/03/victims-britains-harsh-welfare-sanctions>
, found dead in his flat in 2013, starved and penniless, the potentially lethal 
consequences of benefit sanctions have seemed incontrovertible.

The Department for Work and Pensions has imperiously dismissed those warnings 
throughout. It has regularly assured us that sanctions “work”. They provide a 
deterrent effect to the half-hearted job seeker, and a kick up the backside to 
the lazy and feckless to make them “focus and get on”, the DWP insists. 
Sanctions,claimed the former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/12/labour-refer-groundless-iain-duncan-smith-claim-statistics-watchdog>
 in March, were “the reason why we now have the highest employment levels ever 
in the UK”.

Benefit sanctions: the 10 trivial breaches and administrative errors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/24/benefit-sanctions-trivial-breaches-and-administrative-errors>
The NAO reveals that those assertions were essentially baseless. The DWP had 
no clue whether sanctions worked, and zero interest in finding out. When the 
scope and severity of sanctions were increased in 2012, leading to a rapid rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/08/900000-claiming-job-seekers-allowance-subjected-benefit-sanctions>
 in the number affected, it had no evidence to justify the change and no idea 
what the likely effect on claimants would be. It did not know the financial 
costs of sanctions or the wider knock-on impact on health services, let alone 
any potential benefits, and actively resisted any attempt by others to find 
out. Last year the DWP summarily rejected calls from both an all-party 
committee of MPs 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/news/benefit-sanctions-report/>
 and its own social security advisory committee for a formal review of 
sanctions.

Most damning of all is the unravelling of the claim by ministers that 
sanctions are instrumental in getting people into work. This was a fragile 
claim to begin with: the DWP’s own advisers have pointed out that there isno 
evidence to support it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/26/benefit-sanctions-review-urged-amid-concern-over-regimes-effectiveness>
. Employment companies running the DWP’s work programme warned last year that 
for most jobseekers, sanctions actuallymade getting a job harder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/jan/08/benefit-sanctions-absurd-and-dont-work-mps-told-welfare>
.

The DWP cites flimsy international studies to support its claim that sanctions 
lead to jobs, but has never analysed its own data to discover how stopping 
benefits affects claimant behaviour or employment outcomes.


Why sanction benefits when there’s no proof the harsh approach works? | Anne 
Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/benefits-sanctions-imposed-proof-work-welfare-nao-jobcentres>
The NAO conducted its own preliminary analysis of DWP data and found that 
sanctioned claimants were as likely to stop claiming benefits altogether as 
they were to get a job. The effect on sick and disabled unemployed claimants 
was even more stark: the NAO found sanctions were likely to have discouraged 
them from working.


That the DWP’s benefit sanctions policy in recent years was created in a 
largely evidence-free zone, or that once it was in place, ministers
misrepresented its effects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/jobseekers-dole-guardian-research-government-welfare>
 (and wereupbraided by the statistics watchdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/07/statistics-watchdog-asks-dwp-for-clearer-statements-on-sanctions-benefits-jobseekers>
), or that it sought to dismiss any criticism, however well founded, will 
surprise no one who has followed social security in the Duncan Smith era. The 
benefit cap is a similarly aggressive policy championed by ministers with a 
fervent faith out of all proportion with the evidence that it works.

The challenge for the current work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, who 
likes to suggest that he is cut from a different cloth from his controversial 
predecessor-but-one, is to show that he can listen to the NAO’s concerns. The 
first step, the NAO says, should be to institute a wide-ranging review of 
sanctions; the second, a genuine attempt to understand their wider impact. 
Green’s response should tell us whether he really offers any new insights, or 
simply more of the same.
 