
The hunt for Europe’s most wanted man ended in a gun battle outside a Milan 
train station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-berlin-attack-suspect-shot-dead-milan>
 in the early hours of Friday but left authorities facing tough questions about 
how an armed suspected terrorist had been able to travel hundreds of miles on 
public transport before being caught.

Italy’s interior minister, Marco Minniti, said on Friday that the man shot in 
Milan was “without a shadow of a doubt” Anis Amri, who is suspected of carrying 
out Monday’s terroristattack on a Berlin Christmas market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlin-christmas-market-attack>. 
Fingerprints of the shot man matched those secured from within the cabin of the 
truck used to carry out the attack, German authorities confirmed.

Amri was stopped by two police officers in a routine check in the Sesto San 
Giovanni neighbourhood on the outskirts of the city and was asked for his 
documents, Minniti said. Amri initially told the officers he did not have 
documents and that he was from Calabria. When pressed further, Amri slipped his 
hand into his bag and retrieved a .22-calibre gun, shooting 36-year-old officer 
Christian Movio in the shoulder.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20police%20kill%20Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20in%20shootout%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20police%20kill%20Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20in%20shootout%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmilan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report&media=>
Milan police kill Berlin attack suspect in shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/23/milan-police-kill-berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-shootout-video-report>
Berlin Christmas market attack: a graphical guide to what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
A second officer, 29-year-old Luca Scatà, returned fire, shooting Amri in the 
chest. The Tunisian 24-year-old reportedly died of his wounds about 10 minutes 
later, in spite of attempts at resuscitation.

Movio remains in hospital with a wound to his shoulder that is not 
life-threatening. Minniti said he told the wounded officer “Italians will be 
able to have a happier holiday. All ofItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> should be proud of him … It’s not 
simple to guarantee an adequate level of security faced with the threat of 
terrorism, but we are putting everything into it.”

Angela Merkel, who was alerted to the news of Amri’s death by the Italian 
prime minister, Paolo Gentiloni, on Friday morning, thanked the Italian 
officers and said she had asked for an investigation into “each and every 
aspect of the case of Mr Amri”. Wherever there was a need for a political or 
legislative change, it would be done speedily, the German chancellor said.

The fact that a man whose terrorist leanings were known to German spy agencies 
had dropped off their radar before the attack and managed to evade police while 
travelling at least 1,000 miles around the continent in spite of a European 
arrest warrant raised difficult questions for security agencies and politicians 
acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


Paris-based web portal Monde Afrique on Friday claimed the Moroccan 
intelligence agency had twice alerted German authorities to Amri’s “fervent” 
support for Islamic State and his contact with two of their representatives in 
advance of Monday’s attack, once on 19 September and again on 11 October.

A video posted on Friday by Isis’s Amaq news agency, in which Amri pledged his 
allegiance to Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and called for Isis supporters 
to take revenge against “crusaders” bombing Muslims, appeared to be shot with a 
mobile phone on the Kieler bridge in Berlin’s Moabit district, just over a mile 
from the German chancellery.


The bridge is also located only a short distance from the ThyssenKrupp 
warehouse near where Polish truck driverŁukasz Urban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/berlin-christmas-market-attack-polish-truck-driver-lukasz-urban-germany-order-merit>
 on Monday parked the articulated lorry that was used to plough into the 
Breitscheidplatz Christmas market later that evening.

“It simply cannot be the case that someone like Amri was able to move around 
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> freely even though he was 
suspected of planning a terrorist attack,” said Michael Ortmann, a terrorist 
expert for broadcaster RTL.

“Our intelligence agencies have fallen asleep at the wheel,” Ortmann told the 
Guardian, pointing to the fact that Germany had experienced a lack of terrorist 
activity for many decades since the decline of the Red Army Faction, also known 
as the Baader-Meinhof gang. Spy agencies were often understaffed and 
technologically behind the times, he said, making it difficult for regional 
police to share data.

How Amri managed to travel from Berlin in the north of the continent to Milan 
in the south remains unclear. German and Italian media reported that a French 
rail ticket was found in Amri’s backpack, suggesting that he had boarded a 
train in the city of Chambéry in the northern French Alps, near both the Swiss 
and Italian borders. From Chambéry, Amri appeared to have travelled by train 
for two and a half hours to the northern Italian city of Turin, before taking 
another train to Milan.

French media on Friday offered a different theory, reporting that Amri had 
travelled from Lyon to Chambéry by train, then a direct high-speed TGV to Milan.
Alain Acco (@Alain_Acco) 
INFO #E1 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/E1?src=hash> Le terroriste de Berlin a 
pris le train hier entre Lyon Part Dieu et Chambéry, puis le TGV de 17h44 qui 
est arrivé à 21h50 à Milan
 <https://twitter.com/Alain_Acco/status/812346091077304320> December 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Alain_Acco/status/812346091077304320> 
Travelling directly from Germany to France by train, Amri would have run a 
considerable risk of detection. After last year’s thwarted train attack in 
which a 27-year-old Moroccan jihadi opened fire on aThalys train from Amsterdam 
to Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/21/amsterdam-paris-train-gunman-france>
, security on certain French and international train services has been stepped 
up, with passengers having to go through metal-detection scanners on some 
platforms. But not all train services or stations scan passengers before 
boarding.

According to Tagesspiegel newspaper, Berlin police had calculated that their 
suspect would have been unable to travel far beyond the German capital’s 
borders, citing eyewitness reports according to which Amri had sustained 
visible facial injuries during Monday’s attack.

However, several companies run coach services from the centre of Berlin to the 
French Alps. FlixBus, for example, runs a coach service that departs at 11.45pm 
on Monday from Berlin’s central station and arrives in Annecy, near Chambéry, 
at 8.10pm the following day.

Though passengers are required to carry a valid passport to board such 
coaches, their ID documents are checked only by the driver, who is not usually 
qualified to verify their authenticity. FlixBus declined to comment on whether 
Amri could have travelled on board one of its buses, referring the Guardian to 
the criminal investigator.

By the time Amri arrived in Milan, he reportedly had only a couple of hundred 
euros left in his wallet, which has led Italian investigators to presume he had 
been hoping to hide nearby. Italy was familiar territory to Amri, and that may 
explain why he headed back to the country following Monday’s attack. He is 
believed to have arrived in Italy as one of tens of thousands of Tunisians who 
entered the country after the Arab spring protests in 2011.

Merkel said she had spoken to the Tunisian president and that progress had 
been made in the process of sending back Tunisian refugees who had no right to 
stay in Germany. “We can be relieved that one acute threat has come to an end, 
but the threat that comes from terrorism – that is a general threat – 
continues,” she said.
 