
Germany’s security services are under intense pressure to explain how a 
Tunisian man who was under covert surveillance for several months and known to 
multiple intelligence agencies for apparent ties to Islamic extremists appeared 
to fall through the cracks and allegedly carry out Monday night’s truck attack 
on a Christmas market in Berlin.

A European arrest warrant was issued on Wednesday for Tunisian citizen Anis 
Amri, 24, two days after the attack in which at least 12 people were killed and 
dozens of others were injured. Amri is feared to be armed and dangerous, and 
appears to have used six different aliases and three different nationalities.

Berlin attack suspect Anis Amri had been on watchlist since January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-under-monitoring-since-january>
According to a senior politician in the region where he registered as an 
asylum seeker inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in July 
2015, an investigation had been launched earlier this year suspecting Amri of 
preparing “a serious act of violence against the state”. He had been added to 
the government’s central terror watchlist in January and his telecommunications 
were under surveillance until September.

US officials said Amri was on a US no-fly list, had researched bomb-making 
online and been in contact with Isis at least once, the New York Times reported.

German authorities said they had found Amri’s identity card under the driver’s 
seat of the truck he allegedly drove into a crowd of people at the 
Breitscheidplatz Christmas market.

A wanted poster issued by Germany’s federal prosecutor offered a reward of up 
to €100,000 for members of the public who helped to locate Amri, who is 
described as having worn dark clothing, bright shoes and a white scarf on 
Monday night.

“Caution: he could be violent and armed,” the notice warned. “A reward of up 
to €100,000 ($104,000) has been issued for information leading to the suspect’s 
arrest.”
Kate Connolly (@connollyberlin) 
Image of Berlin market attack suspect, Anis A. or Ahmed A. according to @Bild 
<https://twitter.com/BILD>. 24 year old Tunisian registered in NRW 
pic.twitter.com/BJO0GjHWBH <https://t.co/BJO0GjHWBH>
 <https://twitter.com/connollyberlin/status/811522897156182016> December 21, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/connollyberlin/status/811522897156182016> 
 Thomas de Maizière, the interior minister, said that Amri was being sought in 
Germany and across Europe’s border-free travel zone. “This is a suspect, not 
necessarily the perpetrator,” he said, after briefing the German parliament’s 
domestic affairs committee. “We are still investigating in all directions.”

Amri’s parents were reportedly being questioned by Tunisian authorities .

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-attack-suspect-anis-amris-family-speak-out-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri's%20family%20speak%20out%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-attack-suspect-anis-amris-family-speak-out-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20attack%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri%27s%20family%20speak%20out%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-attack-suspect-anis-amris-family-speak-out-video-report&media=>
Berlin attack suspect Anis Amri’s family speak out – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/22/berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amris-family-speak-out-video-report>
 The news that Amri is a suspect again raises difficult questions for the 
authorities. It follows an admission by German police that they had detained 
the wrong man in the immediate aftermath of the attack – releasing 23-year-old 
Pakistani asylum seeker on Tuesday after he spent hours in custody.

 Amri, who arrived in Germany in July 2015 and had his request for asylum 
turned down in July this year, was already known to several security agencies 
because of his links to the radical Islamist scene, according to Ralf Jäger, 
the interior minister for North Rhine-Westphalia, where Amri had first 
registered. Before entering Germany he reportedly spent time in prison in Italy.
Berlin map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/berlin_map/giv-3902ouqbJy8hYjEJ/>
An investigation had been launched into whether Amri was preparing “a serious 
act of violence against the state,” Jäger said.

Amri reportedly had links to a Salafist circle around Ahmad Abdelazziz, also 
known as Abu Walaa, an Iraqi-born preacher based in the German town of 
Hildesheim who was arrested in November. Walaa is suspected by Germany’s state 
prosecutor of openly supporting Islamic State (Isis) and helping to recruit 
people for the terror group. The preacher denies having any links to Isis.

According to Amri’s watchlist file, extracts from which were quoted by 
broadcaster Bayerischer Rundfunk, he was suspected of recruiting collaborators 
for “an attack with an Islamist motivation” and was trying to obtain 
large-calibre automatic rifles through contacts in France.

Germany’s state prosecutor said that Amri’s telecommunications had been under 
surveillance between March and September, after investigators had received 
information about a planned burglary, with the possible aim of acquiring funds 
to purchase arms.

However, the Tunisian suspect dropped off the security agencies’ radar in 
November this year, possibly because of miscommunication between authorities in 
Berlin and North Rhine-Westphalia.

Though originally registered in Germany’s most populous state, Amri had 
reportedly been mainly based in Berlin since February 2016 and frequently 
changed location. Jäger said Amri had been highly mobile.

Berlin attack: police reportedly seeking Tunisian man – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-police-suspect-christmas-market-live-updates>
Newspapers were highly critical of the intelligence services. with the 
Süddeutsche Zeitung saying the authorities “had fallen asleep”, while Der 
Spiegel weekly said on its website that “they had him in their crosshairs and 
he still managed to vanish.

The best-selling Bild tabloid said in a commentary piece that in future such 
suspects had to be locked up andnot allowed “to roam free” 
<http://www.bild.de/news/standards/gesetzesaenderungen/muessen-sofort-geschehen-49436078.bild.html>
.

Amri’s asylum request, authorities failed to deport him. For much of this 
year, Amri was officially in a status ofduldung – “temporary suspension of 
deportation”. Attempts to deport him to Tunisia failed because he did not have 
the required identification papers and the Tunisian authorities had disputed 
whether or not he was their national.

The documents required to deport Amri eventually arrived from Tunisia on 
Wednesday, Jäger noted.

The manhunt to find Amri comes as medical staff tend to survivors of Monday’s 
attack, 12 of whom remain in hospital. Several of the victims have yet to be 
formally identified, but among those confirmed killed were the truck’s 
registered driver,Łukasz Urban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-pore-over-polish-lorry-driver-lukasz-urban-final-hours-berlin-attack>
, a 37-year-old Polish national.

Citing anonymous investigators, the German tabloid Bild reported on Wednesday 
that Urban, who was found with gunshot and stab wounds, had been shot after the 
truck came to its final standstill, and may have fought with the driver until 
the moment the vehicle ploughed into a row of stands at the Christmas market.

“There must have been a struggle,” a source quoted by Bild said, speculating 
that the attacker could have stabbed Urban because he tried to grab the 
steering wheel to avert an even greater tragedy.

Family members fear that Italian woman Fabrizia di Lorenzo, 31, was among 
those killed. Missing since the attack, she did not turn up to work and her 
phone and travel card were found at the scene. Her father, Gaetano, told 
Italian media that he had given up hope of seeing her alive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Witnesses%20describe%20carnage%20of%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Witnesses%20describe%20carnage%20of%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report&media=>
Witnesses describe carnage of Berlin attack – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/19/nine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report>
Isis has claimed responsibility for the attack, although there is no evidence 
yet for its claim. Through its Amaq news agency, the jihadi group claimed the 
attacker was a “soldier of the Islamic State”. The phrasing matches that used 
to claim previous attacks,such as the incident in Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub>
, Florida, in June when 49 people were killed at a gay nightclub.





The Polish-registered truck careered into the Christmas market in Berlin off a 
main road at about 8pm on Monday. The vehicle is believed to have been laden 
with 20 tonnes of steel girders. It travelled for about 80 metres at a reported 
45-50mph (70-80km/h) before coming to a halt outside the Kaiser Wilhelm 
memorial church.

There are about 2,500 Christmas markets in Germany, including 60 in the 
capital, and questions are being asked about whether they are well enough 
protected from the threat of terrorism. Security experts have warned for years 
that they could be a target for terrorists because they are rarely cordoned off 
and have few or no bag checks.


In November, US authorities warned their citizens to avoid Germany’s Christmas 
markets, considering them to be a high risk. No such warning was issued by 
German authorities.
 