
Russian scientists have driven away polar bears that besieged their weather 
station on an island in theArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> 
Ocean for two weeks.

A nearby ship was able to reach the island and supply the scientists with dogs 
and flares to scare off the bears, said the Sevgidromet state monitoring 
network that owns the station.

Five scientists based at the weather station on Troynoy island, in the Kara 
Sea north of Siberia, were encircled by 10 adult bears and some cubs, the 
Russian news agency TASSreported on Monday <http://tass.com/society/899247>.

A female bear had taken to spending nights beneath the station’s windows, and 
one of two resident dogs was killed on 31 August.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-scientists-trapped-arctic-polar-bears-month-wait-rescue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc95e19802e5beafab86ab39d18c6b9bf86d5e9%2F0_109_4149_2490%2F4149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Besieged%20Russian%20scientists%20drive%20away%20polar%20bears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-scientists-trapped-arctic-polar-bears-month-wait-rescue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Besieged%20Russian%20scientists%20drive%20away%20polar%20bears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-scientists-trapped-arctic-polar-bears-month-wait-rescue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc95e19802e5beafab86ab39d18c6b9bf86d5e9%2F0_109_4149_2490%2F4149.jpg>
 The weather station on Troynoy island. Photograph: Peter Prokosch/Grida.no 
The five personnel – two married couples among them – ran out of flares with 
which to deter the predators. Troynoy, the largest island in the Izvestiy Tsik 
archipelago, is 27km long.

The next supply ship that could bring dogs and flares to the island was due in 
“about a month”, Sevgidromet head Vassiliy Shevchenko told TASS on Tuesday.

But the flagship of Russia’s research expedition fleet, the Akademik 
Tryoshnikov <http://archive.fo/7o3i1>, happened to be passing nearby and was 
able to stop at the island, Sevgidromet said. Besides flares, employees at the 
network’s Arctic weather stations carry electronic sirens and sometimes 
firearms to ward off bears. They are instructed to leave the station in pairs 
for safety.

Before the ship arrived, personnel had been advised to “use extreme caution” 
and to remain inside the station in all but the most serious circumstances. 
Meteorological work that required going outside to observation sites had been 
abandoned, but now has resumed.
Polar bear map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/izvestiy/giv-22601SCXA81d64SP1/>
Shevchenko told TASS that the event was not without precedent. “Things like 
this have happened before on the Troynoy island because bears inhabit the area 
and people work there.”

But Sevgidromet spokeswoman Yelena Novikova said such a large number of bears 
was “not standard”. She said the bears’ aggressive behaviour was related to 
climate change and the ongoing reduction in sea ice.

“The bears usually go to other islands, but this year they didn’t. The ice 
receded quickly and the bears didn’t have time to swim to other islands,” she 
said. “There’s no food on [Troynoy] island, so they came up to the station.”

Shevchenko said the bears would leave the island in search of food in late 
October or early November, when the waters near the shore freeze, expanding 
their territory.

Polar bears losing weight as Arctic sea ice melts, Canadian study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/05/polar-bears-losing-weight-arctic-sea-ice-melts-climate-change-canadian-study>
According to the TASS report, Russia’s minister of natural resources and 
environment, Sergey Donskoy, had asked the head of federal weather-watching 
service Rosgidromet to oversee the situation.

Donskoy instructed Alezander Frolov, the head of Rosgidromet, to take every 
measure to protect both the animals – members of a protected species – and the 
weather station’s staff.

In August last year, the three occupants of a weather station on the remote 
island of Vaygach in the Siberian Arcticspoke of living in close quarters 
<http://siberiantimes.com/ecology/others/news/n0384-arctic-residents-issued-with-rubber-bullets-to-shoot-at-polar-bears/>
 with “aggressive” bears.

On Wednesday, the Interfax <http://www.interfax.co.uk/> news agency reported 
that a member of a geological expedition by Alrosa, the world’s biggest diamond 
mining company, had been killed by a bear in Yakutia in northern Siberia. The 
man called for help, but fellow employees arrived only to find his mangled body 
and see a brown bear running away. The environmental ministry later said it had 
shot the bear.







 