
Best Coast singer Bethany Cosentino has criticised singer Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> for “perpetuating rape culture” 
with his recent single Back to Sleep.

Cosentino objected to the lyrics of the track 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/chrisbrown/backtosleep.html>, which is also 
known as Fuck You Back to Sleep and contains lines such as “Just let me rock, 
fuck you back to sleep girl / Don’t say a word no, girl don’t you talk / Just 
hold on tight to me girl / Fuck you back to sleep girl, and rock you back.” The 
track reached the US Billboard top 20 in March.

The Best Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/music/best-coast> star tweeted: 
“You already know how I feel about Chris Brown – but WHY/HOW are those lyrics 
OK? Cool, a song that perpetuates rape culture being a hit.”

She also took aim at the industry, criticising the A&R team who approved the 
song 
<https://twitter.com/BestCoast/status/721747071938658304?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
and publications such as Billboard who gave the track aglowing review 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/review/6812828/chris-brown-royalty-album-review>
.
Best Coast (@BestCoast) 
.@billboard <https://twitter.com/billboard>'s review of that song "excels as a 
quality addition to his catalog’s stellar collection of panty-dropping and 
baby-making songs"
 <https://twitter.com/BestCoast/status/721748360810528769> April 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BestCoast/status/721748360810528769> Best Coast 
(@BestCoast) 
How about this for a review: singing about fucking a girl back to 
sleep/telling her dont say a word is singing about rape + it's disgusting
 <https://twitter.com/BestCoast/status/721748734392926208> April 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BestCoast/status/721748734392926208> 
Responding to criticism of her position, Cosentino wrote: “4 those of you that 
don’t understand the definition of “consensual sex” – it’s not TELLING a woman 
yr gonna wake her up 2 fuck her. BYE”

Brown has been no stranger to controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> since, in 2009, he pleaded 
guilty to a felony assault on his then-girlfriend Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/23/chris-brown-pleads-guilty>. 

Chris Brown or his representatives are yet to respond to Beth Cosentino’s 
accusations.

 