
As I write I have a small canvas bag of yellow-rattle 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/yellow-rattle> seed on my desk. It 
bulges now like a full purse and the disk-like flattened seeds jangle a little 
like cash when shuggled about. In fact, if I bought it commercially, it would 
be the equivalent of £30, which is not bad for two hours’ work.

I find it intriguing to discover how a suite of old names once did link 
yellow-rattle to manmade coin. In SomersetRhinanthus minor was known simply as 
“money” and in Leicestershire as “money-grass”. I love most, however, a wry 
Lanarkshire coinage: “gowk’s sixpences” – “cuckoo’s sixpences”. It was probably 
intended to suggest the idea of fool’s gold, but for me it carries a different 
set of associations.

Yellow rattle: the meadow-maker's helper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2012/sep/27/yellow-rattle-meadow-grassland>
If not wealth for cuckoos, the flowers are indisputable riches for bumblebees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/11/meaning-bumblebee>. Behind 
each single seed, imagine the following transaction, repeated hundreds of 
thousands of times throughout May and June: the insects wandering the flowers 
relentlessly, pressing down their long tongues into the nectaries, extracting 
sweetness to grow new bumblebees and, in exchange, dusting the plant stigmas 
with a few pollen grains from previous blooms. The pollen then germinates and 
extends a tube down into the plant’s ovary where the ovum is fertilised. A 
month later and we get all that rattling new wealth.


The mutually beneficial relationship between angiosperms 
<https://www.britannica.com/plant/angiosperm> and insects dates back to the 
Cretaceous <http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/mesozoic/cretaceous/cretaceous.php>. 
So the yellow-rattle makes another incidental payout to me in the process: 
letting me glimpse a fragment of the world once owned by dinosaurs. Yet the 
plant’s immeasurable donation to this country as a whole was its fundamental 
place in four million acres offlower-rich meadow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/wild-flower-meadows-spring-plantwatch>
.

These knee-high forests of insects and colour, flowers and scented hay, were 
once a glorious centrepiece of the English countryside. Alas, in the rush for 
real cash, we lost almost all of them during the last century. Just 1% 
survives. My bag of seed is a small private act of restitution, because, when 
sown later this autumn, it will expand my embryonic meadow towards its one-acre 
goal. I know it’s not much. Yet it makes a big difference on that one acre.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>




 