
If Liverpool are desperate to recapture past European glories in tomorrow 
night's Uefa Cup final, their Spanish opponentsAlaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> are still getting used to such 
dizzying heights.

When the Merseyside club last won a European trophy, the 1984 Champions Cup, 
the western Basque club were playing in Spain's regionalised Third Division, 
known as el pozo (the well) because once you fall in, it is so difficult to 
climb out again. By the beginning of the 90s they were still only in Segundo B, 
their municipal ground in a state of rack and ruin. Only six years ago they 
were still a semi-professional club.

The past few years, however, have seen an extraordinary transformation, 
culminating in Alaves reaching the Uefa Cup final in their debut season in 
Europe - an unprecedented feat - overcoming Internazionale on the way and 
annihilating Kaiserslautern of Germany by 9-2 on aggregate in their semi-final.

The man due most of the credit is their Basque manager Jose Manuel Esnal 
(nicknamed Mane), who took over in 1997 and swiftly guided the club into the 
Spanish top flight for the first time since a brief appearance in 1955.

Mane and his assistant were in Cardiff on Saturday to see their opponents 
defeat Arsenal at close-quarters. An exponent of the "keep it simple" school of 
management, the highly respected Mane lifted his side last Thursday by 
surprisingly announcing he would stay with the club for another year, saying he 
had no intention of succeeding Hector Cuper at Valencia.

The extent of Mane's achievement is evident in the fact that not only is this 
the club's first Uefa Cup final, it is their first cup final of any sort in 
their 90-year history. The club hails from the small, elegant town of Vitoria, 
just north of the wine-growing region of La Rioja and south of Bilbao. It may 
be the administrative capital of the Basque country but there are few signs of 
the cup run being hitched to a political wagon. At Alaves's ground, 
Mendizorroza ("serrated peak" in Basque), you may see the occasional banner 
unfurled in protest at the plight of ETA prisoners, but little else.

Only one player in the Alaves squad, Pablo Gomez, is actually from Vitoria, 
and even he was not a product of the youth system. This would be a source of 
controversy elsewhere in the region, but here it does not seem to matter. 
Vitoria is a modest, sensible sort of place, showing surprisingly few public 
signs of sporting obsession despite the fact that its basketball team, Tau 
Ceramica, also played (and lost) a European final last Thursday against Kinder, 
in Bologna.

Although the original town became rich on the back of the wool and iron 
trades, the Alava region as a whole suffered poverty towards the end of the 
19th century, particularly when the staple potato crop failed. The club's 
nickname Los Babazorros - meaning, literally, "potato aphids" in reference to 
those 19th-century blights - promises to be one of the more bizarre cries heard 
at a European final. Around 8,000 fans are expected to travel to Dortmund for 
tomorrow night, their ranks swollen by 4,000 Spanish expatriates who live in 
and around the Rühr region.

Perhaps the greatest challenge facing Alaves is to overcome their lack of 
history, which seems to cause them to show too much respect for Liverpool's 
European tradition. Alaves are incapable of viewing themselves as favourites, 
yet anyone who witnessed their most recent home game, a 5-1 demolition of 
Racing Santander, to say nothing of their thrashing of Kaiserslautern, might be 
tempted to think otherwise.

Their game-plan holds no secrets but can be wickedly productive. Their 
reputation for being a more effective side on their travels - they have lost 
only one away game in their Uefa campaign - is founded on the speed of 
communication between the midfield and their lone attacker, La Liga's top 
scorer Javi Moreno, who struck his 21st league goal with a penalty in the 2-1 
defeat at Deportivo La Coruna on Friday.

Against Santander, the aphids strung four attack-minded players across the 
midfield (Jordi Cruyff was at the centre), pushed up the two excellent 
full-backs Cosmin Contra and Delfi Geli, and proceeded to attack their 
opponents relentlessly. And all this without the true engine of the side, the 
Yugoslav Ivan Tomic, who will be back in central midfield tomorrow night.

Up front, the small, seemingly tubby Moreno is deceptively quick, running 
across the back line constantly looking for space to exploit. Once he has the 
ball, they support him as if their lives depend on it. Moreno has many of 
Michael Owen's virtues, and indeed is viewed here as the more complete player.

At the other end, the captain Antonio Karmona is an honest if somewhat 
ponderous centre-back and Messrs Owen, Heskey and Fowler may all cause him 
problems. But first Liverpool have to stop Alaves up front. In the San Siro, 
their tactical destruction of Internazionale reduced expensive stars to 
frustration and their fans to impotent vandalism. And Liverpool should 
understand that Alaves are, at present, a much happier and more cohesive side 
than their own semi-final opponents Barcelona.

Contra, the highly-rated Romanian full-back, said he was happy that Liverpool 
beat Arsenal in the FA Cup final, hoping that they would tire themselves out 
celebrating and be less motivated to win another trophy five days later. 
Cruyff, meanwhile, reckons the game may be "boring", following the general 
perception in Spain of Liverpool as a defensive, pragmatic side after their 
cautious approach to the Barcelona away tie.

Their Argentine midfielder Hermes Desio sounded a much more upbeat note. 
"Liverpool will start as favourites because of their achievements, but it is 
possible that they will fear losing to a team like Alaves," he said. "And they 
will have to play better than they did against Arsenal to beat us."

Of Alaves, he insisted: "In the end it can achieve anything. I have faith in 
the team and we are going to win. I do not have any doubt."

While Gérard Houllier was at pains to keep Liverpool's celebrations muted 
until the end of this week, the romance of the Alaves story should ensure a 
captivating final. Beware the potato aphids! They are hungry, and they might 
not get another chance.

 You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 