
A hardship charity once chaired by Charles Dickens has been overwhelmed with 
requests for support from struggling shopworkers in the months sincethe 
collapse of BHS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>

The failure of the department store chain earlier this year, which triggered 
11,000 job losses, has led to a record number of applications to the Fashion 
and Textile Children’s Trust for help.

The charity assists children whose parents work in the retail sector but are 
struggling to make ends meet. Its grants, which start at £250, aim to help meet 
the cost of essentials like school uniforms, winter clothing and shoes, or 
specialist equipment for disabled children.

The trust, which was founded in 1853 by a group of philanthropic textile 
merchants to support the bereaved family of a colleague, says it has received 
claims from a record 460 families over the past six months, with 275 relating 
to former BHS workers,according to a report in the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/12/27/bhs-collapse-puts-charles-dickens-childrens-charity-hard-times/>
. The figure is a significant increase given last year’s total of 150 claims.

The good work of the 163 year-old charity, originally called the Purley 
Children’s Trust, attracted the attention of Dickens, who chaired its appeal 
board from 1856 to 1857. But the surge in applications for support from the 
Fashion and Textile Children’s Trust is putting pressure on the small charity, 
which hands out more than £350,000 to struggling families each year.

On its website the Fashion and Textile Children’s Trust explains that it is 
currently only accepting applications under its small grants scheme if it is to 
help with the care of a a disabled child. “Due to a very high demand for our 
small grants, we can now only accept new applications from families where one 
or more children have a disability or additional needs. We will re-open funding 
for school uniform and other essential items on 1 April 2017.”

BHS is the biggest high street retailer to enter administration since the 
failure of Woolworths in 2008 with theshutters coming down on all of its 170 
stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/27/bhs-shuts-what-will-take-its-place-on-high-street>
.

The collapse of BHS and the implications for its workers and pensioners has 
damaged the reputation of itsformer owner  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/dominic-chappell-bled-bhs-dry-says-paul-sutton>
Sir Philip Green, who is being pursued by the Pensions Regulator to resolve the 
£571m hole in the bust retailer’s pension scheme. A postmortem into the BHS 
scandal by MPsconcluded that Green had “systematically extracted hundreds of 
millions of pounds from BHS” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 and demands that he be stripped of his knighthood.


Philip Green demands Dominic Chappell pays into BHS pension deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/philip-green-demands-dominic-chappell-pays-into-bhs-pension-deal>


Green owned BHS for 15 years until he sold it to Dominic Chappell, a former 
bankrupt, for £1. During his ownership,the Green family and other shareholders 
collected at least £580m from BHS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/sir-philip-green-bhs-mps-pension-schemes>
 Chappell’s companyRetail Acquisitions received payments of up to £25m from BHS 
despite owning the department store chain for just 13 months until it collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration>
 intoadministration in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
.

BHS is not the only high street failure to increase demand for the charity’s 
services. Thecollapse of suit vendor Austin Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/upmarket-tailor-austin-reed-to-go-into-administration>
, with the closure of its 120 stores in June, also meant the loss of 1,000 jobs 
whileAmerican Apparel made 150 staff  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/american-apparel-shuts-all-but-one-of-uk-stores-london-administration>
 redundant in the week before Christmas. In addition the trust supports retail 
workers in the wider industry including those employed by manufacturers and 
wholesalers.

According to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation <https://www.jrf.org.uk/>, the 
retail industry is the largest low pay sector in the UK. It employs 3 million 
people with more than half of them earning less than the voluntary living wage 
of £9.75 in London or £8.45 outside the capital. Thecharity has also 
highlighted the high proportion of retail workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/philip-hammond-urged-to-downgrade-autumn-statement>
who are not earning enough to life them out of poverty – defined as having an 
income after housing costs of less than 60% of the UK average.

The row over the future of the BHS pension fund looks set to drag on into the 
new year despiteGreen’s promise to “sort” the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 back in June. The Pensions Regulator has started legal proceedings against 
Green and Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 in an attempt to force them to fill the deficit. It is understood to be 
seeking around £350m from Green and as much as £17m from Chappell.

 