
Bill Gates <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> has predicted 
researchers will “discover a clean energy breakthrough that will save our 
planet and power our world” within the next 15 years.

In their annual open letter, Bill and Melinda Gates 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/2016-Annual-Letter?WT.mc_id=02_22_2016_00_AL2016_GL-GN_&WT.tsrc=GLGN>
 provide an update on their plans to stimulate innovation in technologies for 
tackling climate change, energy poverty, and gender inequality.

In Bill’s section of the letter, which is addressed to teenagers, the 
Microsoft founder and billionaire philanthropist argues it should be a 
development priority to deliver clean energy to the 1.3 billion people who do 
not have access to power.

He also stresses that the new power needs to be low carbon in order to tackle 
the risks presented by climate change. “If we really want to help the world’s 
poorest families, we need to find a way to get them cheap, clean energy,” he 
writes. “Cheap because everyone must be able to afford it. Clean because it 
must not emit any carbon dioxide - which is driving climate change.”

And Gates argues the goal has to be truly zero emission power. “Can’t we just 
aim to cut carbon emissions in half?’ I asked many scientists,” Gates wrote. 
“But they all agreed that wouldn’t be enough. The problem is that CO2 lingers 
in the atmosphere for decades. Even if we halted carbon emissions tomorrow, the 
temperature would still rise because of the carbon that’s already been 
released. No, we need to get all the way down to zero.”

In something of a break from past comments when Gates has been critical of 
renewable energy technologies, oncedismissing wind and solar power as “cute” 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/williampentland/2011/05/05/bill-gates-wind-and-solar-are-cute/#42fd38b58d33>
, the letter welcomes recent rapid progress on renewable energy.

“New green technologies are allowing the world to produce more carbon-free 
energy from solar and wind power,” he writes. “Maybe you live near a wind farm 
or have seen solar panels near your school. It’s great that these are getting 
cheaper and more people are using them. We should use more of them where it 
makes sense, like in places where it’s especially sunny or windy. And by 
installing special new power lines we could make even more use of solar and 
wind power.”

However, he reiterates his view that to stop climate change and make energy 
affordable for everyone, the world will need “some new inventions”.

“We need more powerful, more economical solutions,” Gates writes. “In short, 
we need an energy miracle. When I say “miracle,” I don’t mean something that’s 
impossible. I’ve seen miracles happen before. The personal computer. The 
Internet. The polio vaccine. None of them happened by chance. They are the 
result of research and development and the human capacity to innovate.”

Gates argues that a combination of private sector research and development, 
such as hisrecently launched Energy Breakthrough Coalition 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/interview/2437103/bill-gates-low-carbon-innovation-will-be-critical-to-solving-2c-puzzle>
, government action, and individual endeavour can combine to deliver a new 
generation of clean energy technologies.

“We need a massive amount of research into thousands of new ideas – even ones 
that might sound a little crazy – if we want to get to zero emissions by the 
end of this century,” he said. “New ways to make solar and wind power available 
to everyone around the clock could be one solution. Some of the crazier 
inventions I’m excited about are a possible way to use solar energy to produce 
fuel, much like plants use sunlight to make food for themselves, and batteries 
the size of swimming pools with huge storage capacity.

“Many of these ideas won’t work, but that’s okay. Each dead end will teach us 
something useful and keep us moving forward. As Thomas Edison famously said, ‘I 
have not failed 10,000 times. I’ve successfully found 10,000 ways that will not 
work’.”

Gates also urged young people to engage with the energy challenge. “You may be 
wondering what you can do to help,” he wrote. “First, it’s important for 
everyone to get educated about this energy challenge. Many young people are 
already actively involved in climate and energy issues and I’m sure they could 
use more help. Your generation is one of the most globally minded in history, 
adept at looking at our world’s problems beyond national borders. This will be 
a valuable asset as we work on global solutions in the decades ahead.

“Second, if you’re someone with some crazy-sounding ideas to solve our energy 
challenge, the world needs you. Study extra hard in your math and sciences. You 
might just have the answer.”

In a separate interview to promote the letter with news agency Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-23/bill-gates-q-a-on-climate-change-we-need-a-miracle>
, Gates provided more detail on how a global clean energy R&D push could be 
orchestrated and offered an insight into why he is so confident a breakthrough 
will materialise.

“What we need to get that probability [of a breakthrough] up to be very high 
is to take 12 or so paths to get there,” he told the news agency. “Like carbon 
capture and sequestration is a path. Nuclear fission is a path. Nuclear fusion 
is a path. Solar fuels are a path. For every one of those paths, you need about 
five very diverse groups of scientists who think the other four groups are 
wrong and crazy.”

He also revealed the Breakthrough Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Coalition is working on new 
investment approaches that would provide more “patient capital” than that 
offered by traditional venture capital funds, allowing for greater investment 
in long term R&D efforts.
 