
The Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> has waded into the row 
between Apple and the FBI, arguing that the government agency is right to 
demand co-operation from Silicon Valley when it comes to terrorism 
investigations.

Gates also questioned Apple chief executive Tim Cook’s characterisation of the 
case as a demand for a “back door”,the Financial Times reported 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3559f46e-d9c5-11e5-98fd-06d75973fe09.html>.

“This is a specific case where the government is asking for access to 
information. They are not asking for some general thing, they are asking for a 
particular case,” Gates said.

“It is no different than [the question of] should anybody ever have been able 
to tell the phone company to get information, should anybody be able to get at 
bank records. Let’s say the bank had tied a ribbon round the disk drive and 
said, ‘Don’t make me cut this ribbon because you’ll make me cut it many times’.”

With his intervention, Gates stands on the opposite side of the conflict to 
many of the prominent figures in Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/18/google-whatsapp-snowden-back-apple-against-fbi>
, including Google’s Sundar Pichai and WhatsApp’s Jan Koum, and the NSA 
whistleblower Edward Snowden.

More recently, Mark Zuckerberg also expressed support for Apple, telling the 
Mobile World Congress conference in Barcelona that “we’re sympathetic withApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>. We believe in encryption; we 
think that that’s an important tool”.

“I don’t think requiring backdoors with encryption is either going to be an 
effective way to increase security or is really the right thing to do for just 
the direction that the world is going to,” Zuckerberg added.

Even Gates’ own Microsoft has issued support for Apple, of a sort. The Reform 
Government Surveillance industry lobby group, of which Microsoft is a member, 
released a statement on Thursday saying that “technology companies should not 
be required to build in backdoors to the technologies that keep their users’ 
information secure.” The statement wastweeted by Microsoft’s chief legal officer
 <https://twitter.com/BradSmi/status/700499141818880000>, Brad Smith, and then 
retweeted by Microsoft’s CEO, Satya Nadella.

The FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> has demanded that Apple 
rewrite the software on the iPhone used by the San Bernardino shooter in order 
to make it possible for the agency to safely attempt to guess the passcode used 
to lock the phone, without accidentally triggering the destruction of data 
stored on the device. The agency is investigating the murderer for links to 
terrorist groups.

In a public letter released last week <http://www.apple.com/customer-letter/>, 
Cook suggested that such modifications would amount to inserting a “back door” 
in iPhones, and would “undermine the very freedoms and liberty our government 
is meant to protect”.
 