
Bill Gates speaks about his relationship with the late Apple founder Steve 
Jobs and chooses a song in memory of their work together shaping the technology 
of the modern age, in an appearance on BBC Radio 4’sDesert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs> on Sunday.

Describing Jobs, who died in 2011, as an “incredible genius”, Gates, 60, 
chooses as one of his allotted eight favourite tracks the Beatles’s Two of Us, 
for its apposite line: “You and I have memories longer than the road that 
stretches out ahead.”.

He says: “Steve was really into music. He loved the Beatles and so did I. And 
he actually mentioned this song when we were interviewed together. Only he and 
I understood how intense [it was] and what great memories came out of it.”

The presenter Kirsty Young introduces the Microsoft co-founder as “the richest 
man in the world”, and asks him about the competitive friendship that grew 
between the rival innovators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210f60bb3cc1fe133ab3f0359e1fbaae8e3ff830%2F0_71_4851_2910%2F4851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Gates%20recalls%20rivalry%20with%20'genius'%20Steve%20Jobs%20on%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Gates%20recalls%20rivalry%20with%20%27genius%27%20Steve%20Jobs%20on%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210f60bb3cc1fe133ab3f0359e1fbaae8e3ff830%2F0_71_4851_2910%2F4851.jpg>
 Bill Gates and Steve Jobs in 1984. Photograph: Andy Freeberg/Getty Images 
“In the early years, the intensity between us had always been about the 
project and so, then, as Steve got sick, it was far more mellow, in terms of 
talking about our lives and our kids,” Gates says.

Paying tribute to the Apple co-founder’s “singular” part in the story of the 
personal computer, and admitting his envy of Jobs’s “incredible design skills”, 
Gates recalls the formative stages of their work together.

“For some periods we were complete allies, working on the original software 
for Apple. Sometimes he would be very tough on you and sometimes he would be 
very encouraging. And he got really great work out of people.”

Gates, who now spends most of his time running the charitable Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation that he set up with his wife in 2007, defends himself from the 
charge he was ruthless in building up his multibillion-dollar business.

“Well, I was only ruthless if you define having super-low prices as ruthless,” 
he tells Young. “In that sense, yes, we were aggressive.”

Gates enthuses about his work to defeat malaria and his aim for it to become 
the second virulent disease, after smallpox, to be eradicated. His impulse to 
give away most of his vast fortune is not that illogical, he argues.

“You don’t have that many choices. You are not going to spend it on yourselves 
and we think only a small proportion should go to our kids, so they can make 
their own way in the world,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642486d874aabcf1875f1961c2d3d42da1ae9829%2F83_0_3417_2049%2F3417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Gates%20recalls%20rivalry%20with%20'genius'%20Steve%20Jobs%20on%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Gates%20recalls%20rivalry%20with%20%27genius%27%20Steve%20Jobs%20on%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fbill-gates-recalls-rivalry-steve-jobs-desert-island-discs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642486d874aabcf1875f1961c2d3d42da1ae9829%2F83_0_3417_2049%2F3417.jpg>
 Bill and Melinda Gates in Davos last year. Photograph: Ruben Sprich/Reuters 
Choosing a Willie Nelson track, Blue Skies, to remind him of the night before 
his wedding to Melinda in 1994, Gates tells Young how they met: “There was a 
Microsoft meeting in New York and I was the second to last to come and she was 
the last and she sat down next to me.”

She turned down his initial offers of a date, he says, although he was the 
world’s most eligible bachelor.

“Neither of us started out thinking that it would turn into something. I was 
still being fanatical, but then we watched The Sound of Music together, which 
we both loved, and that’s when it turned serious.”

The track Can Love Survive? from the Broadway version of the Rogers and 
Hammerstein musical is another of Gates’s Desert Island choices. Its lyrics 
celebrate the fact that rich people can have a romantic love story too, despite 
having private planes and international business interests.

As a younger man in charge of Microsoft, Gates once memorised the car number 
plates of all his employees so he would know who was at work on any day. 
Marriage to Melinda has tempered this obsessive focus on work, Gates says.

“She changed that and I wanted her to change that. Now we take quite a few 
vacations. I am sure myself in my 20s would look at my schedule now and find it 
very wimpy indeed.”

Selecting Steven Pinker’s lengthy work The Better Angels of Our Nature as his 
book for the island, the castaway says his only truly guilty pleasure in life 
is his ability to fly around the world in his own plane.
 