
Wearing an £80,000 exoskeleton, Sophie Morgan is half woman, half robot.

Beneath her feet are two metal plates, and at her hand a digital display, a 
joystick and, somewhat alarmingly, a bright red emergency button.


As she pushes the joystick forward, the bionic legs take their first steps – a 
loud, industrial whirring strikes up and her right foot is raised, extended and 
placed forward. Her left slowly follows. As she looks up, a smile spreads 
across her face.


Exoskeletons, touted as devices that will allow the injured to walk, elderly 
people to remain independent for longer, the military to get more from soldiers 
and even turn all of us into mechanically enhanced humans, have captured the 
imagination of researchers across the world, from startups to Nasa.

For now, the most obvious – and tangible – application has involved allowing 
paralysed people to stand and walk. “It was a mixture of surrealism and just 
absolute, just the most exhilarating feeling,” says Morgan, describing her 
first experience of the technology four years ago.

Now 31, the artist, model and presenter of Channel 4’s 2016 Paralympic 
coverage was paralysed in a car accident aged 18 and has used a wheelchair ever 
since. The idea to try the exoskeleton, she says, came from the BBC security 
correspondent Frank Gardner, who uses a wheelchair after beingshot while 
reporting from Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/apr/19/saudiarabia.broadcasting>.


The exoskeleton, from Rex Bionics, offered a life-changing experience, 
according to Morgan. “It had been 10 years, give or take, since I had properly 
stood, so that was in itself quite overwhelming,” she says. The impact was far 
reaching. “It is not just about the joy of ‘Oh, I am standing’. It is the 
difference it makes, the way you feel afterwards, psychologically and 
physiologically – it is immeasurable.”


Returning to her wheelchair, says Morgan, is a disappointing experience. “I am 
walking in my dreams, so it does blur that line – that liminal space between 
real and dream, and reality and fantasy,” she says of the device.


The exoskeleton isn’t just about stirring excitement. As Morgan points out, 
there are myriad health problems associated with sitting for long periods of 
time. Areport  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/01/office-workers-on-feet-standing-fours-hours-day-study-health>
co-commissioned by Public Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england> and 
published last year highlighted findings showing that, compared with those up 
and about the most, individuals who spend the longest time sitting are around 
twice as likely to develop type 2 diabetes and have a 13% higher risk of 
developing cancer.

Wheelchair users, adds Morgan, also face side-effects, from pressure sores to 
urinary tract infections. “It could be the difference between longevity and not 
for people like me,” she says of the exoskeleton.


The competition

About 40 of the Rex Bionic devices are currently in use worldwide, including 
in rehabilitation centres, says Richard Little, co-founder of the company. An 
engineer, Little says he was inspired to develop the system after his best 
friend and co-founder was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.

But there is competition. As Little points out, the development of battery 
technology, processing power and components has brought a number of 
exoskeletons on to the market in recent years, including those from the 
US-based companies ReWalk and Ekso Bionics. “[They] offer a whole load of 
different things which are similar in some ways but different in others,” says 
Little. “[Ours] doesn’t use crutches,” he points out, adding that the 
innovation removes the risk of users inadvertently damaging their shoulders, 
and frees their arms.

There are tantalising signs that exoskeletons could do more than just aid 
rehabilitation or increase the mobility options for those who have experienced 
a stroke or spinal cord injury.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2643f710a9d54b5def2a9e3673ccec02090ab7f%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bionic%20legs%20and%20smart%20slacks%3A%20exoskeletons%20that%20could%20enhance%20us%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bionic%20legs%20and%20smart%20slacks%3A%20exoskeletons%20that%20could%20enhance%20us%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2643f710a9d54b5def2a9e3673ccec02090ab7f%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Sophie Morgan walks with the aid of Rex. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the 
Guardian 
While the bionic legs tried by Morgan are pre-programmed, researchers have 
developed exoskeletons controlled by a non-invasive system linked to the brain, 
allowing an even wider range of wheelchair users to walk. What’s more, when 
combined with virtual reality and tactile feedback, the systems even appear to 
promote a degree of recovery  
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=7&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiBrseT8uTQAhWHiRoKHWL5C-oQFggtMAY&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fbrain-training-technique-restores-feeling-and-movement-to-paraplegics-virtual-reality&usg=AFQjCNENlz1U0JJWLhT1iag6aNJWJngwuA&sig2=_PcH1ixikgvJ9DJf0ktKVQ>
for people with paraplegia.

“All our patients got some degree of neurological recovery, which has never 
been documented in spinal cord injury,” says Miguel Nicolelis, co-director of 
Duke University’s centre for neuroengineering, who led the work.


It’s a development that excites Little, whose team have also been exploring 
the possibility of thought control with their own device.


Yet despite their transformative capabilities, the limitations of such bulky 
exoskeletons have left many frustrated. Tim Swift, co-founder of the US startup 
Roam Robotics and one of the original researchers behind the exoskeleton from 
Ekso Bionics, is one of them.

“It is a 50lb machine that costs $100,000 and has a half-mile-an-hour speed 
and can’t turn,” he says of his former work. “There are only so many 
applications where that makes sense. This is not a shift towards consumer, this 
is a hunt for somewhere we can actually use the technologies we are making.”


The dream, says Swift, is to create affordable devices that could turn us all 
into superhumans, augmenting our abilities by merging the biological with state 
of the art devices to unleash a new, improved, wave of soldiers, workers, agile 
pensioners and even everyday hikers. But in devising the underpinning 
technology, he says it is time to ditch the motors and metal approach that he 
himself pioneered.

While hefty, rigid devices can support someone with paraplegia, says Swift, 
such exoskeletons are too heavy and costly for wider applications – such as 
helping a runner go faster. The fundamental challenge, he adds, is to create a 
device that remains powerful while keeping the weight down. “I think you have 
two solutions,” he says. The first is to develop a new, lightweight system that 
efficiently uses battery energy to generate movement. The second, he says, is 
to stick with metals and motors but be more intelligent in how you use them.

Swift’s answer is based on the former – but it hasn’t received universal 
acclaim. “I have spent the last two and a half years literally getting laughed 
out of conferences when I tell people we are going to make inflated 
exoskeletons,” he says. “People think it is a running joke.”


But Swift is adamant that to produce a system that can be used in myriad ways 
to augment humans, be it on the building site, in the home or up a mountain, 
technologists must innovate. And air, he believes, is the way to do it. The 
result, so far, is a series of proof-of-concept devices, braces that look a 
little like padded shin-guards, that can be strapped on to arms or legs.

“The fundamentals allow you to have extremely lightweight structures [and] 
extremely low cost because everything is basically plastics and fabrics as 
opposed to precision machined metals,” he says. And there is another boon. 
“Because you can make something that is very lightweight without sacrificing 
power, you are actually increasing the power density, which creates these 
opportunities to do highly dynamic behaviours.”


In other words, according to Swift, exoskeletons made of inflated fabric could 
not only boost a human’s walking abilities, but also help them run, jump or 
even climb. “When I say I want someone to go into Footlocker and buy a shoe 
that makes them run 25% faster – [we are] actively looking at things that look 
like that,” he says.

Others agree with Swift about the need to reduce the clunkiness of 
exoskeletons, but take a different approach.

Augmenting humans

Hugh Herr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/09/disability-amputees-bionics-hugh-herr-super-prostheses>
 is a rock climber, engineer and head of the biomechatronics research group at 
MIT. A double amputee, the result of a climbing accident on Mount Washington, 
Herr has pioneered the development of bionic limbs, inventing his own in the 
process. But it was in 2014 that his team became the first to make an 
all-important breakthrough: creating a powered, autonomous exoskeleton that 
could reduce the energy it took a human to walk.

“No one is going to want to wear an exoskeleton if it is a fancy exercise 
machine, if it makes you sweat more and work harder, what is the point?” says 
Herr. “My view is if an exoskeleton fails to reduce metabolism, one needs to 
start over and go back to the drawing board.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96af1bb145002d44c51d00e8aa13db58ce7dfc7d%2F0_0_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bionic%20legs%20and%20smart%20slacks%3A%20exoskeletons%20that%20could%20enhance%20us%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bionic%20legs%20and%20smart%20slacks%3A%20exoskeletons%20that%20could%20enhance%20us%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbionic-legs-and-smart-slacks-exoskeletons-that-could-enhance-us-all%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96af1bb145002d44c51d00e8aa13db58ce7dfc7d%2F0_0_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
 Hugh Herr. Photograph: Alamy 
To boost our bodies, says Herr, it is necessary to break the challenge down. 
“We are taking a first principle approach, and joint by joint understanding 
deeply what has to be done scientifically and technologically to augment a 
human,” he says.


For Herr the future is not inflatables (“pneumatics tend to be very 
inefficient,” he says) but minimalistic, stripping away the mass of 
conventional exoskeletons so that the device augments, rather than weighs down, 
the wearer. “If you separated the device from the human, it can’t even uphold 
its own weight,” he says.


The approach, he adds, was to focus on the area of the body with biggest 
influence when it came to walking, “Arguably the most important muscle to 
bipedal human gait is the calf muscle,” he says. “So we said in a minimalist 
design [with] minimal weight and mass, one arguably should build an artificial 
calf muscle.”


Boasting sensors for position, speed and force for feedback, and programmed to 
move and respond in a natural way, the device drives the foot forward, saving 
the wearer energy on each step. “Our artificial calf muscle pushes the human in 
just the right time in the gait cycle where the human is most inefficient and 
after that period gets out of the way completely,” he says.

Herr isn’t alone in focusing on such minimalist ankle-based devices. Among 
other pioneers is Conor Walsh at Harvard University who has createdsimilar 
exoskeletons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/20/robot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again>
 to help stroke patients walk. The devices are a million miles from the 
cumbersome bionic legs with with Morgan walked across the office, but then Herr 
believes the future for exoskeletons lies firmly with the augmented human.

“In the future when a person is paralysed, they won’t use an exoskeleton. The 
reason is we are going to understand how to repair tissues,” he says. “The only 
time to use an exoskeleton is if you want to go beyond what the muscles are 
capable of, beyond innate physicality.”

Making them look like second skins and behave like second skins is going to 
happen

In Bristol, Jonathan Rossiter is hoping to do just that with an even bolder 
approach: smart materials. “Fabrics and textiles and rubbers is a really good 
description of the things we are looking at,” he says. Professor of robotics at 
Bristol University and head of theSoft Robotics 
<http://www.brl.ac.uk/researchthemes/softrobotics.aspx> group at Bristol 
Robotics Laboratory <http://www.brl.ac.uk/>, Rossiter believes exoskeletons of 
the future will look more like a pair of trousers. “Making them look like 
second skins and actually behave like second skins is going to happen,” he says.


The technology behind it, says Rossiter, will be hi-tech materials: rubbers 
that bend when electricity is applied, or fabrics that move in response to 
light, for example. “We build up from the materials to the mechanisms,” he says.


Conscious of an ageing population, Rossiter believes a pair of smart trousers 
will prove invaluable in keeping people independent for longer, from helping 
them out of chairs to allowing them to walk that bit further. But he too sees 
them becoming popular gadgets, helping hikers clamber up mountains.


There is, however, a hitch. Scaling up smart materials from the tiny 
dimensions explored in the lab to a full-blown set of slacks is no small feat. 
“You are taking something which is [a] nanomaterial. You have to fabricate it 
so that it layers up nicely, it doesn’t have any errors in it, it doesn’t have 
any fractures or anything else and see if you can transpose that into something 
you can wear,” says Rossiter. In short, it will be a few seasons yet before 
your wardrobe will be boasting some seriously smart legwear.

But as technology marches on, the dream gets closer to reality. Herr, for one, 
believes commercial devices are a hop, skip and a jump away – arriving within 
the next two decades.

“Imagine if you had leg exoskeletons where you could traverse across very, 
very irregular natural surfaces, natural terrains with a dramatically reduced 
metabolism and an increased speed while you are jumping over logs and hopping 
from rock to rock, going up and down mountains,” he says, conjuring up a scene 
of a bionic, human gazelle.

“When that device exists in the world, no one will ever use the mountain bike 
again.”
 