
For a genre that's been dismissed so many times, the biopic is in 
impertinently rude health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/12/top-10-biopics-movies>. 
In the past six months in the UK – and only counting the ones about major 
public figures – we've hadBehind the Candelabra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154523/behind-the-candelabra>, Renoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/86354/renoir>, Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156631/lovelace>, Rush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156181/rush>, Diana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155590/diana>, Hannah Arendt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148741/hannah-arendt>, The Fifth Estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151168/fifth-estate>, One Chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156210/one-chance>, Saving Mr Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156373/saving-mr-banks>, Kill Your 
Darlings <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156989/kill-your-darlings>, and
Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156450/mandela>. The next few weeks 
alone will grant us audiences with Solomon Northup (12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave>), Charles 
Dickens (The Invisible Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156899/invisible-woman>) and Grace of 
Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/158069/grace-of-monaco>.

Somewhere down the line, though, the biopic tightened up its act. The Mandela 
picture's cradle-to-the-grave trudge looks positively old-fashioned now; even 
12 Years a Slave is a bit copperplate. The new-school, high-definition biopic 
goes for the essence, rather than a chronicle of events, focusing on a 
galvanising incident or episode in the life of our chosen luminary. Often 
that's a romance, such as in The Invisible Woman (about Dickens's affair with 
actor Nelly Ternan), Diana and My Week with Marilyn. Or a romance flipped into 
a rivalry, as in Rush andThe Damned United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128733/damned-united>. Or it could be a 
seminal piece of culture coming to fruition, as in Saving Mr Banks. Or 
overcoming a stammer (The King's Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech>).

Steven Spielberg confirmed that "biopic" had become a soiled concept when he 
refused to giveLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149491/lincoln>, 
which zeroed in on the last four months of the president's life, that label. "I 
sometimes refer to it as a portrait," the director said, "meaning that it was 
one painting out of many that could have been drawn over the years of the 
president's life." The zoomed-in approach isn't new (Bonnie & Clyde is one 
earlier example) – but what certainly is, is the concentration of top-line 
stars such as Daniel Day-Lewis in these projects.

It's not surprising that the genre evolved, given how important it's become. 
Fourteen out of 26 principal acting Oscars since 2000 have gone to people 
playing real-life figures (albeit some in films, likeLast King of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/115233/last.king.of.scotland>, that 
aren't strictly biopics). That double-halo effect – a film star playing another 
famous person – always fired up audiences and awards panels. But the 
intensified celebrity quotient, star and subject merging, is what has allowed 
the biopic to thrive under the harsher financial regimen that has ruled 
Hollywood since the mid-noughties. Unlike other conventional drama (which has 
been pushed to the margins), stories about well-known people have the crucial 
brand-awareness factor studio executives demand now.

Currently hardening into the formula du jour to feed that demand, the high-def 
biopic emerged from a climate ofnoughties experimentation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/18/making-biopics>. By then, the 
traditional cinematic biography – established in the 1930s when the studios 
liked to educate and elevate with "great man" stories about scientists and 
politicians – looked seriously shopworn. Reverential stances and staid 
presentation went out of the window in the likes of24 Hour Party People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91616/24.hour.party.people>, American 
Splendor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96545/american.splendor> and 
I'm Not There <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120865/i.m.not.there>, 
which broke the fourth wall and questioned the idea of biographical fidelity.

The biggest thing to come out of this shakeup was the adoption of the high-def 
biopic as the dominant box-office form. Many of the earlier zoomed-in stories, 
such asShadowlands <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/51770/shadowlands>, 
The Madness of King George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/55729/madness-of-king-george> and Total 
Eclipse, had been transplanted from the tight confines of the stage – and 
tended to attract arthouse and indie personnel in their film versions. But 
since 2003, when Gwyneth Paltrow broke out her cashmere sweater collection to
play Sylvia Plath <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96934/sylvia>, and 
the following year, as Johnny Depp channelled his man-child mojo for a turn as 
JM Barrie inFinding Neverland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/102892/finding.neverland>, the flood of 
big-name stars in these projects hasn't stopped. Helen Mirren's Oscar forThe 
Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114297/queen> – the portrait 
format offering audiences a tantalising intimacy with the world's most famous 
woman, to the tune of $123m box office – sealed the switchover.

So with Tom Hanks (Saving Mr Banks), Naomi Watts (Diana), Day-Lewis, Bill 
Murray (Hyde Park on Hudson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148742/hyde-park-on-hudson>), Michelle 
Williams (My Week with Marilyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142796/my-week-with-marilyn>) et al, 
alongside more traditionally structured works likeWalk the Line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/108558/walk.the.line>, J Edgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142807/j-edgar> and The Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>, there has been a 
conveyor belt of these relatively inexpensive prestige pictures feeding the 
awards machine in recent years. But the high-def biopic has kept the multiplex 
onside by cribbing from the blockbuster world. Two years after Christian Bale 
took us blow-by-blow through Bruce Wayne's early casebook in Batman Begins, 
Anne Hathaway played a feisty but callow twentysomething Hampshire writer who 
gains the life experience she needs thanks to a fling with a metropolitan 
hellraiser. Highlighting a formative episode in her pre-fame life, 2007's
Becoming Jane <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/117357/becoming.jane> was 
effectively an origin story, a prequel to the better-thumbed chapters of the 
Austen biography.

The high-def biopic began to orbit around the origin story; in effect extended 
flashbacks in the style of X-Men First Class-style, in which the nascent 
superpowers were, say, feminist consciousness, directional fashion sense, or 
divine mandate to rule. Shakespeare in Love and Elizabeth, both released in 
1998, got there first, but they were isolated examples – before the superhero 
film took the origin-story model mainstream.

Since that happened, we've had Nowhere Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/132848/nowhere-boy>, kicking off its 
ballad of the adolescent John Lennon with a promissory strum of Hard Day's 
Night's opening chord; The Young Victoria, an unconvincing attempt to pack the 
19th-century queen's early struggles full of Roman-level intrigue; The Damned 
United, with Michael Sheen's 70s Brian Clough working up an oedipal froth about 
his idol and nemesis Don Revie; Coco Before Chanel, Audrey Tautou's young 
seamstress rising from dowdy Parisian bars to high society, among others.

Even if they don't literally go full Muppet Babies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ju75XsCO4o>, plenty of other high-def biopics 
are spiritually and culturally origin stories. The King's Speech uses one man's 
enunciation stress as an excuse for a nostalgic glance at the last time, on the 
cusp of the second world war, when Britain enjoyed imperial world prestige – a 
little backwards patriotic fling for 2011 audiences prior to the jubilee and 
the London Olympics. Lots of the recent biopics revisiting iconic works of art 
are harking back, at a time when originality seems either unachievable or 
commercially taboo, to a kind of pre-internet cultural Eden, when the rivers of 
creativity were undammed, and it was still possible for artists to blindside 
and captivate audiences with a Psycho or an In Cold Blood. Or, as in My Week 
with Marilyn, when film stars still had that old black magic.

An urge to revisit the source and tap into something essential is the spirit 
that rules the high-def biopic. This retro undertow is starting to stand out as 
the important thing, above and beyond the films' subject matter: did the world 
actually need 113 minutes on Princess Di's dalliance with surgeon Hasnat Khan 
(directed by Oliver Hirschbiegel, also responsible for the far superior 
new-school Hitler biopic Downfall)? Does anyone believe, as per Saving Mr 
Banks, that PL Travers' trip to Disneyland during the making of Mary Poppins is 
some kind of fascinating cultural nexus point?

The streamlined biopic industry is feeding a need that's arisen over the last 
decade. It's as if, lacking faith in a difficult present, we're trying to enter 
and stage a sit-in at our own collective past. The traditional biopic was 
closer to a historical or literary document, phrased in the past tense and the 
third person; the high-def version, though still dealing in past events, is 
fiercely present tense and, often getting us to identify with protagonists with 
"universal", superhero-style character arcs, more first-person. King George V's 
ambivalence about his duties is our confusion over national identity. 
Cloughie's instinctive attitude to football is a mirror of our dissatisfaction 
with the moneyed Premier League, and modern corporate ubiquity. Present-day 
concerns always hung over the biopic somewhere, but the compressed form 
enshrines them right at its heart.

The compulsion to search for past touchstones is strong – that's obvious from 
the sheer volume of biopics being produced nowadays. It's so pressing that 
we're increasingly profiling, and according significance to, people on whom 
history has barely settled at all.The Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137709/social-network> is possibly the 
greatest high-def biopic – but you could view the sheer eagerness with which 
David Fincher and Aaron Sorkin tore into Mark Zuckerberg (with only six years 
between Facebook's launch and the film's), and their vituperative line on the 
online revolution, as problematic from a biographer or historian's point of 
view. Had enough time lapsed to truly understand what is happening to us?

The makers of The Fifth Estate, or the three forthcoming Lance Armstrong 
biopics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/16/chris-odowd-lance-armstrong-movie-tour-france-doping>
, obviously think so. But the rush to document contemporary lives could 
actually undermine the integrity of the biopic.Peter Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/13/peter-morgan-scriptwriter-frost-nixon>
, whose screenwriting (The Queen; Frost/Nixon; The Damned United; and more) has 
done so much to drive the new school, operates under a 10-year rule: "If you 
have distance from the events, then your story can work as an analogy or 
parable, rather than its literal narrative," he said. "People can watch the 
Frost/Nixon interviews and make associations that aren't just about Richard 
Nixon and David Frost. Because time has passed, the film can have an additional 
resonance through metaphor."

The ones that can't wait want to secure a premature posterity for the here and 
now. But they're driven by the same insecurity about the present moment – 
whether our political, cultural and sporting figures can live up their 
predecessors – that has fuelled the biopic boom, causing more film-makers to 
inhabit the past with an ever greater immediacy. Once, the classic biopic 
problem was that it was always in hock to the future, struggling to generate 
true drama because it was constantly pre-empted by our knowledge of what that 
person was destined to become. The high-def version solved the drama issue – 
but, as we flounder for our own leaders and trailblazers, it's got caught up in 
trying to prove the past has a future.
 