
Climate change has already led to the vanishing of some bird species in parts 
of England, where intensively farmed land gives them no room to adapt to 
warming temperatures. The revelation, in a new scientific study,contradicts 
previous suggestions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/28/climate-change-driving-birds-migrate-early-research-reveals-edinburgh-global-warming>
 that birds are tracking global warming by shifting their ranges.

The research found that birds that prefer cooler climes, such as meadow pipits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/05/meadow-pipit-flight-peak-district>
, willow tits and willow warblers, have disappeared from sites in south-east 
England and East Anglia, where intensive crop growing is common.

“Birds are facing a double-edged sword from climate change and declines in 
habitat quality,” said Tom Oliver, at the University of Reading, who led the 
new study. “In England, birds really look like they are struggling to cope with 
climate change. They are already being hit with long-term reductions in habitat 
quality and, for the cold-associated birds, those losses are being further 
exacerbated by climate change.”

Related: Climate change is disrupting seasonal behaviour of Britain's wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/29/climate-change-is-disrupting-seasonal-behaviour-of-britains-wildlife>

“Climate change is with us, here and now, and its effects on wildlife are 
increasingly well documented,” said Mike Morecroft, principal climate change 
specialist at Natural England, and part of the research team.

Simon Gillings, at the British Trust for Ornithology, and another member of 
the research team, said: “Intensive [land] management is making it harder for 
cold-associated birds to find cool corners of sites, or to disperse away from 
warming regions.”

But Oliver noted that showing the impact of climate change on wildlife is 
affected by the availability of good habitats means action can be taken: “We 
are not completely at the mercy of climate change.” Creating larger natural 
areas in strategic places will help species cope with a changing climate, the 
scientists said.
 A family of willow warblers at a summer nest site in Scotland. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
The study, published in Global Change Biology 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)1365-2486>, analysed both 
bird and butterfly data from more than 600 sites monitored between 1964 and 
2009. It foundbutterflies <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/butterflies> 
were adapting much better to climate change than birds, although 
cold-associated butterfly species also suffered if the area around the site was 
poor in natural habitat.

But while many of the butterfly species that enjoy warmer weather were 
thriving, birds associated with warmer temperatures were not, due to lost or 
degraded habitat.

Related: 2016 State of Nature report: wildlife winners and losers - in pictures
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/14/2016-state-of-nature-report-wildlife-winners-and-losers-in-pictures>

Oliver said butterflies were faring better as they require much smaller areas 
of natural land, which are more likely to be available. Good habitat means more 
suitable food plants and more microclimates in which species can thrive in good 
years and survive in poor ones.

The ringlet butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/14/2016-state-of-nature-report-wildlife-winners-and-losers-in-pictures>
, for example, suffers badly in drought years. But they can hang on if there 
are patches of broadleaf woodland available, as these resist droughts and keep 
soils more moist than treeless landscapes.

Butterflies <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/butterflies> can also 
produce many generations in a single year when conditions are favourable, 
whereas birds reproduce more slowly. The small copper butterfly can have up to 
five generations a year, Oliver said.
 The large white-faced darter is one of eleven new dragonfly species to arrive 
in Britain since 1995. It made its first appearance in 2012. Photograph: 
Christophe Brochard/British Dragonfly Society 
Like butterflies, dragonflies and damselflies are generally adapting well to 
climate change and warming has brought 11 new species to Britain since 1995, 
according to a new report from theBritish Dragonfly Society 
<http://www.british-dragonflies.org.uk>. Newcomers include the stunning large 
white-faced darter and Genevieve Dalley, at the BDS, said: “These unprecedented 
events currently happening in the dragonfly world are exciting but also act as 
a warning: the natural world is changing.”

But global warming is also threatening the northern damselfly, restricted to a 
few small lochs in Scotland, and the black darter, which is becoming less 
common in the south of Britain.

The scientists conducting the bird and butterfly research determined the 
temperature favoured by each species by looking at the average warmth of their 
ranges across Europe, with those preferring heat found mostly in southern 
Europe and vice versa.

Stopping the destruction of habitat such as hedgerows and old orchards and 
creating new nature reserves can give opportunities for wildlife to adapt to 
global warming said Oliver. Butbiodiversity across England continues to fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/one-in-10-uk-wildlife-species-faces-extinction-major-report-shows>
, he said, despite alandmark review of wildlife sites 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/making-space-for-nature-a-review-of-englands-wildlife-sites-published-today>
 for the government in 2010.
 Meadow pipits, willow tits and willow warblers have disappeared from sites in 
East Anglia due to crop farming. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
“That report called for a step change in nature conservation,” said Oliver. 
“We are still waiting for that step change and until we see it we can’t really 
expect the fortunes of our wildlife to change.”

Richard Bradbury at the RSPB and not involved in the new research said: 
“Making use of the tremendously rich wildlife data collected by dedicated UK 
volunteer observers, this study provides further compelling evidence that 
climate change is already affecting the UK’s species.”

A major report in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/one-in-six-of-worlds-species-faces-extinction-due-to-climate-change-study>
 found that one in six of the world’s species faces extinction due to climate 
change unless action is taken to cut carbon emissions rapidly.
 