
With NYPD cops patrolling streets, visitors to New York often feel as if 
they've got a walk-on part in a TV drama. But is the reality of working in New 
York as a Brit as dramatic?

 Not so, says Harriet Sharrard, executive administrator to Ellen Levine, 
editor-in-chief of Good Housekeeping, one of America's top-selling magazines 
and part of the Hearst Publishing empire. 'A big city is the same anywhere in 
the world, though I sometimes feel that New York is the city and everywhere 
else is just a version of it,' says Sharrard. 'If you are used to city life, 
it's fine.

 It's cleaner than London, easier to get around and shopping is definitely a 
nicer experience.' Sharrard, 36, relocated to New York from London over two 
years ago, when her husband was offered work there. Initially, visa 
restrictions meant she was unable to work but when she gained a prized green 
card a year ago, she began scouring the New York Times and signed up with the 
British Connection, an agency specialising in placing Brits in jobs.

'British PAs are usually the only people who do shorthand. No one here learns 
shorthand, but plenty of bosses, many of them very senior, like to dictate 
direct. There is cachet in the British accent answering the phone, though Ellen 
wasn't bothered with that. She just wanted someone she connected with.' After 
graduating from Keele University and completing a postgraduate journalism 
course, Sharrard worked as a secretary at the Conservative Central Office.

Following 18 months at the Institute of European Defence and Strategic 
Studies, she became PA to Lord Bethel. 'I was his entire staff, working from 
his dining room table.' So the move to an American office might have been a 
shock. 'I knew the job would be similar, working for someone who has no time, 
who has to have someone to gently bully them.' Her bullying tactics are subtle.

 'If Ellen's meetings are overrunning, I'll go in and lift my eyebrows or 
glance at my watch.' Sharrard ensures things run smoothly. 'I have to keep 
Ellen's calendar, as they call diaries here, full to see all the people who 
need to see her, but she also needs time to read or follow up on calls.' 
Sharrard has discovered advantages: 'Sometimes putting on a snooty British 
accent is useful. It's great for stopping people walking in, and for getting 
reservations in restaurants.'

British PAs have a slightly 'nannyish' reputation in the US, says Sharrard, 
although she happily admits to being 'anally retentive' about the organisation 
of her work. Diplomacy is important: 'When someone is shrieking that they need 
to see Ellen, calming them down and making them feel you're on their side is 
what's needed.' Sharrard's main responsibility is Levine's diary.

'It changes the whole time, nothing is written in pen and I have to constantly 
balance her regular meetings with various editors along with fitting other 
people in.' She also gets involved in extra-office activities. Last year she 
helped organise a staff outing to Mohonk Mountain Retreat:

'It was a touchy-feely thing to get people to act as a team. Almost everyone 
was sceptical about it, but we had a good time.' As for homesickness, e-mail is 
a lifeline and while Sharrard misses listening to The Archers, New York and her 
job make up for it.

 Â• The British Connection: 00 1 212 223 2510
 