
Blackpool host their first home game of the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> season on Saturday 
amid a backdrop of relegation, managerial change, player upheaval and, as 
though to confirm that misery can be unremitting, defeat to lower league 
opposition in the first round of the Capital One Cup in midweek. Apprehension 
surrounding Rochdale’s visit to Bloomfield Road, however, continues to centre 
on potential for conflict off the pitch.

Saturday also marks Blackpool’s first home game since their farewell to the 
Championship against Huddersfield Town in May was abandoned when supporters 
invaded the pitch in protest at the club’s owners, the Oyston family, andstaged 
a sit-in demonstration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/04/blackpool-game-huddersfield-not-replayed>
 lasting over an hour.

Northampton Town 3-0 Blackpool | Capital One Cup first round match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/11/northampton-blackpool-capital-one-cup-match-report>
The Seasiders were fined £50,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/fa-fine-blackpool-fans-abandoned-game-huddersfield>
 by the Football Association and warned they must play a game behind closed 
doors if there is another pitch invasion within the next 12 months. The 
Football League imposed a three-point deduction on Blackpool, suspended for two 
seasons, for failing to fulfil the fixture. Both punishments arrived after a 
pre-season friendly at Lancaster City was abandoned when a few Blackpool fans 
staged another centrecircle protest against the controversial chairman Karl 
Oyston.

The threat of a hat-trick that would cost Blackpool three points and gate 
receipts looms over Saturday’s fixture, although theBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> Supporters Trust – who have 
proposed a £16m leveraged buyout of the club and helped organise a protest 
march against the Oystons before the Huddersfield game – are opposed to any 
more pitch invasions. Not that the summer months have brought an appeasement.

“The level of concern about the club’s future under the current owners remains 
exactly the same as it was in May,” says the BST secretary, Kevin Boroduwicz. 
“There is a likelihood of people taking measures they would never normally 
contemplate as they become ever more concerned but we have decided, after 
taking a vote among our members, not to get involved in or condone any further 
pitch invasions.

“We made representations to the FA about why we were protesting against the 
owners in May but the FA ignored us, which was extremely disappointing. There 
will be a protest outside the ground on Saturday but many supporters will not 
pay to go inside the stadium and give money to the current owners.

“It’s very unlikely there will be a repeat of the pitch invasion that took 
place against Huddersfield in the near future but there could be a repeat of 
what happened at Lancaster with one or two people invading the pitch of their 
own volition. The police have made it clear to us, and the Oystons have spoken 
to the police about ensuring matches are completed, that they will act very 
differently (to the Huddersfield protest) if that is the case.”

Indeed, Blackpool police this week charged seven people, aged from 16 to 46, 
with public order offences related to the pitch invasion against Huddersfield 
on 2 May and warned supporters they could be banned from matches for 
encroaching on to Bloomfield Road. “Pitch encroachment is an offence which 
could result in being arrested and banned from matches and we hope that all 
supporters will enjoy this season’s fixtures safely and responsibly,” said 
detective inspector Jason Richardson.

The abandoned friendly at Lancaster was Neil McDonald’s first game as manager 
after replacing Lee Clark, who resigned only six months into the job following 
relegation from the Championship. McDonald’s most recent match was the 3-0 cup 
defeat at Northampton Town on Tuesday, when the League Two side hit the 
woodwork twice in the opening 10 minutes before scoring three times in a 
nine-minute spell midway through the first half. “We were absolutely rubbish in 
the first half,” said Sam Allardyce’s former assistant at West Ham United. 
Blackpool were booed off at the interval by 305 away fans. On Saturday, 
supporters’ anger will revert to the owners they allegehave reduced the club to 
“a parlous state” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/07/blackpool-fan-group-bid-buy-out-owen-karl-oyston-supporters-trust>
.

The BST has responded to a series of questions posed in public by Owen Oyston 
over its takeover bid butrequested that any further negotiations occur in 
private 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/28/blackpool-supporters-trust-private-talks-oyston>
. In the meantime, protests look set to continue whether inside or outside 
Bloomfield Road.

“We are very serious about rescuing the club,” added Boroduwicz. “Although the 
Oystons think they have done a great job we disagree with them on what the 
future holds. We have very real concerns about the future of the club and the 
actions taken have been entirely in response to the owners and the chairman in 
particular. To sue fans, as Karl Oyston is doing, is beyond the pale for many 
people.

“Our concern is for the heart and soul of the football club that we see being 
removed before our eyes. The club is more than a business no matter how many 
people try to take it that way. People are only acting to protect something 
they dearly love. This club is part of the fabric of the town and it really 
matters to us.”
 