
Only blackbirds sang: defiant, enchanting; blackbirds weathered the storm 
through song. From inside huge, green skirts of horse chestnut trees; from 
hedges where emerging sycamore leaves turned the colour of meat cuts on a 
butcher's counter; from the hopelessly pretty flowering cherries shredding into 
many weddings' worth of pink confetti – the blackbirds sang. Theirs was a 
song filled with confidence and daring, as if the wind and rain which silenced 
other birds had suddenly opened a space for an exclusively blackbird 
performance.

Often, it seems to me, blackbirds will sing powerfully and then become 
listless, desultory, until they begin to chide and complain as if they're 
disappointed – disappointed in the day, the world. Not today. Night had seen an 
ogreish wind come kicking down the lanes, mauling through trees, cracking 
branches, dragging a mire of sloshing rain with it. Rain on rain. In the 
morning it was still stair-rodding down. Puddles on paths – where butterflies 
basked and bumblebees careered just days ago – joined together into muddy 
streams. Rippling waves pulsed down lanes, swilling over stick-clogged drains. 
Two magpies, joyless, and several jackdaws trudged around sheep feeders and a 
few wood pigeons hurried for cover.

The west was wiped out by grey mist, the sky wringing rags. Splashing through 
puddles which would certainly become a flood somewhere was delicious. "Vile" 
was how many described the weather, as if we, like the blackbirds, relished our 
complaining so much that our noises of bitter disappointment with the world 
became a sort of backhanded compliment to it. But through all this, only 
blackbirds sang: with power and passion; a clarity which cut through the 
weather like the voice of a loved one in a crowded room.
 