
Blackpool have been given a suspended three-point deduction for the pitch 
invasion that forced their Championship match withHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> to be abandoned in May.

Home supporters entered the field of play in the second half of the last game 
of the season in protest at the club’s owners, eventually forcing the game to 
be called off when they refused to move for over an hour.

Last week the Football Association fined Blackpool £50,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/fa-fine-blackpool-fans-abandoned-game-huddersfield>
 and decreed they would be made to play a competitive match behind closed doors 
next season if another game was to be disrupted by fans.

A commission set up by the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> has now announced its 
ruling on the matter, handing Blackpool a three-point deduction suspended for 
two seasons.

However, despite an application from the League to force Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> to compensate Huddersfield 
supporters following the abandonment, the commission has ruled the club is not 
required to reimburse travelling fans.

The Football League declared in May that the result of the match would be 0-0, 
which was the score when the demonstrations started in the 48th minute, and the 
fixture would not be replayed as Huddersfield were already safe and Blackpool’s 
relegation into League One had been sealed weeks earlier.

Blackpool have now been punished by two separate bodies and know they face 
much heavier sanctions if their supporters show their disgruntlement on the 
pitch again this season.

Similar scenes forced a pre-season friendly against Lancaster to be called off 
last month and a game at Morecambe was played behind closed doors amid fears of 
further protests.

The match with Morecambe had initially been postponed and Blackpool issued a 
strong statement on their website at the time vowing to come down hard on those 
involved in demonstrations.

It read: “For the avoidance of doubt, the club will not stand by and allow the 
actions of a minority continue to hamper football being played.

“The club will hand out stadium bans to those involved in pitch invasions to 
date and pursue civil proceedings for damages, as well as further injunctions 
to include powers of arrest should anybody under the terms of a banning order 
attempt to enter the stadium.”

The unhappiness at the handling of affairs at Bloomfield Road has not 
dissipated in recent weeks and the Blackpool Supporters Trust is hopeful of
entering negotiations with owner Owen Oyston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/07/blackpool-fan-group-bid-buy-out-owen-karl-oyston-supporters-trust>
 over a £16m leveraged buyout.
 