
The tide was out and as I approached the mill outflow I could see a black swan 
hunkered down on the exposed shingle. Native to Australia,black swans 
<https://www.beautyofbirds.com/blackswans.html> were introduced to Britain in 
1791 as ornamental birds in captive wildfowl collections. Due to inevitable
escapees <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-20712981> and 
deliberate releases, sightings in the wild are widespread. Now, the number of 
breeding sites are increasing at such a rate thatCygnus atratus may be on the 
brink of establishing a self-sustaining population.

This was the fifth black swan to visit the creek in a fortnight and, as they 
often pair up during the winter months, it is likely that these birds were 
roaming in search of a mate. This swan didn’t sport the jet black velvet lustre 
of mature adult plumage – its sooty feathers had a charcoal grey cast and were 
fringed with taupe, which gave it an almost scaly appearance.

The swan’s greater wing coverts and tertials were broad and curled, so that 
when closed its wings were ruffled like a rah-rah skirt. The white flight 
feathers were almost completely concealed, leaving a narrow ribbon above the 
flank, and the dull tips suggested that this was a young adult, less than three 
years old. The sexes look similar, but this animal had the shorter, curvier, 
bill of a female.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fblack-swan-becomes-black-sheep-in-the-mob%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ff49c78f5ce48195bc6a6cab1bdaf5f0e2d047%2F0_339_1182_1709%2F1182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20swan%20becomes%20black%20sheep%20in%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fblack-swan-becomes-black-sheep-in-the-mob%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20swan%20becomes%20black%20sheep%20in%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fblack-swan-becomes-black-sheep-in-the-mob%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ff49c78f5ce48195bc6a6cab1bdaf5f0e2d047%2F0_339_1182_1709%2F1182.jpg>
 Red-beaked: the adult black swan. Photograph: Cathal McNaughton/PA 
She shuffled towards me, her garnet-coloured eyes fixed on the bag swinging in 
my hand. I crouched down and offered her a palmful of food. She lunged for the 
pellets, her waxy vermillion bill snapping with such force that they spilled 
across the ground.

Black swans have a reputation for dominant, aggressive, behaviour, but she 
shrank back as the residentmute swans 
<http://www.arkive.org/mute-swan/cygnus-olor/> stomped up the mud bank towards 
us, their eight well-grown cygnets waddling in their wake.

As the mob of mute swans clustered round me and jostled for a handout, the 
black swan inched forward to pluck a fallen pellet from between the stones. The 
mute cob turned on her and hissed a warning, his neck arched into an S shape, 
like a rearing cobra preparing to strike.

Black swans have been known to hybridise with mute swans 
<http://www.birdforum.net/showthread.php?t=45012>, but it looked as though this 
Juliet was going to have to fly farther afield to find her Romeo.

 