
Woundwort grows from a hedge as if to mark some hurt, not to heal so much as 
to witness it. Hedge woundwort,Stachys sylvatica 
<http://www.brc.ac.uk/plantatlas/index.php?q=plant/stachys-sylvatica>, belongs 
to the betony, horehounds and catmint of the waysides. It has small tight 
whorls of “blood and bandages” flowers – purply red clasps with white markings 
– nettle-like leaves and a hairy stem that when rubbed has a stink bad enough 
to do you good.

Country diary: Baltimore, Ireland: For centuries these leaves were nature's 
gift to wearied travellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/05/baltimore-ireland-hedge-woundwort-wearied-travellers>
Mrs (Maud) Grieve described hedge woundwort in her A Modern Herbal  
<http://www.botanical.com/>(1931) as “a coarse, hairy, malodorous plant, common 
in woods and hedges”. She quotes earlier herbalists who claimed that “stamped 
with vinegar” it might be a useful poultice to take away wens and inflammations 
of the lymph nodes. A distillation of the flowers was used to make the heart 
merry and the spirits lively and, like all woundworts, it was used for 
staunching blood.

In the 17th century the herbalist John Gerard 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Gerard> used hedge woundwort for treating 
injuries from pub brawls in London. I recently spent a Friday night in A&E (as 
an observer rather than a patient, thankfully), and the extent of wounds and 
blood coming in was shocking. Yet such a volume of injury was nothing out of 
the ordinary for an A&E department. Imagine what it would look like if the 
patients had to be bound with bunches of woundwort to stop the bleeding. The 
hedge apothecary can no longer cope with the scale of the hurt we do to each 
other.

Even though the hedge woundwort has lost its place in the pharmacy, it is 
still a vital part of the hedge community. Hive, solitary and bumble bees, and 
larger flies are visiting these late flowers for the nectar tucked inside them 
when there are very few sources of food elsewhere. The freshness and vitality 
of the plant lifts the spirits and, according to Green’s Universal Herbal of 
1832, toads are fond of living in its shade. Now that they arehopping towards 
extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-common-toad-numbers-down-two-thirds-in-30-years>
 I wonder if woundwort stands as a marker to the hurt we have inflicted on 
these and other creatures.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 