
Who said French football was predictable? Seven of the top eight teams may 
have won their matches last weekend, but it was the week that their bosses took 
leave of their senses: Paris Saint-Germain's president wrote a letter that 
eventually condemned him to the sack, Marseille's president threatened to quit 
after a public row with the majority share-holder, andLyon bid more than €10m 
for a 30-year-old striker who cost just €5m six months ago 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090119_154957_savidan-pas-insensible-mais.html>
 and whose CV lists improving team morale alongside scoring goals.

The PSG story is perhaps the most surprising of all, given that the club 
appeared to be on a stable footing at long last. But on Fridaypresident Charles 
Villeneuve 
<http://www.teveo.fr/wp-content/uploads/2008/01/charles-villeneuve.jpg> sent a 
letter to the board that criticised their running of the club and demanded more 
power for himself and more investment in the transfer market. Theletter was 
leaked to Le Parisien, 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/sports/villeneuve-met-la-pression-sur-l-actionnaire-du-psg-17-01-2009-376753.php>
 which did not go down well. Villeneuve knew he was under pressure as he 
attended PSG's 2-1 win over Sochaux, so he did what any media-savvy ex-TV 
presenter obsessed with his own image would do: in anostentatious display, 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/sports/l-actionnaire-du-psg-ecarte-charles-villeneuve-19-01-2009-378756.php#>
 he sat himself between Sports Minister Bernard Laporte and ex-Cabinet Minister 
Philippe Séguin, and chose to have dinner with Arsène Wenger instead of meeting 
Sébastien Bazin, president of shareholders Colony Capital. By then, though, the 
board had forced Villeneuve's departure by resigning en masse.

That sparked Phase Two of the Villeneuve media offensive: get a high-profile 
player (one who was on a list of transfer targets for the next 18 months, along 
with Gabriel Heinze and Mathieu Bodmer) to back him. "Firing him is almost as 
if they are seeking instability, and it could bring on an even more serious 
crisis,"Nicolas Anelka told Le Parisien 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/anelka-est-ecoeure-19-01-2009-378755.php>
. "It's a big loss for the club. Villeneuve just wanted to be sure the 
shareholders intended to build a club capable of bringing back the days of 
[David] Ginola and [George] Weah." Bizarre, then, that last week he was 
reportedly offering to sell the club to Arab investors: a task that, as 
president and not a shareholder, is definitely not part of Villeneuve's remit.

Bazin is expected to take over as acting president, though he is not popular 
with the fans, as confirmed by the banner unfurled on Sunday, "Colony: A Great 
PSG or Get Lost". If there is any substance to journalist Pierre Ménès's 
allegation, as revealed on the TV show 100% Foot, that Villeneuve had found out 
about an unaccounted-for €15m in the club's coffers, then the deposed 
president's version of events promises to be interesting.

The timing could not be worse, as it comes just as PSG are getting things 
together on the pitch. They might have found it easier on Sunday had Sochaux 
goalkeeper Jérémy Gavanon been dismissed for a deliberate handball outside the 
area in the first 15 minutes but a Guillaume Hoarau penalty and an effort from 
Péguy Luyindula, in the side for Paul Le Guen's first team-change in nine 
matches, won them the game. Spare a thought for Claude Makéléle, though: 
L'Equipe reported he had been asking questions about PSG's future direction on 
Friday, while on Sunday he went off injured at half-time only to get home and 
find thatthieves had nicked his Porsche, his Mercedes, some watches and a few 
thousand euros in cash 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/claude-makelele-cambriole-19-01-2009-379323.php>
.

Despite that drama, PSG are up to third, six points behind Lyon and only three 
from the Champions League place that Marseille currently occupy after their 
busy week ended with a comfortable2-0 win 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ieO0ea2EmGs> over rock-bottom Le Havre. The 
signings of Brandão and Sylvain Wiltord (on loan) were overshadowed, though,by 
the complaints of club owner Robert Louis-Dreyfus 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090114_082825_rld-met-les-points-sur-les-i.html>
, who moaned that he had stumped up the funds for Bakari Koné, Hatem Ben Arfa, 
Hilton and Elamin Erbate in the summer, even though he had recommended they 
sign a youngster by the name ofYoann Gourcuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/13/yoann-gourcuff-bordeaux-ligue-milan>
. "I gave my opinion but they went for other players, and now it's up to them 
to achieve the goals we set."

Marseille president Pape Diouf offered to resign if Louis-Dreyfus was unhappy 
with him - a slight over-reaction - but he got the response he wanted from his 
players. "We respect Pape Diouf and he's the man for this situation," Mamadou 
Niang toldFabulous Sport 
<http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/archive/2009/01/17/fabulous-sport-interview-teammates-mamadou-niang.html>
. "It's not exactly a crisis here and we still think we can win the title." The 
mood of Eric Gerets has not improved, though. He ranted at one journalist for 
reasonably asking about Modeste M'Bami's omission, and seems more disengaged 
from his squad than ever before. One L'OM insider admitted, "I wouldn't be 
surprised if he stands down before the end of the season."

All of which might suggest that Lyon, who comfortably beat Grenoble 2-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uVNNxGd7JSM>, have it easy again at the top of 
the table but that's far from true. Influential defender Cris claimed there are 
no leaders in the Lyon dressing-room and the day after Sidney Govou criticised 
the team spirit last week – "You either have the unity or you don't and we 
don't" – he was ruled out for the season with an Achilles injury; while Fred, 
deemed psychologically unfit for the weekend, has probably played his last game 
for the club (and would be a good January signing as he's a free agent in the 
summer). Lyon are now short of options up front and have bid over €10m for 
Steve Savidan,France's favourite former dustman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2008/nov/19/france-savidan-football-sport>
, who was on the score-sheet again as Caen came from two goals down to draw2-2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ReN99m5Ud-U> with Monaco.

Lyon thought they were being clever last summer by selling Loïc Rémy to Nice 
for €8m and inserting a first-refusal clause in the 22-year-old's contract, but 
how they could do with him now. Rémy scored as Nice beat Auxerre2-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_devBq7-qY&feature=related> in front of scouts 
from Real Madrid, Juventus and Fiorentina. "It's a sure thing he will end up at 
a very big club as he has all the qualities and the mentality for that," said 
Nice sports director Roger Ricort, who has promised to give Rémy his watch if 
he scores 10 goals this season. Despite missing two months through injury, he's 
already got seven.

Elsewhere, Bordeaux beat Nantes 2-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88fAsBkKxjI> and Gourcuff scored again, this 
time with a header. Laurent Blanc as good as admitted that his future at the 
club is tied in with that of the young midfielder: "I would like to continue 
but it will depend on several factors and I want to know the club want the same 
things as me."

The surprise losers of the weekend were Rennes, whose 18-match unbeaten record 
was finally ended after a1-0 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uktbd-nEeAc> 
defeat at Lille, the team against whom the run began. If the superbMichel Bastos
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UejTE-79EAk> can maintain his current form - 
he has scored five and set up five of his team's last 11 goals - then Lille 
have to be considered dark horses for a Champions League spot. With three 
points separating the five teams chasing third place, it may all come down to 
the fine details: which may or may not include a president in possession of all 
his marbles.

Results, Week 21: Grenoble 0-2 Lyon, Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> 2-0 Le Havre, Toulouse 3-0 
Nancy, Nice 2-0 Auxerre, Lorient 1-1 Valenciennes, Saint Etienne 1-1 Le Mans, 
Nantes 1-2 Bordeaux, PSG 2-1 Sochaux, Caen 2-2 Monaco, Lille 1-0 Rennes.
 