
Bob Bradley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bob-bradley> has claimed 
that Swansea City’s owners “lost their nerve” and “didn’t have the strength” to 
stick with him”, following their sacking of the 58-year-old after just 85 days 
in charge of the Welsh club.

Bradley was dismissed on Tuesday after overseeing seven defeats in 11 matches 
having replaced Francesco Guidolin at the Liberty Stadium in October, a run 
that has left Swansea 19th in the Premier Leaguer with just 12 points from 18 
games. During Bradley’s time in charge, Swansea conceded 29 goals, with the 
four they let inat home to West Ham United on Boxing Day in a 4-1 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 proving the end for the first American to manage in England’s top-flight. 
During the match, Swansea supporters could be heard calling for Bradley to be 
sacked.

The former United States manager’s initial reaction to the decision was one of 
calm but a clear frustration at the lack of patience he was afforded by 
Swansea’s American co-owners Jason Levien and Steve Kaplan emerged in an 
interview with ESPN FC.

Swansea City v Bournemouth: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/swansea-city-bournemouth-match-preview>
“They lost their nerve. They reacted to the fans and didn’t have the strength 
to see it through,” said Bradley. “That part I’m not happy about. I spoke very 
quickly to Jason Levien [after losing to West Ham], I received a message from 
Steve Kaplan and both referenced something about ‘unfair’. But you always tell 
your players that the game will challenge you in all sorts of ways. The game 
can be cruel. In order to have any chance you have to be strong. You have to 
believe in your work, you have to believe in how you do things as a group. It 
can’t be thrown off track every time something goes against you.”

Bradley expected to be given the chance to rebuild the side using the January 
transfer window but says such commitments were quickly abandoned by Levien and 
Kaplan. “What I think happened is that [result against West Ham] made everybody 
nervous,” he said. “That loss and that feeling inside the Liberty that day 
meant all the discussions and all the plans got thrown out of the window, and 
somebody needed to go. And let’s face it, the way that works is the first one 
that’s out is the manager.

“I’m disappointed that somehow, when a few games go against you, that all of a 
sudden all of those discussions and all of the ideas of what it was going to 
take to turn this around got pushed aside.”

Swansea’s hierarchy has now turned its attention to appointing Bradley’s 
successor, with theBayern Munich assistant manager Paul Clement and the former 
Birmingham City manager Gary Rowett believed to be the main contenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/chris-coleman-wife-rules-him-out-swansea-city-managerial-job>
 after first choice Chris Coleman was ruled out of the running via a tweet sent 
by his wife, the television presenter Charlotte Jackson, on Thursday.

The first-team caretaker coach, Alan Curtis, will take charge of the team for 
Saturday’s visit of Bournemouth, whose own manager, Eddie Howe, has called on 
his players to respond positively tolosing 3-0 at Chelsea on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
.

“The Chelsea game ruined my Christmas,” he said. “As always, what’s going on 
with our results dictates my mood and how you enjoy your social time. It was a 
difficult Christmas period.

“We know this is a key period for us. We’ve been a bit inconsistent of late 
and that is something we’ve talked about internally. We’ve turned in some good 
performances, but we need to do that on a more regular basis. With the new 
year, that is something we’re keen to address.”
 