
Bob Bradley has denied that players called him Ronald Reagan behind his back 
during the American’s ill-fated spell in charge ofSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea>.

The 58-year-old former USA national team coach lasted just 85 days as manager 
of the Premier League clubbefore he was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
 by the club’s American owners, Jason Levien and Steve Kaplan, on 27 December.

Swansea’s Àngel Rangel sinks Crystal Palace to give Paul Clement hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
Bradley, who took eight points from 11 matches, was reportedly given the 
nickname by insiders, who felt he was old-fashioned in his methods – a 
throwback to the 1980s when Reagan was US president.

But in an interview with the Times, Bradley said: “Trust me on this, not one 
of those players knows who Ronald Reagan is.”

The former Derby County manager and Bayern Munich assistant Paul Clement was 
appointed Swansea’s new head coach on Tuesday,overseeing their crucial win at 
Crystal Palace on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
. But Bradley warned the club’s problems run deep.

“There is a real trust issue between the supporters and the people involved in 
the change of ownership,” he said. “That has to improve. The other aspect is 
the team. When you take over a team and you’re in that part of the table – just 
like when I took over from Francesco [Guidolin] – it’s for a reason. The reason 
is that the team needs to be improved.”

Bradley, the first American to manage in the Premier League, felt the Swansea 
squad lacked a winning mentality and are short of fighters. He added: “Part of 
what I said [to the board] was that we needed more winners, more fighters, more 
guys that come in every day desperate to improve. I think in the last 18 months 
or so, as different players have left, the club hasn’t been able to replace 
some players with others at the same level.

“When a team goes through a tough period, you need people you can count on, 
people who are strong, people who will stand up for the team. It takes that 
kind of strength to get back on track. I was very direct in those conversations 
and at some level I think that came back to hurt me.”
 