
Stadium: Stadio Renato Dall'Ara, 1927, capacity 38,297

The Stadio Renato Dall'Ara is a multi-purpose stadium that will be mostly 
remembered by English fans of Italian football due to an incident at Italia 90. 
England faced Belgium in the second round and were only minutes away from going 
into a penalty-shoot out beforePaul Gascoigne floated in a free-kick for David 
Platt to volley home in spectacular fashion 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QtqiBAg2biw>.

The ground itself has been renamed three times and used to be called both the 
Stadio Littoriale and the Stadio Comunale. It has a huge tower on one side and 
a roof over the other, features added when it was modified for the World Cup in 
1990.

The atmosphere in the Stadio Renato Dall'Ara is always hostile even though it 
is generally only half-full. The Ultras on the the Curva Bulgarelli are 
passionate and very vocal. Flares, firecrackers and flags are often brought out 
by members of the Turist Group 1996, SGP 1999 and the more notorious Vecchia 
Guardia (Old Guard). These groups are some of the noisiest away fans in Italy 
and make even more effort when at home. The Derby of Appennino, against 
Fiorentina, is always a highlight. The match is a hard-fought affair and it 
shows the Stadio Renato Dall'Ara at its glorious best.
 The Stadio Renato Dall'Ara. Photograph: Mario Carlini/ Iguana Press/Getty 
Images 
The Ultras

Key groups: Forever Ultras, Mods, Molle Cariche, Via Genova, Vecchia Guardia, 
Freak Boys, Supporters, Beata Gioventù andBologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> 1982

Other ultras: SGP 1999, URB Girls, Deragliati, Narab Group, Socmel, Capotatti, 
051, Fuedo, Lungimiranti, Infoiati, Brigata 1992, All the Bancon, Le Rane, 
Pascutti Group, Colonna Romana, Freak Tonici Imola, Noi di Bologna 1997, 
Official Smokers, Gruppo Croci and Turist Group.

It's the 2002-03 season and Bologna have travelled to the capital to face 
Roma. The home fans have choreographed a special display to welcome their 
rivals from Emilia Romagna. The Curva Sud is littered with placards that read
"Bolognese amico della questura: spis spis spia" ("Bologna fans are friends of 
the police: spy spy spy"). Of course, theBolognesi have their view of the 
Romanisti. "Se il mondo fosse una torta di merde torta di merda voi sarests la 
fetta pui grade!" (If the world was a cake of shit, you would be the biggest 
slice!")

Believe it or not, Roma and Bologna used to be Gemellati (twinned). Friendly 
ties existed between two Ultra groups, the Mods of Bologna and the Boys of 
Roma. This was a friendship forged by Calcio as well as politics with both 
groups holding far-right ideologies.

In the 1995/96 season, Bologna were on the brink of promotion to Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. The Mods decided to 
invite their Roman allies to their decisive game against Chievo. Bologna won, 
but the joyous atmosphere was about to turn sour. Some of the Bologna and Roma 
Ultras took advantage of the chaotic celebrations and launched a racist attack 
on a group of north African drug dealers. Allegedly one man was stabbed. It is 
thought that to save their own skin a number of Bologna Ultras gave the police 
the names of the Roman perpetrators who were consequently arrested. The Bologna 
fans' reputation was besmirched. For theRomanisti, the Bolognesi were no longer 
friends but the worst type of enemies,Infami, a term used in the criminal world 
for police informers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOgTMC-w4Y-4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOgTMC-w4Y-4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOgTMC-w4Y-4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It beggars belief that since the birth of Forever Ultras Bologna (URB) in 1974 
the club has spawned 29 Ultra groups (that I know of). It has at times been a 
story of factional infighting, a swirling morass of competing cliques vying for 
pre-eminence on the Curva Bulgarelli or Curva Nord. Both URB and the Mods 
(founded in 1982) have been two of the Rossoblu's more famous groups. Occupying 
central positions of the Curva Bulgarelli (a sign of influence) they have been 
friendly neighbours, choreographing impressive match-day spectacles. This does 
not mean they have always seen eye to eye.

Following the racially aggravated assault, URB condemned the Mods and all 
involved. This falling out, coupled with pre-existent political divisions, made 
the relationship a fragile one. Despite the Mods and their extant sub-groups 
Molle Cariche (Loaded Springs) and Via Genova (Genoa Road) holding right-wing 
inclinations, Bologna's Ultras are traditionally associated with leftist 
politics. This is historical. During the post-war years the city of Bologna 
became a stronghold for the Italian Communist Party. Groups like URB and Freak 
Boys, whose symbol is a marijuana leaf and whose motto "ovunque fattanza" 
("always stoned") became affiliated with the left. Indeed the URB emblem of two 
crossed hammers has strong resemblance to that of West Ham, though one of their 
leaders says it symbolises the left and the workers' fight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzihtyZ2bJe8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzihtyZ2bJe8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzihtyZ2bJe8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
A scrupulous explanation of all the groups that remain would be laborious, but 
it is worth mentioning other Ultras who have been prominent on the Curva. These 
include Supporters (apolitical and formed in 1979), Bologna 1982, Vecchia 
Guardia (Old Guard), who were formed in 2001 and whose philosophy upholds the 
Ultra values of the older generation, and the recently formed Beata Gioventù 
(Carefree Youth) who replaced the Mods after they disbanded in 2012.

Bologna also has a women-only Ultras group known as URB Girls. The various 
groups, factions and alliances can be perplexing, however this phenomenon 
reflects wider Italian culture. Much like Bolognas' Ultras, political parties 
in Italy form and disband, quarrel and mould friendships with dizzying 
frequency and rapidity. It is simply a way of living.

This is not to say the Ultras of Bologna do not unify when fighting a common 
cause. They do and they have a violent reputation. In 2005, following their 
Serie A relegation play-off defeat to Romagna rivals Parma, Bologna Ultras 
hurled metal bars and weights at police while they smashed through security 
barriers and tried to invade the pitch. The Curva Bulgarelli is also united in 
the fight against Calcio Moderno (the corruption of Italian football by 
corporate interests) and against Calciopoli (the match-fixing scandal of 2006 
that implicated many of the country's big clubs).

An incident involving clashes between Bologna and Fiorentina Ultras in 1989 
saw a 14-year-old Bologna fan suffer third-degree burns after Viola Ultras 
launched a petrol bomb on to a train full ofBolognesi. This incident, combined 
with the geographical proximity of the two clubs, makes Fiorentina public enemy 
number one. Roma, Modena, Parma and many other clubs are not far behind. 
Bologna Ultras are said to have ties with Ravenna and German club Vfl Bochum, 
which are thought to be political.

Bologna is renowned for its medieval architecture, ancient university and fine 
cuisine. On match-days the Stadio Renato Dall'Ara only adds to the flavour, 
with the Curva Bulgarelli awash with red and blue accompanied by the colourful 
effects of various pyrotechnics reminiscent of the red rooftops of Bologna.

Classic player: Kennet Andersson
 Kennet Andersson representing Sweden. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
Most remembered for his spell at Bologna, Kennet Andersson may not be 
everyone's first-choice forward when romanticising about Italian football in 
the late 1990s. Howver, the 6ft 4in Sweden striker could score goals in teams 
that were not always that successful and in turn proved to be a huge asset.

Andersson was not new to football when he transferred to Bari in 1995 from 
Caen. He had already featured in the 1992 European Championships and has been 
Sweden's top scorer at the 1994 World Cup, where they finished third. In the 
mid-1990s he decided to try his hand in the most competitive league in the 
world at the time, Serie A.

In a notable first season with struggling Bari he managed to score nine goals. 
His team-mates Igor Protti, Nicola Ventola and countryman Klas Ingesson all 
helped to keep Bari in the division. His performances earned him a move to 
Bologna in 1996.

Andersson found his home in Bologna and in his three seasons there he helped 
them to a Coppa Italia semi-final, an Intertoto Cup and decent positions in 
Serie A (seventh, eighth and 11th). Although not prolific, his physicality and 
superb heading ability allowed him to score 26 goals in 86 appearances, and 
although often overshadowed by the likes of Igor Kolvyanov and Roberto Baggio, 
his contribution should not be ignored.

Andersson left Bologna in 1999 for a big yet ill-fated move to Lazio, where he 
featured only twice before returning to the club he loved in the same year. He 
scored seven times in 28 games for Bologna in his second spell with the club. 
His understated appeal persits in Bologna and, when Calcio ruled the world, 
Andersson was an unsung hero.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 