
Roberto Donadoni made it sound so difficult. After taking over as Bologna 
manager this October, he channelledAl Pacino’s “Inches” speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_b7bgtu2O4E> from the movie Any Given Sunday; 
the one in which an American football coach tells his faltering team that they 
must be prepared to die, to “tear ourselves and everyone else around us to 
pieces”, to keep their season alive. “The inches that we need are points in the 
standings,” said Donadoni. “We must fight for them with our teeth and our 
fingernails.”

Bologna stun Napoli and smash undefeated streak in 3-2 win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/bologna-napoli-seriea-match-report>
It was a compelling narrative, undermined by one tiny flaw. The manager wanted 
us to believe that ferocious effort would be required forBologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> to drag themselves out of the 
mire. But it was hard to buy into that version of events when his players made 
their ensuing victories look so straightforward.

The Rossoblu had collected six points from their opening 10 games of this 
season under Delio Rossi. They equalled that figure in Donadoni’s first two 
matches charge. A 3-0 rout of Atalanta was followed by a 2-0 win away to 
Verona. Not bad for a club whose only previous successes had arrived by 
one-goal margins over fellow newly-promoted sides Carpi and Frosinone.

Donadoni knew before taking the job that this squad was talented enough to do 
better. He had even stressed that he would not accept 17th place if it was 
offered. “There are a lot of teams that are not better than Bologna,” he 
insisted. “I hope we will not have to spend this whole season thinking purely 
about safety.”

Where Frosinone and Carpi had been able to reinforce only with free agents and 
loan signings after achieving promotion, Bologna splashed out close to €25m on 
transfer fees. More than a third of that sum went on signing Mattia Destro from 
Roma but, by the time Donadoni arrived, the striker was yet to score a single 
goal.

“I’m certain he has not forgotten how it’s done,” said Donadoni, contending 
that the issue was one of support. “He needs to be helped by the rest of the 
team. Getting three or four men into the penalty area can reduce the pressure 
on him and can help the team to become more productive.”

So it proved. Destro opened his account in the win over Atalanta, and had an 
assist against Verona, too. More satisfying for the player would be the 2-2 
draw with Roma that came next. Destro had parted on bad terms with the
Giallorossi, and celebrated his 87th-minute equaliser – scored from the penalty 
spot –with such exaggerated enthusiasm 
<http://sport.bt.com/video/destro-scores-against-old-cluband-celebrates-like-a-madman-91364020765971>
 that you wondered if he would ever make it back to the pitch.

Bologna would lose their next game, away to Torino, but after that it was 
Donadoni’s turn to seek revenge on a former employer. Six years have passed 
since he was fired byNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> after 
a mere 19 games at the helm. He protested at the time that the club’s 
film-producing owner, Aurelio De Laurentiis, “understands as much about 
football as I do about cinema”.

Donadoni insisted in the buildup to Sunday’s game that those were distant 
memories, and that he himself had changed a great deal in the interim. And yet, 
he had also been caught up in a more recent dispute with Napoli. After steering 
Parma – for whom relegation and bankruptcy were imminent – to a draw against the
Partenopei in May, Donadoni claimed that their players and directors had 
chastised his teamfor refusing to roll over 
<http://www.corrieredellosport.it/calcio/serie_a/2015/05/10-408199/Clamoroso+Donadoni%3A+che+accuse+al+Napoli>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbologna-roberto-donadoni-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaa5cd52ec0e72f624c8a51c2a04dfb75326e843%2F0_0_2801_3500%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bologna's%20rise%20continues%20after%20Roberto%20Donadoni%20takes%20revenge%20on%20Napoli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbologna-roberto-donadoni-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bologna%27s%20rise%20continues%20after%20Roberto%20Donadoni%20takes%20revenge%20on%20Napoli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbologna-roberto-donadoni-napoli%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaa5cd52ec0e72f624c8a51c2a04dfb75326e843%2F0_0_2801_3500%2F2801.jpg>
 Roberto Donadoni urges his team on against Napoli. Photograph: Giampiero 
Sposito/Reuters 
Such allegations were disputed by Napoli, though perhaps they should simply 
have heeded the warning. If Donadoni could coax such a performance out of a 
Parma squad who had not been paid in months, then it stood to reason that he 
would do even better on Sunday with Bologna.

Napoli, admittedly, are a better team now than they were back then. They 
arrived at the Stadio Renato Dall’Ara as league leaders,fresh from their 
victory over Inter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/01/gonzalo-higuain-napoli-inter-serie-a>
, and having conceded only four times in their last 16 matches. Donadoni’s team 
put three past them inside 60 minutes.

Destro opened the scoring, running on to a long ball from Amadou Diawara and 
finishing coolly. Luca Rossettini made it 2-0 to Bologna midway through the 
first half, heading home after he was left unmarked at a corner. Marek Hamsik 
then accidentally teed up Destro for the third, winning a tackle only to see 
the ball run straight to the feet of his opponent. Pepe Reina should still have 
kept the ball out at his near post.

The combined effect was bewildering. Few had thought it possible that this 
Napoli – so much more disciplined under Maurizio Sarri – could lose to Bologna 
in any circumstances, but the notion that they could ship three goals was 
unfathomable.

On another day, they might still have escaped with a share of the points. 
Napoli created plenty of chances, and eventually pulled two goals back inside 
the final three minutes – both scored by Gonzalo Higuaín. This day, though,
belonged to Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/bologna-napoli-seriea-match-report>
 – and especially to Donadoni.

Parma: the football club milked for all their worth | David Gendelman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/23/parma-the-football-club-milked-for-all-their-worth>
The manager has been praised in Italy for the dignity with which he guided 
Parma last season, performing his duties unpaid but also supporting his players 
when they chose to strike in protest against the footballing authorities who 
had let them down. Gazzetta dello Sport recognised his efforts last month when 
they awarded him this year’s Premio Giacinto Facchetti – a prize bestowed each 
year on a figure who is deemed to represent “The Beauty in Football”.

Donadoni is rightly proud of the work that was done in trying circumstances, 
even if he stressed on receiving the prize that he would sooner have seen it 
given to the club employees whose efforts were made out of the spotlight. But 
he is also interested in a more conventional kind of footballing beauty, that 
created simply by a harmonious team on the pitch. He had been frustrated to 
start this season without a job, but might conclude that Bologna were worth the 
wait.

For all of their early struggles, the Rossoblu are a club with big ambitions. 
Taken over by Canadian businessman Joey Saputo, who also owns Major League 
Soccer’s Montreal Impact, last year, the club has not only invested in fresh 
talent but also opened negotiations with the local authorities about 
modernising the Dall’Ara.

Miracles are not expected overnight. The club’s fundamental target this season 
is still just to stay in the top flight and safeguard the revenue streams that 
will allow them to make further progress in the next one. To fight their way 
forward one inch at a time, as Donadoni himself explained it. Right before he 
threw the team on his shoulders and started out with a series of yard-long 
strides.

Talking points

• Whatever happened to Pazza Inter? In this most unpredictable of starts to the
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> season it is, 
improbably, theNerazzurri who continue to churn out results most reliably. Yes, 
they have lost now to both Napoli and Fiorentina, and drawn against a handful 
of others (including Juventus) but Saturday’s 1-0 win over Genoa was their 
eighth such result of the season and, truthfully, with better finishing the 
scoreline could have been a fair bit more comfortable.


• Such profligacy did beg the question of why Roberto Mancini chose to leave 
Mauro Icardi – club captain and last season’s joint-capocannioniere, lest we 
forget – on the bench throughout. The manager insisted that this was a 
non-story afterwards, saying he had only rested the player twice all season 
(excluding the one game the striker missed through injury). It might also have 
been the least of Icardi’s worries, after he was reportedly robbed at gunpoint 
while on his way out for dinner later on Saturday night.


• Slipping back in the title race are Roma, who had 50kg of carrots dumped 
outside their training ground last week by fans carrying a banner defining them 
as “conigli” - literally “rabbits”, but used as a slang term for “coward” in 
much the same way as “chicken” would be in English. I don’t know that the
Giallorossi especially lacked courage against Torino on Saturday, but they 
certainly lack confidence and there was a sense of inevitability to the way 
they threw away the late lead they had gained courtesy of a Daniele Padelli 
blunder. With Gervinho once again succumbing to injury, it cannot be taken for 
granted that they will get the win they need over Bate Borisov on Wednesday to 
reach the Champions League last-16.


• Still no take-off for Vincenzo Montella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/23/vincenzo-montella-returns-sampdoria-no-quick-fix>
 at Sampdoria, who has now lost his first three games in charge at the club. 
The club’s president Massimo Ferrero described them as “like a fleet of 
Ferraris who respect the speed limits too much.”


• Luigi Delneri won his first game in charge of Verona, at home to Pavia in 
the Coppa Italia last Wednesday, but defeat to Empoli four days later means 
that they remain the only team left in Serie A without a victory. Indeed, they 
have lost further ground on 19th-placed Carpi, who held Milan to a goalless 
draw.

• From 12th place and 11 points behind the league leaders on 28 October, 
Juventus – following their2-0 victory away at Lazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/lazio-juventus-serie-a-match-report>
 – have now climbed to fifth, just six points off the top. And next week, they 
are at home to second-placed Fiorentina.


• Finally, special acknowledgment for Giulio Migliaccio, introduced as a 
second-half substitute for Atalanta and on the pitch for all of 32 seconds 
before he was sent off in their 3-0 win over Palermo. His was,according to 
L’Eco Di Bergamo 
<http://www.ecodibergamo.it/stories/Sport/migliaccio-record-fuori-dopo-32-secondile-espulsioni-piu-veloci-della-storia-_1155298_11/>
, the fastest Serie A red card of the last decade.


Results: Atalanta 3-0 Palermo, Bologna 3-2 Napoli, Carpi 0-0 Milan, Fiorentina 
3-0 Udinese, Frosinone 0-2 Chievo, Inter 1-0 Genoa, Lazio 0-2 Juventus, 
Sampdoria 1-3 Sassuolo, Torino 1-1 Roma, Verona 0-1 Empoli

 