
Serie A title hopefuls Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/01/gonzalo-higuain-napoli-inter-serie-a>
 suffered their first defeat since the opening day of the season when they were 
beaten 3-2 at Roberto Donadoni’s resurgent Bologna on Sunday.

Mattia Destro, revitalised since the new coach was appointed, scored in each 
half for Bologna, either side of a Luca Rossettini header. While Gonzalo 
Higuaín scored two late goals to set up a dramatic finale, Bologna held on to 
secure one of the unlikeliest results of the season and raise doubts about 
Napoli’s title credentials. Napoli remain second on 31 points, missing the 
chance to retake the top spot from Internazionale, who beat Genoa 1-0 on 
Saturday, while victory takesBologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> out of the relegation zone and 
up to 15th on 16 points.

Maurizio Sarri’s side headed into this match with Serie A’s joint-best 
defensive record, having conceded only nine goals, and their superb backline 
had underpinned an 18-game undefeated streak in all competitions, stretching 
back to an opening-day loss at Sassuolo. Bologna, though, have lost only once 
since Donadoni replaced Delio Rossi at the end of October and started strongly, 
taking the lead in the 14th minute.

Destro, who moved to Bologna from Roma during the summer, was picked out by a 
long ball from Amadou Diawara, and outmuscled Raul Albiol before slamming the 
ball past Pepe Reina for his third goal of the season.

Rossettini extended the advantage seven minutes later when he headed Franco 
Brienza’s pinpoint corner past Reina, before the Spanish keeper let a 
first-time Destro shot slip past him on the hour mark after lax defending by 
the visitors.

Higuaín revived Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> when he 
pulled a goal back in the 87th minute after touching a Lorenzo Insigne cross 
past Mirante, and added another three minutes later with a low strike to set up 
a tense finale.
 