
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang struck twice in the final 13 minutes to earn a 
nervousBorussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>
 victory over promoted Ingolstadt on Saturday and cut the gap on the Bundesliga 
leaders Bayern Munich to five points.

The 2015 African player of the year rose high to connect with a Lukasz 
Piszczek cross and beautifully time his header after Dortmund were frustrated 
by a tightIngolstadt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ingolstadt> defence for 
much of the game.

Bayern Munich problems mount as Jérôme Boateng joins long injury list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/28/bayern-munich-jerome-boateng-injury-pep-guardiola>
The league’s leading scorer added a late second with a diagonal shot to take 
his league goal tally to 20 and lift Dortmund to 44 points. Bayern, on 49, play 
Hoffenheim on Sunday.

“On days like this you can be happy with a such a scrappy win,” the Dortmund 
coach, Thomas Tuchel, said. “We were the luckier team in some situations today.”

The hosts had possession and plenty of chances but struggled against the 
second-best defence in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>.

Despite missing the playmaker Ilkay Gündogan and the winger Marco Reus, who 
were both out with a virus infection, Dortmund laid siege to the visitors’ goal 
in the second half but had to wait until the 77th minute for the Gabon 
international Aubameyang to come to the rescue.

Minutes earlier the captain Mats Hummels almost scored a spectacular own goal 
when he sent a high ball into his own net from about 30 metres out only to have 
it ruled out for a foul by an Ingolstadt player.

Elsewhere Javier Hernández also struck twice as Bayer Leverkusen climbed back 
to fourth after beating bottom-placed Hanover 96 3-0. Stefan Kiessling gave 
them the lead on the stroke of half-time before Hernández scored a 62nd-minute 
penalty and he struck again in the 87th with his 12th goal of the season.

Leverkusen are on 31 points, three behind third-placed Hertha Berlin, who 
squandered a two-goal lead to draw 3-3 with Werder Bremen, with the Peruvian 
striker Claudio Pizarro scoring twice in two minutes.

Schalke 04 bounced back from last week’s loss to Werder to ease past Darmstadt 
98 2-0 with goals from Max Meyer and Leroy Sane. The Ruhr valley club are in 
fifth place on 30 points.
 