
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s 14th goal of the season gave Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> a 3-2 win over Schalke 
in the Ruhr derby on Sunday, a result which kept Thomas Tuchel’s side five 
points behind Bayern Munich in second and now eight points clear of Wolfsburg 
in third.

“The win is more than deserved,” said Dortmund’s sporting director, Michael 
Zorc. “With 29 points we’d be table leaders in Spain and Italy but Bayern 
Munich don’t play there.”

The Japanese midfielder Shinji Kagawa opened the scoring in the 30th minute 
with a header off the defender Matthias Ginter’s cross but Klaas-Jan Huntelaar 
equalised three minutes later after Mats Hummels gave the ball away. Leon 
Goretzka chipped forward for the impressive Leroy Sane, who headed the ball 
past Sokratis and gave Huntelaar a tap-in.

Arjen Robben’s goal sparks Bayern Munich demolition of VfB Stuttgart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/07/bayern-munich-stuttgart-koln-bundesliga-match-report>
Ginter restored Dortmund’s lead in the 43rd minute with a header from Henrikh 
Mkhitaryan’s corner, before Aubameyang made it 3-1 in the 48th minute. 
Mkhitaryan sent a loose ball forward and Gonzalo Castro timed his pass 
perfectly for Aubameyang to score inside the far post.

The Gabon striker, who has 22 goals in 20 competitive games for Dortmund this 
season, celebrated by taking off his jersey to reveal a Batman logo and the 
words ‘Do you remember’ – referring to the last Ruhr derby where he celebrated 
scoring with a Batman mask. Aubameyang was booked for the gesture.

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> goalkeeper Ralf 
Faehrmann kept his team in the game with saves from İlkay Gündoğan and 
Mkhitaryan before Huntelaar claimed his second with a classy chip in the 70th 
to set up a tense finale.

“You could see we were perhaps lacking a little experience, that we conceded 
so soon after the break,” Schalke’s coach, Andre Breitenreiter, said. “But we 
showed great morale to come back.”

“We played well, unfortunately lost. But we did all we could,” Huntelaar said.

Tempers became frayed towards the end of the game when Faehrmann made another 
huge save to deny Gündoğan and Roman Buerki made a fingertip save to push the 
substitute Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg’s shot on to the post as the visitors finished 
strongly.

“It would have been our own fault if we didn’t take all three points,” Ginter 
said after the match.

Pep Guardiola will discuss new contract in December, say Bayern Munich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/07/pep-guardiola-contract-extension-bayern-munich> 