
Best of Red Bull Soapbox Race
6pm, Dave

A collection of highlights from a spectacle that – like those Birdman contests 
where people leap off piers wearing homemade wings – combines eccentric 
invention with the real possibility of severe injury. Competitors in 
engine-less, elaborately decorated go-karts of their own design hurtle down a 
track seemingly intended to send them into waiting straw bales. This clipfest 
rounds up the best bits from races around the world.Jack Seale

Revolting Rhymes 
6.30pm, BBC1

Here’s a treat. Over two evenings, Roald Dahl’s subversive reworkings of 
classic fairytales are brought to life in animations based on Quentin Blake’s 
illustrations. First up, the stories of a pistol-packing Red Riding Hood and 
her best friend – the admirably self-sufficient Snow White – are interweaved 
with a cautionary tale of finance and property-developing pigs. Among a starry 
voice cast, Dominic West plays a big, bad and laconic Wolf. Concludes tomorrow.
Jonathan Wright

The Witness for the Prosecution
9pm, BBC1

Toby Jones and Kim Cattrall star in this adaptation of the classic Agatha 
Christie short story. Set in 1920s London, it concerns the murder of glamorous 
heiress Emily French. The finger of suspicion is pointed at the young lover to 
whom she left her fortune. Lawyer John Mayhew, however, discovers that there’s 
more to the case than meets the eye. Fruity melodrama, as comforting as a nice, 
reheated slice of Christmas pud.David Stubbs

The Big Fat Quiz of the Year 2016
9pm, Channel 4

With a flittering light finally in sight at the end of the slime-slathered 
tunnel that was 2016,Jimmy Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jimmy-carr>
 returns to help roast a year that left us all feeling burned. Richard Ayoade, 
Rob Delaney, Mel Giedroyc, Sarah Millican, David Mitchell and Romesh 
Ranganathan make up this year’s teams, with Jon Snow, Charles Dance and a 
roster of celebrity inquisitors on hand to posit questions on everything from 
Boaty McBoatface to Brexit.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Made in Chelsea Christmas Party
9pm, E4

Joy and harmony abound as the Made In Chelsea cast get together for an 
end-of-season party, featuring a grilling from Rick Edwards and a look at their 
highlights from the latest series. Not really: with this perfectly groomed yet 
vicious pack, things are likely to turn ugly. Then at 10pm it’s over to Jamie 
Laing, a man so posh he should come with subtitles, who’s grilling guests 
including Pamela Anderson in his spinoff chatshow.Hannah Verdier

The Entire Universe
9.30pm, BBC2

This is, approximately, Monty Python’s Galaxy Song extrapolated into an 
hour-long special. It’s a collaboration between Eric Idle and Brian Cox, hung 
on the somewhat laboured conceit that Cox thinks he is presenting an academic 
lecture but has, in fact, been roped into a glitzy musical. It has its moments 
and, naturally, there’s a “hilarious” Uranus pun. Robin Ince, Warwick Davis and 
Noel Fielding also star.Andrew Mueller
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152e2bebfe1c8451f2ad01fcf286c38adef922cf%2F0_85_3498_3045%2F3498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boxing%20Day's%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Revolting%20Rhymes%3B%20The%20Witness%20for%20the%20Prosecution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boxing%20Day%27s%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Revolting%20Rhymes%3B%20The%20Witness%20for%20the%20Prosecution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152e2bebfe1c8451f2ad01fcf286c38adef922cf%2F0_85_3498_3045%2F3498.jpg>
 Change is in the air … Outnumbered. Photograph: Colin Hutton/BBC/Hat Trick 
Outnumbered 
10pm, BBC1

As accomplished as leads Claire Skinner and Hugh Dennis may be, Outnumbered’s 
best bits have historically come from the kids, their ad hoc delivery giving 
freshness to an otherwise standard situation comedy. So how will the show fare 
now they are a full three years older? Change is in the air all round in this 
special: the bulk of it takes place outside the house, as the Brockmans hit the 
road to honour one of recently deceased Grandad’s final wishes.John Robinson

Film choices

Great Expectations (David Lean, 1946) 9.50am, More4

Lean’s haunting masterpiece remains one of the best big-screen Dickens 
adaptations. The gothic tone is set in the opening scene – Pip’s graveyard 
encounter with Magwitch – and seeps through the film to Miss Havisham’s 
embittered existence. The flawless cast includes John Mills and Valerie Hobson 
as the grown-up Pip and Estella, plus Martita Hunt, Jean Simmons and Alec 
Guinness.Paul Howlett

The Adventures Of Tintin: The Secret Of The Unicorn (Steven Spielberg, 2011) 
11am, BBC2

Hergé’s adventures of Belgium’s cartoon boy-reporter come to near-life in 
motion-capture animation. Tintin (Jamie Bell), Captain Haddock (James Serkis) 
and Snowy are on the trail of ancient treasure manuscripts, rushing through 
Spielbergian scrapes with Daniel Craig’s evil Sakharine from stormy seas to the 
Sahara, in a spirited adventure.PH

The Jungle Book (Jon Favreau, 2016) 11.45am, 6pm, Sky Cinema Premiere

Jon “Iron Man” Favreau’s reworking of the Kipling story and Disney’s magical 
1967 animated film is a wondrous thing. Neel Sethi is Mowgli, brought up in the 
Indian jungle by wolves and immersed in a world of beasts so realistically 
formed by CGI they look as if they’ve stepped straight out of Planet Earth II. 
They’re voiced by a stellar cast, including Bill Murray as Baloo the bear, 
Scarlett Johansson as Kaa the snake and Idris Elba as the deadly tiger Shere 
Khan. Tremendous fun.PH

Deadpool (Tim Miller, 2016) 2pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere

Ryan Reynolds is potty-mouthed antihero Deadpool, rogue X-Man and antidote to 
Marvel’s army of superpowered do-gooders – his main strength being the ability 
to swear stunningly. That, and heal any physical injury he suffers – except for 
his cruelly mutated face – and a capacity for dishing out ultra-violence. His 
arch-enemy, Ed Skrein’s villainous Ajax, is a little underwhelming, but this is 
a highly entertaining slant on the whole superhero thing.PH

Brave (Mark Andrews, Brenda Chapman, 2012) 2.40pm, BBC1

Fiery Princess Merida (Kelly Macdonald) is a female Braveheart in Pixar’s 
dazzling mock-fairytale. In lush medieval Scotland, Merida is outraged to 
discover that her parents, King Fergus and Queen Elinor (Billy Connolly, Emma 
Thompson), want to marry her off. So she stomps off into the woods in search of 
an alternative to the fairytale ending.PH

Harry Potter And The Prisoner Of Azkaban (Alfonso Cuarón, 2004) 4.10pm, ITV

Cuarón’s dark and chilly third chapter is one of the best of the Potter 
series. The eerie Dementors loom large, and Hogwarts is infested with menace 
and teenage dread. Most of the familiar faces are back, but Michael Gambon is a 
slightly less grandfatherly Dumbledore, while Gary Oldman adds ferocious energy 
and emotion as the apparently deranged Sirius Black.PH

Les Misérables (Tom Hooper, 2012) 8pm, More4

Even if you wouldn’t man the barricades in defence of musicals, or the 
long-running West End show, this is a stirring experience. Early 19th-century 
Paris is epically recreated, with huge star performances from Hugh Jackman as 
the reformed convict Valjean and Russell Crowe as Javert, the policeman 
vindictively pursuing him. Their singing (recorded as they filmed) is 
unexpectedly moving.PH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ea72c9604b89b6c2f0f62ffc8199dac66250332%2F0_36_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boxing%20Day's%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Revolting%20Rhymes%3B%20The%20Witness%20for%20the%20Prosecution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boxing%20Day%27s%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Revolting%20Rhymes%3B%20The%20Witness%20for%20the%20Prosecution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fboxing-day-monday-best-tv-revolting-rhymes-witness-for-the-prosecution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ea72c9604b89b6c2f0f62ffc8199dac66250332%2F0_36_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Unnervingly intense … Captain Phillips. Photograph: SMPSP/Hopper Stone 
Captain Phillips (Paul Greengrass, 2013) 9pm, ITV

Paul Greengrass’s account of a real-life Somali pirate hijacking is an 
unnervingly intense action movie, underpinned by a powerful sense of the global 
economic forces that separate the haves and have-nots. Ultimately it focuses on 
the riveting confrontation between Tom Hanks, as the eponymous captain, and the 
electrifying newcomer Barkhad Abdi as the pirates’ leader, both struggling for 
control of the giant cargo ship Maersk Alabama.PH

Pride (Matthew Warchus, 2014) 10.30pm, BBC2

There are shades of Made In Dagenham in this feelgood tale of inspirational 
industrial action. It’s set during the 1984 miners’ strike and recounts the 
birth of the Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners movement, bringing macho 
miners and metrosexuals together in funny, rousing, sexy union. A triumphant 
cast includes Bill Nighy’s old-school activist, Paddy Considine’s striker Dai 
and Imelda Staunton’s indomitable Hefina. How did the miners ever lose?PH

Pitch Perfect (Jason Moore, 2012) 11.10pm, Channel 4

Broadway director Jason Moore takes to the big screen with this chirpy, rude 
and funny musical comedy about a girls’ group versus a boys’ group at the 
collegiate a cappella championships. Anna Kendrick is Beca, the fresher who 
joins up with a crew including Bridesmaids’ Rebel Wilson as the acerbic “Fat 
Amy”. The music may be a little ancient for some tastes (“There’s nothing from 
this century,” as Beca puts it), but it’s right on song, and sparked a sequel.PH

Muriel’s Wedding (PJ Hogan, 1994) 12.05am, Channel 5

Skipping along to Abba songs and sporting a pretty wicked sense of humour, 
this comes on like another Aussie feelgood comedy, but the laughs are bitter. 
Muriel (Toni Collette) is unpopular and snubbed by her awful mates, until new 
chum Rachel Griffiths shows her how to hit back. Underneath the laughter, 
Muriel’s deadbeat family remain irredeemably awful.PH

Live sport

Test Cricket: South Africa v Sri Lanka The first Test in the three-match 
series begins in Port Elizabeth. 7.55am, Sky Sports 2

Premiership Rugby Union: Bristol v Worcester Warriors Coverage of the match 
from the 11th round of fixtures. 2.30pm, BT Sport 2

Premier League Football: Hull City v Manchester City Sides from opposite ends 
of the table meet (kick-off 5.15pm). 5pm, Sky Sports 1
 