
There was nothing to separate James DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> and Badou Jack after their 
world super-middleweight title unification fight at the Barclays Center in New 
York. It ended in a majority draw which meant the world’s two best 168lb 
fighters retained their belts. But while an immediate rematch to settle 
unfinished business would seem the obvious next step, what is next for either 
man appears uncertain.

DeGale, who holds the IBF’s version of the title, scored a knockdown in the 
first round on Saturday and boxed masterfully early on, using balletic footwork 
to create angles that made Jack look flat-footed and clumsy.

Related: James DeGale and Badou Jack fight to majority draw in title 
unification fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/james-degale-badou-jack-super-middleweight-unification-title-fight-boxing>

Jack, the WBC title-holder, showed patience and poise to rally in the middle 
stages. He started to walk through the DeGale punches, hurting him with 
punishing body shots in the sixth and knocking out a tooth in the eighth.

As the outcome hung in the balance in the final round, Jack nearly closed the 
show when he dumped DeGale to the canvas for the first time in his career with 
a counter right uppercut. The Olympic gold medallist made it to his feet and 
showed immense heart to make it to the final bell. The drama of the final reel 
was laid bare on the cards: were it not for the late knockdown, all three 
judges would have given the fight to DeGale.

It was a thrilling affair that enthralled the crowd of 10,128 on a snowy night 
in Brooklyn, a matchup between top operators that featured everything but a 
decisive result. Both men articulated interest in a rematch in the immediate 
aftermath. So it would seem a simple choice to put them in with one another 
once more.

But this is boxing, where nothing is simple. First, there’s the matter of 
weight. Jack, who has had trouble making the super-middleweight limit, had 
already planned on moving to light heavyweight after this fight. A rematch 
would likely have to take place at 175lbs or a catch-weight, which could give 
the smaller DeGale pause for thought.

Then, there is the matter of venue. Saturday’s fight marked DeGale’s fourth 
straight bout on foreign soil, a run that has included his title-clinching win 
over Andre Dirrell in Boston and successful defences against Lucian Bute and 
Rogelio Medina.

He has been itching to fight in the UK, where his domestic profile has slipped 
even as his stature in the sport has redoubled, and spoke all week about an 
outdoor homecoming fight in the spring at the Emirates Stadium, home of his 
beloved Arsenal. His post-fight plea to “do it again in London” could fall on 
deaf ears.

Another option is Callum Smith, the youngest of the fighting Smith brothers of 
Merseyside, who is undefeated in 22 fights. That option would have become a 
foregone conclusion if DeGale had won, since Smith is the WBC’s mandatory 
challenger. Should Jack vacate the WBC title and climb to light heavyweight, 
then Smith will likely fight Anthony Dirrell for the vacant belt.

A third choice and perhaps the biggest fight in Britain would be George 
Groves, the man responsible for the lone blemish on DeGale’s professional 
ledger, a disputed points decision in 2011. DeGale has been eager to avenge 
that result for years but Groves is in negotiations to fight Fedor Chudinov for 
the vacant WBA title, further complicating matters.

The fighters had not even left the ring when Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> Jr, who promotes Jack, 
gatecrashed the televised interview with the fighters to gripe about the 
decision. “At the end of the day, this is really bad for boxing,” said 
Mayweather, on the best night this beleaguered sport has seen in some time.

The former pound-for-pound king was even more bellicose at the post-fight 
press conference, offering cryptic allusions to the incompetence and even 
outright corruption of the judges with repeated invocation of that famous 
Trumpism: “There’s something going on.”

“The thing with boxing is, if they can’t get it right the first time, they’re 
not going to get it right the second time,” Mayweather said. “We don’t need the 
second time around.”

Mayweather may not need it but what worked for him might not be in the best 
interests of either fighter.Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
needs great fights and DeGale and Jack showed what can happen when the best 
fight the best. They owe it to themselves to finish what they started. If only 
the sport would get out of the way long enough to let it happen.
 