
As they prepared for Saturday’s FA Cup second round tie at Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool>, the players and staff of 
Brackley Town held a quiz in their hotel , just as they had done before their 
match at Gillingham in the previous round. Here is a question that was not 
asked on either occasion: which club had to wait until the final minute of last 
season to avoid relegation from the sixth tier of English football but are now 
on the verge of joining the elite in the third round of the Cup for the first 
time in their history? The answer is obvious to everyone at Brackley, the 
Northamptonshire club who are enjoying a radical upturn in results on all 
fronts this season.

A 1-0 victory against Tamworth in April, coupled with Lowestoft Town’s failure 
to beat Gloucester City, enabled Brackley to survive in the Conference North on 
the final day of the 2015-16 campaign. That was the second season in succession 
that they had cut it so fine and this time it was only goal difference that 
kept them up. But now they are riding high in their league and advancing in two 
cup competitions as well as flying the non-league flag in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, one win away from going into the 
third round draw with Manchester United, the holders, and all the other top 
clubs.

FA Cup photo essay – a look at Stockport v Woking in the first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/02/fa-cup-photo-essay-a-look-at-stockport-v-woking-in-the-first-round>
“We managed to stay up by the skin of our teeth last season and that gave me 
the opportunity to stay at this level and make the changes that I felt were 
necessary,” says the Brackley manager, Kevin Wilkin, who was appointed in 
September 2015 in the hope that, with time, he could emulate the success he 
enjoyed during six years in charge of Nuneaton Borough, whom he guided to the 
highest level of the non-league pyramid.

“We didn’t keep very many of last year’s squad and the profile of player that 
we’ve taken on board is better suited to being competitive at this level,” says 
Wilkin, whose recruits included four players with whom he worked at Nuneaton – 
James Armson, Adam Walker, Alex Gudger and captain Gareth Dean. “I know what 
they bring as players but also as characters. And the character and spirit that 
we’ve got in the changing room now is a big part of why we’ve done so well this 
season.”

It has already been evident in the club’s Cup run, most obviously in the 
replay against Gillingham, when the non-leaguers, all of whom are part-time 
players, recovered from the disappointment of losing a two-goal lead against 
the League One side and ultimatelyprevailed 4-3 in extra time thanks in part to 
a hat-trick by Armson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/brackley-gillingham-fa-cup-jimmy-armson-football>
.

“You might have thought at 2-2 that there was only going to be one winner but 
all through this season we’ve shown the resolve you need at crucial moments,” 
says Wilkin. “We might be limited in certain areas but we have great spirit, we 
all have a go for each other.”

Brackley’s previous best result in the FA Cup had also been against 
Gillingham, whom they eliminated in the first round three years ago before 
losing in the second to Macclesfield Town. Some of the money earned from that 
run went towards the construction of a 3G training pitch not far from St James 
Park, the club’s home ground, where the highest league attendance so far this 
season was642 for the visit of Darlington 1883 
<http://www.00svrh.brackleytownfc.com/fixtures/> (they have sold 230 tickets 
for the trip to Blackpool).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbrackley-fa-cup-shock-blackpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F667d44ca1257c634124a61293f00fdbe668deb66%2F0_0_3557_2433%2F3557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brackley%20back%20from%20the%20brink%20and%20aiming%20for%20another%20FA%20Cup%20shock%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbrackley-fa-cup-shock-blackpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brackley%20back%20from%20the%20brink%20and%20aiming%20for%20another%20FA%20Cup%20shock%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbrackley-fa-cup-shock-blackpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F667d44ca1257c634124a61293f00fdbe668deb66%2F0_0_3557_2433%2F3557.jpg>
 Brackley Town’s Jimmy Armson celebrates after completing his hat-trick against 
the Gills. Photograph: John Sibley/Reuters 
“The 3G surface is excellent and having it allows us to schedule things with 
confidence, since we always know we’ll be able to train on Tuesdays and 
Thursdays,” says Wilkin. Except that the schedule goes out the window when the 
club find themselves competing in several cup competitions at once. They take 
on Blackpool without having trained at all this week because they had a FA 
Trophy replay against Mickleover Sports on Tuesday night, winning 3-1 to 
continue pursuing honours on four fronts.

Counting their progress in the Hillier Senior Cup, and the fact that they have 
had to contest five FA Cup matches to win the right to face Blackpool, and 
Saturday’s match will be their 27th of a season that began four months ago. 
That is one more than has been played so far by the professionals of Blackpool.

“Everyone now works incredibly hard on the fitness and sports science side of 
things so the difference between non-league and league is not so much in how 
often you train, it’s in how much rest you can get,” says Wilkin. “We’ve got 
guys who after a night’s training are up at 6.30am to do a full day’s work as a 
tarmacker or a bricklayer. That’s difficult. The rest element is something they 
miss out on in non-league. But you can come through that.

“The fixtures may be backing up on us a little bit but we’re enjoying it. 
We’ve got a game plan for Saturday and we’re determined to try to apply it. The 
Cup run has been a lot of fun and we’ll do our best to make it continue. This 
is certainly more fun than last season.”
 