
The Rugby Football League has terminated Bradford’s membership following the 
club’s decision to go into administration.

Marc Green, chairman of the Championship club, announced on Monday he had 
placed the Bulls into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/bradford-bulls-placed-into-administration-rugby-league>
 to protect them from a winding-up petition brought by HM Revenue and Customs 
for unpaid taxes.

On Wednesday the RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> announced its 
decision to withdraw the club’s membership and warned they could face automatic 
relegation to League 1.

Bradford Bulls have been placed into administration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/bradford-bulls-placed-into-administration-rugby-league>
In a statement, the governing body said: “As is normal when a club enters 
administration, the RFL board has today terminatedBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> Northern Limited’s membership 
of the RFL.

“The RFL is in discussion with the appointed administrators about their plans 
for the future of the club. The RFL board will consider any proposals put 
forward by the administrators to secure the future of the club and membership 
[and the conditions of any membership] of the RFL is then entirely at the 
discretion of the board.

“As part of exercising its discretion, the RFL board would assess any 
individual proposed be involved in the ownership or management of the club to 
ensure that they are a fit and proper person.

“In addition, as part of the conditions of any membership, the RFL board would 
then determine the appropriate sporting sanction, which could include a points 
deduction or possible relegation.

“This is clearly a distressing time for supporters, players and employees of 
Bradford Bulls. We will aim to keep them updated of any progress as and when we 
can.”

Bradford were also put into administration in 2012 and 2014 and tax officials 
said at a hearing in a Bankruptcy and Companies court in London last month that 
the club owe around £350,000.

England blew their perfect chance to reach the Four Nations final. What next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/nov/16/england-australia-four-nations-new-zealand-scotland-london>
However, Bradford officials estimate the debt at nearer £133,000 – and the 
barrister Rowena Page told a judge more than £100,000 had already been paid.

Gary Pettit and Gavin Bates, directors of PBC Business Recovery and 
Insolvency, have been appointed as joint administrators of the Bulls and say 
early indications suggest there is interest in saving the club.

The former Bradford City co-chairman Mark Lawn and London-based businessman 
Richard Lamb, who were keen to take over the crisis-torn club during their most 
recent spell in administration, have again expressed an interest.

Lamb, a Bulls shareholder who took over as chief executive of the rugby union 
club Rotherham last summer, had a bid accepted by the administrator David 
Wilson in 2014 but no deal materialised because he was unable to provide £1m 
proof of funds to the RFL within a strict timescale.

Bradford dominated the early years of Super League and were world club 
champions in 2006. But they were relegated two years ago and in 2016 failed to 
reach the top four of the Championship.
 