
It was perhaps the opening few words of the Rugby Football League’s statement 
regarding the liquidation ofBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> which struck the most telling 
chord of all. “While this is terribly disappointing and sad,” they said, “it is 
not an entirely surprising development given the scale of debt incurred by the 
previous management of the club and the debilitating level of financial 
commitment already entered into for 2017.”

Related: Bradford Bulls go into liquidation after years of financial struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-go-into-liquidation>

However, this was not the result of a few months of off-field troubles for the 
former Super League champions, more the culmination of years of mismanagement 
for a club who blazed a trail for so many following rugby league’s switch to 
summer in 1996. At the height of what was dubbed Bullmania, it was not uncommon 
to see 20,000 people inside Odsal. When the Bulls played what proved to be 
their final game in October, there were only 3,518 present. It was a telling 
indictment of how far the club had fallen.

Those who have played a part in dragging a club who were world champions only 
11 years ago <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/feb/04/rugbyleague.sport> 
to its knees should be ashamed. Three administrations in four years, relegation 
from Super League in 2014 and a failure to subsequently gain promotion have all 
combined to lead the club to their lowest point – but what now?

The RFL has already confirmed that a new club should be formed within the 
coming days and will take the old entity’s place in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> this season, 
albeit with a 12-point deduction and severely reduced central funding. On a 
dark day for rugby league and the city of Bradford, that is at least a rare 
glimmer of light in all of this.

Encouragingly, the RFL has already fielded several expressions of interest 
about starting a new club – and with that, there is hope. Any new company will 
start debt-free – rather than facing the £1.2m-plus the previous company owed 
to creditors – and it also has an opportunity to cut its cloth accordingly. In 
many ways, it is a blank canvas and theRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> will ensure only those with the club’s 
best interests at heart are afforded this opportunity which has now presented 
itself.

Placing the new club straight back in the Championship as opposed to the 
bottom tier, League 1, is a decision which will naturally be seen as 
controversial by some. But replanning fixture lists – which for League 1 clubs 
include the newly introduced transatlantic trips to Toronto – was unfeasible, 
say RFL sources. Thousands of Bradford fans had bought season tickets on the 
assumption they would get Championship rugby – how would they be refunded? 
These are all problems which led the RFL to its decision, rightly or wrongly.

But as encouraging as a new start for rugby league in Bradford could be, it is 
a process which will be intertwined with difficulties in its infancy. How, for 
starters, do the prospective new owners begin to build a squad capable of 
competing and overhauling a 12-point deduction this season?

All the players are now free agents and many will sign elsewhere. Some, it is 
believed, already have and clubs already spending the salary cap will be given 
special dispensation to bring in former Bradford players. This is not a plan 
which can be carefully executed over a period of several months: Bradford are 
due to start the new season at Hull Kingston Rovers in four weeks.

Will their coach, Rohan Smith (who should emerge through this process which a 
huge amount of credit for the way he has handled it), decide he wants to stay? 
That should be any new owners’ priority: keeping the highly regarded Australian 
would be a significant building block from which to start.

However, that only addresses the problems on the field – which have to be 
solved with around £100,000 less central funding than the club were expecting 
for 2017. The RFL will offer the new club a chance to stay at their Odsal home 
on the same terms as the previous club, but there are myriad issues for new 
owners to solve to have a fully functioning professional club up and running in 
just a few weeks, as well as the business-related practicalities of starting a 
new company from scratch.

For the good of the sport, this will hopefully not be the end of rugby league 
in Bradford, more the closing of a catastrophic chapter. History has taught us 
that clubs can reform and rebuild; Bradford did it themselves in 1964 after 
all. This, perhaps, is an opportunity for change and for a forward-thinking 
owner to start afresh but it will not be an easy road for whoever decides they 
want the sizeable task of trying to restore one of rugby league’s biggest names.
 