
Bradford Bulls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> lost six 
Super League points and a takeover bid collapsed on another dramatic and 
damaging day in a crisis that has now been running for almost two years.

It is the second time in three seasons that the Bulls have been docked the 
maximum of six points for breaching Super League's operational rules, and this 
time the implications threaten to be a good deal more serious than they were in 
2012, given the reintroduction of relegation for the bottom two in the final 
table.

Despite last Thursday's gutsy win at Wakefield, Bradford are now four points 
adrift at the bottom, with ongoing uncertainty over their future financial 
viability. But Robbie Hunter-Paul, a hero of the club's success during the 
first decade ofSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>, 
who is now trying to hold things together as chief executive, insists that they 
can still survive.

"There are a lot of fighters at this club, as has been proved before," said 
the New Zealander. "We've got a game coming up this weekend at home to London 
Broncos, and it's important we focus on doing the job. We've been given a 
six-point deduction by the governing body, but I'm confident the boys can turn 
it round. I'm a pint-half-full type of guy."

Paul will represent the club at a Super League meeting , when the 
administrator, David Wilson, will also inform all the Bulls employees, 
including the players, of the latest developments. "We're heartened by the fact 
there's been some interest already in the club and that those parties are still 
interested in taking the club on," said Blake Solly, one of the Rugby Football 
League officials who have been trying to help the Bulls steer a path through 
the crisis. "In that respect it's a healthier situation than when they were 
last in administration in 2012."

The signs have been increasingly grim at Odsal through the winter. Omar Khan, 
the local restaurant owner who rescued the club in partnership with the local 
MP Gerry Sutcliffe in 2012, left last September citing ill health, and three 
months later he launched a legal action against the directors who he said had 
agreed to buy him out.

They all resigned on Christmas Eve because of Khan's refusal to transfer the 
club's shares and last month, shortly before the start of the Super League 
season, the club again entered administration. Mark Moore, who remained the 
chairman, then had an offer accepted by the administrator last week, although 
it had still to be ratified by theRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> â€“ 
whose decision to buy Odsal at the end of 2011 has been proved exceptionally 
prescient.

But Moore was ready to announce that the offer would be withdrawn before the 
RFL brought forward the announcement of the points deduction, stating that his 
consortium "were left with no other option ... based on what we believe is an 
immoral position from the sport's governing body due to their involvement in 
this whole affair".

That drew an unusually strong response from the RFL, suggesting that Moore's 
consortium may not be such a great loss. "It is disappointing and disingenuous 
for Bradford Bulls to suggest that the RFL has acted in any manner other than 
fairly and properly throughout a crisis which is entirely of the club's own 
making," said Ralph Rimmer, the deputy chief executive.

"The root cause of the current situation is the failed attempt ... to use the 
club's own money to purchase Bradford Bulls from Omar Khan, who had left the 
club in a parlous state. Had Mr Moore not refused to honour the agreement he 
signed to buy the club from Mr Khan, Bradford Bulls would not be where they are 
today.

"Throughout our dealings with them, the club's directors were unable to 
provide any evidence of new capital investment into Bradford Bulls and 
consequently, the RFL executive had no confidence in the business plan that was 
presented.

"In the last six months two other clubs have had to restructure their 
businesses, introduce new investment from owners and release players to avoid 
administration. For Bradford to effectively drop off debt as a result of the 
administration without a points deduction would have significantly impaired the 
integrity of the competition."
 