
Around the turn of the century, there can be little doubting rugby league’s 
undisputed force were the Bradford Bulls. It is almost 11 years to the day 
since the club were crowned world champions for a second time after thumping
Penrith Panthers 22-4 on 13 February 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/feb/14/rugbyleague.bradfordbulls>. They 
would wina third World Club Challenge title in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/feb/04/rugbyleague.sport>, as well as 
becoming Super League champions again in 2005.

Yet today, the Bulls begin life outside of the top tier for the first time 
since the restructuring of the game in 1996.Relegation from the Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/12/bradford-bulls-one-last-hurrah-relegation-london-broncos->
 last season was the culmination of years of financial strife and struggle, 
compounded bya six-point penalty for entering administration at the start of 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/25/bradford-bulls-takeover-collapses-six-point-sanction>
. After the halcyon days of winning league titles and major trophies in front 
of crowds of over 15,000, the numbers dipped under the 6,000 mark last year, as 
the club slid out of the elite with a whimper.

Under the stewardship of the London-born businessman Marc Green, the Bulls are 
on a sound footing off the field once again. Season ticket sales are in excess 
of 3,000 – with hopes the club can beat last year’s total of just over 3,300 – 
and Bradford are being tipped to bounce back into theSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> at the first attempt, albeit in 
a new and complicated league structure.

Heading the charge on the field is the former hooker and club stalwart James 
Lowes, who is held in such high esteem by Bradford’s fans he was voted into 
their greatest side in 2007. Lowes is an uncompromising and tough character, 
who has had coaching spells in both codes of rugby before taking up the helm at 
Bradford midway through last season.

He admitted he can see similarities between the Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> of today and the club who 
started in the Super League in 1996, sparking hopes of another rise to the top. 
“The Bulls fans are fantastic; once you show you’re fighting the cause they’ll 
turn out and back you in their thousands, which is what we’ll have with us,” 
Lowes said.

“I think there are very similar circumstances compared to when I joined as a 
player back in 1996. That time, I was coming into a club who had just changed 
names from Bradford Northern to Bradford Bulls, they took the switch to Super 
League by the horns. The feel of the place now is very good as it was back 
then, things are just starting to come together nicely for us.”

The Bulls start their charge back to Super League at Leigh on Sunday, in a 
game expected to lure a five-figure crowd, which is no surprise given it is a 
meeting of the two teams regarded as favourites for the Championship title.

Likely to be backed by strong crowds all season, the story of Bradford is one 
well worth keeping an eye on in the months to come as rugby league kicks off 
its new era.

Should the Bulls show the same guts and steel Lowes did during his career at 
the club, there can be little doubting Bradford’s credentials as title 
challengers in their first season away from the Super League spotlight.
 