
The Olympic gold medallist Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> and the actor Michael Sheen 
are among high profile figures who will take control of BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme between Christmas and the new year.

Lawyer Miriam González Durántez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miriam-gonzalez-durantez>, the wife of 
Nick Clegg, will also edit one edition, as will John Browne, the former chief 
executive of BP, the human rights campaigner Jane Campbell and the architect 
David Adjaye.

The station’s flagship current affairs programme will also for the first time 
have a guest business editor, the former No 10 adviser Rohan Silva.

Today programme guest-edited by PJ Harvey slated as 'liberal drivel'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/02/today-programme-pj-harvey-liberal-drivel-bbc>
Many famous faces have been guest editors since the tradition began in 2003, 
with the first raft including the author Monica Ali, Norman Tebbit, the 
Radiohead singer Thom Yorke and Stephen Hawking.

The U2 singer Bono, the entrepreneur Richard Branson, Queen Noor of Jordan, 
Yoko Ono, Jarvis Cocker, David Hockney, the actor Colin Firth and Melinda Gates 
have also taken the reins over the 12-year period.

Last December, the comedian Lenny Henry, who has been a vocal critic of the 
BBC’s efforts on diversity,used his slot as guest editor to put the spotlight 
on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/30/lenny-henry-guest-editing-radio-4-today-twitter-bbc>
 in the media and other areas of public life.

The show featured a presenting team made up exclusively of people from ethnic 
minority backgrounds, including the BBC World Service’sNkem Ifejika 
<https://twitter.com/nkemifejika>, who co-hosted with regular presenter Mishal 
Husain.

Items included interviews with Sajid Javid, the first British-Asian cabinet 
minister; Diane Abbott, one of the first four black MPs; and Ukip communities 
spokesman, MEP Amjad Bashir.

Why I left Ukip for David Cameron’s Conservatives | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/18/why-i-left-ukip-for-david-camerons-conservatives>
The Mercury prize-winning singer PJ Harvey divided opinion with her guest 
editor slot in January 2014, which was slated as “unusual” by the Conservative 
cabinet minister David Jones for its leftwing slant.

The Wikileaks founder Julian Assange was given the slot on Thought for the 
Day, delivered from the Ecuadorian embassy, and was introduced by Harvey as a 
“person of great courage”.

The campaigning journalist John Pilger also drew ire from the BBC’s 
thenpolitical editor Nick Robinson, himself now a presenter of the Today 
programme, when Pilger criticised Barack Obama for paying tribute to Nelson 
Mandela when he had not closed the Guantanamo Bay detention camp.
Nick Robinson (@bbcnickrobinson) 
Pilger always thought provoking but was he really suggesting that BBC ignore 
Obama's Mandela grief as he is a hypocrite? Or ....@BBCr4today 
<https://twitter.com/BBCr4today>
 <https://twitter.com/bbcnickrobinson/status/418651988700987392> January 2, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/bbcnickrobinson/status/418651988700987392> 
Colin Bloom, executive director of the Conservative Christian Fellowship, 
lambasted the show <https://twitter.com/Colin_Bloom/status/418650888090435584> 
as a “trainwreck of a programme” and “incomprehensible liberal drivel”.
 