
Roberto Martínez has said Brendan Galloway deserves a new contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/everton-brendan-galloway-new-contract-roberto-martinez>
 that reflects his rise to prominence at Everton as Leighton Baines edges 
closer to a first-team comeback. Galloway has excelled in Baines’ absence this 
season, alleviating pressure on the England left-back to rush back from a 
long-term injury and ensuring fierce competition for a place when the 
30-year-old is match fit. The 19-year-oldjoined Everton on a five-year contract 
from MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/02/everton-sign-brendan-galloway-mk-dons>
 in August 2014 but Martínez views the Zimbabwe-born defender as an established 
member of the squad, after only 14 Premier League appearances, and believes 
that should be reflected in a new deal. “Brendan Galloway is a first-team 
player, he is not a young player any more,” the Everton manager said. “With 
what he has done this season he has earned the right to be considered a starter.

Everton’s Ross Barkley and Romelu Lukaku lead thrashing of Aston Villa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/everton-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
“At the moment our options at left-back are as good as you are going to get in 
the league with Bryan Oviedo, Leighton Baines and Brendan Galloway. It is going 
to be down to competition for places, whatever we need on the day and allowing 
them to fight for that position. I don’t consider Brendan as a teenager who is 
just filling a role in the first team. He has earned the right of being an 
important player in the first team and that’s the way I see it.”

Martínez added: “I would like him to get a different contract. He has got 
three years left [after this season] and he’s in line for a different one. We 
have been talking with his agent. We have just exchanged ideas at the moment 
and we’ll see where we go with that.”

Everton visit Bournemouth in the Premier League on Saturday but Martínez has 
yet to decide whether to involve Baines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/leighton-baines-everton-return-roberto-martinez>
. The England international, the manager believes, needs to restore his 
confidence going into challenges before making a competitive return.

Baines has been sidelined since May by an ankle injury that required two 
operations, one to address a long-standing ligament problem and a second after 
the repair work snapped in training days before the new season. The defender 
has stepped up his rehabilitation in recent weeks and had a second run-out on 
Sunday when he played 45 minutes forEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> Under-21s against Porto B in the 
Premier League International Cup.

“Physically Leighton is fine from a medical point of view,” Martínez said. 
“Now it’s about giving him the right sort of introduction. More than anything 
it’s about confidence, about going into a 50-50 challenge without being fearful 
because of the way he got the [second] injury by blocking a ball, not by 
stretching.

“It’s about preparing his body to be physically strong, but it is great to see 
him back in training. It’s about giving him exactly what he needs, not rushing 
him back and losing him for the rest of the campaign. We can use his freshness 
and experience for the rest of the season.”
 