
Civil service <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/civil-service> unions are 
celebrating the apparent end of the much-loathed “rank and yank” performance 
management system introduced by former Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude in 
2013.

 The system forces managers to identify the bottom 10% of performers in their 
workforce as part of a controversial “guided distribution” appraisal system 
that has been criticised from the start by unions, managers and staff. One 
senior civil servant described it as theworst thing they’d seen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/nov/13/civil-service-performance-ratings-unfair-expensive>
 in a 40-year career.


The system was introduced to help target poor performance, something the civil 
service has acknowledged has been a struggle. But the ranking system was also 
part of a wider belief by Maude in importing private sector approaches to shake 
up civil service systems.

Unions were told on 7 December 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/pcs_comment/pcs_comment.cfm/pressure-wins-major-changes-to-hated-appraisals>
 told that a new Cabinet Office framework will be introduced in 2017, with new, 
more flexible arrangement based on some core principles that all departments 
will need to meet. Crucially,according to the PCS 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/pcs_comment/pcs_comment.cfm/pressure-wins-major-changes-to-hated-appraisals>
, one of the largest civil service unions, the principles do not require 
departments to operate quotas and relative assessment, where staff are judged 
against the performance of others and placed in categories, including “must 
improve”, which ultimately puts them at risk of losing their jobs.

Civil Service World has report 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/civil-service-performance-management-set-major-overhaul-%E2%80%93-full-details-and-reaction?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=CSW%20Breaking%20News&utm_content=CSW%20Breaking%20News+CID_dcc703669c1607dae2ed5e30509e0fb5&utm_source=Email%20newsletters&utm_term=Civil%20service%20performance%20management%20set%20for%20major%20overhaul%20%20full%20details%20and%20reaction>
ed that four major government departments – HM Revenue and Customs, the 
Department for Work and Pensions, the Ministry of Defence and the Home Office – 
are understood to have said that they will overhaul their system and end guided 
distribution from next April.

In May, the PCS union, which represents civil servants, called for the 
“discredited” system to be scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/26/scrap-performance-management-pcs-mark-serwotka>
. It estimates that theMinistry of Defence alone was spending £100m a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/29/ministry-of-defence-100m-performance-management-civil-service>
 running the system and has welcomed the news that several of the biggest 
departments are to stop using it, as have the other civil service unions. 
According to a PCS official, the regime was wrong and divisive and should never 
have been introduced, so the union is really pleased its pressure has paid off.

Of course, it’s not just the huge Brexit iceberg looming over the civil 
service that has done for the system. Many of those at both the top of the 
civil service and in middle management have privately acknowledged that having 
to grade all their staff in the system’s clunky framework has taken up far too 
much of everyone’s time. It’s something they would have no doubt got rid of 
eventually anyway. But managing the complexities of Brexit has no doubt 
concentrated minds, with rising bills for hiring new staff and astark warning 
in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/civil-service-unable-to-cope-with-brexit-bob-kerslake>
 from the former head of the civil service Lord Kerslake that the civil service 
will find it hard to cope.

Union calls on Whitehall to scrap discredited performance management system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/26/scrap-performance-management-pcs-mark-serwotka>


Getting rid of this much-hated system is perhaps the biggest legacy from 
Maude’s time in office to be overturned, but some of his other initiatiatives 
have too have also struggled since the departure of the former minister, who 
recently took on aBrexit advisory role at a law firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/ex-minister-francis-maude-takes-brexit-advisory-job-at-law-firm>
. The Government Digital Service, lauded by Maude as a trailblazer for digital 
government services, has suffered from a leaching of senior managers over the 
past couple of years, and there were significant problems with the civil 
service pension scheme, MyCSP, which was spun out by Maude, resulting in
thousands of pensions being miscalculated or delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/feb/11/mycsp-government-pension-scheme-civil-service>
.

And of course, one of the first things Maude did to get “private sector 
discipline” into the civil service was invite Sir Philip Greento lecture 
Whitehall on government efficiency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/13/philip-green-eficiency-savings>
.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 