
The costs and benefits of the UK’s membership of the single market were widely 
debated before the referendum. However, the customs union was hardly mentioned. 
Yet it is the customs union that permits goods to circulate freely within the 
EU (and beyond, to a few other countries including, for the most part, Turkey) 
and which means the EU negotiates trade agreements with non-EU countries as a 
single entity.

So does Brexit mean leaving the customs union? It seems obvious that it would 
– what’s the point of leaving the EU if we leave the EU in charge of UK trade 
policy? On the other hand, the Treasury is now taking a good hard look at the 
costs and logistical implications of having to reinstate at least some border 
checks for goods flowing between Dover and Calais, or Felixstowe and the 
continent (not to mention the thorny issue of the Republic of Ireland-Northern 
Ireland border).
What is a customs union graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=71ad41a4-8857-43b5-ae8b-509afaf287cd>
There are no simple answers here – while there are undoubtedly short-term 
costs to leaving, it is perfectly reasonable to argue that if the UK is to make 
a success of Brexit over the longer term we need the flexibility to formulate 
our own, independent trade policy. To make an objective assessment of the costs 
and benefits, you might even want to ask some experts …

What you definitely don’t want to do is to listen to anyone who claims that 
leaving the customs union has no costs, only benefits. But that’s precisely 
what Change Britain did whenit claimed on Tuesday 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/03/uk-will-create-400000-jobs-quits-customs-union-part-brexit-talks/>
 that leaving the customs union – and concluding new free trade deals with 
countries ranging from India to Korea – could “create 400,000 new jobs”, 
because of the projected increase in UK exports.

Let’s leave aside the fact that India has made it abundantly clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/06/india-warns-uk-immigration-policy-wreck-post-brexit-trade-deal>
 that it’s not interested in a trade deal with the UK as long as we continue to 
go out of our way to make skilled workers and students from India unwelcome. 
Let’s even brush over the fact that the EU already has afree trade deal with 
Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/change-britain-brexit-michael-gove-eu-referendum>
. Since this has been broadly in force since 2011 – and would not necessarily 
continue post-Brexit, although it may well do so – this is a potential cost of 
leaving the customs union, not a benefit. Even more fundamental is the obvious 
point that the impact of free trade deals – if they are successful – is to 
increase both exports and imports.

Claiming that free trade deals would create British jobs because our exports 
would go up, but ignoring the fact that our imports would also increase, is 
either deeply ignorant or deliberately misleading. In fact, almost any 
economist – regardless of their views of the economics of Brexit – would tell 
you that over time the impact of trade dealson overall employment in the UK is 
likely to be negligible or zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/economists-dispute-claim-that-brexit-could-create-400000-jobs>
. As withits report last week 
<https://www.changebritain.org/leave-eus-single-market-customs-union-boost-uk-450-million-week/>
, Change Britain seems to be doing its best to crowd out serious debate on the 
costs and benefits of leaving the customs union.

Economists dispute claim that Brexit could create 400,000 jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/economists-dispute-claim-that-brexit-could-create-400000-jobs>
Meanwhile, back in reality, the Financial Times’ annual survey found that the 
vast majority of economists remain of the view that Brexit will be a drag on UK 
growth over the medium to long term. Of course, economists, like others, should 
not just be asked what they think will happen next, but be held to account for 
what they predicted in the past.Last year I said that 
<http://www.niesr.ac.uk/blog/2016-financial-times-economists-surveymy-answers#.WGuPAlOLQdU>
 Brexit would have relatively little impact on the economy in the short term 
(that is, in 2016) but that it would be significant medium-term costs; we will 
see how that turns out.

Less definitively, I also said that the UK could survive and indeed prosper 
outside of the EU, but there are obvious and serious risks. The current framing 
of the Brexit debate, across the political spectrum – that we are somehow 
“trading off” the economic benefits of the single market against the downsides 
of free movement – illustrates those risks. Restricting trade, capital flows 
and immigration – reducing the openness of the UK economy – all have negative 
economic impacts.

It is these big choices about the UK’s economic future – not fictional numbers 
made up for a cheap headline or to support the political agenda of one faction 
or another – that we should be focusing on as we approach the start of the 
Brexit process.
 