
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as 
Britain starts edging towards the EU exit. If you’d like to receive it as a 
weekly email, do please sign uphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
.

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism is expensive – but 
supporting us isn’t. If you value our Brexit coverage, pleasebecome a Guardian 
supporter <https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?CMP=ema-3377> and help 
make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture

The good news: we finally saw the broad strokes (though nothing of the fine 
detail, which is where the devil will obviously be) of what the government 
wants Brexit to mean – and what it doesn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90222267aab1f2b83d0fe19c5107aa61913dca8%2F0_22_5604_3363%2F5604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90222267aab1f2b83d0fe19c5107aa61913dca8%2F0_22_5604_3363%2F5604.jpg>
 Secretary of state for exiting the European Union, David Davis. Photograph: 
Paul Faith/AFP/Getty Images 
The bad news: it’s hard to see what on earth would induce the EU and its 
member states to endorse this vision, and one or two cabinet members may have a 
hard time getting behind it too.

What’s more, we learned that some not insignificant non-EU countries – major 
investors in the UK – are deeply worried about the consequences.

The government’s number one red line will be controlling EU immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/31/restricting-immigration-will-be-at-heart-of-brexit-deal-theresa-may-says>
, it emerged after a cabinet away-day last week, and MPs will not get a vote 
when article 50 is triggered and the formal two-year exit process begins.

Britain will aim for a “unique model” allowing it to limit immigration but 
also provide “a positive outcome” for trade in goods and services so the 
country can “confirm its place as one of the great trading nations in the 
world”.

Making his first statement as Brexit minister in parliament on Monday, David 
Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/david-davis-vows-to-build-national-consensus-on-brexit>
, whose department’s 180 staff are analysing how Brexit might affect 50 
different business sectors, was similarly optimistic – and similarly vague:

Brexit isn’t about making the best of a bad job. It is about seizing the huge 
and exciting opportunities that will flow from a new place for Britain in the 
world. There will be new freedoms, new opportunities, new horizons for this 
great country.

No clues as to how or when exactly this might be achieved, of course, although 
Davis did confirm that Brexit meant leaving the EU (who’d have thought it?) and 
regaining control of “our borders, our laws and our taxpayers’ money”.

Britain would be seeking “access” to the single market, he said, although not 
necessarily full membership, and this would not come at a cost to trade:

This government is looking at every option, but the simple truth is that if a 
requirement of membership is giving up control of our borders I think that 
makes it very improbable.

Opposition MPs dismissed this “best of both worlds” deal as a pipe dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/david-davis-vows-to-build-national-consensus-on-brexit>
. EU leaders have always said free trade on anything like the terms Britain 
currently enjoys must mean single-market membership, which in turn means 
freedom of movement.

Meanwhile, both the US and Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/g20-theresa-may-warns-of-tough-times-for-uk-economy-after-brexit>
 were warning the prime minister, Theresa May, that from where they stand, 
Brexit trouble looms as well.

President Obama said at the G20 summit in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> that Britain wouldn’t be a priority 
for a US trade deal because Washington wanted to focus on trade negotiations 
with the EU and pacific nations first.

Japan issued an unprecedented 15-page warning about the impact of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/04/britain-japanese-brexit-letter-eu>
, saying there could be a string of corporate departures from the UK if the 
privileges that come with single market membership are not maintained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4caac79d9ed3db635e65c1b417db0576eeedc908%2F0_0_4065_2439%2F4065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4caac79d9ed3db635e65c1b417db0576eeedc908%2F0_0_4065_2439%2F4065.jpg>
 US president, Barack Obama, who said during the G20 summit that Britain 
wouldn’t be a priority for a US trade deal after Brexit. Photograph: Saul 
Loeb/AFP/Getty 
May also risked running into conflict with some of her own ministers by ruling 
out the kind of Australian-style “points-based” immigration system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/no-10-theresa-may-rules-out-points-based-immigration-system-for-britain-brexit>
 the leave camp – including foreign minister Boris Johnson – promised,pledging 
instead merely “some control” over EU immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/05/david-davis-brexit-commons-statement-leaving-uk-since-brexit-vote-poll-suggests-politics-live?page=with:block-57cd5bc0e4b0456abb93da49#block-57cd5bc0e4b0456abb93da49>
.

Downing Street said this was because points-based systems didn’t work, but 
after the PM also stepped back from other key campaign pledges – to commit an 
extra £100m a week to the NHS, scrap VAT on fuel and end all EU budget 
contributions forever – former Ukip leaderNigel Farage was quick to accuse her 
of betraying Brexit values. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/05/david-davis-brexit-commons-statement-leaving-uk-since-brexit-vote-poll-suggests-politics-live?page=with:block-57cd2b09e4b01f3b278917b0#block-57cd2b09e4b01f3b278917b0>

All of which suggests fun times ahead, with the PM’s cautious determination to 
be bound only by delivering “the best deal for Britain” likely to fuel fears 
among leave voters and politicians that “Brexit means Brexit” actually means a 
pale shadow of what people wanted.


Further muddying the waters earlier in the week was former prime minister Tony 
Blair, who popped up on French radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/britain-stay-eu-public-opinion-shifts-brexit-tony-blair>
 to say remain campaigners should continue warning of the costs of Brexit and 
that Britain could conceivably remain in the EU if public opinion shifts over 
the next few years:

Who made a rule that we have to stop the debate now? There will come a moment 
when we have had the negotiations and can see the terms, and we will be able to 
say that it is a good idea or perhaps that it is a bad idea, with major 
consequences.

The view from Europe
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90f22f9c0109be237c99c34b630af64286619331%2F285_622_2298_1378%2F2298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90f22f9c0109be237c99c34b630af64286619331%2F285_622_2298_1378%2F2298.jpg>
 Former European Council president, Herman van Rompuy: ‘The negotiations will 
take years and years’. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty 
Europe, essentially, would just like Britain to get on with it, because it has 
more important things to worry about.

Former European Council president Herman van Rompuy lamented to Euractiv 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/uk-europe/news/van-rompuy-brexit-will-take-years-and-years/>
 that Brexit would run and run, but was more a reflection of a specific 
national sentiment and circumstances than of a European phenomenon:

Brexit is a political amputation. But Britain was never a full member of the 
European Union; it had even stopped playing a role in EU foreign policy. The 
negotiations will take years and years.

Koon Lenaerts, president of the European Court of Justice, agreed Britain was 
never really European and said he thought Brexit might never happen at all 
<https://euobserver.com/uk-referendum/134874>. He told Dutch public broadcaster 
NTR:

We don’t know yet if and when and under what conditions [it might happen]. We 
have had the referendum, which was a clear political signal, but a lot still 
has to happen. Everything is still somewhat speculative.

Frans Timmermans, the European Commission’s first vice-president, put his 
finger on the crux of the matter, telling AFP:


The onus is on the country that decides to leave to tell us how they want to 
leave, and I think that’s the starting point of the discussion … Perhaps they 
should first get their act together and tell us what they really want.

Meanwhile, back in Westminster:

Conservative divisions over Brexit are as nothing compared to Labour’s 
increasingly acrimonious split.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F825ada43136d28f6a542719d728602aff81a021f%2F954_410_1717_1030%2F1717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F825ada43136d28f6a542719d728602aff81a021f%2F954_410_1717_1030%2F1717.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the Labour party, in Ramsgate, arriving to speak at a 
rally. Photograph: Vickie Flores/Rex/Shutterstock 
As the party’s leadership contest rumbles on, the challenger, Owen Smith, 
warned members that re-electing the current leader Jeremy Corbyn would see the 
party “consigned to irrelevance” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/jeremy-corybn-labour-party-leadership-vote-election-owen-smith>
 and allow the Conservatives to rule for decades:

It’s a disastrous government we’ve got right now, and where are we in offering 
really robust, serious and credible opposition to that? Nowhere. And Jeremy has 
to be held accountable for that.

Corbyn, meanwhile, has revealed he is investigating allegations that the 
contest is being rigged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/corbyn-investigating-claims-leadership-contest-is-being-rigged>
 against him, possibly by party officials:

I’m surprised at the numbers of people who’ve been denied a vote and at the 
lack of reason that’s been given to people. I’m concerned about that because 
surely in a democratic process everyone should be entitled to vote unless there 
is some very good reason.

You should also know

 * Britain’s economy continues to weather the immediate shock of the leave vote
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/05/services-sector-pmi-expected-to-ebound-after-brexit-shock-business-live>
, with the UK’s vital services sector staged a record monthly rise in August. 
(This is not a “post-Brexit bounce”: Brexit has not yet even begun to be 
negotiated.)

 * The EU referendum debate was “dire”, according to the Electoral Reform 
Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/electoral-reform-campaigners-slam-dire-eu-referendum-debate>
, who found “glaring democratic deficiencies” in the run-up to the Brexit vote 
and a public feeling “totally ill-informed”, disengaged and confused about 
contrasting and overwhelmingly negative claims.

 * Poland can play intermediary in Brexit talks, according to deputy PM 
Mateusz Morawiecki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/poland-wants-to-play-intermediary-for-brexit-talks-says-deputy-pm>
, who believes Britain will have to make concessions on free movement and that 
a Norway-style EEA deal may be best. 
 * The department for exiting the EU has a Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/DexEUgov/status/771280241419517952>. 
 * According to the Financial Times, one-fifth of City revenues – some £9bn – 
could be at risk from a “hard” Brexit 
<https://www.ft.com/content/72aa537a-7116-11e6-a0c9-1365ce54b926> [paywall] 
with restricted single market access. 
 * Martin Roth, the German director of London’s V&A museum, is leaving because 
of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/german-v-and-a-director-martin-roth-quits-brexit-vote>
. He said the vote felt like a personal defeat and that he was particularly 
upset to hear aggressive “war rhetoric” during the referendum campaign. 
Read these:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb285aeab4b4a205391a2ddb5e335a8fc48d93b%2F792_425_1366_1566%2F1366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20EU%20exit%20could%20be%20pale%20shadow%20of%20what%20voters%20wanted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-eu-exit-could-be-pale-shadow-of-what-voters-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb285aeab4b4a205391a2ddb5e335a8fc48d93b%2F792_425_1366_1566%2F1366.jpg>
 The Observer’s William Keegan. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer
Senior Tory MP Andrew Tyrie’s reasoned  
<http://openeurope.org.uk/intelligence/britain-and-the-eu/giving-brexit-meaning>
pamphlet for Open Europe 
<http://openeurope.org.uk/intelligence/britain-and-the-eu/giving-brexit-meaning>
 argues that the government must now set out in detail what it hopes to achieve 
from Brexit talks, explain that much of what was promised will come at 
considerable economic and fiscal cost, and manage “sky-high” public 
expectations.

In the Observer, veteran economics commentator William Keegan said Brexit is 
“truly daunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/04/brexit-truly-daunting-biggest-crisis-i-have-known-eu-referendum>
 – the biggest crisis I have ever known”, while in the Guardian,Martin Kettle 
warned that May and her government have an extremely problematic few months 
ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/theresa-may-bleak-future-outside-single-market-eu-trade>
:

They know they are advancing into an autumn in which all the big political and 
economic calls are connected and all have big consequences. They mostly 
understand the problems they face. What they lack at this stage are the 
answers. But the inescapable truth is that all the choices that follow from 
Brexit are difficult – and many of them are very bad ones indeed.

In the New Statesman, Stephen Bush argues that Theresa May will never get the 
deal she wants from Europe 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/08/theresa-may-will-struggle-keep-her-promises-brexit>
 because for domestic political reasons Europe can’t afford to give it to her;
and also that it is still way, way too early 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/09/brexit-success-after-all-dont-believe-word-it>
 to say whether Brexit has been a success because it hasn’t happened yet.

May’s dilemma, he adds, is this:

There is a path to a successful Brexit that doesn’t knacker the British 
economy – it just involves breaking many of the promises made by Vote Leave, 
something she has sounded reluctant to do just yet.

Back at the Guardian, Jackie Ashley wonders whether May might have ended up 
throwing in her lot with the Brexiters after all: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/theresa-may-brexiteers-conservative-right-prime-minister>

We are going into the huge Brexit experiment with the tiller of state tied 
fast in a single position, without proper parliamentary opposition and under a 
new leader who has only to look in one direction to maintain her position.

And for balance, in the FT former chancellor Nigel Lawson 
<https://www.ft.com/content/6cb84f70-6b7c-11e6-a0b1-d87a9fea034f> [paywall] 
reckons Brexit gives Britain the chance to finally finish the Thatcher 
revolution, arguing that article 50 should be triggered forthwith with no time 
wasted on a “a futile and wholly misguided attempt to secure a trade agreement” 
with the EU:

It is the benefit of intelligent deregulation, something that cannot be 
captured in any theoretical economic model but which we demonstrated in the 
1980s, that offers the prospect of the greatest economic gain. And this is 
entirely in our own hands, and not a matter of negotiations with others. That 
is what we need to be focused on now.

Tweet of the week

Hugo Rifkind expertly sums up exactly where we stand two-and-a-bit months on, 
according to Her Majesty’s government:
Hugo Rifkind (@hugorifkind) 
So. Today we learned Brexit means Brexit, and will be successful, not 
unsuccessful, and will achieve difficult things, not not achieve them.
 <https://twitter.com/hugorifkind/status/771096483097636866> August 31, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/hugorifkind/status/771096483097636866>  