
“Brexit” has emerged ahead of “Trumpism” and “hygge” to be named the word of 
the year by Collins after seeing an “unprecedented surge” in use.

The dictionary publisher said that Brexit saw its first recorded usage in 
2013, but has since increased in use by more than 3,400% this year as the 
referendum approached in June, and as the ramifications have played out since. 
Such an increase, said Collins, is “unheard of” since it began monitoring word 
usage.

“‘Brexit’ is arguably politics’s most important contribution to the English 
language in over 40 years, since the Watergate scandal gave commentators and 
comedians the suffix ‘-gate’ to make any incident or scandal infinitely more 
compelling,” said Helen Newstead, Collins’s head of language content.

According to Newstead, Brexit is “proving even more useful and adaptable” than 
Watergate. As well as its obvious definition as “the withdrawal of the United 
Kingdom from the European Union”, and its spawning of words including “bremain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/brexit-or-bremain-readers-eu-referendum>
” and “bremorse 
<http://www.dailysabah.com/feature/2016/07/02/first-brexit-then-bremorse-is-breturn-possible>
”, the term has also inspired “a lot of wordplay”, said Collins. She pointed to 
“BrexPitt 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/like-brexit-and-bakexit-brex-pitt-has-left-us-all-stunned/>
” or “Bradxit”, referring to the end of Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt’s 
marriage, “Mexit <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-36643270>”, for the 
footballer Lionel Messi’s retirement, and “Bakexit 
<http://www.cityam.com/249321/bake-xit-two-great-british-bake-off-hosts-leave-programme>
”, about the BBC’s loss of The Great British Bake Off. It was added to the 
current print edition of Collins Dictionary earlier this year.

Other contenders for Collins’s word of the year included Trumpism. “Trump is 
not the first politician to have had his name co-opted by language: 
‘Thatcherism’ and ‘Reaganomics’, for example,” said Newstead. “However, the 
longevity of ‘Trumpism’ as a word may depend on his success in the forthcoming 
election.”

Hygge – the Danish art of living cosily – on its way to UK bookshops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
Collins’ 10-strong list of final contenders for the top spot, which will 
appear in Collinsdictionary.com, also included “snowflake generation”, which it 
defines as “the young adults of the 2010s, viewed as being less resilient and 
more prone to taking offence than previous generations”, and the Danish concept 
of “hygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/hunting-for-hygge-a-new-ingredient-in-denmarks-recipe-for-happiness>
”, or “creating cosy and convivial atmospheres that promote wellbeing”.

The phrase “throw shade 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/where-the-expression-throw-shade-comes-from-2015-3>
”, which Collins said was made popular in gay communities in late 1980s 
America, and which it defines as “to make a public show of contempt for someone 
or something, often in a subtle or non-verbal manner”, also made Collins’s 
list, as did “sharenting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/may/18/pros-cons-of-sharenting>” 
(“the habitual use of social media to share news, images, etc of one’s 
children”).

“Most of this year’s words are used by or relate to the generation born 
towards the end of the last century. They are the drivers of ‘dude food’, 
quickest to ‘throw shade’ or ‘mic drop’. They may be referred to by some as the 
‘snowflake generation’, but they are the most likely to rail against ‘Brexit’ 
and ‘Trumpism’. Their contribution to the constant evolution of the English 
language should not be overlooked,” said Newstead.

Collins’s words of the year, with full definitions

Brexit (ˈbrɛɡzɪt) noun: the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European 
Union

dude food (ˈduːd ˌfuːd) noun: junk food such as hot dogs, burgers, etc 
considered particularly appealing to men

hygge (ˈhyɡə) noun: a concept, originating in Denmark, of creating cosy and 
convivial atmospheres that promote wellbeing

JOMO (ˈdʒəʊməʊ) noun acronym: joy of missing out: pleasure gained from 
enjoying one’s current activities without worrying that other people are having 
more fun

mic drop (ˈmaɪk ˌdrɒp) noun: a theatrical gesture in which a person drops (or 
imitates the action of dropping) a hand-held microphone to the ground as the 
finale to a speech or performance

sharenting (ˈʃɛərəntɪŋ) noun: the habitual use of social media to share news, 
images, etc of one’s children

snowflake generation (ˈsnəʊfleɪk dʒɛnəˌreɪʃən) noun: the young adults of the 
2010s, viewed as being less resilient and more prone to taking offence than 
previous generations

throw shade (ˌθrəʊ ˈʃeɪd) verb: to make a public show of contempt for someone 
or something, often in a subtle or non-verbal manner

Trumpism (ˈtrʌmpɪzəm) noun: (1) the policies advocated by the US politician 
Donald Trump, especially those involving a rejection of the current political 
establishment and the vigorous pursuit of US national interests (2) a 
controversial or outrageous statement attributed to Donald Trump

uberization (ˌuːbəraɪˈzeɪʃən) noun: the adoption of a business model in which 
services are offered on demand through direct contact between a customer and 
supplier, usually via mobile technology
 