
For chancellors of the exchequer, annual International Monetary Fund meetings 
have not always been the happiest of occasions. Heading there in early October 
2008,Alistair Darling knew that the solvency of the UK banking system was 
hanging by a thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/08/economy.gordonbrown>. In 
1992, Norman Lamont went to Washington with his economic strategy in tatters 
after Britain’s departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism on Black Wednesday. 
In 1976, on his way to Manila, Denis Healey only managed to get as far as 
London’s Heathrow airport, such was the intensity of the sterling crisis. On 
that occasion, the chancellor did not need to go to the IMF: the IMF came to 
him.

Compared with some of his predecessors, Philip Hammond has got off lightly. 
The IMF’s belief –expressed repeatedly and forcefully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 before the EU referendum on 23 June – was thatBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> would be to 2016 what the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers was to 2008 – the trigger for a massive global 
economic shock. These fears have so far proved unfounded. The UK appears 
unlikely to plunge into the immediate recession confidently predicted by the 
IMF. House prices are not collapsing and there has been no stock-market crash. 
The impact on the rest of the global economy has so far been minimal.

Yet it is safe to say that finance ministers and central bank governors are 
unlikely to be in celebratory mood when they jet in to Washington later this 
week. Even in the absence of an immediate meltdown, they will have plenty to 
talk about. Here are five topics likely to be on the agenda.

Brexit and other threats to the global economy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cc4997a6e3776a3fa9b7a2761dc6fa3b950e697%2F0_44_3375_2024%2F3375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cc4997a6e3776a3fa9b7a2761dc6fa3b950e697%2F0_44_3375_2024%2F3375.jpg>
 The IMF will urge a clean-up of the problems besetting Deutsche Bank. 
Photograph: Luke MacGregor/Reuters 
While the IMF has revised upwards its short-term forecasts for the UK economy, 
it remains convinced that the long-term impact will be negative, particularly 
if Theresa May’s government makes control of migration a higher priority than 
continued access to the single market.

Christine Lagarde <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, the 
IMF’s managing director, will urge the Bank of England and the Treasury to 
continue providing stimulus to the economy, with a warning that there could be 
fresh turbulence for both the UK and the rest of the EU when, with the 
triggering of article 50, divorce proceedings eventually start.

Even so, having been a cheerleader for what Leave campaigners called Project 
Fear, Lagarde and her officials will have some explaining to do. Hammond is 
keen to talk up the prospects for the UK economy and will expect Lagarde to be 
less pessimistic than she was during the referendum campaign. The IMF can be 
expected to focus on other worries – and it has plenty of choice.

The IMF’s global financial stability report is likely to highlight the 
problems of European banks hobbled by hundreds of billions of euros’ worth of 
non-performing loans. It will be urging a speedy resolution of the problems 
besettingDeutsche Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank>. It 
also fears that defeat for Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, in the 
referendum onreform of the senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/matteo-renzi-italy-referendum-banks-brexit>
 called for December would lead to a political and economic crisis that would 
have ramifications for the whole eurozone.

Other countries being closely monitored by the IMF include the US – now set to 
grow more slowly in 2016 than was predicted six months ago – and China, where 
the government is trying to rebalance the economy away from its reliance on 
exports.

Adjusting to the ‘new mediocre’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b6d62d9334bf12753bc64e8c29bb18df77ec4c6%2F0_294_4992_2996%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b6d62d9334bf12753bc64e8c29bb18df77ec4c6%2F0_294_4992_2996%2F4992.jpg>
 Poor economic performance in Japan, as well as the US and Europe, means world 
growth is stuck at around 3%. Photograph: Toshifumi Kitamura/AFP/Getty Images 
Ten years ago, the global economy was growing rapidly. Between 2003 and 2006, 
global growth averaged more than 5% a year – the strongest performance since 
the early 1970s. The IMF’s flagship publication, the World Economic Outlook, 
could see no reason why the “new normal” would come to an end and hailed the 
liberalisation of world financial markets as an unmitigated benefit.

Times have changed. The new normal has become what Lagarde describes as the 
“new mediocre” – in which growth remains stuck at barely more than 3% a year, 
thanks largely to the persistently poor performance of the developed nations: 
the US, Europe and Japan.

“For the past several years, the global recovery has been weak and fragile, 
and this continues to be the case today, especially for advanced economies,”she 
said in a speech last week 
<http://www.imf.org/en/news/articles/2016/09/27/am16-sp09282016-boosting-growth-adjusting-to-change>
. “And while there are some good signs, the overall growth outlook still 
remains subdued.”

The IMF’s concerns about Brexit stem, in part, from the knowledge that it 
would not take much for mediocre growth and low levels of inflation to turn 
into recession and deflation.

Central banks are out of ammo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc0deae97617fe169352d5b9b7117fbeec2a2f6b%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc0deae97617fe169352d5b9b7117fbeec2a2f6b%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 There is speculation that the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates 
before the end of the year. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
Global growth has been weak despite the best efforts of central banks. They 
have cut interest rates to record low rates and made repeated use of the 
money-creation process known as quantitative easing in an attempt to boost 
demand.

This week’s meeting take place against a backdrop of growing speculation that 
the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates before the end of the year. 
But other central banks – the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the 
European Central Bank –are moving in the opposite direction and providing 
additional stimulus.

Lagarde has maintained a neutral position on a rise in US interest rates, but 
is known to fear the volatility a rate rise could bring – as money held in 
developing world banks, and even in London and Frankfurt, flows to the US in 
search of a safe return at a higher rate. She also thinks central banks are 
being asked to do too much, and that achieving higher levels of growth will 
require a three-pronged approach: monetary stimulus, tax cuts or spending 
increases from finance ministries, and structural reform.

The IMF has urged countries which have the financial headroom to do so to 
spend money on growth-boosting public investment.In a recent speech 
<http://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2016/09/27/AM16-SP09282016-Boosting-Growth-Adjusting-to-Change>
, Lagarde singled out Canada, Germany and South Korea as ones with plenty of 
spare cash. And this comes afteran IMF report at the beginning for the year 
called on the G20 nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/24/imf-urges-uk-to-ease-austerity-should-economy-slow-further>
, including the UK, US, Mexico and Turkey, to ramp up their outlay on 
much-needed infrastructure projects.

The ghost of protectionism
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f594d4fd4678795729d12bd675b954ebf12ef41%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f594d4fd4678795729d12bd675b954ebf12ef41%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s anti-free trade rhetoric is an alarming sign of moves towards 
trade barriers. Photograph: Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters 
The IMF was born out of the turmoil of the 1930s, when tit-for-tat 
protectionism amplified the effects of the Great Depression. Since its creation 
at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, the IMF has been at the forefront of 
attempts to reduce barriers to trade. It now views with alarm the ebb tide of 
globalisation, seen in theanti free-trade rhetoric of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/trump-clinton-free-trade-policies-tpp>
, the stalling of negotiations between Washington and Brussels on the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> and the Brexit vote.

The director general of the World Trade Organisation, Roberto Azevêdo, will 
join Lagarde in Washington this week to make the case for freer trade. The 
concern of both organisations is not just that there has been a gradual rise 
over the past four years in the number of protectionist measures introduced, 
but that there is a risk of an anti-trade narrative taking root, which says all 
the gains from openness are being captured by a tiny global elite.

Lagarde says this mood is encouraged by growing inequality, and that tackling 
the divide between rich and poor would make it easier to negotiate trade deals 
and for governments to push for other structural reforms.

A new debt crisis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ddf3bc558ee963e7e64b4ab8e18468c814282e1%2F0_120_2420_1452%2F2420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20low%20growth%20%20and%20the%20spectre%20%20of%20protectionism%20stalk%20an%20IMF%20in%20sombre%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fimf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ddf3bc558ee963e7e64b4ab8e18468c814282e1%2F0_120_2420_1452%2F2420.jpg>
 Angola is one of the countries that has asked the IMF and World Bank for help 
as growth and commodity prices fall. Photograph: Siphiwe Sibeko/Reuters 
For the past decade, the activities of the IMF have overshadowed those of its 
sister organisation, the World Bank, which also holds its annual meeting this 
week. The focus has been on the problems of the developed world – the sub-prime 
crisis, the near collapse of the banks, the threat to the euro and Brexit – 
rather than on the world’s poorest countries, many of which had been growing 
rapidly as a result of booming commodity prices.

Many poor countries borrowed heavily on the global capital markets during the 
good times but are now finding the environment far more hostile. Weak demand in 
the developed world has led to sharp falls in commodity prices and slower 
growth in developing countries. The World Bank expects growth in sub-Saharan 
Africa to be just 1.6% – the lowest in more than two decades.

Angola, Kenya and Nigeria are among countries that have already turned to the 
IMF and the World Bank for help, and if growth remains weak others are likely 
to join them.

The echoes of another age – one when the annual meetings were dominated by 
calls for debt relief – are getting louder.
 