
In the early hours of 24 June 2016, the world turned. For the permanent 
secretary spotted in carefree party mode the previous evening – along with 
everyone else in public service – Brexit has since been the only game in town.

It has become Whitehall’s black hole, sucking in resources and those most 
precious of commodities, ministerial time and attention.

 You can hear the damage Brexit has done public service in Britain in the 
drawl of pro-Brexit Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg,who criticised Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/bank-of-england-governor-rejects-accusations-of-bias-over-eu-referendum>
, governor of the Bank of England, for his warnings about Brexit. The object of 
his sneer by vocation, knows more. Central bankers are public servants and 
their colleagues, permanent secretaries, chief medical officers and local 
authority service directors have all been damaged by this year’s denigration of 
expertise and casual dismissal of planning and forecasting – the lifeblood of 
responsible public service.

Bank of England governor rejects accusations of bias over EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/bank-of-england-governor-rejects-accusations-of-bias-over-eu-referendum>
 The views of the prime minister, Theresa May, on expertise and public 
management can only be surmised. As home secretary, she de-professionalised 
aspects of police work and appointedTom Winsor 
<https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/about-us/who-we-are/tom-winsor/>, 
a solicitor with no police experience as chief inspector of constabulary. May 
has been conspicuously silent on the justice department’s failing effort to 
de-professionaliseprobation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/06/liz-truss-calls-rapid-completion-probation-privatisation-review>
 by splitting it up and parcelling the pieces out to private firms with no 
track record in offender management.

 And yet Brexit also affirms how stolid and unchanging public management has 
been in 2016.

That isn’t necessarily a compliment. 

You could ask, as in many previous years, why there are notmore signs of 
cumulative efficiency, or why the National Audit Office keeps finding the same 
problems – for example, the absence of common, cost-saving procurement.

 Take shared services. It remains a no-brainer that much more of the work of 
Whitehall departments, NHS trusts, local authorities could be standardised and 
supplied by third-party specialists, which don’t have to come from the private 
sector. But as with procurement, the divisions and particularities of the 
public sector defeat the common good – and unit cost reduction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F118a51681f208d1eb17a93266ead126b04ad73e4%2F533_94_1129_1129%2F1129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20was%20Whitehall's%20black%20hole%20in%20a%20bleak%202016%20for%20public%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20was%20Whitehall%27s%20black%20hole%20in%20a%20bleak%202016%20for%20public%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F118a51681f208d1eb17a93266ead126b04ad73e4%2F533_94_1129_1129%2F1129.jpg>
 Cabinet secretary Sir Jeremy Heywood: keeping the show on the road Photograph: 
PA 
 Yet that stolidity is also a virtue. The OECD survey <> of civil service in 
austerity is remarkable. Despite cuts and downsizing, there has been so little 
blowback, taking the form of corruption or internal dissent.

 Stability’s personification is Sir Jeremy Heywood. Whether or not he 
personally deserves credit for the relatively high scores for engagement and 
morale in the Cabinet Office’speople survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-service-people-survey-2016-results>
, his 2016 has shown him as the ace practitioner of what Whitehall does best, 
which is keeping the show on the road.

 Prime ministers stand in Downing Street and announce their departure; prime 
ministers come in and rearrange the deckchairs. Profound cracks show in British 
society. The economy is in high jeopardy. But Heywood keeps on keeping on, and 
has even found time for photo opportunities with his predecessors 
<https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/100-years-cabinet-secretaries-six-conversation>
 as the Cabinet Office celebrates its centenary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27a9583a5e84cf20fae8c66c764fabf92dadaf50%2F507_552_3965_2378%2F3965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20was%20Whitehall's%20black%20hole%20in%20a%20bleak%202016%20for%20public%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20was%20Whitehall%27s%20black%20hole%20in%20a%20bleak%202016%20for%20public%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbrexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27a9583a5e84cf20fae8c66c764fabf92dadaf50%2F507_552_3965_2378%2F3965.jpg>
 Six cabinet secretaries in conversation Photograph: Institute for Government 
 We said earlier in the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/02/sir-jeremy-heywood-evasive-accountability-public-service>
 how welcome a bit of reflection would be, even a smidgeon of theorising about 
public service and management. There’s plenty of scope, in areas such as who 
should take responsibility for failure. Local government chief executiveAndrew 
Travers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/13/barnet-chief-executive-andrew-travers-voting-blunder>
 walked the plank in Barnet; should there have been other exemplars?

And what about intellectual integrity? Emran Mian 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/dfe-hires-grammar-school-critic-as-head-of-strategy-and-social-mobility/>
 of the Social Market Foundation has joined the education department as chief 
of strategy, presumably to implement a grammar schools policy - a policy backed 
by no evidence and much false assertion. Is that really the civil service 
vocation – to condone the speaking of untruth by power?

But hoping for reflection is a vain hope: Heywood’s forte is doing, including 
creating a new department of state from scratch, organising private offices for 
new ministers and so on. He has also, of course, ripped up theset of 
departmental plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/20/brexit-whitehall-black-hole-2016>
 that John Manzoni had published only a few months before that referendum 
changed everything.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 