
Rugby league is no stranger to code swapping but in 2013, long before Jarryd 
Hayne was padding up andjoining the NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/03/jarryd-hayne-nfl-san-francisco-49ers>
 and Sam Burgess wascrossing codes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/23/sam-burgess-rugby-league-union-south-sydney-bath>
 to play for Englandin the Rugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/27/sam-burgess-henry-slade-england-rugby-world-cup-squad-stuart-lancaster>
, the sport secured its own high-profile capture from another ball game.

It is almost three years since the Rugby Football League announced the former 
Football Association chief executive Brian Barwickwould be its new chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/30/brian-barwick-rugby-league-chairman>
 and in that time a lot has changed. The 61-year-old arrived just in time to 
oversee the sport’s most successfulWorld Cup in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/new-zealand-australia-rugby-league-world-cup-final>
 before becoming a driving force in pushing through a restructure of the game 
this season, which will climax on several fronts over the next fortnight.

Despite the structure receiving initial criticism for being too confusing and 
too elongated, Barwick has no doubts it has worked. “We’ve got a cracking 
league structure; there was scepticism over it but you can see it’s been 
strong,” he tells the Guardian. “The bookends of this year are great examples; 
the World Club Series was terrific and then there’s a Test series [for England, 
against New Zealand] to end the year, and with one of those games being in 
London, we can hopefully look back at our first year of the new structure with 
pride.

No NRL grand final concern for Justin Hodges despite Bronco's failure to train
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/no-nrl-grand-final-concern-for-justin-hodges-despite-broncos-failure-to-train>
“Obviously, people didn’t want to be messed about too much and that’s why 
there was a healthy amount of scepticism – and we all had to be brave to push 
it through. But I’m thrilled personally; my take was we had to push it through 
but I would support it, push it in all the key places and chair the meetings 
when things are tough.

“We have to now accept that we can’t change it every two minutes from hereon 
out because what we’ve ended up with at every level of the game is renewed 
interest and an injection of real competitiveness – coupled with a really 
fascinating end to the season.”

Despite his obvious allegiances to football – Barwick spent four years at the 
FA and was heavily involved with the sport during his time at the BBC and ITV – 
he has his own history with rugby league, too, which was one of the reasons he 
opted to apply for the job when the previous incumbent, Richard Lewis,left for 
the All England Tennis Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/apr/10/richard-lewis-chief-executive-wimbledon>
.

“When Richard went, I immediately became interested in the post because 
throughout my personal life and professional career, I often bumped into rugby 
league,” he says. “When I started out at the BBC, rugby league was one of 
Grandstand’s major elements on Saturdays. I used to watch Liverpool City when I 
was a youngster and would alternate my weekends between watching Liverpool at 
Anfield and Liverpool City at Knotty Ash, which isn’t there any more. Then I 
started working at a local paper in Barrow and one of the main jobs was to be 
rugby league reporter, so I certainly know all about the sport.

“I remember working on Grandstand in 1980, they asked me to go to Hull ahead 
of the Challenge Cup final [between Hull and Hull KR]; it was Des Lynam’s first 
television film. I had to knock on his hotel door at 6am to get him to go to a 
fish factory in Hull – it’s probably the toughest thing I’ve done in my career.”

Barwick extends his remit to all levels of the professional game – “I was at 
Oldham to see them get promoted recently; there were around 1,400 people there 
and it was good, honest sport at its best” – and he believes the reintroduction 
of promotion and relegation is the biggest benefit of the new system. “There 
will still be some who say it’s too complicated but it’s really not been half 
as bad as people thought it would be,” he says. “It’s delivered some real 
vigour to the competition and the opportunity and possibility of promotion and 
relegation has really added some genuine excitement.

“You can only judge on what’s happened in year one but as it grows more, we’ll 
see more positive things happening in the sport. After three years or so I 
think we’ll be very pleased with what we’ve established.”

And his own challenge to drive a sport forward as opposed to overseeing one at 
the top of the food chain? “It’s obviously very different to football and it is 
a challenge,” Barwick adds. “But it’s an interesting one and it’s a great one 
to take on.

“We can’t avoid the fact that we’ve got strong broadcast contracts with 
numerous partners, which underlines the strength of our brand: national 
broadcasters recognise our sport makes for top-class television. But rugby 
league has got to learn how to progress it and to grow it. The challenge now is 
getting new people to engage in it; that’s a challenge that people have had 
before me and people will probably have after me – but I’m hungry to make it 
happen.”
 