
Ben Barba produced a standout performance to lead the way for Cronulla in a 
36-4 demolition of lowly Newcastle at Southern Cross Group Stadium. With 
playmaker James Maloney missing on Sunday, Barba was brilliant in helping the 
Sharks to their 15th straight win – an eight-tries-to-one rout which saw them 
retain top spot on theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder.

Barba scored two tries, had another two denied by the video referee, set up 
another two, and came up with a linebreak and three linebreak assists in front 
of a 16,882 crowd.

Golden-point NRL win puts Raiders in top four for first time in decade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/golden-point-nrl-win-puts-raiders-in-top-four-for-first-time-in-decade>
All five members of the Sharks back five crossed for tries with Valentine 
Holmes getting a double to celebrate his 21st birthday as they became just the 
fourth team in history to win 15 straight games in a season. Holmes was also 
influential, running for 236m and terrorising his opposition down the right 
flank.

For the last-placed Knights, it was their 12th straight loss and they had 
injury added to insult when five-eighth Jarrod Mullen left the field with what 
appeared to be a recurrence of a hamstring problem.

When Barba sent Sosaia Feki over in the 26th minute, the Sharks took a 10-0 
lead into the break but were unlucky not to be up by more after twice being 
controversially frustrated by the bunker. Holmes was denied in the second 
minute after picking up a loose ball and sprinting 60m but was ruled to have 
committed a double movement after being pulled down on the line.

The Sharks were the victim of a video referee clanger in the 30th minute when 
Barba was denied a brilliant solo try after Bernard Sutton ruled Sharks hooker 
Michael Ennis took out his Knights opposite Chris Adams in the lead-up.

Barba made up for it just two minutes after the resumption of play when he 
finished off a brilliant 90m effort started by Holmes and Jack Bird. And from 
there the floodgates opened with Gerard Beale and Bird crossing in the space of 
three minutes to extend their lead to 24 points.

The Knights scored a consolation try when Nathan Ross reeled in a Mitch 
Barnett bomb in the 64th minute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fnrl-round-20-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e190d751603f7208e18413edb071c73ca96a943%2F0_0_4548_3032%2F4548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brilliant%20Ben%20Barba%20leads%20Cronulla%20to%20comfortable%20win%20over%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fnrl-round-20-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brilliant%20Ben%20Barba%20leads%20Cronulla%20to%20comfortable%20win%20over%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fnrl-round-20-sunday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e190d751603f7208e18413edb071c73ca96a943%2F0_0_4548_3032%2F4548.jpg>
 Aaron Woods (left) of the Tigers gets to grips with the Dragons’ Benji 
Marshall, who made his 250th NRL appearance against his former club on Sunday. 
Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
Mitchell Moses showed he can be the man to lead Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> into the post-Robbie Farah era 
after starring in the club’s 25-12 win over St George Illawarra later on 
Sunday. Moses was sharp in attack and solid in defence at ANZ Stadium as the 
Tigers kept their slim finals hopes alive against a Dragons outfit that again 
looked lost for much of the contest.

The win will in part justify the decision by Tigers coach Jason Taylor to dump 
Farah to reserve grade. Moses’ halves partner, Luke Brooks, also impressed for 
the Tigers, as did winger David Nofoaluma.

St George Illawarra remain in finals contention with six rounds to play 
despite the loss, but given their impotent attack it would be a miracle if they 
qualified. Yet the Dragons had a promising start to the the match when winger 
Kurt Mann scored out wide in the fifth minute. But that was about as good as it 
got for the Dragons until a brief period late in the game, which was attended 
by 15,087 fans.

The Tigers hit back quickly through Nofoaluma 10 minutes later. Luke Brooks 
took Wests to the lead in the 26th minute when he easily beat Tariq Sims close 
to the line and when a Nofoaluma linebreak set up a 80m James Tedesco try four 
minutes later, the Tigers led 18-8 - a gap they maintained to the break.

Moses put Josh Aloiai over in the 58th minute to propel the Tigers to a 24-12 
lead but the Dragons didn’t lie down. An Adam Quinlan try set up by Taane Milne 
moved the home side closer to give them a chance late. But as has been the 
story for much of the year, the Dragons’ attack wasn’t up to the task when they 
needed more points. A Moses field goal sealed the win in the 77th minute.

Dragons forward Leeson Ah Mau was put on report for a first-half high tackle 
on Tim Grant, who was taken off on a medicab and didn’t return, and Tigers 
forward Chris Lawrence left the field early in the second half with a leg 
injury.
 