
A young and inexperienced Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> side did what few 
believed they could by claiming a point in a 0-0 draw with Brisbane Roar and in 
doing so handing traditional rivals Adelaide United the A-League’s Premiers’ 
Plate.

A-League final round: Melbourne Victory 0-0 Brisbane Roar – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/09/a-league-final-round-melbourne-victory-v-brisbane-roar-live>
Victory coach Kevin Muscat sent out a much-changed side at AAMI Park with his 
squad having arrived back just two days ago from their Asian Champions League 
assignment against Suwon Bluewings, and with theirA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> fate already decided.

With Victory missing the likes of Mathieu Delpierre, Kosta Barbarouses, Leigh 
Broxham and Besart Berisha, Brisbane were widely favoured to win the three 
points that would have seen them end the 2015-16 home-and-away season on top of 
the ladder.

But Muscat’s youthful charges proved their doubters wrong with a dogged 
display that frustrated the would-be premiers from Queensland.


The result confirms Adelaide’s astonishing transformation from zeroes to 
heroes, after sitting on the bottom of the competition, winless after eight 
rounds. After a 2-0 away win over Melbourne City on Friday night, United 
watched and waited from Adelaide, needing the Roar to slip up against the 
Victory.

Their arch-rivals duly delivered as Brisbane bottled their chance to win the 
premiership in John Aloisi’s first season in charge, handing the Reds a second 
Premiers’ Plate, a decade after their first.

Luis Garcia bids farewell to Central Coast with defeat to Newcastle Jets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/luis-garcia-bids-farewell-to-central-coast-with-defeat-to-newcastle-jets>
Roar had their chances to put the game to bed and ensure the Plate would 
accompany them back to Brisbane, but a combination of profligacy in front of 
goal and an outstanding performance from Victory goalkeeper Lawrence Thomas 
ensured Adelaide were the big winners on the night.

Brisbane were left to rue two golden opportunities in particular. The first 
fell to captain Matt McKay as early as the third minute, but he somehow 
conspired to put wide when the ball found him at the back post, and then Jamie 
Maclaren wasted a one-on-one chance with Thomas just before the hour mark.

Thomas capped a fine individual display with crucial saves to deny substitute 
Henrique and then James Donachie as time ran down.

Roar now stand to lose second place when Western Sydney meet Wellington 
Phoenix on Sunday. A win for Wanderers will see them leapfrog Brisbane and set 
up an intriguing rematch between the Roar and Victory in an elimination final.
 