
The prime minister has made it crystal clear in recent months that he wants to 
see more children adopted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-unveils-drive-to-increase-adoptions-and-cut-unacceptable-delays>
, faster. But following two landmark appeal court cases, the brakes are firmly 
on: family judges are applying the full rigour of statute to local authority 
evidence when applications are made for adoption placement orders. The result, 
much to some politicians’ vocal displeasure, is that the number of children 
placed for adoption hasfallen significantly 
<http://www.adoptionuk.org/news/significant-fall-adoption-decisions-and-placement-orders-latest-figures-show>
.

Caught between the pressure of ministerial urgings and the stringent demands 
of adoption law are child protection social workers, who must make finely 
balanced judgment calls on what option they believe is best for a vulnerable 
child – with a final court decision now required within 26 weeks of a care 
application being made. And it is in this uncomfortable, risky space that the
British Association of Social Workers <https://www.basw.co.uk/> (BASW) last 
week launched a year-long inquiry into the role of the social worker in 
adoption. The intention is to interrogate the ethical and human rights bases on 
which recommendations for severing a birth family’s legal bond with a child are 
made, and lives changed forever.

“We’re interested in hearing what influences social workers’ decision making 
around adoption, such as how court timescales influence their decision making, 
and whether adoption practice is affected by the resources available to 
families under stress – do they find they genuinely have enough resources and 
time to explore the possibility of a child staying with their family?” says 
Brid Featherstone, professor of social work at Huddersfield University, who 
together with independent social worker and Royal Holloway senior lecturer Anna 
Gupta won the bid to lead the inquiry.

Adoption is a traumatic upheaval and our care systems aren't helping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/01/adoption-foster-care-children-transition-traumatic>
The inquiry comes in the wake of a pointed European Court of Human Rights 
decision <http://www.familylawweek.co.uk/site.aspx?i=ed160026> in March, which 
had a strong message for social workers. Not only did the panel of judges hold 
that the Portuguese governmenthad violated the Article 8 rights to family life 
<http://www.bailii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/2016/186.html> of a mother who had her 
children removed for adoption solely on the grounds of poverty, but stronger 
still was the concurring opinion of one judge, who warned social workers that: 
“Absolutism in the interpretation of the best interests of the child can easily 
become a source of formalism on the part of social services; that can in turn 
degenerate into benevolent paternalism of the state ... It is of the utmost 
importance that child protection services fully respect the fundamental rights 
of all, including those of parents, even if these benevolent persons are 
convinced that they are simply promoting the best interests of the child.”

The BASW evidence sessions will be planned by a steering group of adoptive 
parents, birth parents, adult adoptees and senior law professionals, as well as 
social work practitioners and academics. Contributions are invited not just 
from social work professionals – who may give evidence anonymously if they wish 
– but also from birth and adoptive family members, adult adoptees and others 
with personal and professional experience of the issues raised. It is a mark of 
how politically sensitive adoption has become that BASW’s new chief executive, 
Ruth Allen, takes great pains to emphasise that the inquiry will be an 
“investigation of the facts: a robust, honest and balanced look at adoption 
policy and practice as it’s emerging across the UK”.

There is no doubt that while all other European countries allow adoption 
without the consent of birth parents, England pursues this as an option more 
vigorously than most of its counterparts; there were around 5,000 adoptions in
England <https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/england> last year, of 
which half were contested all the way to final hearing, compared with a yearly 
average in the Netherlands of just 28.

“It’s not a road that every country has followed, so we are aware that we are 
pursuing something that others haven’t in the same way,” says Featherstone.

Because of this, she says, it is critical that the social work profession 
“takes control of its own professional duty around this issue … and has very 
serious debates around aspects of our practice and take ownership of the ethics 
that underpin our work every day. It is important that we don’t just take our 
mandate from a government, whatever its hue.”

Children in foster care aren't waiting for a loving home – they are already in 
one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/31/foster-care-nicky-morgan-adoption>
Professional bodies regularly interrogate their members’ views and 
experiences, and then define a public position on an issue, points out Maggie 
Mellon, who recently stepped down from her position as vice-chair of BASW. The 
British Medical Association, for example, regularly investigatesmembers’ views 
on assisted dying 
<http://www.bma.org.uk/news-views-analysis/news/2014/november/bma-opens-end-of-life-care-debate>
, and votes on the issue are made public.

Mellon initiated the idea for the inquiry after chairing a BASW conference 
session at which England’s most senior family judge, Sir James Munby,spoke on 
the culture of family courts <https://www.basw.co.uk/news/article/?id=767>, 
prompting an outpouring of concerned comments from social workers. “We need to 
hear from all our members,” she says. “We have got an open mind, but we have 
concerns, and these are legitimate concerns when the government is quite openly 
at odds with the law.”

Of course, if you take the world as it is, rather than as you’d like it to be, 
Featherstone observes, there is a very good argument for adoption. But she 
insists that “a good society has to engage with ethical questions constantly. 
The debate on adoption has always been about its effectiveness: does it work, 
rather than is it right. We now also need to be asking about its ethics.”

To find out more about the inquiry and to submit evidence, contact 
adoptionenquiry@basw.co.uk <mailto:adoptionenquiry@basw.co.uk>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 