 On Thursday night, an elderly American professor stood in front of a large 
audience at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London and told them 
about how the capsicum had reached China from its original habitat in South 
America. Sidney Mintz, 85, is a professor of anthropology at Baltimore's Johns 
Hopkins University. He walked with a stick to the platform, spoke with a slight 
lisp and sometimes departed from his script - there was an interesting 
excursion into the origins of the Crow tribe - and the American he most 
reminded me of was the humorist Will Rogers, who said (at the prospect of 
meeting Trotsky) that he'd never met a man he didn't like. Mintz radiated a 
similar kind of comradeship with humanity, as befits a man who has spent 60 
years studying it.
He should be better known. In 1985 he published a book that saw the modern 
history of the world, and particularly of Britain, through the prism of sugar. 
It wasn't the first book to take an everyday plant, substance or object and 
show how it had changed civilisation. That distinction probably goes to 
Redcliffe N Salaman's The History and Social Influence of the Potato, published 
in 1949. In popular publishing terms, nothing much happened after that until 
Henry Petroski's The Pencil: A History appeared in 1980. The titles of these 
books used to cause a smile, with their implications of eccentric and narrow 
scholarship, but after Mintz published his Sweetness and Power: The Place of
Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> in Modern History, a new 
genre got under way. There have since been histories of all kinds of unlikely 
things - cod, pineapples, nutmeg, typewriters - intended to demonstrate their 
social importance and aimed at non-specialist audiences. Some are good, other 
demonstrate the deficiencies of a bright idea, a Â£12,000 publishing advance, 
and three months spent in the British Library.

None can equal Mintz. His book came out of a lifetime's work, beginning in 
1948 when he went to live as a fieldwork student with the cane-cutters of 
Puerto Rico, and it tells the story of how a human appetite remade the world in 
a way that rivals (in Mintz's view, even surpasses) the more celebrated 
influences of the steam engine and the web. Some facts about sugar are 
well-known: it causes teeth to rot; Europeans shipped slaves from Africa to the 
Americas and the Caribbean to harvest the cane (13 million of them between 1500 
and 1850). But why was the white world so keen and ruthless to have it? Mintz 
calls it one of his tropical "drug foods", whose consumption rose rapidly among 
European populations from the 17th century. Like tea, coffee, tobacco, 
chocolate and rum, it had physiological, consoling effects, particularly in 
children, but they were barely visible. In this way, sugar escaped moral 
censure until late in the 20th century, when doctors began to worry about the 
results of eating - or over- eating - a food so high in calories and low in 
nutrients, and, thanks to new techniques in food processing, omnipresent on 
supermarket shelves.

What sugar did was awaken and then feed an appetite, the human tongue's 
predisposition for sweetness. Perhaps this comes with mother's milk or our 
primate ancestors' delight in ripe and more easily digested fruit - nobody can 
be sure - but in northern Europe a thousand years ago the appetite had only the 
rare treats of honey or fruit to satisfy it.

Sugar cane was over the horizon, one of a family of grasses squeezed to 
produce a sweet liquid in New Guinea and India. Then Arab traders brought 
trickles of its crystals. Mentions of sugar are hard to find in Chaucer but 
common enough in Shakespeare. Queen Elizabeth's teeth are said to have been 
blackened by over-consumption. Sugar was then rare and exotic enough to be 
thought of as a spice or medicine. This high status might have been preserved, 
but Columbus had taken canes with him on his second voyage to the New World. 
England founded its first American colony at Jamestown in 1607. Sugar and 
slaves were both present in the colony by 1619.

Slavery made sugar cheaper, and the cheaper it grew the more central it became 
to the British diet. Its use had two large boosts. When tea and coffee, both 
naturally bitter, became popular in the 18th century, sugar was their 
indispensable sweetener. Then, in the late 19th century, cheap jam (one third 
fruit pulp to two thirds sugar) began to appear on the table of every 
working-class household. In the 18th century, sugar was popular enough: even 
the wife of the poorest farm labourer took it with her tea. But a hundred years 
later it was making a real contribution to human energy, comprising 14% of the 
average calorie intake. Women who worked in factories no longer spent their few 
spare hours before bed making soups for the next day's lunch, but gave in to 
the easy convenience of bread and jam.

The figures are astonishing. Britain's annual per capita consumption of sugar 
was 4lbs in 1704, 18lbs in 1800, 90lbs in 1901 - a 22-fold increase to the 
point where Britons had the highest sugar intake in Europe. And while slavery 
had been abolished (lastly in Cuba, in 1884), cheapness was sustained by new 
flows of indentured labour from India, Africa and China. In his lecture, Mintz 
estimated that during the 19th century, 100 million people left home to 
establish new lives in other continents: 50 million Europeans for North 
America, Australia and South Africa, and the same number of Asians and Africans 
for the plantation economies of the European empires. "So you might even say," 
he told me over lunch, "that half of these 100 million migrants were cutting 
cane and making sugar for the other half, who were eating it."

He is the son of that second migrant half. He grew up in New Jersey, with a 
father and mother who reached New York from "the village slums of Eastern 
Europe". "I'm from the lucky generation," Mintz said, "lucky to have served in 
the only good war in history [in the USAF], lucky to have gone to college, 
lucky to have grown up in a more optimistic age, lucky to be a professor."

His subject is the anthropology of food and in London he was lecturing on 
"food and the diaspora", on food that left its growers behind (the tomato and 
the courgette didn't bring American Indians to Europe) and on people who left 
their food behind (as Indians from India did in the 19th century). The delight 
of his work, which I suspects he recognises, is that it carries a minimum of 
anthropological theory. Remembering himself as young man discovering the 
stories of Puerto Rican cane-cutters, he said, "The first time I wrote 
something down that nobody else knew, that's when I felt I'd grown up."

His book gave us another dimension to British history. Suddenly many things 
become clearer: why our mothers and grandmothers had their teeth pulled out in 
their early 20s, why our fathers loved jam, why our most fashionable gallery is 
called the Tate, why obesity is more a British problem than, say, a French one, 
why Lyle's Golden Syrup has a Biblical illustration on the tin.

The last big ships to sail up the Thames beyond Tilbury carry sugar. All this, 
and many more sinister byproducts, in the trivial cause of sweetness.
 