
All is not yet lost for British film-makers hoping to see their work included 
in the Cannes selection.

When the line-up was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/cannes-2015-line-up-michael-fassbender-cate-blanchett-oscars>
 on Thursday, there was some dismay among UK observers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/16/cannes-2015-british-directors-peter-bradshaw-preview>
 that no British directors had been included. Hopes had been high particularly 
for High Rise, the JG Ballard adaptation from Ben Wheatley, and Terence 
Davies’s long-gestating Sunset Song, based on Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s classic 
Scots novel.

However, in an interview with Screen International 
<http://www.screendaily.com/festivals/cannes/thierry-fremaux-cannes-2015/5086670.article?blocktitle=LATEST-FILM-NEWS&contentID=40562>
, festival director Thierry Frémaux suggested that both these films are still 
in contention for the slots that, as mentioned in the original line-up 
announcement, are yet to be filled.

On the subject of High Rise – a natural Cannes film, from the pedigree stable 
of producer Jeremy Thomas and featuring red-carpet-friendly faces such as Tom 
Hiddleston, Jeremy Irons and Sienna Miller – Frémaux said: “They’re still 
working on [it] and we might still be able to see it in time.” As for Sunset 
Song, which features Agyness Deyn in a chronicle of harsh existences in 
north-east Scotland in the the early 20th century on which Davies has been 
intermittentlyworking for well over a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/aug/18/1>, Frémaux said enigmatically: 
“You’ll have to wait and see.”

However, the Stephen Frears-directed Icon, about the doping scandal 
surrounding cyclistLance Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong>, will definitely not be 
there, as Frémaux remarked the film “isn’t ready”.

British interest is not entirely absent from the line-up as it stands, though. 
Film4, Channel 4’s film-making arm, have given funding to four films announced 
by Frémaux, though none with British directors: Justin Kurzel’s Macbeth, Yorgos 
Lanthimos’ The Lobster, Paolo Sorrentino’s Youth and Todd Haynes’ Carol. The 
last two are also co-produced by British outfit Number 9, the company run by 
Liz Karlsen and Stephen Woolley.

The Cannes film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> 
runs from 13-24 May.
 