
It was the most improbable summit since Reinhold Meissner said "Servus" to a 
Yeti, and it was live in 185 countries. "I hope that one billion Chinese people 
will watch the game," the Mainz 05 general manager, Christian Heidel, said 
before kick-off. "I want them to seeMainz 05 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mainz-05> and then come to visit Mainz 
soon after. It will definitely be a great advertisement for the club and city."

Heidel was obviously right in terms of sheer worldwide exposure, but he had 
perhaps underestimated the systemic dangers of comparative advertising. Mainz 
(top of the Bundesliga) v Dortmund (second) yesterday afternoon panned out like 
a "Pepsi test" in reverse: Borussia, not Thomas Tuchel's new kids on the block, 
were the real thing at the Bruchwegstadion. "They did everything better than 
us," Heidel said after the 2-0 defeat, "maybe better than we are actually able 
to do."

The second return of Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> to the club he made – and 
vice-versa – was always going to be emotionally charged. No one could have 
known a few months ago that the football would be so relevant, however. The two 
best Bundesliga teams of the season promised an intriguing battle of similar 
sides: youth and high-tempo pressing v high-tempo pressing and youth. Both had 
suffered their first real setback by getting knocked out of the cup in midweek, 
too.

The managers were full of praise for each other beforehand and Klopp paid his 
successor the ultimate compliment: Dortmund changed their formation to a 
4-3-2-1 Christmas tree to congest the midfield even further.

Mainz blinked first. Wary of the visitors' aggressive fore-checking, Tuchel 
had prescribed a combination of direct short passing and the odd long ball. But 
his team found it hard to deal with the fact that the tables were turned on 
them for once. They unsettled themselves with a series of nervous, helpless 
back-passes and were lucky to survive the opening 20 minutes without conceding. 
Dortmund were almost unplayable.

Two mistakes from the Mainz right-back Niko Bungert paved the way for Mario 
Götze's fine opener – it was the minimum Borussia deserved. Götze, 18, is fast 
turning into the next big thing of German football. The son of an IT professor 
will be called up by the national team for the friendly against Sweden and is 
considered to be "one of the greatest talents we ever had" by the German FA 
sporting director, Matthias Sammer.

The youngest ever Dortmund team for a Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> game – average age a 
fraction over 23 – hustled and harassed 05 into submission. "At times, they had 
three men attacking our man in possession; they're more advanced than us in 
that respect," said Heidel.

Tuchel, grateful to go into half-time only one goal down, took off Niko 
Bungert and changed the system to give Lewis Holtby more freedom up-front. As 
Mainz were having a go, Dortmund's defensive partnership of Neven Subotic and 
Mats Hummels became increasingly exposed. Subotic's untidy tackle on Adam 
Szalai resulted in a harsh penalty for the hosts but Eugen Polanski had his 
weak effort saved by the formidable Roman Weidenfeller. "It was the key moment, 
we got lucky," said Klopp.

Dortmund weathered 20 more minutes of Mainz attacks, then hit back with a 
beautifully crafted second. Lucas Barrios, fed by Götze, went past Christian 
Wetklo to decide the match. "They scored precisely when we were dominating; 
that broke our back," said Heidel.

"This is not a defeat to be embarrassed about," Tuchel insisted. "Dortmund 
have insane amounts of quality." But the 37-year-old could not hide his 
disappointment. "There were spells when we were not courageous enough to close 
ranks. Quality, calmness and confidence on the ball were missing in the final 
third." The centre-back Nikolce Noveski also blamed nerves. "It's not common 
for us to be so shaky," the Macedonian international said.

Mainz are still second in the table, only one point behind a Dortmund side 
that look poised to play a major role in the title race. They have the best 
attack, the best defence and they have managed to win their first five away 
games of the season – a new record. "Thinking about the championship does 
nothing for us," said Klopp. Good job he was wearing Kevlar underwear.

Results: Bayern 4-2 Freiburg, Köln 3-2 Hamburg, Kaiserslautern 3-0 Gladbach, 
Bremen 2-3 Nürnberg, Wolfsburg 2-0 Stuttgart, St Pauli 1-3 Frankfurt, Mainz 0-2 
Dortmund, Schalke 0-1 Leverkusen, Hoffenheim 4-0 Hannover.

The latest Bundesliga table 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/bundesligafootball/tables>

Talking points

• Demichelis, Gomez, Tymoshuk and Kroos scored: it was a festival of the 
forgotten and/or underperforming Bayern players against Freiburg on Friday 
night. The 4-2 win seemed to suggest things are slowly coming back to normal in 
the Allianz Arena. But up in his mountain retreat overlooking the Tegernsee, 
Uli Hoeness was harbouring dark thoughts. The Bayern president used a TV talk 
show last night to launch an astonishing, premeditated attack on the manager 
Louis van Gaal. He explicitly faulted the Dutchman for not backing the fringe 
players more. "You only have success if you keep all the players happy. That 
hasn't happened in the past," he said icily. "Now we see the players score who 
were almost shunted out in the summer." Asked whether he would try to convince 
Van Gaal to change his ways, Hoeness shrugged his shoulders. "It's very 
difficult to talk to him because he has his own opinion and doesn't accept 
anyone else's. There's not much to talk about [with him]."

The timing of Hoeness's outburst is difficult to understand. There's certainly 
an element of raw, emotional "I told you so" involved, because Van Gaal has 
openly undermined Gomez and Tymoschuk as players "signed before I came here". 
Politics comes into it, too, of course. Behind the scenes, a full-blown battle 
for the direction of the club has erupted. Van Gaal's stubborn refusal to buy 
new players in the summer has exasperated the board and his critique of 
Bayern's "open ear" policy vis-à-vis unhappy players in his autobiography 
didn't go down well either. "Players will always be able to come to us, if they 
have a problem. We are like a family," Hoeness told the Guardian in a sumptuous 
pre-match lunch at Freihof Brenner with international journalists, when the 
true extent of his anger was not yet apparent. A serious knee injury to Ivica 
Olic in training this morning will have done nothing to lighten the mood.

• Kaiserslautern's 3-0 win over Gladbach was a pretty sight in more than one 
respect. In honour of the 1954 hero and local god Fritz Walter, who would have 
been 90 years old yesterday, the Red Devils wore a sponsorship-free shirt with 
a Walter face on the reversible inside. Christian Tiffert scored a suitably 
beautiful goal: his long-range curler hit the corner of the net to give the 
home team the lead. "I always seem to score when it's my daughter Mila's 
birthday," said the happy midfielder. Stefan Kuntz, also a birthday boy – the 
supporters serenaded him before the game – had seen a small wish come true. "If 
I could paint myself a day, that's how I would paint it," he said. A Mark 
Rothko-like piece in various shades of red would probably do quite well. 
Especially in the Anglo-Saxon collector's market, where his name has a certain 
ring to it.

• The Sporting director Klaus Allofs was at a loss to explain Bremen's 2-3 
home defeat against Nürnberg. "We are stabbing around in the fog a bit," he 
said. On reflection, he did identify one culprit. Mikaël Silvestre was singled 
out for giving the ball away before the visitor's second strike. "He is in a 
difficult spot and plays well below his ability," Allofs said, somewhat 
optimistically.

• Schalke 04 are still without a home win and in the relegation zone following 
a 1-0 defeat to Leverkusen in the Veltinsarena. The home side were unlucky to 
hit the woodwork three times yet the result had something of the inevitable 
about it. "There is too much fear in the team," said Raúl, who must surely rue 
his decision to move to the Ruhr area. Felix Magath, the king of the Royal 
Blues, is starting to get worried, too. "I don't have a panacea," he said. The 
good news is that he's amassed so much power – he's also the general manager 
and a board member – that getting rid of him is almost impossible. "Who in the 
world could determine a successor – apart from him?" wondered Die Tageszeitung.
 