
Brett Morris has scored three tries in his return from an extended layoff due 
to a knee injury as Canterbury thrashed Brisbane 40-14 in round 16.


In his first match after suffering the pre-season injury, Morris scored three 
second-half tries as the Bulldogs turned a 10-4 halftime lead into a 
comprehensive 26-point victory at ANZ Stadium in front of 15,106 fans.


Morris scored in the 45th, 58th and 70th minutes in an super-impressive 
performance that could have him in the frame for NSW in State of Origin III.


The home side also added second-half tries to David Klemmer and Sam Kasiano, 
who scored two tries, in one of the Bulldogs’ best wins of the season.


Penrith's Bryce Cartwright rips South Sydney to shreds in NRL win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/penriths-bryce-cartwright-rips-south-sydney-to-shreds-in-nrl-win>
James Roberts and Anthony Milford claimed second-half tries for the Broncos, 
who are in the middle of an Origin period slump.


Brisbane, who had Corey Oates, Matt Gillett, Darius Boyd, Josh McGuire and 
Corey Parker backing up from Wednesday’s Origin II and were missing the 
suspended Sam Thaiday, have won just two of their past seven matches after 
winning eight from nine to start the year.


The Dogs have won five of their past six to launch a genuine challenge for a 
top-four spot.


The Dogs outscored Brisbane two tries to one in a bruising first half.


A Boyd pass put Oates over in the 22nd minute for the game’s first try.


Seven minutes later, the resurgent Tony Williams crashed through the Broncos’ 
line from a Moses Mbye pass for a converted try.


Just before halftime, Kasiano bounced out of dummy-half and over the three 
Brisbane defenders to score one of the season’s more unusual tries for the Dogs 
to lead 10-4 at the break.


Brisbane NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> debutant Tom Opacic left 
the field with a foot injury in the 22nd minute and didn’t return.


Gillett left the field midway through the second half with an eye injury and 
didn’t return.


Corey Parker played his 337th NRL game to supersede Brad Fittler at fourth on 
the list of most first-grade games.


Brisbane’s Wayne Bennett coached his 750th first-grade game.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab88ea17fbe92b4fab241cce89684d93bce76dc0%2F0_41_4333_2600%2F4333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bulldogs%20thrash%20Broncos%2C%20Cronulla%20edge%20Warriors%20as%20Saints%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bulldogs%20thrash%20Broncos%2C%20Cronulla%20edge%20Warriors%20as%20Saints%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab88ea17fbe92b4fab241cce89684d93bce76dc0%2F0_41_4333_2600%2F4333.jpg>
 James Maloney’s field goal proved the difference as Cronulla edged the 
Warriors. Photograph: Craig Golding/AAP 
Meanwhile, ladder leaders Cronulla have equalled their club’s all-time winning 
streak with a controversial 19-18 golden-point win over the Warriors at Shark 
Park.


Sharks five-eighth James Maloney potted the winning field goal in the second 
stanza of extra time to extend his side’s winning run to 11.


Their streak equals the club’s record, set in 2002 and 1977-78, and has Shane 
Flanagan’s side well poised heading into the business end of the season.


After the home side took a 12-10 lead into halftime, the game turned when 
Jason Bukuya was controversially awarded a penalty try due to interference from 
Simon Mannering.


Phil Gould's attack on Paul Gallen is personal, says Shane Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/phil-goulds-attack-gallen-personal-flanagan>
While Mannering clearly dragged Bukuya off the ball in the race for a Michael 
Ennis grubber, Warriors skipper Ryan Hoffman pleaded with the refs that there 
was no guarantee the Sharks’ forward would have scored.


However, the bunker ruled there was sufficient evidence to give the Sharks a 
four-pointer which proved decisive.


The Warriors hit back when five-eighth Thomas Leuluai stretched out and Issac 
Luke slotted a penalty goal with six minutes left on the clock to send the game 
to golden point.


Sharks fullback Ben Barba had a chance to win it after Chad Townsend burst 
clear but he dropped the ball cold with the tryline begging before Maloney 
sealed the match.


Earlier, the Sharks looked to have the Warriors on the rack for most of the 
first half but it was the visitors who struck first, racing out to a surprise 
10-0 lead.


The Warriors cut up Cronulla’s left-side defence with former Sharks Blake 
Ayshford and Jonathan Wright both crossing.


Just when it looked like Andrew McFadden’s side had wrested control, the 
Sharks hit back when Ennis literally ran rings around the Warriors’ defence and 
Ricky Leutele reached out on the stroke of halftime for a 12-10 lead.


The Sharks were forced to play most of the second half without winger 
Valentine Holmes after he went off with an apparent head knock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc26796943a28d83f8240cdfa497c51043fba2ad6%2F0_59_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bulldogs%20thrash%20Broncos%2C%20Cronulla%20edge%20Warriors%20as%20Saints%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bulldogs%20thrash%20Broncos%2C%20Cronulla%20edge%20Warriors%20as%20Saints%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fdragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc26796943a28d83f8240cdfa497c51043fba2ad6%2F0_59_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Benji Marshall celebrates his try against the Knights. Photograph: Tony 
Feder/Getty Images 
At Hunter Stadium, mercurial playmaker Benji Marshall has wound back the clock 
to spark St George Illawarra to a 30-18 victory over cellar-dwellers Newcastle.

The 31-year-old scored a try and set up three more as the Dragons won their 
third game from their past four – climbing back into the top eight – and handed 
the Knights a ninth-straight defeat.

The Dragons dominated the first hour and never looked like losing but coach 
Paul McGregor would have been disappointed to see them concede two late tries 
to an outclassed Newcastle side who never quit.

Newcastle conceded five tries to trail 22-6 at the break and should have been 
further behind, but Dragons five-eighth Gareth Widdop could manage only two 
conversions.

The Dragons targeted Newcastle’s brittle left edge early, running in three 
tries to skip to a 14-0 lead by the 16th minute.

Origin punching bags NSW should consider bringing back Jarryd Hayne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/origin-punching-bags-nsw-should-consider-bringing-back-jarryd-hayne>
Right winger Kalifa Faifai Loa opened the visitors’ account in the second 
minute after the Dragons found wide-open spaces on their first possession of 
the game.

Back-rower Jacob Host, playing his fourth NRL clash, charged on to a short 
pass from Widdop to score in the 10th minute and Widdop converted to extend the 
Dragons’ lead to 10-0.

When centre Euan Aitken took a Marshall pass to stroll over and score the 
Dragons’ third try for a 14-0 lead, Knights fans must have feared yet another 
blowout.

But the Newcastle faithful had cause for celebration when acrobatic winger 
Nathan Ross vaulted the corner post to touch down in the 30th minute.

Trent Hodkinson’s sideline conversion cut the deficit to 14-6 but the comeback 
was short-lived.

Marshall’s cut-out pass in the 35th minute set up a try for left centre Tim 
Lafai, then Marshall skipped away from Jacob Saifiti to scoot away and score in 
the final seconds of the half.

Tempers frayed in the 43rd minute when Dragons back-rower Joel Thompson 
resented a play-the-ball shove from new Knights winger Brendan Elliot and 
responded in kind.

From the subsequent penalty, Thompson trampled over the top of Sione Matautia 
and Dane Gagai to score and Widdop converted to stretch the lead to 28-6.

The offload by Knights forward Robbie Rochow and Gagai’s grubber kick set up a 
consolation try for Matautia in the 65th minute, which Hodkinson converted to 
trim the deficit to 28-12.

Former Raiders forward Mitch Barnett pushed through Tyson Frizell’s attempted 
tackle on the goal-line to score Newcastle’s third try in the 73rd minute and 
Hodkinson converted, adding further respectability to the scoreboard.

Ross conceded a professional foul in the 79th minute and finished the game in 
the sin-bin, gifting Widdop a penalty goal to end the scoring.
 