
When Burton Albion of the Northern Premier League were drawn against Division 
One sideLeicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> in 
the third round of the FA Cup in 1985, it appeared to be a romantic tie: a 
David v Goliath clash that the part-timers of Burton in the spotlight and in 
the hunt for an upset. It had all of the ingredients required for a third round 
classic but, sadly, the tie ended up making headlines for different reasons.

Neil Warnock’s Burton team took hope from the memory of Leicester’s surprising 
defeat to Harlow Town in the Cup in 1980. Leicester had drawn with the Athenian 
Premier League side at Filbert Street, before suffering a 1-0 defeat in the 
replay. Leicester defender Tommy Williams had played in that tie and did not 
want to suffer another embarrassment against Burton. “We realise we are on a 
hiding to nothing,” said Williams. “We were terrible that night at Harlow and 
it would have been no injustice if they had won by three or four clear goals. 
So some of us know what to expect. That’s why we are going out against Burton 
determined not to let it happen again.”

Burton had already disposed of Wootton Blue Cross, Stevenage Borough, 
Willenhall Town, Wycombe Wanderers, Staines Town and Aldershot on their way to 
reaching the third round for the first time since 1956, but their adventure was 
expected to end against Leicester. They had been hammered 7-0 by Charlton at 
this stage 29 years before and Burton suffered another thrashing when they met 
Leicester on the 5 January 1985. However, this time there were outside 
influences to take into account.

Giantkiller or early bath? Test your FA Cup knowledge – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/football-quiz-fa-cup-third-round>
Midlands brewery company Ind Coope 
<http://www.midlandspubs.co.uk/breweries/staffordshire/ind-coope.htm>, sponsors 
of both teams, provided both sets of players with an even greater incentive to 
progress to the fourth round; a barrel of best bitter, containing 288 pints of 
beer. Come the end of the match, Burton keeper Paul Evans must have felt like 
he had drunk the lot. Burton had been holding their own before the incident. 
Gary Lineker had opened the scoring after 16 minutes before an equaliser from 
David Vaughan sent the Burton fans into raptures. Then things took a turn for 
the worse.

Throughout the match – which had been moved to the Baseball Ground in Derby 
for safety reasons – Burton keeper Evans had been showered with missiles while 
patrolling his area. “Someone threw a can in the goalmouth just after the 
start,” Evans recalled after the match. “So I picked it up. It was full of 
sand.” There was more to come. “There were a lot of coins being thrown and one 
of them hit me. Then I was hit by something else and I went down.”

Evans was struck by a block of wood thrown from the stands, believed to be a 
part of the seating, and players gathering around the stricken keeper with 
concerned looks on their faces. “I didn’t quite pass out and eventually I 
managed to get up. I felt very nauseated and kept trying to throw up.” In fact, 
Evans was sick on the pitch and continued to vomit at half-time.

Eventually struggling to his feet, Evans then conceded two goals, not that he 
knew much about them. “I can’t remember the second and third goals at all. 
Someone told me they were headers.” Having already used their one permitted 
substitute, Burton were reluctant to go down to 10 men, but they had a big 
decision to make at half-time.

Referee Brian Hill extended the break by five minutes to give Evans time to 
recover. “I was weak at the knees,” Evans said. “A doctor told me not to go out 
for the second half but by then I was beginning to feel a little better. I 
didn’t want to miss anything.” Evans made it out for the second half but three 
more goals gave Leicester a 6-1 win, Lineker’s hat-trick apparently putting 
Gordon Milne’s team into the fourth round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2783117b2fc1020fa05fc55389b7e32f44277ac4%2F0_69_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burton%201-6%20Leicester%3A%20the%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20that%20was%20replayed%20after%20a%20fan%20injured%20a%20player&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burton%201-6%20Leicester%3A%20the%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20that%20was%20replayed%20after%20a%20fan%20injured%20a%20player&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2783117b2fc1020fa05fc55389b7e32f44277ac4%2F0_69_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Leicester players celebrate with 288 pints of beer. Photograph: Duncan 
Raban/Empics 
“It should have been a gala occasion. Instead, it was a rather unpleasant day 
out,” wrote Simon Barnes in the Times, as rumours began to circulate that 
Burton would lodge a protest with the FA asking for a replay. After a two-hour 
meeting, Burton decided to appeal to the FA, with the club’s chairman, Bill 
Royall, making the 200-mile round trip through snow to deliver the protest 
letter to Lancaster Gate. “We know we are only little Burton but the principle 
is important,” said Warnock. “Whoever is playing, hooligans must not be allowed 
the opportunity of altering the course of a match.”

In 1974, the FA ordered Newcastle and Nottingham Forest to replay their 
fifth-round tie after crowd trouble and Uefa had recently ruled that the 
Cup-Winners’ Cup tie between Celtic and Rapid Vienna should be played again due 
to a missile allegedly striking a Rapid player. So there was hope for the 
non-league team. Six days after the original match, Burton’s case was heard.

Leicester secretary Alan Bennett made his feelings clear on the matter. “Of 
the 6,000 tickets sold behind the goal, only 1,828 were issued by Leicester. 
The rest were sold at the gate on the day to anyone. There were incidents 
earlier in the match when Leicester fans behind the goal were hit by missiles 
from the stand above. The feeling was that the culprits were Derby people.” 
Derby officials hit back but the most important opinion would be that of the FA 
committee.

The FA came down in favour of Burton, ordering a replay to be played at the 
Baseball Ground behind closed doors. “The clear message from the decision is 
that the FA will not draw back from actions strong enough to prove that crowd 
trouble must not pay,” FA secretary Ted Croker announced after the hearing. 
Leicester were less than happy but had to accept the decision. “The team and 
our genuine supporters are victims of idiots and to call them only idiots is to 
treat them kindly,” said Milne.

The Foxes found an unlikely ally in the Burton goalkeeper. “My sympathies are 
with Leicester. I think they deserve the tie on the basis of the first result,” 
said Evans, admirably, after the hearing. Evans, his manager and team-mates now 
had another chance, but it brought another headache: could they get time off 
work to play in the replay? “I’ve got lorry drivers, shopkeepers, solicitors 
and all sorts of working lads who will have to get the day off,” said Warnock. 
“But we’ll have 11 out there and that’s the important thing.” Warnock, who was 
also working as a chiropodist in Sheffield, had to cancel a number of bookings, 
a situation that wasn’t improved when the replay scheduled for Monday 14 
January was called off due to snow.

The £35-a-week part-timers now had to sort out leave from work for a second 
time, as the fixture was moved to the Wednesday afternoon at Highfield Road in 
Coventry due to the unavailability of the Baseball Ground. Finally, the replay 
went ahead, in front of 200 or so people, made up of club representatives, 
journalists and a few ball boys who had to stand and shiver on the empty, 
snow-covered terraces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8791667b72e2e41592caae64146a89eb7cfc3473%2F0_0_4000_2572%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burton%201-6%20Leicester%3A%20the%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20that%20was%20replayed%20after%20a%20fan%20injured%20a%20player&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burton%201-6%20Leicester%3A%20the%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20that%20was%20replayed%20after%20a%20fan%20injured%20a%20player&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-leicester-city-burton-albion-block-wood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8791667b72e2e41592caae64146a89eb7cfc3473%2F0_0_4000_2572%2F4000.jpg>
 Alan Smith of Leicester City and Steve Dolby of Burton Albion battle it out at 
an empty Highfield Road. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
Paul Ramsey’s goal after four minutes settled the tie but Doug Newton and 
Stewart Mell went close for Burton. The match was a strange affair, played out 
in an eerie atmosphere. “It is unfair to ask teams to play in that environment 
and I wouldn’t like to think that any professional side will be asked to do 
that again,” said Milne after his team had progressed to a fourth-round date 
with Carlisle. “The crowd is part of the game and you can’t perform without 
them.”

How Arsenal won the Centenary Trophy, the least celebrated title in their 
history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2017/jan/04/arsenal-centenary-trophy-title-football-league-history>
“We did ourselves justice,” said Warnock as the saga reached its conclusion. 
“Without outside interference we got on with the game and showed a lot of guts 
and determination and quite a lot of skill. We are disappointed we lost but we 
were happy to prove that it would have been closer in the first match without 
intimidation.”

But the final word should come from Evans. “We went to the game to enjoy 
ourselves. But I was deprived of half an hour of a game I had been looking 
forward to.” And that is the saddest part of this sorry tale. A chapter that 
unfortunately could be added to many others in a season of violence that sent 
British football hurtling to rock bottom.

• This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 