
Burton Albion have announced the appointment of Nigel Clough as their new 
manager. The 49-year-old’s return to the Pirelli Stadium had been anticipated 
afterJimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s departure to QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-new-manager>
 on Friday.

Clough first took the reins at Burton as their player-coach, aged 32, in 
October 1998 and went on to become their longest serving manager, leaving a 
little over 10 years later for Derby, with Burton on course to attain promotion 
from the Conference.

Burton are currently top of League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table> by two points 
after 20 games. The club’s chairman, Ben Robinson, said: “We have enjoyed a 
great start to the season under Jimmy and his assistant David Oldfield and 
Nigel Clough is the ideal man to continue that work.

“He has a tremendous track record in football as both a player and a manager 
and during a 10-year spell at Eton Park, and then the Pirelli Stadium, has 
already shown his tremendous passion and commitment forBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>. We are delighted to 
welcome him back.”

Clough was in charge of Derby for nearly five years before being sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/28/derby-county-sack-nigel-clough>
 after a poor start to the 2013-14 season. He took overat Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/23/sheffield-united-nigel-clough-fa-cup>
 less than a month after his departurebut left Bramall Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/sheffield-united-sack-manager-nigel-clough>
 after they were beaten in last season’s League One play-off semi-finals by 
Swindon.

Clough had been linked with the vacant position at Burton’s League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> rivals Chesterfield 
but is delighted to make his return to the club.

He said: “It’s wonderful to be back at Burton Albion again, working with the 
chairman Ben Robinson and his staff, who make this club so special. We’re 
looking forward to trying to maintain the remarkable success the club is 
enjoying.”

Clough admitted it was an emotional reunion at his press conference on Monday 
afternoon as he faced the media as the Burton manager for the first time since 
January 2009.

In the intervening years Burton, under Paul Peschisolido, Gary Rowett and 
Hasselbaink, have won two promotions while Clough has managed in the 
Championship and most recently at Sheffield United, who he guided to the 
semi-finals of the FA Cup, League Cup and League One play-offs in just under 
two years in charge.

“So much has changed,” he said. “It is quite emotional to be back, I never 
thought this would happen. But it is just the way things have worked out and it 
is the set of circumstances that we are in. It must be one of the first times 
since we last left that a manager has had the chance to take over a club at the 
top of the league.

“The club has definitely moved on a lot and improved, but so have we as a 
management team and Andy Garner and Gary Crosby will be joining me again. We 
have a lot more experience now and that is a key asset.

“I’m not shocked by how Burton have done, they have been on an upward curve 
for some time. It can be held up as a beacon for how clubs should be run. You 
are allowed to manage here, and that is a massive plus.

“St George’s Park is another big plus, access to one of the top facilities in 
the country can be a draw for new players.

“It makes it easier with so many familiar faces still here but the club has 
moved on in seven years and we have to catch up with that.”

Clough insists he will retain many of the things that have made Burton as 
success so far this season.

“I want to try to continue the progression of the team. We want to keep things 
the same and keep things going as much as possible but we want to improve as 
well. We are not going to change much, we will work with the existing squad and 
see how we go. It is a continuation.

“The defensive record in particular is superb this season and something we 
have to concentrate on.”

Clough’s first game in charge of his second spell comes on Saturday when he 
takes his side away to fourth-placed Gillingham.
 