
Nigel Clough is not one for spectacular rises. He is more of a 
methodical-progress kind of bloke. If it takes until the final second of the 
last of Burton Albion’s remaining eight games to secure Championship football 
he will wait. Fortunately forBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>, he is driven by a burning 
sense of injustice.

Rather like his father, Clough Jr holds a grudge and would love to prove a 
point to his former employers Sheffield United and Derby County. To leave the 
former behind inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> and take his Burton 
side the short trip down the A38 to face the latter next season will be added 
motivation to cling to the four-point advantage his side hold over Wigan 
Athletic, the team Clough makes favourites to win the division.

Football League round-up: Billy Sharp keeps Sheffield United’s season alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/football-league-roundup-billy-sharp-crewe>
After Wigan’s victory at Swindon 24 hours earlier, the grumbles and groans 
could be heard after Burton’s failure to reclaim their six-point cushion from a 
match in which they were second best for long periods against John Sheridan’s 
relegation-threatenedOldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham>, but 
Clough remains the pragmatist. “It feels a lot worse to lose 1-0,” he said.

The ifs and buts over Tom Flanagan’s header against the crossbar and Stuart 
Beavon’s miss from eight yards are minor details for a team that were promoted 
as League Two champions last year. “Seventy-five points with eight games to go 
is not bad,” said Clough with trademark understatement. It is another building 
block for a gradually constructed club that Clough first took charge of 18 
years ago and led them to the verge of the Football League before leaving for 
one of his father’s old clubs, Derby, in 2009.

He owes a lot to the patience and support of the Burton chairman, Ben Robinson 
– especially after the £7.2m investment in a new stadium. Standing on the verge 
of moving to within one tier of the summit of English football is the reward 
for that support and the shrewd appointments of Gary Rowett and Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink as managers since Clough departed. Not bad for a town that has seen 
previous incarnations Swifts, United and Wanderers all fail because of 
financial issues.

There is a family feel, which was underlined by Hasselbaink sitting next to 
Robinson here, flanked by his daughters, who every couple of minutes pierced 
the serenity of the director’s box with shrieks of: “Come on Burton.” Don’t be 
fooled by the cosy exterior. Within there is an ambition and the gradual 
progression that has taken them from the Conference in seven years underlines 
that.

Shrewdly, Clough – who succeeded Hasselbaink in December – is prepared to 
temper expectations by diverting towards Lancashire. “We are not even thinking 
about what it would mean to get promoted. Wigan are favourites. They have the 
best squad in the division,” said Clough. It is a luxury that is not afforded 
to Sheridan at Oldham, but in the last two months the new manager at Boundary 
Park has breathed new life into their survival bid.

There were few chances they could reflect on, but the knowledge they were 
superior for long periods and played the more enterprising football will foster 
greater belief. “A point against the league leaders is a bonus, it gets us a 
little bit closer, but not where we want to be,” said Sheridan, whose team 
remain one point behind Blackpool, who occupy the last safe spot but have 
played two games more.

Clough turned 50 this month, almost unnoticed. He is a little rounder in the 
face these days, but the cherubic looks remain, with not a grey hair in sight. 
There is a Clough Way near the Pirelli Stadium, named in honour of his 
achievements at Burton. He will be “back on the telly” trying to do better 
against Millwall on Monday and show that his methods of old-fashioned values, 
loyalty and football principles do work if people have the patience to allow 
them to flourish.
 