
Tim Boxall points at a shape in the field bordering the seven-acre wooded pen 
where he keeps 1,500 pheasants. “Here you are,” he says. “Look! There’s one 
over here.” He bends down and prises the remains of a pheasant from the long 
grass. “That’s a buzzard kill, you can tell by the way it’s been eaten.”

Boxall is a gamekeeper, raising 10,000 pheasants a year to be killed in 
commercial shoots on the land he rents in Gloucestershire. This year, however, 
the pheasants have something other than Boxall’s clients to fear: the buzzard.

“There’s an old saying: where there’s livestock, there’s going to be 
deadstock,” Boxall says. “You accept the buzzards are always going to have 
some, but this year was horrendous. I lost 500 pheasants at £3.75 each. It cost 
me £75 a day to pay someone to sit there all day to watch over them, basically 
sunbathing for two weeks, but it did keep them away.”

The buzzard’s robust health – and its appetite for pheasants – has brought the 
protected bird of prey into the sights of the shooting industry. At the end of 
July, Natural England, the government agency tasked with protecting England’s 
wildlife, issued a licence allowing a gamekeeper toshoot up to 10 buzzards 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/issue-of-buzzard-licence> to stop them 
killing pheasants. Last week it announced that four more licences were under 
consideration. While the announcement couldn’t come soon enough for Boxall, it 
has left many conservationists up in arms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ce041c145ffe77c3423b56626e98415df708a1%2F0_0_3818_3750%2F3818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buzzards%20back%20in%20hunters%E2%80%99%20crosshairs%20over%20threat%20to%20UK%20pheasant%20shoots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buzzards%20back%20in%20hunters%E2%80%99%20crosshairs%20over%20threat%20to%20UK%20pheasant%20shoots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ce041c145ffe77c3423b56626e98415df708a1%2F0_0_3818_3750%2F3818.jpg>
 Gamekeeper Tim Boxall with the remains of a dead pheasant found next to his 
pen in Gloucestershire. Photograph: Dan Glaister for the Observer 
“If you take a buzzard out, others will move in,” said the broadcaster and 
naturalist Chris Packham, describing Natural England’s decision as a 
“catastrophe”. “All you are doing is making a vacuum. In practical terms it’s 
doomed to fail. In ethical terms it’s abhorrent. These are native birds being 
killed to protect a non-native species, it’s Lewis Carroll, it’s insane. Now 
the floodgates will open and everyone will apply for these licences. Will it be 
peregrines next? Kites?”

Martin Harper 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/community/ourwork/b/martinharper/archive/2016/07/29/bad-news-for-a-friday-rspb-reaction-to-natural-england-issuing-license-to-control-up-to-10-buzzards.aspx>
, conservation director for the RSPB, asked: “Why are we allowing this 
still-recovering magnificent bird to be legally killed? In order to protect a 
private business concern. To protect a few of the tens of millions of 
non-native game birds that are released into the countryside each year.”

Gamekeepers, however, are having none of it. “The RSPB line is nonsense,” said 
a spokesman for theNational Gamekeepers’ Organisation 
<http://www.nationalgamekeepers.org.uk/>. “In law it’s quite clear: Natural 
England cannot grant a licence for any purpose that would adversely affect the 
sustainable status of the species concerned. There has to be a genuine need and 
no other satisfactory solution. Natural England cannot refuse a licence if 
those tests are met.”

While campaigners question the morality of the decision, they cannot question 
its legality. The gamekeepers’ organisation backed a successful judicial review 
launched by a gamekeeper last year to challenge Natural England’s decision to 
refuse him a licence to control buzzards. Under the terms of the high court 
ruling, Natural England must “balance the protection of wild birds against the 
requirement to prevent serious damage to livestock”. The court further ruled 
that, “where birds are either in pens or are significantly dependent on people, 
they are classed as livestock”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cde85a5428a66ff6cf3792740d271778549a3a5%2F0_913_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buzzards%20back%20in%20hunters%E2%80%99%20crosshairs%20over%20threat%20to%20UK%20pheasant%20shoots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buzzards%20back%20in%20hunters%E2%80%99%20crosshairs%20over%20threat%20to%20UK%20pheasant%20shoots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbuzzard-hunting-licences-threat-to-uk-pheasant-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cde85a5428a66ff6cf3792740d271778549a3a5%2F0_913_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
 Broadcaster Chris Packham has described the buzzard hunting licence as a 
catastrophe. 
The buzzard, a protected bird of prey, has recovered from near extinction in 
the Victorian age to become one of the conservation movement’s success stories. 
With between 57,000 and 79,000 breeding pairs in the UK, according to the
British Trust for Ornithology <https://www.bto.org/>, it is one of the fastest 
growing bird populations in the country. In support of its decision, Natural 
England noted that in July the trust declared that buzzards “are not considered 
to be of current conservation concern”.

An estimated 40 million non-native pheasants are released into the British 
countryside each year. A report for theBritish Association for Shooting and 
Conservation <https://basc.org.uk/> estimated that on average between 1% and 2% 
of pheasant poults were killed by birds of prey.

“There’s a huge amount of hyperbole and panic about this,” said the 
gamekeepers’ organisation spokesman. “All birds are protected by law. Buzzards 
are no different. The only difference is one of perception, that for years it’s 
been believed that in some ways buzzards are different, that they have a 
separate protection. You can’t go on saying that there was once a time when 
this [species] was scarce and using it as a reason to prevent licences.”

However, campaigners say that the legal shooting of buzzards will make it more 
difficult to police the illegal shooting of birds of prey. Calling the move 
shameful, Eduardo Gonçalves, chief executive of theLeague Against Cruel Sports 
<http://www.league.org.uk/>, said: “Authorising this protected raptor to be 
killed purely to boost the profits of private shooting interests sets a very 
dangerous precedent. It’s difficult to see how the police can effectively 
tackle the illegal persecution of these birds of prey now the floodgate of 
government-approved exceptions to the law has opened.”

Boxall remembers when buzzards were rare. “When I came here in 1990 you never 
saw buzzards,” he says. “When you did you thought, bloody hell, what’s that? 
They used to feed on carcasses, but they can’t do that now because farmers 
aren’t allowed to leave carcasses, so they turn to the next easiest thing. The 
next thing we’ll get is red kites. They’re lovely birds, but they have to eat.”

The gamekeeper pauses and cocks an ear. “That’s a buzzard calling now. He’s up 
in a tree there somewhere. It must be teatime.”

WING AND A PRAYER

■ MPs are to debate banning driven-grouse shooting, after a petition launched 
by Mark Avery, a formerRSPB <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rspb> 
conservation director, gained more than 120,000 signatures.

■ The Hen Harrier Action Plan, a government-led initiative involving 
conservation groups, landowners and shooting organisations, collapsed in July 
following incidents of shooting and poisoning. There are thought to be only 
three pairs of hen harriers in England, about 600 pairs in Scotland and 50 
pairs in Wales.

■ The RSPB has launched a campaign to license shooting estates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/rspb-calls-for-grouse-shooting-estates-to-be-licensed>
, giving authorities the power to withdraw licences where birds of prey are 
illegally killed.
 