
The cousin of the Polish driver whose truck was hijacked for Monday’s 
terrorist attack on a Berlin Christmas market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlin-christmas-market-attack> said his 
family had been inundated with offers of financial support, as a campaign to 
award him with Germany’s order of merit gathered pace.

Łukasz Urban was found shot dead in the cabin of the truck after the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-pore-over-polish-lorry-driver-lukasz-urban-final-hours-berlin-attack>
, which killed another 11 people and left dozens more injured. Investigators 
who have analysed the wounds on Urban’s body believe he must have fought with 
the hijacked vehicle’s driver until the moment the juggernaut ploughed into the 
busy Christmas market in Breitscheidplatz, possibly in an attempt to change the 
truck’s course and avoid further loss of life.

After initially heading straight down a busy lane on the northern edge of the 
Christmas market by the Kaiser Wilhelm memorial church, the truck took a left 
turn and came to a standstill outside the market.

A postmortem report is expected to clarify whether the Polish driver was shot 
before or during the attack.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20issue%20arrest%20warrant%20for%20suspect%20in%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20issue%20arrest%20warrant%20for%20suspect%20in%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&media=>
Germany issues arrest warrant for suspect in Berlin attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/21/german-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
Urban, 37, leaves a wife and a 17-year-old son. According to his cousin Ariel 
Żurawski, who also owns the truck company, Urban had said in their last 
conversation that he wanted to return to Poland by Thursday, in time for 
Christmas. “He wanted to buy his wife a Christmas present,” Żurawski said.

Berlin Christmas market attack: a graphical guide to what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
In a Facebook post on Thursday, Żurawski said he had been contacted by a huge 
number of people inquiring how they could support Urban’s family financially. 
“We are grateful for every good word, every deed and every bit of help. It is 
incredible how much strength there is in people,” he said.

A Go Fund Me webpage <https://www.gofundme.com/van9vwuk> raising money for 
Urban’s family has received £80,000 in pledges in the two days since its 
launch, anda petition to award the driver Germany’s order of merit, the 
Bundesverdienstkreuz 
<https://www.change.org/p/bundespr%C3%A4sident-joachim-gauck-bundesverdienstkreuz-f%C3%BCr-polnischen-lkw-fahrer-lukasz-urban?recruiter=654817943>
, had gathered over 6,000 signatures by last night.


Constanze Stelzenmüller, a security policy analyst at the Brookings 
Institution who set up the petition, told the Guardian: “I’ve never written a 
petition before and never thought I would. But this man is a hero. And I’ve 
seen social media put to use all through the year for the nastiest and most 
depressing purposes. It’s time to use it for good, and perhaps to help Urban’s 
widow and son, who have to spend Christmas without him.”

In his truck company, Urban had been nicknamed “inspector” because “he always 
followed the rules”, according to his cousin. “He wouldn’t step into his 
vehicle on a Sunday if he had had two beers on a Saturday.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-christmas-market-attack-polish-truck-driver-lukasz-urban-germany-order-merit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a3db2c3f8dcb7a50af6ae4b66b9f0d63f4cb96%2F0_135_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calls%20for%20Polish%20truck%20driver%20killed%20in%20Berlin%20to%20receive%20order%20of%20merit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-christmas-market-attack-polish-truck-driver-lukasz-urban-germany-order-merit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calls%20for%20Polish%20truck%20driver%20killed%20in%20Berlin%20to%20receive%20order%20of%20merit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fberlin-christmas-market-attack-polish-truck-driver-lukasz-urban-germany-order-merit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a3db2c3f8dcb7a50af6ae4b66b9f0d63f4cb96%2F0_135_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Passersby stop to look at candles and flowers outside the Breitscheidplatz 
Christmas market in Berlin. Photograph: Rainer Jensen/EPA 
Żurawski, 36, had been called in to identify his relative on Monday night and 
said he too believed there had been a struggle inside the cabin. “You could 
certainly see that he had fought.” He told the Polish broadcaster TVP that 
Urban’s face had been left “swollen and bloodied”.

Urban arrived in Berlin on Monday morning, a day ahead of schedule, to deliver 
25 tonnes of steel beams to a warehouse owned by ThyssenKrupp. The steelmaking 
firm confirmed on Tuesday that it turned away the driver because it was unable 
to unload the shipment of beams, which had originated in Turin, Italy. The 
company told Urban, who was from the western village of Rożnowo, near the 
border withGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, to return on 
Tuesday.

 