
The results may remain the same but there is a distinctly different feel to 
this Australia side compared with those who have toured here in the past.
Victory against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/four-nations-final-australia-looking-to-reassert-itself-against-new-zealand>
 in the Four Nations final on Sunday would be nothing new for a team accustomed 
to sweeping aside all before them but, as the Kangaroos’ captain, Cameron 
Smith, admits, there is a growing desire to change the perception of Australian 
rugby league’s view of the international game.

Four Nations final: Australia looking to reassert itself against New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/four-nations-final-australia-looking-to-reassert-itself-against-new-zealand>
Ever since Mal Meninga pulled on his green and gold polo shirt as coach for 
the first time earlier this year the message has been simple – to put 
international competition back at the top of the agenda in Australia. Smith, a 
staunch internationalist and one of the game’s undisputed greats, says the 
Kangaroos’ task these days is now twofold: winning is the priority but showing 
that international rugby usurps State of Origin as the pinnacle of the sport is 
just as crucial.

“Mal has put a set of values down he thinks we should believe in and what the 
Kangaroos should stand for,” Smith says. “From the public’s point of view back 
home in Australia, they’ve seen State of Origin as the pinnacle. Some of the 
younger guys maybe had a perception that Origin would be the highest accolade 
you could have in our game but Mal has wanted to put the international game 
back to where it needs to be.”

That Smith is so open about it makes the point indisputable: international 
rugby league had, as many people feared, slipped down the pecking order. 
“Everywhere else it’s been No1 forever but because we have State of Origin we 
have to show that playing for the Kangaroos is the pinnacle,” he adds.

It is clear the fire still burns brightly inside Smith – his battle cry to the 
nation says as much. Fellow greats like Johnathan Thurston have already
earmarked their international swan-song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/australia-johnathan-thurston-england-four-nations-final>
 for next year but for the 33-year-old captain there is no fixed date in place 
yet as he prepares to lead his country in a major final once again.

“Playing and being around the team and playing in great stadiums and having 
victories, it’s still as enjoyable as when I started back in 2006,” he says. 
“I’m still excited to get a jersey and have my name read out at the start of 
each week when Mal names the team. I still feel great. I’m as fit as I’ve ever 
been in my whole career.”

There have been countless clashes with New Zealand in finals in the past – 
they metin the World Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/new-zealand-australia-rugby-league-world-cup-final>
 three years ago at Old Trafford. But with another World Cup looming – and the 
added incentive of the winner of Sunday’s game at Anfield becoming the 
No1-ranked side in the world – Smith is typically forthright about what victory 
in the Four Nations would represent.

“Winning this weekend would send that message out back home saying to people: 
‘Look guys, this is what we are – the No1 team and a team that wins,’” he 
acknowledges. “The younger guys in the squad have jumped on board with it. It’s 
now about sending that message out back home about what this all means. Nothing 
beats it.”
 