
Melbourne captain Cameron Smith kicked the Storm to the top of the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder after a dramatic 15-14 
golden-point victory over South Sydney. The Rabbitohs went within 60 seconds of 
recording their first-ever win at AAMI Park on Saturday night before hooker 
Damien Cook was penalised for a dangerous tackle on Storm fullback Cameron 
Munster, allowing Smith to nail a 40m penalty goal to level the scores at 
14-all as time expired.

Opposing halfbacks Cooper Cronk and Adam Reynolds each missed a field goal 
during golden-point time before the ever-reliable Smith drilled the 
match-winner to send the Storm above Cronulla on the table, following the 
Sharks’ 30-14 defeat to Canberra earlier in the day.


NRL caught off-guard over match-fixing, says Todd Greenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/nrl-caught-off-guard-over-match-fixing-says-todd-greenberg>
The opening half was evenly matched, with the referees awarding a high number 
of penalties, including an on-field obstruction ruling on a potential Storm try 
in the 23rd minute. Souths centre Aaron Gray also had his four-pointer 
cancelled over a double movement.

The visitors eventually opened the scoring five minutes before the main break, 
with Reynolds lobbing a kick into the path of Alex Johnston to touch down out 
wide. Reynolds nailed the conversion from the sideline for a 6-0 lead, then 
Greg Inglis almost doubled the advantage two minutes later, with his angled run 
cutting through the Storm defence before the video review ruled obstruction.

Melbourne responded immediately after half-time, with Marika Koroibete diving 
over in the corner to level the scores. The Storm appeared to click into gear, 
finally able to break through the Rabbitohs defensive line. With Jesse Bromwich 
eating up metres through the middle, the ball went wide for Cheyse Blair to put 
the home side ahead 10-6.

But the Rabbitohs struck back after a Sam Burgess offload released Greg Inglis 
deep into Storm territory. From the next set of six, Reynolds went to the air 
again for Angus Crichton to score his first NRL try and give his side a 12-10 
advantage.

A Smith penalty goal levelled the scores at 12-all but a penalty against 
Christian Welch for a crusher tackle allowed Reynolds to regain the lead with 
10 minutes remaining. However, the Rabbitohs could not hold on and despite a 
much improved performance, slumped to their ninth straight defeat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6a3f85373f9a5c4dae6a58c315dcb184643fc1%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20Smith%20seals%20golden%20point%20win%20as%20Storm%20leapfrog%20Sharks%20at%20top%20of%20NRL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20Smith%20seals%20golden%20point%20win%20as%20Storm%20leapfrog%20Sharks%20at%20top%20of%20NRL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6a3f85373f9a5c4dae6a58c315dcb184643fc1%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jordan Rapana celebrates scoring for the Raiders in a win over the Sharks that 
saw them establish their minor premiership credentials. Photograph: Brendon 
Thorne/Getty Images 
Canberra staked their claim as genuine premiership contenders by becoming the 
first team to defeat Cronulla in almost five months. In a high-quality affair 
in front of 15,133 fans at Southern Cross Group Stadium, the Raiders extended 
their winning streak to six on Saturday night with a 30-14 victory

However, the victory could come at a cost, with star five-eighth Blake Austin 
failing to finish the match after coming off with a shoulder injury following 
his crucial second-half try.


It was Cronulla’s first defeat since round three against Manly – a remarkable 
run of 16 games – and the 30 points put on them was the most the Sharks had 
conceded this season.


The loss is a major blow to Cronulla’s minor-premiership chances, while for 
the Raiders, the win lifts them back over Canterbury into third spot with just 
four regular-season games remaining.


With Sharks veteran Michael Ennis missing the game with a virus, rival hooker 
Josh Hodgson took over the middle of the field, laying on two first-half tries 
in a man-of-the-match effort. Fullback Jack Wighton also pulled off two vital 
try-saving tackles in the second half.

The visitors led 22-8 in the 59th minute when Austin was ruled to have 
committed a double movement, however the bunker controversially overturned the 
decision, explaining that the Sharks’ defenders had contributed to Austin’s 
momentum over the line.


Croker’s conversion pushed the lead out to 28-14 before sealing the win with a 
penalty. Hodgson earlier set up a 12-point lead at the break, playing one of 
the best individual halves of football this season.

After Jordan Rapana and James Maloney traded early tries, Hodgson broke the 
game open by setting up tries to Wighton in the 23rd minute and then Rapana in 
the following set.


A joint leader of the Dally M count when it went behind closed doors after 
round 16, Hodgson finished the game with two try assists, three tackle breaks, 
two line breaks, two line break assists and 124 running metres.


Sharks captain Paul Gallen reduced the lead with a try from close range in the 
55th minute, however Austin restored the advantage before the Raiders held on 
for the win.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2df9b9313af8b63b0db4f980b1d6f78e8fe1110%2F0_175_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20Smith%20seals%20golden%20point%20win%20as%20Storm%20leapfrog%20Sharks%20at%20top%20of%20NRL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20Smith%20seals%20golden%20point%20win%20as%20Storm%20leapfrog%20Sharks%20at%20top%20of%20NRL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fknights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2df9b9313af8b63b0db4f980b1d6f78e8fe1110%2F0_175_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Chris Adams and Dane Gagai cannot hide their concern at Newcastle’s latest 
defeat at Hunter Stadium. Photograph: Tony Feder/Getty Images 
Canterbury condemned Newcastle to a club-record 14th straight NRL loss at 
Hunter Stadium, outclassing the hapless Knights 28-14 to move back into the top 
four.

Newcastle lost 13 straight games in 2005, but their 2016 counterparts – 
winning just once this year and on track for a second-straight wooden spoon – 
have displaced them in the record books as the worst-performed team in club 
history.

Bulldogs halfback Moses Mbye scored a try, set up another and kicked six goals 
from as many attempts on a wet Saturday afternoon to inspire the visitors to 
their sixth win from their past seven games.

Canterbury (30 points) climb to third, at least temporarily leap-frogging 
Canberra (29) and North Queensland (28) who are yet to play this weekend. The 
Raiders take on Cronulla at Shark Park on Saturday night and the Cowboys travel 
to Leichhardt Oval on Sunday to face the Wests Tigers.

Newcastle led 2-0 in the 12th minute courtesy of a penalty goal by former NSW 
Origin halfback Trent Hodkinson, playing against his old club for the first 
time.

The Bulldogs eventually adjusted to the slippery conditions and responded with 
two tries in four minutes midway through the half to take a 12-2 lead.

Hooker Michael Lichaa scooped up a Mbye pass and stepped past Jarrod Mullen to 
score in the 21st minute, then Josh Morris took a pass from twin brother Brett 
to touch down four minutes later. Mbye converted both tries then added a 
36th-minute penalty goal for a 14-2 lead at the break.

Newcastle created few genuine scoring chances and made life difficult for 
themselves with sloppy handling and a lack of discipline in the ruck, conceding 
five penalties while earning only one.

Hodkinson’s 40-20 kick in the 43rd minute provided a solid platform for the 
Knights to mount a second-half resurgence.

Mullen took advantage two minutes later, bouncing out of Mbye’s tackle and 
firing a one-handed pass for winger Brendan Elliot to score in the corner. 
Hodkinson’s sideline conversion cut the deficit to 14-8 and the crowd of 13,318 
found their voice.

Elliot crossed for his second try just three minutes later, regathering 
Hodkinson’s chip kick to score in the corner and Hodkinson converted from the 
sideline again to level at 14-14.

The Bulldogs regained momentum in the 54th minute when Sam Kasiano charged 
down a Mullen clearing kick. Mullen tried to recover the ball but lost it in 
James Graham’s tackle and Mbye was on the spot to pick up the crumbs and score 
next to the posts, then converted for a 20-14 lead.

Mbye added a penalty goal in the 73rd minute to stretch the margin to 22-14, 
then Sam Perrett scored in the corner and Mbye converted.
 