
Environmental campaigners are launching a last-ditch legal attempt to prevent 
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> from slaughtering whales in the 
Antarctic this winter, after Tokyo indicated it would ignore a ban on its 
“scientific” expeditions.


The Australian branch of Humane Society International <http://www.hsi.org.au> 
(HSI) will on Wednesday ask the federal court in Sydney to find Kyodo Senpaku, 
the Japanese company that organises the hunts, in contempt of a 2008 ruling 
that banned the whaling fleet from hunting in an area of the Southern Ocean 
that Australia recognises as a whale sanctuary.

Japan, however, does not recognise the sanctuary and has continued to hunt in 
the area over the past several years, although it has not killed a single whale 
there since theinternational court of justice (ICJ) rejected Japanese claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 in March last year that “lethal sampling” was necessary to conduct scientific 
research into whale populations.

Whale meat on the menu at Japanese food festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/whale-meat-on-the-menu-at-japanese-food-festival>
Although the International Whaling Commission (IWC) banned commercial whaling 
in 1986, Japan had permission to kill a certain number of whales every year for 
what it called scientific research, with themeat sold legally on the open market
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/whale-meat-on-the-menu-at-japanese-food-festival>
.

After initially agreeing to comply with last year’s landmark ICJ judgment in 
the Hague, Japan appears poised to defy the court and resume the hunts early 
next year.

HSI is launching its challenge to Kyodo Senpaku seven years after the federal 
court found Japan in breach of theEnvironment Protection and Biodiversity 
Conservation Act <https://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/C2013C00301>, and 
instructed it to halt whaling in the area.

The group says Japan has killed “tens, if not hundreds” of whales in the 
sanctuary since the injunction. “Whales are protected under Australian law, and 
we want to see that law upheld,” said Jess Harwood, HIS Australia’s 
biodiversity programme officer.

“If the ruling goes our way it will be an important statement – that Japan is 
in contempt of court by continuing to kill whales.”

In addition to a ban, the group will ask the court to impose a “substantial” 
fine on the whalers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcampaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5373d82b6f905e86ce476dfd9e000ce832f68a8%2F0_0_1333_1999%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaigners%20try%20to%20halt%20Japan%20whale%20hunt%20in%20last-ditch%20legal%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcampaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaigners%20try%20to%20halt%20Japan%20whale%20hunt%20in%20last-ditch%20legal%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcampaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5373d82b6f905e86ce476dfd9e000ce832f68a8%2F0_0_1333_1999%2F1333.jpg>
 Two minke whales are hauled up the ramp of the Nisshin Maru, a Japanese 
factory ship, in 2013. Photograph: Kate Davidson/epa/Corbis 
In a recent note submitted to the UN, Japan gave notice that it was ready to 
defy the ICJ, saying the court’s jurisdiction “does not apply to ... any 
dispute arising out of, concerning, or relating to research on, or 
conservation, management or exploitation of, living resources of the sea”.

Japan has so far failed to convince the IWC that there is any scientific 
justification for the annual whale hunts. In April,IWC scientists rejected a 
revised research plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/14/experts-reject-japans-new-whaling-plan>
 under which 333 minke whales would be killed each year between 2015 and 2027, 
about one third the haul Japan previously targeted.

The federal court in Sydney is expected to take several weeks to rule, 
possibly while Japanese whaling ships are en route to the Southern Ocean. The 
fleet usually leaves the south-western port of Shimonoseki in December and 
returns in April the following year.


Campaigners said a favourable federal court ruling would give Australia’s 
government a sound legal basis to apply diplomatic pressure on Japan to end its 
whaling programme.

They have been encouraged by the recent appointment of the experienced 
diplomat, Peter Woolcott 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/australia-brings-in-big-gun-for-whaling-fight-20150918-gjpxc3.html>
, as Australia’s new commissioner to the IWC, as well as by the recentchange of 
prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/malcolm-turnbull-to-be-australias-new-pm-after-ousting-tony-abbott-in-party-vote>
.

“We will be asking the Australian government to raise this with Japan and ask 
that the sanctuary be observed by the whaling fleet,” Harwood said. “Australia 
has taken the lead in campaigning against whaling in the past. It was behind 
the ICJ ruling, and so now we will wait and see if the [Malcolm] Turnbull 
government returns to those days. Australia has a love for whales and that 
needs to be translated into action.”

Campaigners in Japan have joined the growing chorus of protest, demanding the 
country retract its recent rejection of the ICJ ruling.

The Tokyo-based Dolphin and Whale Action Network 
<http://ika-net.jp/en/our-actions/whaling-issue/316-jointstatement-rtrct-the-amndmnt-to-the-icj-cmplsry-jrsdctn-agrmnt-n-wthdrw-fm-the-implmnttn-of-the-new-rsrch-whlng-plan>
 pointed to the enormous cost of Japan’s whaling programme, despite adramatic 
drop in whale meat consumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/04/japan-whaling-industry-dead-water>
.
 