
“Can’t sing. Can’t act. Balding. Can dance a little.” The famous, possibly 
apocryphal, description ofFred Astaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/04/clip-joint-five-best-tap-dancing-scenes-movies-fred-astaire-chicago-the-artist>
’s first screen test sprung unbidden to my mind as I watchedRyan Gosling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> in the new film La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>. It is the most dazzling 
confection, a full-blown Hollywood musical confidently set in contemporary Los 
Angeles, a movie carrying the scent of movies that have gone before and yet 
allowingEmma Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> and Gosling, 
two of today’s most attractive stars, to reveal themselves in a new light. They 
play Seb, a jazz pianist, and Mia, an aspiring actor, who meet, fall in love, 
sing and dance like it’s 1929, bringing the genre blazingly back to life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
That you can think of Gosling, a brooding presence in films such as Drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/drive-ryan-gosling-film-review> 
andThe Place Beyond the Pines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/11/place-beyond-the-pines-review>, 
at the same time as recalling the well-groomed charm of Astaire is testimony to 
how charismatic his performance is. (And he’s not really balding.) But as he 
and Stone shuffle their shoes softly beneath a lamppost and sing gently of love 
with an unembarrassed grace, they evoke a lost world of romance.

Musicals favour emotions over logic. They’re not a literal reflection of life 
– they’re about how life feels
Damien Chazelle 
Director Damien Chazelle had wanted to make La La Land ever since he was at 
college with the film’s composer, Justin Hurwitz. As he has written, musicals 
“favour emotions over logic. They’re not a literal reflection of life – they’re 
about how life feels.” His first film, made in 2009 as a project at Harvard as 
a tribute to the mood of Jacques Demy’sThe Umbrellas of Cherbourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/16/umbrellas-cherbourg-romance>, was 
the musicalGuy and Madeline on a Park Bench, shot in black and white. Its US 
gross was only $33,000, indicating that the world wasn’t exactly waiting for a 
story about a jazz trumpeter and his desire to find a girlfriend. Chazelle had 
to wait for the success of 2014’sWhiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review> before he could 
convince anyone of the value of a new big-screen musical.

La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
Yet from the moment La La Land begins, with a woman stuck in traffic on a 
freeway, getting out of her car, stretching her arms and bursting into a song 
that triggers a full-scale production number with the energy and drive ofFame 
and the chutzpah ofOn the Town, it is irresistible. No wonder it has just won 
the New York Film Critics Circle award for best picture. In a time of 
uncertainty, it takes America back to the most glorious days of the silver 
screen – and reasserts the value of an art form Hollywood invented.

The Hollywood film musical is not the same as a filmed version of a stage 
production. It is also a different beast from the Broadway musical, though they 
are closely related. Initially, Hollywood simply imported the stars of the 
stage and stuck them in front of the camera: Al Jolson, Eddie Cantor and Fanny 
Brice among them. But gradually, the filmic ambitions of the studios became 
more complicated. They realised that film could create a fantasy land bigger 
than any Broadway stage, and full of dazzling imagery, beautiful women and 
toe-tapping choreography. “It was an art form that allowed directors to take 
risks and to experiment,” notes film historian Clive Hirschhorn, author ofThe 
Hollywood Musical and a biography of Gene Kelly. From the late 20s until the 
late 50s, when TV dimmed its light, the film musical became a thing of wonder, 
a refuge in time of recession and war, an assertion of the human spirit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef676af82b204732114cfae008d6884afc2000d4%2F0_135_3135_4340%2F3135.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20La%20La%20Land%20help%20us%20handle%20the%20Trump%20era%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20La%20La%20Land%20help%20us%20handle%20the%20Trump%20era%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef676af82b204732114cfae008d6884afc2000d4%2F0_135_3135_4340%2F3135.jpg>
 Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire in The Barkleys of Broadway, 1949. Photograph: 
MGM Studios/Getty Images 
From the early 30s, Busby Berkeley, among others, set the tone, perfecting a 
style that turned excess into art, marshalling huge numbers of dancers to 
create exquisite, elaborate patterns in such Warner Bros films asFootlight 
Parade <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FRqcZcrgPaU> and Gold Diggers of 1933. 
Meanwhile, at RKO, Astaire and Ginger Rogers were putting their own indelible 
mark on the film musical, in a series of romances as sharp and sassy as their 
stylised black-and-white design. Astaire’s perfectionism may have made Rogers’ 
feet bleed, but together they made dancing look as effortless and natural as 
breathing, yet complex enough to take the breath away. Their soundtracks were 
drawn from the best of US popular music: Cole Porter, Irving Berlin and Jerome 
Kern.

There’s something entrancing about these films, a kind of innocence that sits 
alongside their sophistication. When Astaire serenades Rogers, her hair covered 
in shampoo, with“The Way You Look Tonight” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dIW_Ah0wg-w> in Swing Time (1936), it’s a 
recognisably intimate vision of love, something everyone can dream of even if 
the setting is impossibly glamorous. No wonder such movies carried audiences 
through the Great Depression. They offered a vision where life was lovely, 
people were beautiful and happy endings came to those who deserved them. They 
are the ultimate fantasy, recognisable yet distant.

The Berkeley-choreographed 42nd Street, released in 1933, is revealing in this 
context. There is no doubting the misery that afflicts Julian (played by Warner 
Baxter), the impresario prepared to risk his health for a hit after the Wall 
Street crash has cleaned him out; you can’t miss the chorus girls’ desperation 
for security as much as fame. When Julian rehearses Peggy (Ruby Keeler) before 
her debut – “I’ll either have a live leading lady or a dead chorus girl” – real 
issues are on the line. The truthfulness of the frame sets off the glory of the 
dance routines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143fa11db28c7acb9e64c968d8e7c05226a830a8%2F0_161_1760_2039%2F1760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20La%20La%20Land%20help%20us%20handle%20the%20Trump%20era%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20La%20La%20Land%20help%20us%20handle%20the%20Trump%20era%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fla-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143fa11db28c7acb9e64c968d8e7c05226a830a8%2F0_161_1760_2039%2F1760.jpg>
 Radiant … Cyd Charisse inThe Band Wagon, 1953. Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
A similar quality haunts Vincente Minnelli’s The Band Wagon, made 20 years 
later. Astaire, by then 54, plays with rueful charm a fading star who hopes a 
Broadway musical will revive his career, battling a crazed director and falling 
in love with his young co-star Gaby (a radiant Cyd Charisse). Chazelle says it 
is one of his favourite musicals, citing Minnelli’s “supple and graceful 
camerawork”, but adding “it’s a great portrait of the artist as an older man, 
learning what to hold on to, what to adapt to – in short, how to live.”

This is what the best film musicals do. Their heads may be in the clouds, but 
they are rooted in reality; the fragility of people’s dreams is embodied by the 
form. “I think the musical can be just as truthful as any realist genre,” 
Chazelle writes. “Musicals can get at the way it feels to hold hands in a movie 
theatre, when your heart is beating a thousand times per second. They can nail 
what it feels like to fall in love. They can describe with absolute accuracy 
what it’s like to cling to a dream when the odds seem stacked against you, and 
the pain you feel when that dream is dashed. They can capture like no other 
genre the joy and the triumph when the dream comes true.”

They can capture like no other genre the joy and the triumph when the dream 
comes true
Damien Chazelle 
It is for this reason, as much as for the practical one of having people who 
can sing and dance and mount a flashy production number, that US film musicals 
are so often about actors, singers, dancers and writers. They focus on artists 
because they can transform drab reality by the creative power of their work. 
Another of Chazelle’s favourite musicals isSummer Stock, made in 1950, which 
features a scene where Gene Kelly, alone in a darkened theatre, uses a 
squeaking board and a piece of newspaper to weave a tap dance of relaxed 
improvisatory joy almost out of thin air. He transforms the mundane into magic 
in front of our eyes. It is art in action.

The most obvious example of this is Singin’ in the Rain, many people’s choice 
as the best film musical of all time (though when it was released in 1952, it 
won far less critical praise thanAn American in Paris which had been in cinemas 
the previous year). This is a film about film, a love letter to the industry it 
depicts.

La La Land shares those qualities. It is a film where other films – Notorious, 
Rebel Without a Cause, Casablanca – appear on screen, but it remains utterly 
itself. When Seb and Mia dance amid the stars in the planetarium at the 
Griffith Observatory, they are entering a building they have just watched on 
screen, and transforming it into their own romantic wonderland.

Layers within layers, thoughts within thoughts. Throughout its history, the 
film musical has allowed directors to assert the value of dreaming, 
particularly at times when people’s hopes were being crushed by reality. The 
release ofLa La Land as the world is facing the arrival of President Trump is 
more apposite than Chazelle could have imagined when he planned the film all 
those years ago. Its bittersweet beauty is the perfect antidote to the world 
around it. Just as in the old days.

• La La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is released in the 
UK on 13 January.
 