
It’s a new season, with a vast, rather sexy new cast (211 players bought for a 
combined €400m), new leading roles at a third of all clubs (plus new coaches to 
come at Werder Bremen and Eintracht Frankfurt very soon), a rich newcomer (RB 
Leipzig) who will fly the flag for the footballistically under-represented east 
of the country – “Da Zone” as kids used to call it in the 80s – and double up 
as the new baddie everyone will love to hate.

Will the “new delight in the league” (Kicker) be tempered by the fear the 54th 
instalment of the Bundesliga could bring an all-too-familiar denouement, 
however? A fifth league title in a row forBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>, who kick off the new 
campaign on Friday at home to crisis-ridden Werder Bremen, is the expected 
outcome in most quarters.

The Bavarians’ squad have more depth than a Jean-Michel Cousteau documentary 
afterthe arrival of Mats Hummels and Renato Sanches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/bayern-munich-sign-benfica-renato-sanches-manchester-united>
 for a combined €70m. The only slither of hope for the rebellion is the Red 
Empire will be too busy shooting for the stars in Europe with the Champions 
League specialist Carlo Ancelotti at the helm to take matters down on planet 
Germany too seriously. Complacency may just bring down the Death Star.

Low crowds and chaotic La Liga fixture list cannot deter from guarantee of 
drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/19/la-liga-season-preview-sid-lowe>
But it’s a one-in-eight shot for Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, according to the 
bookies. “Bayern win the league with their hands in their pockets,” Ancelotti 
said a few months before he agreed to become Pep Guardiola’s successor. The 
Italian must ensure those words do not come back to haunt him.

The Black and Yellows, for their part, have outspent the champions, pumping 
€110m into the squad by way of adding seven recruits who range from the 
underrated (Sebastian Rode) to future superstars (Ousmane Dembélé) and former 
ones (Mario Götze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/borussia-dortmund-sign-mario-gotze-bayern-munich>
) in need of a new beginning. Thomas Tuchel’s reboot of the squad is one the 
most exciting projects in European football, with added interest provided by 
the uncertain outcome.

Dortmund fans seem unsure whether the high turnover will quickly produce a 
team capable of challenging for silverware; there were some whispered 
complaints about the loss ofterrace favourites such as Kuba Blaszczykowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/01/jakub-blaszczykowski-signs-wolfsburg-borussia-dortmund-poland>
, too. Player by player, Dortmund will have an abundance of quality, especially 
in attack, though – enough to indulge Tuchel’s heavy-rotation policy and make 
BVB’s game even more varied.

The Hertha Berlin coach, Pal Dardai, has tipped Bayer Leverkusen “to do a 
Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
”, with the new arrivals Kevin Volland (Hoffenheim) and Julian Baumgartlinger 
(Mainz) in the Jamie Vardy and N’golo Kanté roles respectively. And the Germany 
international Julian Brandt can be Riyad Mahrez. It’s not an wholly absurd 
suggestion but still unrealistic in the light of the two superpowers ahead of 
the Werkself.

Others have tipped stable, cleverly run Borussia Mönchengladbach and Schalke, 
who are at last run by one of the smartest guys in the league (sporting 
director Christian Heidel) and have a young, energetic coach (Markus Weinzierl) 
to take the team forward. It is worth remembering hopes had been high for 
Weinzierl’s predecessor André Breitenreiter at this stage a year ago.

Once again the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> will be the most open 
and, if you will, competitive league in Europe, with no fixed hierarchy below 
the handful of top clubs, no obvious relegation candidates bar the pretty skint 
Darmstadt sans miracle worker Dirk Schuster (now at Augsburg) and a dozen sides 
who might well unexpectedly end up in Europe or in a dogfight, or, in fact, in 
both during the course of the season.

Juventus to dominate Serie A title race but there will be plenty of drama | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/18/juventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli>
Interestingly enough, the absence of a genuine title race since 2011 – 
Dortmund (2012) and then Bayern (x4) won the championship at a canter – has 
done little to suppress the appetite for Germany’s favourite sport. League 
chief Christian Seifert has managed to increase the value of the domestic TV 
rights by 85%, securing an annual income of €1.16bn from the 2017-18 season 
onwards. It’s still only half of the Premier League’s value and has to be 
divided among the 36 clubs in Bundesliga and Bundesliga 2 but the increased 
demand shows Bayern’s hegemony – and Dortmund’s perceived stranglehold of 
second spot – does not deter viewers.

While a wider range of championship contenders would undoubtedly help the 
brand internationally, the bigger concern inside Germany is still the 
proliferation of small clubs without strong fanbases at the expense of giants 
fallen or sleeping. If clubs such as Hamburg, Werder, Köln and Schalke do not 
make the most of their considerable resources, the clamour for external 
investment will grow.

By and large, the Bundesliga has been able to deal with the challenges of 
football’s rapid globalisation rather well by focusing on stadium experience 
and the production of players to keep down transfer spending but their largely 
organic, slow way of doing business could come under threat during the next 
wave of Chinese-driven takeovers in England and Italy.

Whether domestic audiences would put up with a markedly less German version of 
the Bundesliga selling off bits to stay competitive in Europe will be the key 
questions for the show-runners in Frankfurt in the years to come
 