
The Canadian government has agreed a deal with eight of the country’s 10 
provinces to introduce its first national carbon price,Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> has told reporters.


The prime minister said the move would help Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> meet its international climate 
change obligations.

Scientists rate Canadian climate policies | James Byrne and Catherine Potvin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/28/scientists-rate-canadian-climate-policies>
 The agreement was struck on Friday only after heated talks. The 
energy-producing province of Saskatchewan did not sign up, saying the cost 
would be too great. Manitoba also declined to sign but officials said it might 
do so later.

 Trudeau is promising to impose a carbon price on any province that refuses to 
sign on.

 Under his plan, carbon pollution would cost C$10 (£6, US$7.60) a tonne in 
2018, rising by C$10 a year until it reaches C$50 in 2022. The provinces can 
either implement a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade market.

In November Canada announced it would phase out the use of coal-fired 
electricity by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/canada-coal-electricity-phase-out-2030>
.

“Taking traditional coal power out of our energy mix and replacing it with 
cleaner technologies will significantly reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, 
improve the health of Canadians, and benefit generations for years to come,” 
the environment minister, Catherine McKenna, said.

 Trudeau is broadly aligned politically with The US president, Barack Obama, 
who has pushed hard to cut emissions of greenhouse gases.

There goes the neighborhood? Canada frets over Trump's trade agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/canada-donald-trump-nafta-economy-nato>
The US vice-president, Joe Biden, told the meeting he doubted the 
president-elect, Donald Trump, could undo much of the administration’s policies 
since many of them had taken firm hold.

The premier of Saskatchewan, Brad Wall, said the carbon price would make 
Canadian firms less competitive at a time when Trump looked likely to adopt 
policies cutting energy costs.

Four of Canada’s 10 provinces still use coal-based electricity. Alberta has 
been working toward phasing out coal-fired electricity by 2030.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&media=>
Obama’s complicated legacy on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/30/obama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video>
• This article was amended on 13 December 2016 to correct the first name of 
the Canadian environment minister.
 