
The Canadian armed forces have sent a crew to investigate reports of a 
mysterious “pinging” sound that seemed to be coming from the sea floor.

Hunters in a remote community in the Canadian Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> have become concerned about a 
pinging or beeping sound they say they’ve been hearing in the Fury and Hecla 
Strait, a channel of water that’s 120km (75 miles) north-west of the Inuit 
hamlet Igloolik.

Diver may have found 'lost nuke' missing since cold war off Canada coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/canada-lost-nuke-found-cold-war-bomb>
Paul Quassa, a local politician, told CBC 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/ping-beep-hum-sound-arctic-ocean-igloolik-1.3831861>
 that the sound seems to be coming from the sea floor, and is scaring animals 
away from a popular hunting area of open water surrounded by ice that is 
usually abundant with sea mammals.

“And this time around, this summer, there were hardly any. And this became a 
suspicious thing,” he said.

Several reports were passed to the military, which sent a CP-140 Aurora patrol 
aircraft to investigate on Tuesday under the mandate of Operation Limpid, a 
domestic surveillance programme designed to “detect, deter, prevent, pre-empt 
and defeat threats aimed atCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> or 
Canadian interests”.

In a statement, Department of National Defence spokeswoman Ashley Lemire said: 
“The Canadian armed forces are aware of allegations of unusual sounds emanating 
from the seabed in the Fury and Hecla Strait in Nunavut. The air crew performed 
various multi-sensor searches in the area, including an acoustic search for 1.5 
hours, without detecting any acoustic anomalies. The crew did not detect any 
surface or subsurface contacts.

The 'Windsor Hum': where is the noise plaguing a city of 210,000 coming from?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/windsor-hum-canada-zug-island-united-states>
“The crew did observe two pods of whales and six walruses in the area of 
interest.

“At this time the Department of National Defence does not intend to do any 
further investigations.”

That hasn’t stopped people from theorising about the source of the sounds, 
which have been variously attributed to the sonar surveys of local mining 
operations or to Greenpeace activists.

Sonar is used by mining companies to make detailed maps of the sea floor in 
their search for offshore oil and gas. Thesonar is known to disturb marine 
mammals such as whales and dolphins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/14/whales-dolphins-california-hawaii-us-navy-sonar>
. However, the Baffinland Iron Mines Corporation, which has conducted sonar 
surveys nearby, told CBC it has no equipment in the water at this time.

Others believe that Greenpeace is creating the sound on purpose to scare 
wildlife away from Inuit hunters – an allegation Greenpeace denies.

Mysterious sounds have a tendency to send people’s imaginations into 
overdrive. Earlier this year a high-pitchedflute-like noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/mysterious-high-pitched-tone-keeps-oregon-residents-up-at-night>
 kept people in Portland, Oregon, awake. The steady whistling noise had also 
been heard by residents several decades previously.
Chris Liedle (@chrisliedle) 
Mystery sound frustrates people in a west Forest Grove neighborhood. Where it 
could be coming from?#LiveOnK2 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/LiveOnK2?src=hash> 
@ 11pmpic.twitter.com/p0inj5TBr2 <https://t.co/p0inj5TBr2>
 <https://twitter.com/chrisliedle/status/699468731508850688> February 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/chrisliedle/status/699468731508850688> 
Meanwhile in Ontario, a low rumbling sound known as the “Windsor Hum” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/windsor-hum-canada-zug-island-united-states>
 has confounded residents for six years, with some describing it as like 
thunder or a subwoofer that can rattle windows.

The sound appears to come from an island surrounded by fences that’s home to a 
steel plant. The secrecy surrounding the plant has led towild and unfounded 
speculation 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/unanswered-questions-fuel-obsession-over-mysterious-windsor-hum/article29737974/>
 that the sound comes from an alien aircraft or from the construction of an 
underground tunnel by a billionaire.
 