
Canberra flexed their premiership muscle and jumped to third place on the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder with a 54-4 flogging of South 
Sydney at ANZ Stadium. The Raiders ran in 10 tries to one on Sunday afternoon 
to notch their fifth straight win, leaping over North Queensland and cementing 
their reputation as title contenders.

The game was pretty much over by half-time after Jordan Rapana and Joey Leilua 
went on a rampage down the right side to make it 26-0. Rapana had a hand in 
four of the Raiders’ five first-half tries, offloading for Elliott Whitehead’s 
opener, scooting out of dummy-half for the next and diving on a Leilua grubber 
on the stroke of halftime for his second.

Kieran Foran 'heartbroken' by Manly NRL match-fixing claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/kieran-foran-heartbroken-by-manly-nrl-match-fixing-claims>
The 26-year-old winger sent a message to Kiwi coach Stephen Kearney as he 
notched his 14th try of the year. As well as his double, he finished with two 
try assists, three linebreaks and six tackle busts.

The victory was the Raiders’ biggest win over the Rabbitohs, surpassing their 
48-0 win at the Sydney Football Stadium in 1990.

The Rabbitohs were dreadful, handing over the ball cheaply inside their own 
20m zone on several occasions and coming up with costly errors that led 
directly to points.

Five-eighth Luke Keary may have played his last game for the club after 
suffering a hamstring injury in the 11th minute and not returning to the field, 
and the game was summed up seven minutes into the second half when the 
Rabbitohs’ John Sutton dropped the ball cold and Jack Wighton ran 40m untouched 
to make it 32-0.

The loss was the Rabbitohs’ eighth loss in a row and will heap pressure on 
coach Michael Maguire. Souths scored a consolation try through Sutton, with the 
home side’s only points coming in the 55th minute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fcanberra-raiders-move-third-on-nrl-ladder-after-destruction-of-rabbitohs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6995840de7e68b57864747603b37e1114112481%2F0_0_2747_1831%2F2747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canberra%20Raiders%20move%20third%20on%20NRL%20ladder%20after%20destruction%20of%20Rabbitohs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fcanberra-raiders-move-third-on-nrl-ladder-after-destruction-of-rabbitohs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canberra%20Raiders%20move%20third%20on%20NRL%20ladder%20after%20destruction%20of%20Rabbitohs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fcanberra-raiders-move-third-on-nrl-ladder-after-destruction-of-rabbitohs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6995840de7e68b57864747603b37e1114112481%2F0_0_2747_1831%2F2747.jpg>
 Manly’s Martin Taupau is tackled by Korbin Sims during the Sea Eagles’ win 
over the sorry Knights at Brookvale. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
A year after coach Rick Stone was sacked by Newcastle, little has changed for 
the Knights, as evidenced by their 36-16 defeat to Manly at Brookvale Oval. 
Stone was sacked on 27 July last year after managing five NRL wins but this 
season, under Nathan Brown, the Knights have recorded just one win in 21 rounds.

The Knights equalled a club-record losing streak of 13 against the Sea Eagles 
on Sunday – Manly’s fourth win in a row – despite having showed some 
improvement in recent weeks. None of that was evident in the first half in 
front of 11,222 fans.

Dylan Walker returned after two weeks out with an off-field hand injury and 
was one of the home side’s best, as was fullback Tom Trbojevic and Manly 
streaked out to a 36-0 lead after 50 minutes then eased off considerably.

The late withdrawals of Jamie Lyon (calf) and Nate Myles (knee) didn’t affect 
Manly early, and Jorge Taufua crossed untouched in just the fourth minute. 
Brayden Wiliame waltzed through some poor Knights defence six minutes later for 
an 8-0 scoreline and when Jamie Buhrer brushed his way through the Knights’ 
line in the 16th minute, it was obvious the visitors were in for another long 
afternoon.

Newcastle managed to weather the storm through the middle of the first half 
before Wiliame added his second in the 35th minute. Daly Cherry-Evans 
selflessly passed off to Josh Starling, with the line wide open for the big 
prop to trudge over and help Manly claim a 26-0 half-time lead.

Walker scored shortly after the break followed by Matt Wright, and with 30 
minutes to go Manly led 36-0. Manly have long had a habit of easing up on the 
back of big leads at Brookvale and that was the case again on Sunday.

Newcastle were finally on the scoreboard through Peter Mata’utia in the 58th 
minute and David Bhana added some more respectability to the score in the 76th 
minute. Brendan Elliot scored the visitors’ final try after the full-time siren.
 