
Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> suffered a knockout 
every bit as brutal as the first one of his career here on Saturday night when 
Saul “Canelo” Álvarez threaded a chilling right hand on to his briefly exposed 
jaw in the sixth round to leave the Briton senseless on the canvas for a couple 
of worrying minutes.

“I’m all right, I’m all right,” Khan told his concerned corner after rising – 
but the tears flowed as he lent his head on the shoulder of his trainer, Virgil 
Hunter, knowing a split-second lapse in concentration had undone all his good 
early work, as he “dared to be great”by going up two weights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/amir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-weight-preview>
 to challenge the Mexican for his world middleweight title.

They shared anxieties, but differing forms: Khan’s in concern for his chin, 
Canelo perhaps worried he would run out of time if he fell too far behind. As 
it happened, the Mexican timed his fight to perfection.

Canelo Álvarez beats Amir Khan: WBC middleweight boxing – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/07/canelo-alvarez-amir-khan-wbc-middleweight-boxing-live>
“I got in the ring with a big guy, but this is boxing,” Khan said after the 
fight, looking suitably recovered. “I want to be the best, I want to fight the 
best, but my natural weight is 147.”

Canelo, admitting he had been in a tricky engagement before pulling off a 
peach of a punch, said through an interpreter, “I knew time would come to my 
favour.”

At ringside, the man considered by many as the best 160lb fighter operating 
today, Gennady Golovkin, watched his rival’s work with interest. “I will fight 
him later this year,” Canelo said to the raucous cheers of his supporters. 
“Viva Mexico!”

For Khan, there is the consolation of dropping back down to welterweight, 
where he is the mandatory challenger for Danny Garcia’s WBC belt, but it will 
take him a little while to come to terms with the manner of his defeat.

Nobody could – and no sensible pundit would – accuse Khan of not reaching 
high. He was attempting the biggest upset by a British boxer fighting abroad 
since John H Stracey beat the great Jose Napoles in Mexico City in 1975; Lloyd 
Honeyghan’s inspired victory in six rounds over a weight-drained but still 
estimable Don Curry in Atlantic City 30 years ago is in that mix; before that, 
we have to dip into ancient history. This was some wall to climb, too tall as 
it happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Famir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-middleweight-title-fight-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe94c25074e2c957031061881392f484e46230cd9%2F0_366_4684_2810%2F4684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canelo%20%C3%81lvarez%20knocks%20out%20Khan%20and%20eyes%20Gennady%20Golovkin%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Famir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-middleweight-title-fight-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canelo%20%C3%81lvarez%20knocks%20out%20Khan%20and%20eyes%20Gennady%20Golovkin%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Famir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-middleweight-title-fight-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe94c25074e2c957031061881392f484e46230cd9%2F0_366_4684_2810%2F4684.jpg>
 Amir Khan contemplates defeat. Photograph: Andrew Couldridge/Reuters 
And speaking of walls, every Las Vegas cleaner, janitor, construction worker 
and cab driver with roots south of the border were pulling for their 
cinnamon-topped hero, and would mightily have loved it had their bête noir, 
Donald Trump, been dumb enough to accept an invitation to sit somewhere in the 
cheaper seats.

Canelo Álvarez v Amir Khan: WBC middleweight title – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/08/canelo-alvarez-v-amir-khan-wbc-middleweight-title-in-pictures>
Khan’s small but vociferous army, who have been by his side here since he 
began his grand American adventure nine fights and nearly six years ago in 
Madison Square Garden, were vastly outnumbered, of course. And there weren’t 
many neutrals among the 16,540 squeezed into the new arena. The mood of high 
drama and respectful conflict could not have been more intense.

This, though, was Canelo’s town for the weekend, Cinco de Mayo, co-opted since 
the days of Julio Cesar Chavez we were told, even if, contrary to the 
salesmanship of the event’s golden-tongued promoter, Oscar De La Hoya, only a 
handful of his fights in this city coincided with Mexico’s most cherished 
national holiday. Still, this is boxing; on a night when the great Panamanian 
Roberto Durán was introduced at ringside as Mexican, we were reminded that myth 
and hokum are perennial ingredients of the pie.

There was nothing counterfeit about the fight, however. It was as honest as a 
desert sunset. The most common larceny in this town and this business is of the 
spirit and the pocket, but nobody could complain they were shortchanged while 
it lasted.

From round one, Khan’s reflexes and concentration were on fire. If those 
faculties let him down in previous disasters – against Breidis Prescott eight 
years and in 2012 against Garcia – here he was, “en fuego”, as they say.

Khan stole the first round with stealth and that snaking jab, as expected, 
sniping from distance and circling his prey. Khan said beforehand he expected 
to be hit and hurt, but he was doing his damnedest to make a liar of himself as 
he made the early running – literally – and a rare left hook rattled his teeth 
without obvious discomfort.

Canelo found his range a couple of times in the third, but Khan continued to 
shift left, right and every which way to stay out of trouble, picking on the 
move like a bird in the park.

“Canelo never backs down” said the message on the T-shirts of his compadres, 
but Khan was taking that out of the equation by not asking him to, as he 
continued to box at range, scoring with intermittent flurries. It was nearly 12 
minutes before they clinched, so clean was the action.

There was a case for giving the champion the fifth, as he landed a couple of 
solid head shots, but Khan remained cool under fire. And there was some way to 
go. Could Khan contain his natural thirst for a fight and hold his 
concentration?

As they got to half way, Canelo, more relaxed, began to let his hands go and, 
for the first time, looked the more dominant fighter. And that is when the 
crunching conclusion arrived – a long right hand from out of the blue that 
landed with such precision the British challenger was unconscious before he hit 
the canvas.

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> always craves fresh talent 
and on the undercard the virtuoso boxing of the promoter’s baby-faced cousin, 
Diego De La Hoya, caught the eye of knowledgeable fans who turned up before the 
pay-per-view broadcast began.

The smooth-moving super-bantamweight toyed with the unbeaten and game 
Californian, Rocco Santomauro, in nearly every exchange before an audacious 
uppercut on-the-walk in the seventh coincided with the merciful intervention of 
his opponent’s trainer, Shane Mosley. We will be hearing a lot of 21-year-old 
De La Hoya, who has stopped nine of his 15 opponents, and embarrassed all of 
them.

All in all, not a bad night for Mexico.
 