
Jacques Audiard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacques-audiard> has 
cemented his place as the premier contemporary French director by winning the 
Palme d’Or in Cannes for his seventh feature, Dheepan.

Audiard, 63, took the Grand Prix (or runner-up award) five years ago for A 
Prophet, and competed at the festival three years ago with Rust & Bone. His new 
film is a less-starry affair than those two; the tale of a former fighter in 
the Sri Lankan civil war trying to make a new life in France with a fake family.

Dheepan review - Tamil Tiger loose in the urban jungle makes powerful thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/dheepan-review-tamil-tiger-jacques-audiard-cannes-2015>
In his speech, Audiard thanked his father, the prolific screenwriter Michel 
Audiard, who died in 1985.

It was a night of surprises at the 68th Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, with many critics’ 
favourites thwarted and the jury – who are only allowed to award one prize per 
film – exhibiting eclectic taste and a pronounced accent on the celebration of 
French acting talent.

This year’s Grand Prix went to 38-year-old debut director László Nemes for Son 
of Saul, the Auschwitz-set story of a prisoner working as a Sonderkommando, 
guiding Jews into the gas chambers and then disposing of their bodies.

Son of Saul star: ‘God was holding the hand of every Jew in the gas chamber’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/19/geza-rohrig-son-of-saul-interview-auschwitz-jewish-prisoner-sonderkommando>
Bookies’ favourite The Lobster, a British co-production directed by Greek 
film-maker Yorgos Lanthimos, took the Prix du Jury (or third prize) for his 
satire about single people who must find a mate within 45 days or be turned 
into a wild animal. The director thanked his producers and actors, including 
Colin Farrell and Rachel Weisz.

Carol, Todd Haynes’s adaptation of the Patricia Highsmith lesbian romance The 
Price of Salt, which many had tipped for the Palme d’Or, had to console itself 
with one-half of a shared best actress award. Rooney Mara took the gong for her 
role as an inexperienced shopgirl in 1950s New York who begins a relationship 
with Cate Blanchett’s unhappily married mother-of-one.


Haynes, accepting the award in Mara’s absence, said both he and she were 
“completely blown away and surprised” by the honour. “I love you, I wish you 
were here,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fcarol-cate-blanchett-film-video-interviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432041302956%2FKP_232854_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%3A%20'People%20are%20fascinated%20by%20sex%20in%20general'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fcarol-cate-blanchett-film-video-interviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%3A%20%27People%20are%20fascinated%20by%20sex%20in%20general%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Fcarol-cate-blanchett-film-video-interviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432041302956%2FKP_232854_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Carol: ‘People are fascinated by sex in general’ – video interviews 
Mara’s joint winner, Emmanuelle Bercot, was rewarded for her role as a woman 
recovering from a broken leg inlittle-loved French domestic drama Mon Roi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/mon-roi-review-vincent-cassel-maiwenn>
.

Veteran French star Vincent Lindon earned prolonged applause as he took the 
stage to pick up the best actor award for Stéphane Brizé’s The Measure of a 
Man, in which he plays a man crushed by his job as a supermarket security 
guard. Lindon beat the likes of Michael Caine (for Paolo Sorrentino’s Youth), 
and Tim Roth, who plays a traumatised palliative care nurse in bleak drama 
Chronic.

That film did take the best screenplay prize went to its writer/director 
Michel Franco, who paid tribute to jury chairs theCoen brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/coenbrothers>, “my heroes”, as well as to 
Roth, who chaired the Un Certain Regard jury who presented his previous film, 
After Lucia, with their top prize three years ago.

The Lobster review - dark satire on relationships gets fishy near the tail-end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/the-lobster-review-cannes-film-festival-2015>
Serving under the Coens on this year’s jury were Franco’s countryman Guillermo 
del Toro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro>, as well as the 
actors Jake Gyllenhaal and Sienna Miller. Early in the ceremony, the London 
singer and pianist Benjamin Clementine performed the song Fare Thee Well from 
Inside Llewyn Davis, the Coens’ folk drama which took the Grand Prix at Cannes 
in 2013. The brothers looked on, toes not visibly tapping.

In a less explicable musical interlude, The Lobster and Tale of Tales actor 
John C Reilly took to the stage to sing a be-bop version of Just a Gigolo with 
four-man Dixieland outfit the Flyboys, before presenting the Camera d’Or for 
best first film to César Augusto for Land and Shade. After his speech, Augusto 
continued the musical theme of this year’s ceremony by leading the audience in 
a rendition of Happy Birthday to Reilly, who turned 50.

Best director went to Taiwanese film-maker Hou Hsiao-hsien, whose martial arts 
epic The Assassin marks his return to cinema after an eight-year absence.

The Assassin review - enigmatically refined martial arts tale baffles 
beautifully
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/the-assassin-review-enigmatically-refined-martial-arts-tale-baffles-beautifully>
Jane Birkin presented the honorary Palme to veteran director Agnes Varda, who 
won a standing ovation. In an emotional speech, Varda, now 86, paid tribute to 
her late husband, new wave film-maker Jacques Demy, who died 25 years ago.

Critics are mixed on the overall quality of this year’s festival. Artistic 
director Thierry Frémaux’s programme was at pains to promote homegrown talent, 
with nine of the 19 competition films either French productions or 
co-productions, and US and UK directors thin on the ground.

But although there has been an absence of high-profile turkeys such as last 
year’s opener, Grace of Monaco, the number of flat-out classics was also been 
felt to be down. Last year’s festival saw the premieres of Leviathan, Winter 
Sleep, Mr Turner, Jimmy’s Hall, Foxcatcher, Wild Tales, Clouds of Sils Maria, 
Mommy and Two Days, One Night. The sense on the Croisette is that fewer of this 
year’s crop are likely to progress either to Oscar contention, or into the 
cinematic canon.

Instead, the headlines were dominated by the midnight screening of Gaspar 
Noé’s 3D sex movie, Love, and by “flatgate”, which saw the festival under 
attack after security guards banned a number of women – including an amputee – 
from premieres for not wearing high heels.

Full list of awards

Palme d’Or
Dheepan dir: Jacques Audiard

Grand Prix
Son of Saul dir: Laszlo Nemes

Jury prize
The Lobster dir: Yorgos Lanthimos

Best director
Hou Hsiao-Hsien, The Assassin

Best screenplay
Chronic dir: Michel Franco

Camera d’Or (best first feature)
La Tierra y la Sombra (Land and Shade) dir: Cesar Augusto Acevedo

Best actor
Vincent Lindon, The Measure of a Man

Best actress: (joint) 
Rooney Mara, Carol; Emmanuelle Bercot, Mon Roi

Best short film
Waves 98 dir: Ely Dagher
 