
Firemen, spitfire pilots, a parade of bald men and one hundred morris minor 
drivers are among those who will descend onCardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cardiff> this weekend, as the entire city is 
given over to a theatrical spectacle to mark Roald Dahl’s centenary.

Over two days, the Welsh capital is to be transformed into a City of the 
Unexpected to mark the birth of their most beloved storyteller, who was born in 
Cardiff in 1916.

My grandfather Roald Dahl, the magician
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/13/my-grandfather-cast-a-spell-over-my-childhood>
A cast of six thousand has been recruited for the performances, pop ups, 
visual spectacles and live readings that will happen in the streets and 
institutions of Cardiff, all inspired by Dahl’s vivid stories.

There will be no set schedule, and instead people are encouraged to arrive in 
the city centre and walk the streets as unexpected moments arise. Among the 
events visitors could encounter are weddings, funerals and a procession of 
members of the oppressive ministry, who will try to shut down the eruptions of 
delight by lining the streets with 67,000 metres of hazard tape.

The event has been brought to life by theatre director Nigel Jamieson who 
directed the opening ceremony for the Sydney Olympics. Jamieson said the idea 
that drove his vision for the weekend was: “IfRoald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> was handed the puppet strings of 
the city, and the strings of logic and gravity and indeed municipal 
regulations, how might he play with the city? What kind of mayhem he might to 
to create?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fcardiff-prepares-to-celebrate-roald-dahls-centenary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ef1a39eef61c107151e8cd6c116bf58efc6311%2F0_148_1812_1087%2F1812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cardiff%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20Roald%20Dahl's%20centenary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fcardiff-prepares-to-celebrate-roald-dahls-centenary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cardiff%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20centenary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fcardiff-prepares-to-celebrate-roald-dahls-centenary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ef1a39eef61c107151e8cd6c116bf58efc6311%2F0_148_1812_1087%2F1812.jpg>
 Roald Dahl with Pat and Valerie Eaton Griffith. Photograph: RDNL/Courtesy of 
RDMSC 
Rather than re-enacting specific moments from Dahl’s books, Jamieson said they 
had drawn on the spirit and imagination that was at the core of Dahl’s writing 
to create the different performances. People would recognise elements – be that 
chocolate or even a giant peach – but they would be fused together in a unique 
way he hoped would be “endlessly surprising”.

“There is something amazingly egalitarian about the reach of Roald Dahl, he is 
embraced by all ages and all members of society. I hope if he’s looking down 
over this weekend he will see that we’ve created something democratic that 
looks at the world freshly and does, in a magical, metaphorical and strange 
way, try to tackle issues of the heart.”

There will also be a pillow fight between 1,200 volunteers, a procession of 
older people on their mobility scooters, and the event will close with a 
picnic, where everyone is invited to come in their pyjamas, in a nod to many 
people’s first encounter with Dahl as a child tucked up in bed.

How family tragedy turned Roald Dahl into a medical pioneer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/12/roald-dahl-medical-pioneer-stroke-hydrocephalus-measles-vaccination>
Jamieson also convinced the head of the Welsh fire brigade to take part in a 
wedding ceremony and the Welsh first minister, Carwyn Jones, will also play a 
part in the theatrics. He said it was a testament to the enduring appeal of 
Dahl that 6,000 volunteers had signed up to take part. Even callouts for those 
with very specific skills or attributes – anglers, rock climbers, bald men and 
morris minor owners – all proved successful.

He said it was important that the event had drawn those on the fringes of 
society, or those who are often forgotten, to take part, as they often ended up 
the heroes in Dahl’s stories.

“Often these books are about people who get cut away from all the things that 
they know in the world, whether its because their parents get eaten by a 
rhinoceros or because they sail across the world in a peach,” said Jamieson. 
“In a strange way, this is actually a very current issue – what do you do when 
something strange, odd and curious and doesn’t have a home turns up in your 
city? How do you greet it and how do you welcome it?

“The weekend is about embracing the unexpected, just as Dahl always did, with 
the open arms of six thousand people.”
 