
Thousands of people, politicians, celebrities and refugee charities have 
backed a campaign to stop a teenager who fled to Britain fromAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as a 10-year-old after his 
father was murdered from being forcibly removed to the country of his birth.

 Bashir Naderi’s sole memory of Afghanistan is his father being shot by the 
Taliban and he has no contacts with family or friends, cannot speak any of the 
Afghan languages and claims he will not survive if he is sent back.

Naderi, 19, was detained by immigration officials in Cardiff – where he was 
brought up by a loving foster family – taken to Gatwick airport and came within 
minutes of being forced on to a plane bound for Kabul when his long-term 
girlfriend and her family managed to win him a temporary reprieve.

 Naderi said he was terrified that any day now he might be detained again and 
sent back to a country he fears and has no connections with. “I am really, 
really scared,” Naderi told the Guardian. “I was in the middle of my college 
exams when all this happened. My life and my family is here. I feel as if I was 
born in Cardiff, not Afghanistan. I couldn’t cope there.”

 His foster mother, Dawn Jackson, who took Naderi in, said she was frightened 
for the teenager. “I love him to death. I’ve had him for 10 years. I’ve 
nurtured him, looked after him. He’s part of my family. He’s a Cardiff boy. The 
Home Office seem to think it’s safe for him to go back. We know it’s not. It’s 
a very cruel society that can do this to a young man.”
 Naderi aged 13 with his foster mother, Dawn Jackson 
 After his father was shot, Naderi’s mother sold the family’s land to send her 
son to the UK. He does not know what has happened to her. It took him a year to 
reach Britain, where he was placed with Jackson in the Welsh capital. He 
flourished, attending a Catholic high school, gaining nine GCSEs and going on 
to study at Cardiff and Vale college.

Naderi was detained after attending what he thought was going to be a routine 
immigration appointment and spent 11 days behind bars at a police station in
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and a detention centre.

“I’ve never been in trouble but it felt as if I had been put in prison,” said 
Naderi. When it became clear that he was going to be taken to Gatwick to be put 
on a plane, he resisted, was restrained with some sort of belt and suffered a 
wrist injury, meaning his lower arm is now in a cast. “The guards just 
laughed,” he said.

 Meanwhile Naderi’s girlfriend, Nicole Cooper, 24, the daughter of a retired 
policeman, was at the Royal Courts of Justice in London trying to halt the 
process.

At the last moment, Naderi’s lawyer managed to obtain a stay of removal, 
arguing Afghanistan was not safe for him because he was so westernised. Naderi, 
nursing his injured arm, was freed and left outside in the cold for two and a 
half hours as he waited for Cooper’s family to pick him up.

 It is now up to the Home Office to make the case again for Naderi’s removal. 
It could lead to a judicial review that may have implications for many other 
unaccompanied youngsters who have made a life in the UK and become westernised. 
Naderi is on tenterhooks. “I’m not myself. I can’t sleep. Life is on hold,” he 
said.

 The response to the case 
<https://www.facebook.com/search/str/+stand+up+for+bash+/keywords_top> has been 
extraordinary. By Thursday around 12,000 people had signeda petition calling 
for Naderi to be allowed to stay 
<https://www.change.org/p/home-office-please-save-bashir-our-19-year-old-friend-from-deportation-on-monday-to-afghanistan>
. The Welsh singers Charlotte Church and Cerys Matthews were among those to 
voice support.

 Members of all parties at the Welsh assembly – including Ukip – took part in 
a demonstration in support of Naderi on the steps of the Senedd on Wednesday.
steven morris (@stevenmorris20) 
Welsh Assembly members of all parties fighting home office attempt to send 
Bashir Naderi back to Afghanistanpic.twitter.com/EhYmzEv173 
<https://t.co/EhYmzEv173>
 <https://twitter.com/stevenmorris20/status/796677796877762560> November 10, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/stevenmorris20/status/796677796877762560> 
The Labour assembly member Jenny Rathbone said: “He is a Cardiff citizen. He’s 
an amazing guy, very keen to make a contribution. I think there’s a deliberate 
policy for the UK government to push back all the people who were unaccompanied 
minors. That is really worrying.”

 Immigration is not a devolved issue but responding to an urgent question on 
Naderi’s case, the Welsh government’s cabinet secretary for children and 
communities,Carl Sargeant 
<http://gov.wales/about/cabinet/cabinetm/carl-sargeant?lang=en>, said: “I hope 
the home secretary will take note of the views expressed here and among the 
wider Welsh public.”

 Jo Stevens, the MP for Cardiff Central and shadow Welsh secretary, said the 
case highlighted a wider issue. “To forcibly remove Bashir and others like him 
to a country where there is a high security risk seems completely against what 
the public wants,” she said.

 Judith Dennis, policy manager for the Refugee Council 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/?gclid=CNfK0KWTntACFUk8GwodnMsAMQ>, said: 
“It’s utterly baffling that the government is doggedly determined to return 
these teenagers to a country where the security situation is worsening.”

 A report from the Refugee Support Network published this year  <http:// 
http://www.refugeesupportnetwork.org/resources/after-return>said that since 
2007 more than 2,000 youngsters had been forcibly removed to Afghanistan. It 
monitored 25 and found that most struggled to find work or access education and 
suffered mental health problems.

 If an unaccompanied child qualifies for asylum, they are granted limited 
leave to remain, normally for a period of five years. Once an individual turns 
17½, the Home Office expects them either to start making preparations to return 
to their country of origin once they turn 18 or to make a further application 
for leave to remain. These applications are considered on a case by case basis.

 A Home Office spokesperson said it could not comment on individual cases. 


 