
Dear Theresa May,

It’s great that you’ve noticed all of those “just about managing” – or Jams – 
out there. Here in the social care sector we know all about Jam, although a 
more accurate acronym might be Nam: “not always managing”.

The reason we’re not always managing is because we’ve faced year upon year of 
cuts which have resulted in frozen or reduced wages, an increasing workload as 
we’re asked to do more for less and a correspondingly high turnover of staff.


On a more personal level, for my colleagues not always managing means always 
being on the brink of financial disaster where an unexpected bill or an 
unforeseen expense is likely to push them over the edge. It can mean having to 
do without “luxuries”, such as new shoes or dental care. It can sometimes mean 
running out of money before payday for things like gas and electricity or even 
food.

Being a Nam can really wear you down. One of my colleagues said when he took a 
different career path that he was leaving his job in social care because he was 
“sick of being poor”.


The funny thing is, although you’ve only just noticed us Jams or Nams or 
whatever else you want to call us, we’ve been around for a long, long time. If 
you wanted to choose a point in the social care sector where Jams started 
turning into Nams, it would be when social care jobs began to be privatised. 
That’s when the race to the bottom in regards to social care pay levels really 
began. I just wondered if at the time, or in any of the intervening years, you 
ever raised any objections to these “efficiency” savings, which resulted in 
people being paid subsistence wages.


So Mrs May, it’s nice to know you’ve noticed all us Jams and Nams out there, 
it’s just a pity it didn’t happen a couple of decades ago.


The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write for 
the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> 
with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 