
Carl Froch admits he is tempted to extend his career with a big-money fight in 
Las Vegas after defending his WBA and IBF super-middleweight titles with a 
vicious one-punch knockout of George Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/carl-froch-beats-george-groves-wembley>
.

The 36-year-old Froch was narrowly behind going into the eighth round before 
landing with an overhand right and afterwards called it “the best moment of my 
boxing career”.

“I’d love to box in Las Vegas – it’s the fight capital in the world,” he said. 
“You are never going to top boxing at Wembley stadium. My kids will look back 
at this and this is why it is so, so special. This evening is so, so special.”

But Froch appeared to dismiss the prospect of meeting James DeGale, who 
produced the best performance of his professional career as he dismantled the 
dangerous American Brandon Gonzales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/james-degale-brandon-gonzales-boxing>
 in four rounds in a final eliminator for Froch’s IBF title, any time soon. “I 
don’t have to fight him next as I can take a voluntary,” he said.

“But I am going to take the summer off before I even think about what I do 
next,” he added. “But there is one box that has not been ticked and that’s Las 
Vegas. I have not had my name up in lights in the fight capital in the world 
and I’d like to do that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F01%2Fcarl-froch-punch-george-grove-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401615069611%2FCarl-Froch-Punch-that-kno-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carl%20Froch%3A%20Punch%20that%20knocked%20out%20George%20Groves%20was%20my%20best%20ever%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F01%2Fcarl-froch-punch-george-grove-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carl%20Froch%3A%20Punch%20that%20knocked%20out%20George%20Groves%20was%20my%20best%20ever%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F01%2Fcarl-froch-punch-george-grove-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401615069611%2FCarl-Froch-Punch-that-kno-001.jpg>
Froch: Punch that knocked out Groves was my best ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/jun/01/carl-froch-punch-george-grove-video>
Eddie Hearn, who promotes both Froch and DeGale, refused to be drawn on the 
subject. “That’s for the future,” he said. “Now is the time to celebrateCarl 
Froch <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carl-froch> as a champion. Time and 
time again he has done it, all over the word. He deserves the respect.”

Groves was gracious in defeat, saying: “Congratulations to Carl. I wish him 
all the best. It was a split-second that let me down.” But he admitted he 
thought he was winning “comfortably” and was “shocked” that the judges had it 
as a close fight. “I was dominating Froch with the jab, I buzzed him, I stood 
him up,” he added “I was in my groove but Carl caught me well.”

Froch paid tribute to Groves for his performance. “I was trying to establish 
my jab but George was quicker than me,” he said. “But I stuck to my boxing and 
timed that punch perfectly. I showed why I am a four-time world champion and 
why I have defended my title 13 titles.”

After the fight it appeared that Froch had proposed to his model girlfriend, 
Rachael Cordingley, the mother of his two children. However, he was unusually 
vague when pressed on the subject after the fight. “I told her how much I love 
her,” he said. “I didn’t actually officially propose to her. I was going to but 
I couldn’t sort a ring out. I will be marrying Rachael one day.

“This is the most special moment of my life – the next will be wedding Rachael 
and making us a proper family, me, my kids and her. Tonight will be remembered 
for defending title. I did ask Rachael a sneaky question tonight but it’s not 
official. She said: ‘Yes.’”
 