
AFL club Carlton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> intends to lodge 
a complaint with police after its recruitment strategy for the national women’s 
league was allegedly published. The Blues released a statement on Sunday, 
outlining their concerns after a website posted what it claimed to be Carlton’s 
recruitment plans for the inaugural NWL season.

“Carlton Football Club is currently conducting an investigation with a view to 
lodging a complaint with Victoria Police to ensure those responsible for the 
theft of the club’s IP with respect to recruiting and its women’s team are 
prosecuted,” the statement read. “Those who subsequently promulgate this 
sensitive information may also be subject to action.”

Moana Hope leads Western Bulldogs to AFL women's All-Stars win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/moana-hope-western-bulldogs-afl-womens-all-stars>
The saga came a day after Whitten Oval hosted a women’s exhibition match that 
attracted a crowd of 6,365 and peak TV ratings of 1.05 million, numbers that 
exceeded the league’s expectations.

“We feel both excited and humbled by the support of the community for the 
women’s game,” AFL boss Gillon McLachlan said. “These are massive TV numbers 
and beyond our expectations. It is thrilling for theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> and our women players. As I told the 
players in the rooms after the match, they should be immensely proud of how 
they have contributed to the development of women’s football.”

The league will launch an eight-team women’s competition in February 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/eight-teams-to-make-up-inaugural-womens-afl-competition-in-2017>
, with the season to last eight weeks. The AFL and AFL Players’ Association are 
still negotiating the standard playing contract, with AFLPA chief Paul Marsh 
recently saying “we are some distance apart”. Many pundits have criticised the 
league for forcing female players to pay for their own health insurance.

“We haven’t settled on the salaries yet,” AFL’s general manager of game and 
development Simon Lethlean said on Sunday. “We want this to be a fully 
professional league. Next year it’s part time and eight matches but our job is 
to make this professional for the women as fast we can.”

Moana Hope, who booted six goals on Saturday night and has already joined 
Collingwood as a marquee signing, insisted players weren’t talking about wages. 
“I’m just blessed to pull on an AFL jersey,” Hope said. “The pay is exciting 
but right now I get to play AFL. There are generations of girls coming through 
who are going to be able to fulfil their dreams and in years to come I’m sure 
that [pay] will be addressed. When we are around each other all we are talking 
about is football [not pay].”
 