
The federal resources minister, Matt Canavan, wielded some big numbers this 
week as hepleaded with the Queensland media to help save the mining industry 
from an “unprecedented” threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/green-abuse-warrants-australian-law-review-says-resources-minister>
.

The sunshine state, he said, was under attack from “environmental activists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/activism> who have brought court cases 
againstAdani’s Carmichael coalmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carmichael-coalmine>. The big numbers 
came from a PricewaterhouseCoopers report, which found that “legal delays” had 
already cost Queensland $3.9bn in economic output and 2,665 “lost” jobs and had 
cost Adani $200m.

Green 'abuse' warrants Australian law review, says resources minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/green-abuse-warrants-australian-law-review-says-resources-minister>
This, the minister advised the assembled media “is a story”. 

Turns out, they were already onto it. Canavan cited what he called an “expose” 
in the previous week’s Sunday Mail entitled “Stop with Madness: Greens 
jeopardise Queensland’s future”. That story, in turn, favourably cited the 
minister railing against the greens andan accompanying editorial 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/opinion/editorial-eco-madness-strangling-queenslands-economy-must-stop/news-story/93525e9bb6af6642c674c37cf0551bbc>
 implored the federal government to “step in” and “rid Queensland of these 
delays”.

Conveniently, that happens to be exactly what the minister wants to do. 

As a backbencher he was one of the most vocal advocates of the Abbott 
government’s so called “lawfare” changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/18/coalition-to-remove-green-groups-right-to-challenge-after-carmichael-setback>
 – the amendments to the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation 
Act to remove the right of most environmental organisations and other groups to 
challenge developments under federal laws unless they can show they are 
“directly affected”. This, the government argued, would stop the dastardly 
“green saboteurs”. The senate refused to pass the changes and the early 
indications after Malcolm Turnbull became prime minister was that they would be 
shelved.

But Canavan is now the resources minister and is determined to revive them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/green-abuse-warrants-australian-law-review-says-resources-minister>
, speaking to the new senate crossbench and insisting the government “remains 
committed” to the changes.

Coalition to restrict green groups' right to challenge after Carmichael setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/18/coalition-to-remove-green-groups-right-to-challenge-after-carmichael-setback>
It would be easy to forget, given these screaming headlines and dire economic 
predictions, that conservation groups have recently lost a number of cases 
against the Carmichael mine in the courts, which they are now appealing. Easier 
still to forget how few cases are actually taken, and how few succeed.

In any case, the argument for watering down Australia’s central environmental 
legal protections is now being framed in terms of the cost of delay while the 
legal challenges play out, rather than the cost of blocking projects 
altogether. Which brings us back to the PwC report and the very big numbers.

A quick search revealed the report had actually been first exclusively 
reported in the Courier Mail in June, as well as in numerous mining 
publications. 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/state-economy-missing-39-billion-and-2665-jobs-because-delays-to-adani-megamine/news-story/d0a653456208de71308f64d008c0f486>
 But PwC told Guardian Australia it was unable to provide a copy because it 
remained the property of the client who commissioned it – Adani.

And Adani’s spokesman said that even though it had been cited in numerous 
articles and a minister’s speech the chief executive had determined the report 
would “not be released”.

Luckily Guardian Australia was able to procure it elsewhere, and it made for 
interesting reading.

Its overarching assumption is the Carmichael mine will proceed, at the scale 
originally envisaged, and as soon as the legal hurdles are cleared. Many 
analysts question whether the project is financially viable at all, andeven 
those who think it is say the plan is to proceed with a much smaller operation. 
<http://www.afr.com/opinion/columnists/adani-prepares-for-an-end-to-lawfare-with-a-smaller-cheaper-carmichael-20160921-grla4o>

And even accepting that the Adani mine is ready to go, the figures are being 
quite creatively interpreted.

The report appears to say, for example, that the mine will employ exactly the 
same number of workers as was always assumed. But if it starts three years 
later than originally planned, some of those jobs will be created later than 
first envisaged. The report averages the number of jobs over the decade from 
the original start date, first assuming the mine did start then, and then 
assuming it started three years later. The “2,665 lost jobs” was the difference 
in those averages.

Greg Hunt's approval of Adani's Queensland mine upheld by federal court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/greg-hunts-approval-of-adanis-queensland-mine-upheld-by-federal-court>
And those calculations were based on the project’s original size and the 
original widely-advertised claim that the mine would create 10,000 jobs.

But evidence from an economist commissioned by Adani itself – Jerome Fahrer of 
ACIL Allen –given in the land court  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/27/adani-coalmine-would-not-deliver-jobs-and-royalties-promised-land-court-hears>
in one of the legal cases said: “Over the life of the project it is projected 
that on average around 1,464 employee years of full-time equivalent direct and 
indirect jobs will be created.” In other words, fewer jobs in total than those 
we are told have been “lost” due to legal delays. Adani has said the higher 
estimate was based on a “broader assessment” of the project’s impact.

The document also raises questions about whether “legal delays” have cost the 
company $200m. It says legal consulting costs were in fact $5.9m and internal 
staff costs to manage the cases were $1m. Another $21.8m is slated as the 
“holding cost” of maintaining a workforce. But the biggest cost by far was 
$123m, primarily for “redesigning previously approved components”. The main 
redesign was due to conditions imposed by the federal government to force the 
company to dispose of dredge spoils on land, rather than in the water. But the 
former environment minister Greg Hunt boasted about this so presumably we 
shouldn’t count it as part of the unbearable cost of lawfare.

Linking Adani coalmine to social uplift in India ridiculous, says 
conservationist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/linking-adani-coal-mine-to-social-uplift-in-india-ridiculous-says-conservationist>
It is true the company has faced additional costs because of the court cases. 
Andthe minister is quite right when he says the green groups are trying to use 
the courts stop the mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/greg-hunts-approval-of-adanis-queensland-mine-upheld-by-federal-court>
.

But he’s wrong when he says it’s because they are just “ideologically opposed” 
to all development.

In fact they are motivated by a different set of big scary numbers – that if 
all of the coal from Carmichael was burned, it would register on a global scale 
– amounting to about 0.5% of the “budget” of carbon dioxide that can be emitted 
before the world tips past global warming of 2 degrees celsius.

The minister, and the courts to date, say if Carmichael doesn’t export the 
coal to India someone else will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/linking-adani-coal-mine-to-social-uplift-in-india-ridiculous-says-conservationist>
, an argument that could be used by every country to continue with business as 
usual.

The consequences of that, sadly, really would be an unprecedented story.
 