
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has claimed an 
agreement to keep 1,100 manufacturing jobs in Indiana from being shifted to 
Mexico would be a harbinger of deals to come and is proof that he could deliver 
on his bold campaign promises.

“Companies are not going to leave the United States any more without 
consequences,” he told workers at the Carrier furnace and fan coil plant in 
Indianapolis. “It’s not going to happen. It’s simply not going to happen.”

But critics warned that the arrangement struck with Carrier – which had 
planned to shift its operations at the plant to Mexico before Trump’s 
intervention – is unsustainable on a large scale and could set a dangerous 
precedent for companies looking for tax concessions.

Trump was returning to public speaking for his first major appearance since 
his election victory. He will begin aso-called “thank you tour” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-tour-midwest-indiana-ohio-carrier-factory-jobs>
 of key states where he won in November on Thursday night in Ohio.

Donald Trump heads to midwest for self-described 'thank you tour'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-tour-midwest-indiana-ohio-carrier-factory-jobs>
“These companies aren’t going to be leaving any more. They’re not going to be 
taking people’s hearts out,” he said in Indianapolis. “They’re not going to be 
announcing, like they did at Carrier, that they’re closing up and they’re 
moving to Mexico.”

Carrier’s parent company United Technologies had planned to close the plant 
and shift production of about 1,400 jobs from Indianapolis to Monterrey, 
Mexico, by 2019, along with a United Technologies factory in Huntington,Indiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/indiana>, with 700 employees.

Under the new deal, Carrier will keep 1,100 jobs at the Indianapolis plant, 
where the highest-paid employee can make as much as $26 an hour, or $70,000 a 
year with overtime. Seth Martin, a spokesman for Carrier, said that Indiana 
offered the air conditioning and furnace manufacturer $7m in tax incentives 
after negotiations with Trump’s team, which covered “multiple years, contingent 
upon factors including employment, job retention and capital investment”,the 
Indianapolis Star reported 
<http://www.indystar.com/story/money/2016/11/29/reports-trump-announce-deal-keep-carrier-jobs--state/94637112/>
.

The Huntingdon plant will still close.

On the stump, Trump campaigned aggressively for preserving and restoring 
manufacturing jobs to the United States, and promised to persuade Carrier to 
keep its operations in Indianapolis or punish the company with fines if they 
refused. Trump had said he would impose a 35% tariff on companies who exported 
operations to countries where labor is cheaper.

On Thursday neither Trump or Pence expanded on the vague details of the 
arrangement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ac3cd86137a5a7323c3451c29ad7b0cbefbb5a%2F0_69_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrier%20deal%20saves%20Indiana%20jobs%2C%20but%20Trump%20critics%20fear%20dangerous%20precedent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrier%20deal%20saves%20Indiana%20jobs%2C%20but%20Trump%20critics%20fear%20dangerous%20precedent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ac3cd86137a5a7323c3451c29ad7b0cbefbb5a%2F0_69_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump on a factory tour. Under the new deal, Carrier will keep 1,100 
jobs at the Indianapolis plant rather than shifting them to Mexico. Photograph: 
Mike Segar/Reuters 
During his roughly 15-minute remarks, some of which rambled off course, Trump 
told his audience that his interest in the plant’s fate was piqued by a news 
segment featuring a Carrier employee who believed Trump would save their jobs.

Vice-president elect Mike Pence, the outgoing governor of Indiana, who played 
a key role in shaping the deal, praised Trump “for picking up the phone, for 
keeping his word” and he called deal the beginning of a “renewed day for 
manufacturing in America”.

“When Donald Trump was running for president he said that if he was elected 
president of the United States America would start winning again,” Pence said. 
“Well today, America won and we have Donald Trump to thank.

“I got a feeling, working beside this extraordinary man, this is just the 
beginning.”

While Trump notches up a victory for delivering on a campaign promise before 
being sworn in as president, the impact will be narrowly felt. Since 2000, 
Indiana has lost 150,000 manufacturing jobs. Nationally,5m manufacturing jobs 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/03/29/news/economy/us-manufacturing-jobs/> 
disappeared over the same period.

The White House on Thursday applauded the deal but noted that it was small in 
scope – and hardly comparable to the number of manufacturing jobs created under 
President Obama, which he put at 804,000.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
“That’s obviously good news and an announcement that we would welcome,” said 
White House press secretary Josh Earnest. “But ... Mr Trump would have to make 
804 more announcements just like that to equal the standard of jobs in the 
manufacturing sector that were created in this country under President Obama’s 
watch.”


Economist Paul Krugman said on Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/paulkrugman/status/803964275756830721?lang=en>that Trump 
would have to negotiate a similar deal with manufacturing companies every week 
for the next four years to restore just 4% of the total US manufacturing jobs 
lost since 2000.

The deal drew criticism from some Democrats, who said it set a dangerous 
precedent that corporations can threaten to move operations abroad and would be 
rewarded with tax concessions.


In an op-ed for the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/12/01/bernie-sanders-carrier-just-showed-corporations-how-to-beat-donald-trump/?tid=sm_tw&utm_term=.6fa079106116>
 on Wednesday, Senator Bernie Sanders, of Vermont, slammed the president-elect 
for using tax breaks and incentives to rescue a small fraction of Indiana’s 
manufacturing jobs from being sent to Mexico. Sanders, who railed against the 
country’s trade policies on the campaign trail, said Carrier’s parent company, 
United Technologies, “took Trump hostage and won”.

“Just a short few months ago, Trump was pledging to force United Technologies 
to ‘pay a damn tax,’” Sanders said. “He was insisting on very steep tariffs for 
companies like Carrier that left the United States and wanted to sell their 
foreign-made products back in the United States. Instead of a damn tax, the 
company will be rewarded with a damn tax cut. Wow! How’s that for standing up 
to corporate greed?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba1e450685bb0f8396cbc81f6ddb0d8311a18e45%2F0_136_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrier%20deal%20saves%20Indiana%20jobs%2C%20but%20Trump%20critics%20fear%20dangerous%20precedent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrier%20deal%20saves%20Indiana%20jobs%2C%20but%20Trump%20critics%20fear%20dangerous%20precedent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba1e450685bb0f8396cbc81f6ddb0d8311a18e45%2F0_136_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Senator Sanders has slammed Trump’s deal, saying the company ‘took Trump 
hostage and won’. Photograph: Phillip Faraone/Getty Images 
In a statement on Wednesday, Carrier said the incentives offered by Indiana 
were “an important consideration” in its decision.

“This is all terrible for a nation’s economic vitality if businesses make 
decisions to please politicians rather than customers and shareholders,” James 
Pethokoukis, the DeWitt Wallace Fellow at the conservative thinktank American 
Enterprise Institute, wrote in The Week Magazine. “Yet America’s private sector 
has just been sent a strong signal that playing ball with Trump might be part 
of what it now means to run an American company.”

Trump spoke after touring the factory with vice-president-elect Pence. Trump 
observed the machinery, waving and flashing thumbs up to employees who lined 
the industrial concrete pathway to capture photos of the incoming president. 
Some wore his trademark red hats while others wore campaign T-shirts.

Trump relished the moment. He walked over to one employee named Mario and 
squeezed the man’s shoulders.

Turning to reporters, Trump said: “They’re going to have a good Christmas.”
 