
A less distinctive and eccentric performer than Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>, who has died after a heart 
attack aged 60, might well have had an entire career eclipsed after playing one 
of the leads in the most successful movie franchise of all time. Fisher’s 
portrayal of the intergalactic rebel leader Princess Leia Organa in the Star 
Wars series certainly made her a household name: “In the street, they call out, 
‘Hey, Princess!’, which makes me feel like a poodle.” But the films never 
defined her as they did some of her co-stars.

If anything, her bristling humour and intellect made it seem in retrospect as 
though she had been rather slumming it in those trumped-up B-movies. Certainly 
the snappy writing in her autobiographical novelPostcards from the Edge  
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Postcards-Edge-Carrie-Fisher/dp/1849833648>(1987) was 
light years ahead of anything she ever had to say on screen as Leia. She was 
unimpressed about her role in the first Star Wars (1977): “A lot of it was just 
running down corridors. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-history-profile>
”

It came as no surprise, then, that she enjoyed a successful writing career 
alongside her increasingly intermittent acting appearances, with other novels 
including Surrender the Pink (1990) and Delusions of Grandma (1993). Her most 
recent book, The Princess Diarist (2016), drew on diaries she wrote while 
shooting the firstStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> film in 
1976 and included the revelation that she and her married co-star Harrison Ford 
had been romantically involved.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKh1t2MJDbrs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKh1t2MJDbrs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKh1t2MJDbrs&media=>
 Carrie Fisher interviewed on her return to Star Wars in The Force Awakens 
Anyone lacking Fisher’s tenacity would surely have been capsized by a 
Hollywood childhood marked by turbulence and scandal. Her parents, the actors
Debbie Reynolds <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001666/> and Eddie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/24/eddie-fisher-obituary>, divorced 
when she was 18 months old; her father ran off withElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary> while 
her mother turned to drink. Fisher grew up to have difficult relationships with 
each parent. As a child, she rarely saw her father; as an adult, they took 
cocaine together. Her arguments with her mother could be cataclysmic. As a 
teenager, Fisher once threw milk in Reynolds’s lap; Reynolds responded by 
putting baked beans in Fisher’s hair.

If anything, Fisher’s difficult background made her seem impossibly savvy and 
whip-smart. “I was going to be this nonchalant, seemingly tough kid,” she wrote 
in 1991. “I was going to handle it. I was going to put my head down and get 
through it as quickly as possible and get out.”

She gave off the impression of having no illusions about love, family or fame, 
and yet she would always be charmingly frank and self-deprecating about why 
another of her relationships or marriages had run aground – her marriages to 
the singer Paul Simon and the agent Bryan Lourd each ended in divorce – or why 
she had fallen prey to extended bouts of drug addiction.

She spoke widely of her bipolar disorder, declared herself “Joan of Narc, 
patron saint of addicts”, claimed that therapy had been “my only serious 
relationship” and said of relationships: “Sex is out of my element. I’m much 
more successful during the cigarette.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScrFOYlwo4w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScrFOYlwo4w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScrFOYlwo4w&media=>
 Carrie Fisher interviewed in 2009 about her early years and her reluctance to 
go into show business 
It was this mix of candour, sweetness and wit that prevented her from 
appearing bitter. No matter how hard her life was, or how poor some of her 
personal choices had been, her wry observations always seemed suffused with 
hope. She was no cynic.

Fisher was born and raised in Beverly Hills, Los Angeles, and lived in the 
media glare from an early age. The first published photograph of her, in Life 
magazine, was taken when she was just two hours old. She was educated at 
Beverly Hills high school and began putting on razzle-dazzle performances at 
friends’ barmitzvahs at the age of 13. By 15, her mother had roped her into 
performing alongside her, first in her nightclub act and then in 1973 on 
Broadway in the musical Irene. Fisher then enrolled at the Central School of 
Speech and Drama in London.

“She never played a grand game or pulled rank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-history-profile>
,” her classmate, the actor and director Selina Cadell, told the Guardian in 
2015. “She was just a lovely person with this amazing sense of humour. We think 
of sharp, witty people as being very resilient but she had a striking softness 
and vulnerability.”

In 1975, Fisher made a brief but memorable film debut propositioning Warren 
Beatty in the satire Shampoo, before landing her big break on Star Wars, where 
she sported a hairstyle she described as “hairy earphones”. She was already 
drinking heavily and taking drugs (cocaine, LSD, Percodan) and her addiction 
only intensified, along with her fame, following the colossal success of the 
movie and its immediate sequels, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of 
the Jedi (1983), in which there was less running along corridors and more 
sparkling banter, particularly between her and Ford.

She later explained that drugs “managed something in me that I was too lazy to 
manage on my own, this thundering emotion and verbal excitement that would roar 
out of me. It still can: I can still take a dinner party hostage but I try not 
to.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06fbe7f9fe78527de5d2fe074cebcfee98ff224e%2F0_200_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06fbe7f9fe78527de5d2fe074cebcfee98ff224e%2F0_200_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
 Left to right, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher and Harrison Ford in the original 
Star Wars film, 1977, later known as Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope. 
Photograph: Sunset Boulevard/Corbis via Getty Images 
She had her stomach pumped after overdosing on Percodan in 1985. “I’m glad 
they did it,” she said, “because that was a very powerful piece of evidence 
that drugs and I had to part ways.” That incident, and a subsequent month-long 
spell in rehab, formed the basis for Postcards from the Edge. The novel was 
filmed by Mike Nichols in 1990 from Fisher’s own screenplay, with Meryl Streep 
and Shirley MacLaine playing characters based on the author and her mother 
respectively. She was also a highly paid Hollywood script doctor; films that 
benefited from her uncredited polishes or rewrites including Sister Act (1992), 
The Last Action Hero (1993), The River Wild (1994) and The Wedding Singer 
(1998).

Her non-Star Wars film appearances were sporadic and not especially notable, 
with the exception of parts in The Blues Brothers (1980), Woody Allen’s Hannah 
and Her Sisters (1986), When Harry Met Sally (1989) and David Cronenberg’s 
Hollywood satire Maps to the Stars (2014). In the last of these, in which she 
played herself, her face seemed oddly immobile, though rumours that she had 
undergone plastic surgery were never confirmed.

She was, however, an outspoken critic of Hollywood’s treatment of women, and 
revealed that she had been asked to lose weight to play Leia both in the 
original Star Wars and the seventh instalment, The Force Awakens (2015), nearly 
40 years later. “They don’t want to hire all of me – only about three-quarters! 
Nothing changes, it’s an appearance-driven thing. I’m in a business where the 
only thing that matters is weight and appearance. That is so messed up. They 
might as well say get younger, because that’s how easy it is.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&media=>
Carrie Fisher, actor and writer, dies at 60 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Latterly she had become a much-loved figure on social media along with her 
French bulldog Gary, whose Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/gary_thedog?lang=en> had around 16,000 followers to her 
1.13m <https://twitter.com/carrieffisher?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. She also had an 
acerbic cameo in the acclaimed Channel 4 sitcom Catastrophe. Although Fisher 
did not shoot any new footage for the Star Wars prequel-cum-spin-off Rogue One: 
A Star Wars Story (2016), she made a surprise appearance at the end of the 
movie in digitally manipulated footage drawn from her 1977 performance, and had 
recently finished production on Star Wars Episode VIII, to be released in 
December 2017.

She is survived by her daughter, Billie, from her marriage to Bryan Lourd, by 
her mother and byher brother, Todd 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0279816/?ref_=fn_al_nm_1>.

• Carrie Frances Fisher, actor and writer, born 21 October 1956; died 27 
December 2016
 