
Actor and writer Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> was in “stable condition” 
on Sunday, two days after reportedly suffering a heart attack on a flight from 
London to Los Angeles.

Fisher’s mother, actor Debbie Reynolds, said 
<https://www.facebook.com/thedebbiereynolds/photos/pb.227597847379339.-2207520000.1482696500./810616899077428/?type=3&theater>
 the family would update the public with any further developments before 
thanking fans for their well wishes.

“To all her friends and fans, I thank you all for your prayers and good 
wishes,”Reynolds wrote 
<https://www.facebook.com/thedebbiereynolds/photos/pb.227597847379339.-2207520000.1482696500./810616899077428/?type=3&theater>
 on her official Facebook account.

Fisher, 60, has been hospitalized since Friday after going into cardiac arrest 
while aboard an 11-hour flight. After the aircraft landed, Fisher, best known 
as Princess Leia in theStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> 
series, was rushed to the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and placed in an 
intensive care unit.

Her brother, Todd Fisher, on Saturday said she was in critical condition. 

Concerned friends and co-stars of the Hollywood star expressed hope she would 
make a full recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/24/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-hospital-star-wars-co-stars-well-wishes>
.

Carrie Fisher's Star Wars co-stars send well wishes amid hospitalization
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/24/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-hospital-star-wars-co-stars-well-wishes>
“I am shocked and saddened to hear the news about my dear friend,” Fisher’s 
Star Wars co-starHarrison Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrisonford>, 
who played Han Solo opposite Fisher, said in a statement to the Associated 
Press.

The 74-year-old actor added: “Our thoughts are with Carrie, her family and 
friends.”

Others offered their hopes for the actor’s recovery on Twitter using the 
trending hashtag #MayTheForceBeWithHer.

Fisher had been in London filming the third season of the British television 
comedy Catastrophe and to promote her latest book, The Princess Diarist.

It remains unclear precisely when and how Fisher became unwell on her flight 
to LA.

The daughter of Debbie Reynolds and the late singer Eddie Fisher, Fisher shot 
to stardom when the originalStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> was released in 1977. She revisited 
the role as the leader of a galactic rebellion in three sequels, including last 
year’s Star Wars: The Force Awakens.


In her first and best known book, Postcards From the Edge, she wrote about her 
turbulent relationship with her mother, as well as a cocaine addiction and 
mental health problems for which she had received electroshock therapy. She also
recently started writing an advice column for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/carrie-fisher-advice-column-mental-illness-bipolar-disorder>
.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 