
The Labour party has been faced with deadlock in the Welsh assembly after an 
informal coalition of Plaid Cymru, the Conservatives and Ukip successfully 
blocked a vote to reappointCarwyn Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/carwyn-jones> as the country’s first 
minister.

The leader of Plaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru>, 
Leanne Wood, was able to draw level with Jones in the vote on Wednesday, with 
29 assembly members each. The nationalist leader received the unlikely support 
of the Tories and Ukip.

Throwing the process into confusion, the meeting was adjourned until further 
notice and the parties were expected to begin talks in an attempt to break the 
stalemate.

Had Kirsty Williams, the sole Liberal Democrat in the assembly, voted with the 
other opposition parties, Wood would have become the first minister despite
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> being by far the largest 
party. “I was not re-elected to support a “a ragtag coalition made up of Ukip 
assembly members who at the moment can’t even agree with each other,” said 
Williams.

A source at the Welsh assembly said the standing orders rule book was being 
consulted to determine the protocol in such circumstances, but it did not go 
into much detail. A tied vote for first minister is unprecedented in the 
history of theWelsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>, which was 
established in 1999 following the passage of the Government of Wales Act 1998.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fcarwyn-jones-leanne-wood-tied-welsh-first-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa3ad9abc0e429a9c8c01144f8757970c50648e9%2F0_294_2334_1400%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carwyn%20Jones%20and%20Leanne%20Wood%20tied%20in%20battle%20to%20become%20Welsh%20first%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fcarwyn-jones-leanne-wood-tied-welsh-first-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carwyn%20Jones%20and%20Leanne%20Wood%20tied%20in%20battle%20to%20become%20Welsh%20first%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fcarwyn-jones-leanne-wood-tied-welsh-first-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa3ad9abc0e429a9c8c01144f8757970c50648e9%2F0_294_2334_1400%2F2334.jpg>
 Carwyn Jones before casting his vote in the Welsh assembly elections on 5 May. 
Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
The Government of Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> Act 2006 
prescribes that a first minister must be elected within 28 days of polling day 
or another election must be called, giving parties until the end of 1 June to 
end the deadlock.

Sources in the Welsh assembly said the parliament was likely to be recalled in 
the next couple of weeks to start the process of taking nominations for first 
minister again, but that this was unlikely to happen until the situation had 
changed. “They’re not going to do it if they think a vote will get the same 
result,” said one.

In last Thursday’s Welsh assembly elections, Labour lost its overall majority 
in the parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
 after losing one seat, leaving it with 29. Plaid Cymru gained one seat, 
leaving it with 12. The Tories have 11 seats, while Ukip has seven and the 
Liberal Democrats have one.

A spokesperson for Plaid Cymru said: “On 5 May, Wales chose not to elect one 
single party to govern Wales with a majority. As is the convention, the biggest 
party were given an opportunity to reach an agreement on forming a government 
which could lead Wales with the support of the majority of members in the 
national assembly. They took the decision not to pursue that option and were 
not prepared to give the process of negotiation any further time.”


The spokesperson said that Plaid Cymru had followed normal parliamentary 
protocol in nominating Wood for first minister and there had been “no formal 
discussions, agreements or deals” pursued between any party.

“This afternoon, the assembly failed to reach agreement on who should become 
first minister and form the next government,” they said. “It is now for the 
parties to discuss this matter further in order to seek the best outcome for 
Wales.”

Ukip group to be led by Neil Hamilton in Welsh assembly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/ukip-group-neil-hamilton-elected-lead-welsh-assembly-wales>
Ukip’s leader in the Welsh assembly, Neil Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/ukip-group-neil-hamilton-elected-lead-welsh-assembly-wales>
, told the BBC that his party had been approached by Plaid Cymru on Monday to 
supportWood <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/leanne-wood>; Plaid Cymru 
said it had only approached Ukip to tell them Wood was standing.

Welsh Labour’s Alun Davies said: “Plaid Cymru have just fought an election 
campaign spending eight weeks saying they’d never do a deal with Ukip or the 
Tories. They referred to Ukip as the ‘far right’. And yet today we’ve seen them 
stitching up a deal to try and form a government. The people of Blaenau Gwent, 
the Valleys and Wales will know they can never trust a word Plaid Cymru says in 
the future.”

He said Welsh Labour had won a clear mandate and currently had a bigger lead 
over Plaid Cymru than they had over the Tories following the 2011 election. 
Davies accused Plaid Cymru of handing Ukip “another day in the sun” when he 
said they should be working with Labour tosave jobs in Wales’s steel industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/tata-steel-seven-bidders-uk-operations>
 andcampaign to stay in the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

“People expected us to be given the right to form a government, and for the 
other parties to hold us to account on the way we perform in office,” he said. 
“What we’ve seen today is an unseemly deal between two parties hurting from 
election defeat, and Ukip going along for the ride.”

Davies said he was absolutely certain that Jones would be first minister next 
week. Jones had held the post since 2009 and ben a member of the Welsh assembly 
for Bridgend since 1999.

Williams, the Lib Dem member, explained her decision to refuse to join the 
coalition behind Wood. “That is not my politics and not something I will even 
contemplate. I am disappointed that Plaid seem to think that is a viable 
option,” she said. “The reality that we have to face is that Labour have 29 
assembly members. It is therefore clear that they have the strongest mandate 
from the people of Wales.”

• This article was amended on 14 May 2016. Because of an editing error, an 
earlier version said “the Tories and Ukip … took seats from Labour in the 
recent local elections”.
 