
The Super League side Castleford have started high court proceedings against 
Denny Solomona over breach of contract following the confirmation ofhis 
cross-code transfer to Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sale-controversial-denny-solomona-deal-castleford-rugby-league-union>
. Castleford are also seeking damages from the Sharks despite the union club’s 
insistence on Tuesday that they have done nothing wrong in signing the 
23-year-old.

Solomona was unveiled as a Sale player on Tuesday after weeks of speculation 
which began when the wing – who scored a record-breaking 42 tries during the 
2016 Super League season –failed to return to pre-season training 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/castleford-legal-case-denny-solomona-rfl>
 with Castleford as agreed last month. He then informed the club he had retired 
from rugby league.

Until now Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> had 
resisted the temptation to comment publicly on the situation under instructions 
from their legal team. But in a statement issued on Tuesday evening, the Tigers 
– who rejected three previous bids, including one from Sale, for Solomona – 
said they are opening legal proceedings against Solomona, Sale and the player’s 
agent, Andy Clarke, after the player walked out on the remaining two years of 
his contract.

Related: Sale insist they have done nothing wrong in contentious Denny 
Solomona deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sale-controversial-denny-solomona-deal-castleford-rugby-league-union>

Clarke is also under investigation by the Rugby Football League for his 
involvement in the transfer. “In August this year we made it very clear to 
Solomona andSale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> that there was 
an unbreakable contract in place until the end of the 2018 season with no basis 
whatsoever for either ourselves or Solomona to depart from each other’s mutual 
obligations,” said the Castleford chief executive, Steve Gill.

“We have repeatedly told Sale Sharks that it would be impermissible for them 
to talk to Solomona, let alone sign him. Clear, unequivocal warnings have 
clearly been disregarded.

“Unfortunately we are not privy to what has happened over the last three 
months between Solomona and his agent, but on the back of losing the player in 
the circumstances described and now announced by Sale we confirm that we have 
issued proceedings out of the high court in Leeds for damages against Denny 
Solomona for breach of contract and for damages including exemplary damages 
against Sale Sharks Ltd and Andrew Clarke for inducing breach of the said 
contract.”

Gill added that despite late efforts to resolve the situation the decision to 
go to the high court to pursue damages was a “last resort”.

“We have confidence that the legal system will bring out all of the facts and 
truth,” he said. “We are fighting this not just for Castleford Tigers but also 
for the integrity of all sports including rugby union clubs. Our belief is that 
all contracts are sacrosanct in professional and amateur sports.

“The proceedings have been issued as a last resort having failed over the last 
couple of weeks to try and resolve matters without the formality of court 
proceedings. If the shoe was on the other foot and Solomona had suffered a 
career-ending injury in the last match of the season, there would have been an 
absolute obligation on us to honour our contractual obligations.”

The RFL’s chief executive, Nigel Wood, said: “It is not surprising that when a 
club believes the terms of a contract have been broken, they may issue legal 
proceedings to protect their position.” Earlier, the Sale director of rugby, 
Steve Diamond, said his club had done nothing wrong in signing Solomona and 
added they were not the only rugby union side interested in the Samoa 
international.

“I don’t think we’ve done anything wrong at all, to be honest,” he said. 
“Players have agents and they put the players up on the marketplace.

“Let’s get it straight: there were other clubs in for Denny and there were at 
least two rugby union clubs I know of that were in the market to sign him.

“I think the situation has been blown out of proportion. These things happen 
in sport almost every week where players move around and, yes, we’re at a point 
now where we’re at an impasse.

“But I’m sure that’ll be ironed out before too long. It’s in the hands of the 
owners of the clubs, it’s nothing to do with me, really.”

Solomona had already begun training with Sale before the confirmation of the 
transfer and, despite a potentially lengthy legal battle now beginning, Diamond 
said he wanted the wing to make his debut in the Champions Cup clash against 
Saracens at the weekend.

“There’s no point trying to play him in A team games,” he said. “I think he’ll 
be involved on Sunday – he’s been training with us for about a week or so now.”
 