
The race for the League Leaders’ Shield was blown wide open after Castleford 
withstood a late charge from first-placed Hull FC to win away 16-30 in round 
one of the Super 8s while Wigan thrashed Wakefield 60-12 to go level on points 
at the top of the table. The results, coupled withWarrington’s defeat at home 
to St Helens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/st-helens-warrington-wolves-super-league>
 on Thursday, means the top three Super League sides are separated by one point.

St Helens beat Warrington to open promising Super 8s campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/st-helens-warrington-wolves-super-league>
Castleford boosted their outside chances of making the play-offs against a 
jaded-lookingHull side, continually catching the hosts napping from dummy half 
to exploit openings on both wings and reach the break 20-0 up.

Hull’s coach, Lee Radford, said: “One team rolled their sleeves up and turned 
up the tempo and the other team didn’t. Whether that’s a physical thing or a 
mental thing I don’t know. It might have been a bit of both.”

His side fell behind in the fourth minute when Greg Minikin scored in the 
left-hand corner, ducking under a weak Carlos Tuimavave tackle following Denny 
Solomona’s powerful break downfield after gathering a high kick deep in his own 
half.

After an unusual four interchanges in the 17th minute Ryan Hampshire scored 
the first of his two tries, cutting back on the inside in the right-hand corner 
through a gap left by the ragged Hull defence. The coach, Daryl Powell, said: 
“I thought that making four changes at that time could give us an advantage and 
it did.”

Luke Gale made it 10-0 with his first successful conversion of the night and 
he was quickest to a loose ball to dive over for a simple try.

Worse was to come for Hull as a try disallowed for offside after Carlos 
Tuimavave took a skied ball from an offside position was immediately followed 
by Luke Dorn dummying extravagantly at the other end to bamboozle a 
tired-looking defensive line. Gale’s conversion completed the scoring before 
the interval.

A superb Rangi Chase offload close to the line sent Hampshire careering over 
for his second try of the night, before Hull had another disallowed when Steve 
Michaels’ trailing leg was found by the video referee to have brushed touch 
before he grounded the ball. However, Michaels finally got his side off the 
mark in the 63rd minute, the start of a flurry for his side that briefly 
threatened to set up a lively finish. Danny Washbrook added a second and an 
outstanding Frank Pritchard charge and offload set up Jamie Shaul by the posts, 
easily converted to make it 24-16 with 13 minutes remaining.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9ad7b97f563e8d594c1ca9ad20a98e110669c1%2F0_4_1881_1129%2F1881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Castleford%20upset%20Hull%20FC%20as%20Sam%20Tomkins%20helps%20Wigan%20thrash%20Wakefield&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Castleford%20upset%20Hull%20FC%20as%20Sam%20Tomkins%20helps%20Wigan%20thrash%20Wakefield&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9ad7b97f563e8d594c1ca9ad20a98e110669c1%2F0_4_1881_1129%2F1881.jpg>
 Castleford’s Greg Minikin, centre, celebrates after opening the scoring in the 
fourth minute. Photograph: Ed Sykes/Reuters 
However, the scoring was rounded off by Castleford’s Adam Milner, who walked 
through in the final minute to leave his side in sixth, seven points outside 
the top four to compound Hull’s misery and leave his side seven points behind 
the top four.

Meanwhile at the DW Stadium Wigan bounced back from their Challenge Cup 
disappointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/wigan-warriors-hull-fc-challenge-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 against Hull to blitz a depletedWakefield. The Wigan full-back, Sam Tomkins, 
scored two of his side’s 11 tries, taking his total for the club to 150, as 
they ended their three-match losing run in style.

The Wigan coach, Shaun Wane, said: “I’m very pleased but I’m not getting 
carried away. We tweaked a few things in training and it just clicked. We saw a 
different class of attack tonight.”

It was sweet revenge for Wigan’s humiliating 62-0 thrashing by Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/wakefield-wigan-super-league-match-report>
 in April when Wane’s side were badly hit by injury and illness. This time 
Wakefield went into the game with 13 senior players on the injury list and were 
forced to hand debuts to the teenagers Judah Mazive and Frazer Morris.

The home side were in charge of a massively one-sided match from the fifth 
minute when the stand-off George Williams broke the visitors’ defence with a 
jinking run to score their first try and his half-back partner Matty Smith 
kicked the first of his three goals.

Four minutes later the Wigan hooker Sam Powell forced his way over from dummy 
half and, before Wakefield had time to regroup, the centre Oliver Gildart 
followed up Williams’s grubber kick to send the left-winger, Josh Charnley, 
over.

On 27 minutes Tomkins dummied his way over before Wakefield briefly hit back 
through the centre Joe Arundel, who crossed for their only try of the first 
half.

But second-row John Bateman went on a weaving run on the last tackle to earn 
his first try for three months while a barnstorming charge from the recent 
signing Frank-Paul Nuuausala created the position for Gildart to go over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fc9a1c8aa219cbe540d3b8bd3856a3c2bc1931%2F0_87_2621_1573%2F2621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Castleford%20upset%20Hull%20FC%20as%20Sam%20Tomkins%20helps%20Wigan%20thrash%20Wakefield&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Castleford%20upset%20Hull%20FC%20as%20Sam%20Tomkins%20helps%20Wigan%20thrash%20Wakefield&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fcastleford-hull-fc-sam-tomkins-wigan-wakefield-super-league-super-8s-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fc9a1c8aa219cbe540d3b8bd3856a3c2bc1931%2F0_87_2621_1573%2F2621.jpg>
 Wigan’s Dom Manfredi evades a challenge from Wakefield’s Jacob Miller to run 
in and score his side’s seventh try. Photograph: Craig Brough/Reuters 
After the break Dom Manfredi plucked a Miller pass out of the air to sprint 90 
metres for a try to set the scoreboard ticking again. The substitute Jake 
Shorrocks took over goalkicking duties after failures by Smith and Charnley and 
scored his first points for the club with the first of five conversions.

Williams jinked his way over for his second try and the impressive Bateman 
sliced through Wakefield’s defence to send the centre Dan Sarginson and Tomkins 
over.

An interception try from the Wakefield winger Craig Hall briefly halted the 
one-way traffic but Wigan had the final say when Bateman dribbled the ball 
through before sending Smith over for the game’s final try.

Mazive was praised by his coach, Chris Chester, after being pressed into 
action shortly after returning early from the England academy tour of Australia 
due to the death of his father.

“He trained with us during the week and we just wanted to see what his state 
of mind was like. He’s a nice kid and a tough kid. He gave it a real go 
tonight. He’s certainly been through a lot this last couple of weeks and he’s a 
credit not just to himself but to his family as well.”
 