
Lost in Showbiz is abundantly aware that celebrities live upon a different, 
more rarefied plane to the one inhabited by us lesser mortals. Over the years, 
it has collected ample evidence that, like the past, the sphere of the 
celebrity is a foreign country – they do things differently there. Oh, its very 
eyes mist over at the thought of that distant, mystical land, that Chiltern 
Firehouse Brigadoon, with its own mystifying but beautiful language, and its 
own delightful customs – a place where the Kardashian sisters are granted an 
audience with the president of Armenia, Sinitta can unsmilingly compare Simon 
Cowell to Jesus, and Intuitive Heart Healer, Awakened Warrior and Enlightened 
Master Blaire Allison can find bountiful employment thanks to her ability to 
communicate with “animals, angels, fairies, archangels, ascended masters, 
guides, star beings, and those who have crossed over”.

And yet, it admits, Lost in Showbiz occasionally finds itself baffled: not by 
the exotic denizens of this alien nation, but by our own, pathetic response to 
them and their attempts to interact with us. Take, for example, the news that R 
Kelly has recently appeared, fully clothed, in the sauna of a Las Vegas branch 
of the 24 Hour Fitness gym andserenaded two men with the introduction to his 
1994 smash hit Bump N’ Grind 
<http://www.tmz.com/2015/11/10/r-kelly-sauna-singing/>. There are those who 
have looked at video footage of this incident – Kelly in a tracksuit, singing 
“MY MIND KEEPS TELLING ME NO! BUT MY BODY’S TELLING ME YES!” at a volume that 
suggests he’s engaged in an attempt to permanently damage everyone in earshot’s 
hearing: sweaty men in towels wearing what look suspiciously like fixed grins – 
and come to the conclusion that what they’re witnessing is in some way “creepy” 
or “a profoundly disturbing image that I fear I’ll carry with me to the grave”. 
To them, Lost in Showbiz can only say: for God’s sake, look beyond the horizons 
of your own culture and realise that there are places far beyond your 
narrow-minded ken with cultures of their own. Just as it’s customary in the 
Gulf states and Yemen for men to say hello by touching their noses together or 
for Filipinos in Guam to hail an older relative by pressing their knuckles to 
their forehead, so, in the distant realm of celebrity, it’s entirely customary 
to walk around a sauna with all your clothes on singing R Kelly’s 1994 smash 
hit Bump N’ Grind at the top of your voice as a form of greeting. Look askance 
and, frankly, you’re one step away from the kind of Ukip-voting old duffer who 
thinks all Frenchmen are terrifying sexual deviants because they kiss each 
other on the cheek.

We move on to the revelation that, as part of a promotional tie-in for his new 
album with “peer-to-peer ride-sharing network” and Uber competitor Lyft, Justin 
Bieber has been “casually hijacking” Lyft passengers’ rides and “starting 
in-car dance parties” with them Forget the carping voices claiming that, on 
past evidence, Bieber in your car is the last thing you need unless you fancy 
getting nicked: this is clearly an act of pure munificence on the part of the 
Turn to You (Mother’s Day Dedication) hitmaker and a treat for all concerned. 
Who wouldn’t want to get in a car and go for a spin with a man who, over the 
past few years, has variously been found guilty of dangerous driving and 
assault after crashing an ATV into a minivan and then getting into a fight with 
the van’s occupants; arrested fordriving under the influence 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Driving_under_the_influence> of alcohol, 
marijuana and prescription drugs, driving with an expired licence, and 
resisting arrest after police claimed they found himdrag racing a Lamborghini 
down a residential street 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/news/justin-bieber-arrested-on-suspicion-of-dui-and-drag-racing-in-miami-9080201.html>
; accused of driving at 136mph over a bridge in Miami called the Julia Tuttle 
Causeway; stopped by police after engaging in a high-speed chase in a plug-in 
hybrid car he’d had entirely chrome-plated and accessorised with 
fuchsia-coloured LED lighting? Anyone who knows anything about the distant land 
of celebrity will agree that, over there, this is a CV that screams “safe ride 
home”. What self-respecting “peer-to-peer ridesharing network” would hesitate 
before leaping at the opportunity to be associated with him?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091593548cdb78177593c1f8bfd9bc94ed11bbdf%2F0_0_3040_4561%2F3040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrityland%20is%20a%20foreign%20country%2C%20they%20do%20kids'%20parties%20differently%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrityland%20is%20a%20foreign%20country%2C%20they%20do%20kids%27%20parties%20differently%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091593548cdb78177593c1f8bfd9bc94ed11bbdf%2F0_0_3040_4561%2F3040.jpg>
 Lean on me ... Chris Brown. Photograph: SYSPEO/SIPA/Rex Shutterstock 
But it’s the final story – or more exactly, the reaction to it – that leaves 
Lost in Showbiz most agog. It concerns the singer Chris Brown, who, it is 
reported, has left friends “concerned” with his ever-increasing appetite for 
“lean” or “purple drank”. A mixture of prescription cough syrup containing
promethazine and codeine, soft drinks such as Sprite or Mountain Dew, with a 
Jolly Rancher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/shortcuts/2013/mar/26/lil-wayne-cough-syrup-seizures>
 thrown in for sweetness, it has been implicated in the deaths of Houston 
producer DJ Screw andrapper Pimp-C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/feb/05/news>, and in the 
hospitalisation of Lil’ Wayne after a series of seizures, the latter a claim 
refuted by the rapper. One report claimed that the concotion had taken over 
Brown’s life to such a degree that he was using it around children, offering as 
evidence video footage of him apparently drinking it at a birthday party for 
rapper Tyga’s son, in the company of an associate carrying the necessary 
ingredients to mix more; cue widespread opprobrium, necessitating a loud denial 
from Brown.

This time, it’s not so much a lack of understanding of the land of celebrity’s 
different cultural and moral values that’s the problem, as a case of mitigating 
circumstances. Lost in Showbiz can only assume that those lambasting Brown for 
taking drugs at a small child’s birthday party are people who haven’t been to a 
small child’s birthday party recently. Lost in Showbiz has, and it can tell you 
for a fact that one thing that would have alleviated the unending ghastliness 
of the experience is a hefty slug of some opiate-based substance reputed to 
cause motor-skill impairment, lethargy, drowsiness and a dissociative feeling 
from all other parts of the body. In fact, it would go as far as to say it’s 
never wanted to feel dissociated from anything so much in its entire life. It 
waves a hand dismissively in the face of those who bring up the sad demise of 
DJ Screw and insist that purple drank can kill you. Frankly, slipping from 
consciousness into death’s merciful release was pretty much what Lost in 
Showbiz spent the whole afternoon praying for, particularly when a man who 
persisted in referring to himself as the Potty Professor started doing balloon 
tricks. Indeed, Lost in Showbiz isn’t really in the habit of “reaching out” to 
R&B’s favourite domestic abuser, but as it looks at its calendar of forthcoming 
events and notes the imminent arrival of its daughter’s sixth birthday, it 
feels impelled to send out a message to Chris Brown: could you possibly lend us 
some of this lean?

Gwen Stefani’s canine clobber
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77548223c2196bb351eb5d68928b8efa4681829c%2F0_210_740_444%2F740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrityland%20is%20a%20foreign%20country%2C%20they%20do%20kids'%20parties%20differently%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrityland%20is%20a%20foreign%20country%2C%20they%20do%20kids%27%20parties%20differently%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fcelebrityland-foreign-country-justin-bieber-chris-brown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77548223c2196bb351eb5d68928b8efa4681829c%2F0_210_740_444%2F740.jpg>
 Doggy style ... Harajuku Lovers’ range of pet clothing. Photograph: PETCO 
There are few things that Lost in Showbiz wishes to encourage more than 
celebrity entrepreneurship. It confesses to shedding a tear whenGossip Girl 
star Blake Lively’s website Preserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/sep/11/blake-lively-lifestyle-website-preserve-gwyneth-paltrow-goop>
 ceased trading last month. “We launched the site before it was ready, and it 
never caught up to its original mission ... it’s hard to build a brand when 
you’re running full steam ahead – how do you catch up?”Lively explained to Vogue
 <http://www.vogue.com/13351603/blake-lively-preserve-new-project/>, which, for 
those of you not fluent in the language of celebrity, translates as: “I sorely 
overestimated how many people would be gullible enough to fork out $110 on an 
apron or indeed $68 plus P&P on a wooden egg holder.”

Lost in Showbiz’s devastation was allayed a little by the thought that 
Gwynneth Paltrow’s Goop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/oct/16/blake-lively-or-gwyneth-paltrow-who-is-queen-of-the-lifestyle-market>
 is still, happily, flogging not justBath Salts for Inner Peace ($78) 
<http://shop.goop.com/products/ila-bath-salts-for-inner-peace> but a $24 kit 
<http://shop.goop.com/products/the-gin-tonic> that enables you to make a gin 
and tonic while on an aeroplane, the latter clearly an essential item for 
anyone who hasn’t worked out you can just ask for one when the drinks trolley 
comes round. And its tears were further dried by the news that Lively is 
planning a return to e-commerce. “Our goal has always been to touch millennials 
through storytelling, and the idea is to create a shoppable lifestyle,” she 
said. “This is a thing that I created with my own two hands and this is how you 
can do it, or this is something that I found on my adventures and travels and 
this is how you can have it. It’s about creating a level of ease for the people 
who identify with us.” Rest easy everyone, the opportunity to spend $68 on an 
egg holder with a load of waffly old cobblers about artisan craftsmanship and 
the never-ending curiosity and wonder of life’s journey attached will be back 
soon: that seems to be her overall message here.

Until that happy day comes, let us turn our attentions towards lauding another 
celebrity entrepreneur, Gwen Stefani, who this week announced the expansion of
her fashion line Harajuku Lovers <http://www.harajukulovers.com/> from merely 
providing womenswear and accessories to offering a range of clothing for dogs, 
visibly influenced by skinhead and mod styles. Lost in Showbiz choses to 
fast-forward past the image ofa solemn-looking dog wearing a union jack sweater 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/94bbcRIVwV/>, which, alas, looks a bit like the 
kind of image Britain First might send round Facebook accompanied by a misspelt 
caption about never surrendering to sharia law, and alights instead on the 
photograph of one of those small dogs you normally see sticking out of a 
handbag,here wearing a little pork pie hat held on with a strap, a shirt collar 
and a black-and-white chequered tie <https://www.instagram.com/p/9tq6lqoV7H/>. 
This, Lost in Showbiz feels, is the answer to everyone’s prayers, so long as 
everyone’s prayers have been: “Please God, enable me to make my dog look like a 
member of Bad Manners.” Confident that’s something that people have been crying 
out for, it raises its glass of $24 Goop kit gin and tonic in Stefani’s 
direction.
 