
Brendan Rodgers believes Celtic have the potential to be a fixture in the last 
16 of theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>
 in two or three years.

They take on Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> on Tuesday 
looking to add to their solitary Group C point after three matches and knowing 
that realistically a win is needed to stand any chance of qualifying for the 
knockout stages.

After losing the left-back Kieran Tierney last week with ankle ligament damage,
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> will have to do it without 
another three key players as Kolo Touré, Jozo Simunovic and Leigh Griffiths 
missed the trip to Germany with injury, fatigue and illness respectively.

Celtic thwarted as Lars Stindl and André Hahn strike for Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
Rodgers was asked if would expect Celtic to be a last-16 side in the next two 
or three years. “I would hope so, yes,” he said. “That’s the process we’re 
beginning. This is what this experience of this competition has given us – the 
chance to build towards that. The huge improvement that’s been made 
domestically is a huge credit to the players and how well they’ve worked and 
how hard they’ve worked. And it’s step by step.

“They’ve arrived into this level, in the toughest group in the competition, 
and it’s been difficult for them. We don’t see it as a threat. It’s a major 
challenge for us but it’s a great challenge to have.”

He added: “Each year we can arrive here we can improve on it and hopefully get 
to the latter stages consistently. Let’s see how the next game goes and take it 
from there.”

Rodgers acknowledged the difficulty of keeping a squad together for any length 
of time. “It’s also the job within the club that we can have this pipeline of 
players, if we lose one or two, that we’re ahead of the game and ensuring we 
can replace them.

“It’ll always be the nature that, no matter how great Celtic is as a club and 
the great support and playing for Celtic being the great privilege it is, there 
are other factors in football that will sometimes take players away and you 
can’t blame a player. I think you have to be realistic, but the idea is to keep 
that pipeline of players coming in.”

Celtic were beaten 2-0 by Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
 a fortnight ago with the visitors more than worth their win. “They reinforced 
that they are a very good side even with players missing. The level they are 
developing over the last couple of years is a level we are trying to get to 
over time,” Rodgers said. “I experienced it in the Champions League when I was 
in England. It is a step up even from that, the intensity, the quality, the 
speed.

“We are taking a couple of jumps up to that level. At this level there are 
very few opportunities and you have to take them but while remaining very solid 
and super competitive.”

Borussia Mönchengladbach (3-4-2-1): Sommer; Jantschke, Vestergaard, Elvedi; 
Korb, Kramer, Strobl, Wendt; Stindl, Hazard; Hahn.

Celtic (4-2-3-1): Gordon; Gamboa, Lustig, Sviatchenko, Izaguirre; Bitton, 
Brown; Forest, Rogic, Sinclair; Dembélé.

Referee M de Sousa (Por).
 