
Celtic are two points clear of Rangers at the top of the Scottish Premier 
League following a nervy 2-1 win overDundee United at Parkhead.

First-half goals by the striker Gary Hooper and the midfielder Victor Wanyama 
gaveCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> a comfortable interval 
lead but the midfielder John Rankin pulled a goal back five minutes after the 
break.

Celtic needed a third goal to alleviate the growing tension and Georgios 
Samaras had the chance in the 72nd minute when he raced into the box to meet a 
flighted cross from Adam Matthews but the Greece striker's diving header went 
straight to Dusan Pernis.

As the game entered its final 10 minutes an energetic United stepped up their 
quest for the equaliser but Fraser Forster was well protected by his defence.

Samaras shot over the bar with five minutes remaining and all in all it was an 
uneasy second half for Neil Lennon's side, but they did enough to climb back 
above the champions, who had beaten St Johnstone earlier in the day.

Aberdeen and Kilmarnock shared the spoils in a goalless SPL meeting at 
Pittodrie. The Dons went into the match hoping to record three consecutive wins 
for the first time this season but rarely troubled Cameron Bell in theKilmarnock
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> goal.

Goalmouth action was at a premium although Paul Heffernan should have scored a 
winner late on when he was thwarted by theAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> goalkeeper, Jason Brown.

Two goals from Leigh Griffiths earned Hibernian a vital 3-2 victory over 
Dunfermline at East End Park.

Andy Kirk opened the scoring for Dunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> after 10 minutes before 
Griffiths levelled 12 minutes before half-time.

The substitute Garry O'Connor put Hibs ahead on 75 minutes before Liam 
Buchanan equalised with eight minutes remaining.

The home side were dealt a blow a minute later when a rapid Hibs breakaway 
ended with Griffiths's shot slipping through the hands of Iain Turner.

A spectacular strike from the Inverness forward Gregory Tade consigned 
Motherwell to their third consecutive SPL defeat.

Tade scored the only goal, firing into the top corner from long range midway 
through the second half asMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> again failed to win in the 
league at Fir Park. They started well but ran out of ideas in the second half 
as they slipped out of the top three for the first time this season.

Rudi Skacel struck a hat-trick as 10-man Hearts cruised to a fifth win in six 
games with a 5-2 victory overSt Mirren at Tynecastle. The Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> captain, Marius Zaliukas, headed 
a first-minute goal but he was later sent off for tripping Paul McGowan, who 
converted the subsequent penalty after 13 minutes.

Steven Thompson headed the visitors in front, but Skacel equalised after 23 
minutes, added his second after 64 minutes and his third after 69 minutes 
before John Sutton struck a 90th-minute fifth as Hearts moved above Motherwell 
into third place in the SPL.

St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> brought on Nigel 
Hasselbaink up front and carried on driving forward, but Hearts absorbed the 
pressure.

The St Mirren goalkeeper Craig Samson conceded an indirect free-kick in the 
area after Jeroen Tesselaar attempted to control a ball. From six yards out, 
Ian Black found Sutton, who fired into the roof of the net to gain just reward 
for his efforts up front.
 