
An emotional Ronny Deila ended his tenure as the Celtic manager in a “perfect” 
way as his side surged to a 7-0 win overMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell>.

The Scottish Premiership champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/celtic-seal-scottish-premiership-title-3-2-win-aberdeen>
 hit top form and the rout of Motherwell began in the 21st minute, when the 
18-year-old left-back Kieran Tierney opened the scoring with his first goal for 
the club before the midfielder Tom Rogic and the stand-in captain, Mikael 
Lustig, ensured the second half was a breeze.

Ronny Deila plans for downtime after saying farewell to Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/ronny-deila-celtic-farewell-scotland>
Stuart Armstrong and Patrick Roberts scored at the start of the second half 
before Ryan Christie gained his first Celtic goal before the hour mark. Then 
the debutant substitute Jack Aitchison – who at 16 years and 71 days became the 
youngest player to play for the club – made it seven with his first touch and 
leftCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 15 points clear of 
Aberdeen at the top of the table.

Deila took the acclaim of the fans after the trophy presentation and it 
signalled the end of a long goodbye for the Norwegian, whoconfirmed last month 
he would be leaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/celtic-confirm-under-fire-manager-ronny-deila-will-leave-at-end-of-season>
 at the end of the season.

After the match, he said: “It was perfect. It was like you had dreamed of. A 
very good performance, a young team out there, who I think is the future of 
this club, it was 7-0, a sunny day as well, which is not often and a very good 
atmosphere as normal, so it was a perfect ending for me.

“It is a very tough day. It is hard to speak about it to be honest. I am 
grateful to have been here.

“I learned so much in two fantastic years. I am going to enjoy the new life now
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/ronny-deila-celtic-farewell-scotland>
. There are going to be new opportunities but these two years will always be 
special to me – but right now it is too much to take in.”

Christie, playing in the unusual position of main striker in place of the 
suspended Leigh Griffiths, was glad to make it on to the scoresheet after 
missing a sitter in the first half when he ballooned the ball over an empty 
goal.

He said: “I was delighted and it was brilliant, especially after the first 
half. I don’t know how I missed that one. The ball fell to me and I thought: 
‘This is a goal’ and then I put it over and I don’t know how I managed that.

“I was just thankful the minute it went in to the back of the net. It was more 
relief than anything. It was really good performance and it was a great sendoff 
for the gaffer.

“I think everybody knew before the game we were wanting to put on a show and 
the way we went about that game was brilliant.”

The young forward Aitchison felt “amazing” after his dream debut coming off 
the bench to replace Rogic.

He told BBC Scotland: “It’s just brilliant, an amazing feeling. I’ve been 
dreaming of this since being a wee boy. It was a great atmosphere when I 
scored; I didn’t know what to do. Hopefully I’ll get more opportunities.”

The Motherwell manager, Mark McGhee, had lost 9-0 when he brought his Aberdeen 
side to Celtic Park in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/06/celtic-aberdeen-scottish-premier-league>
 and feared it could have reached that tally again. The former Celtic striker 
said: “After 56 minutes and you are six down, absolutely. To get to 90 minutes 
with seven wasn’t a bad result. It’s a horrible feeling and it is a horrible 
feeling when you are 3-0 down at half-time because you know what can happen 
here.

“This has happened to me here before. That day I felt I had a team capable of 
losing 9-0, I didn’t think I had a team today capable of losing 7-0, so it is 
slightly different. I am more surprised today than I was back then.

“We didn’t pass the ball, we didn’t work hard enough, we looked as if we had 
more or less downed tools and were ready for the summer.”
 