
The Championship play-offs start on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/bristol-championship-rugby-union-play-off>
 and, while Bristol topped the table by 16 points from Doncaster and finished 
31 points ahead of their semi-final opponents, Bedford, their record this 
season against the top four does not stand out.

It is seven years since Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby>, whose director of rugby is 
the former England coach Andy Robinson, were last in the Premiership and in 
recent years they have contrived various ways of tripping up in the play-offs, 
losing to Exeter, London Welsh and Worcester when they were expected to win.

Bristol, captained by the veteran David Lemi but missing the injured Tom 
Varndell and Gavin Henson, won 39-6 at Bedford last Saturday, although the 
Blues were not at full strength, but they lost the home fixture earlier in the 
season and were also beaten at Ashton Gate by Doncaster, again successful on 
the road. They did the double overYorkshire Carnegie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leedsrugby>, who are looking to give Kevin 
Sinfield a fine send-off and are likewise looking to get back into the 
Premiership after being relegated (as Leeds) in 2011. They are at home in the 
first leg of their semi-final against their county rivals Doncaster, the one 
club in the play-offs that has not played in the top flight.

The Knights passed the audit process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/bristol-yorkshire-carnegie-doncaster-london-irish-premiership-championship>
 after arranging to play their matches at the home of Doncaster Rovers should 
they win promotion. Like Bristol, they have lost two of their six matches 
against their play-off rivals; they lost 27-20 in Leeds but won the return 
34-28.

The only escape route for the side that finishes at the bottom of the 
Premiership – a fate that could befall London Irish on Sunday – is Bedford 
winning the play-off final. The Blues did not put themselves up for audit, not 
seeing the value in upgrading their Goldington Road ground or looking to share 
with a football club. They beat Yorkshire Carnegie at home but were doubled by 
Doncaster in two close games.

Championship play-offs

Sunday 1 May Yorkshire Carnegie v Doncaster (3pm), Bedford v Bristol (3.15pm)

Sunday 8 May Doncaster v Yorkshire Carnegie (2.30pm), Bristol v 
Bedford (3.15pm)

Wed 18/Wed 25 May Final (two legs)
 