
Charlton Athletic’s chief executive has hit out at football supporters, 
telling a sports conference in London that “sometimes the fans cross the line” 
in their protests at the way clubs are administered.

Katrien Meire also claimed that criminal offences have been committed against 
her after responding to suggestions from the top table that Charlton, Leeds 
United and Portsmouth were all poorly run clubs.

The on-stage panel of Ed Warner, chair of UK Athletics, Damian Collins MP, of 
the Culture, Media and Sport select committee, and Jane Purdon, formerly of the 
Premier League and now head of governance at UK Sport, had been discussing 
shoddy ownership at theBusiness of Sport conference 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/2016/05/12/business-of-sport-day-two-lord-coe-takes-centre-stage-ahead-of-d/>
 when Meire spoke up from her seat in the audience.

“For the last couple of months, I’ve had extreme abuse, I’ve had criminal 
offences committed against myself, and I’m disappointed about governance in 
sport, that none of the governing bodies contacted me and stood up for the fact 
that things are not allowed, that’s one step too far,” she said.

“I also ask the governing bodies in this country, that sometimes some of the 
fans have crossed the line, very far, and this is just acceptable. It’s been 
reported by the media as it’s normal and it’s actually not, and the governing 
bodies have a responsibility to make people aware that that is not what sport 
is about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcharlton-athletic-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd017f5d2aa0cabc48b1c4867b964fae1e3694b8c%2F0_147_3198_1919%2F3198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlton%20Athletic%20chief%20executive%20hits%20out%20at%20fans%20who%20%E2%80%98cross%20line%E2%80%99%20in%20protests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcharlton-athletic-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlton%20Athletic%20chief%20executive%20hits%20out%20at%20fans%20who%20%E2%80%98cross%20line%E2%80%99%20in%20protests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcharlton-athletic-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd017f5d2aa0cabc48b1c4867b964fae1e3694b8c%2F0_147_3198_1919%2F3198.jpg>
 Charlton fans stage a mock funeral for their club. Photograph: Henry 
Browne/Reuters 
The 31-year-old lawyer, who was brought on board by Roland Duchâtelet – the 
founder of Belgium’s Vivant political party who bought the club in January 2014 
– has attracted Charlton fans’ ire by referring to them as “customers”. In 
Februaryher resignation was falsely posted on Companies House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/09/charlton-resignation-katrien-meire-companies-house>
, apparently by a disaffected Charlton supporter.

The Addicks, who were relegated from the Championship after drawing at Bolton 
in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/charlton-athletic-relegated-league-one-bolton>
, were plagued by fan protests during the second half of the season.

There is widespread discontent at the way the club is being run by Duchâtelet, 
Charlton having burned through six managers in just over two years. In March 
the clubreleased a statement accusing fans of “wanting the club to fail” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/charlton-athletic-championship-fans-protest>
 when supporters held a mock funeral before the match against Middlesbrough at 
the Valley.

On Wednesday the Northampton manager Chris Wilder, who is now a target for 
Sheffield United, failed to reach agreement to take over from José Riga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/northampton-chris-wilder-charlton>
, who resigned from his second spell as manager on Saturday after they were
beaten at home 3-0 by the Championship winners Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/charlton-athletic-burnley-championship-match-report>
.

The game was marred by protests from Charlton fans, with flares thrown on to 
the playing area and a supporter encroaching on to the pitch. Addicks 
supporters scuffled with police and stewards in front of the tunnel area after 
the final whistle before the home fans congregated in front of the main stand 
to protest more peacefully against their Belgian owner.
 