
When Russell Slade took over as Charlton manager this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/charlton-appoint-russell-slade-manager>
, he knew that there was quite a job to do. Thatthey had just been relegated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/charlton-athletic-relegated-league-one-bolton>
 was bad enough, but worse were the circumstances leading to them dropping into 
League One, which had alienated many of their fans. “It takes a lot of time to 
build trust,” says Slade. “There were clearly things that needed addressing at 
the football club, and going forwards there will still be things that need 
addressing … It’s like putting little bricks in place, to build something 
that’s reliable and solid. To build something that the fans can identify with.”

‘They’re destroying the club’: Charlton fan threatened with ban hits back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/charlton-athletic-letter-forcing-fans-social-media>
Yet since Roland Duchâtelet took over as owner in 2014, there has been very 
little for the fans to identify with 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/01/roland-duchtelet-charlton-the-valley-addicks-nick-miller>
. A few months after his arrival Chris Powell, not so much a club hero and more 
a Charlton god, was sacked, unwilling to buy into Duchâtelet’s plan to populate 
the Charlton squad with players (many of them substandard) from his network of 
European clubs, and unhappy with the owner’s meddling in team matters. In the 
two years since, five managers – José Riga, Bob Peeters, Guy Luzon, Karel 
Fraeye then Riga again – have come and gone.

Last season’s abject relegation was only half the point for fans, who feel 
they have been treated with such disrespect by Duchâtelet and the chief 
executive, Katrien Meire, that irreparable damage has been done to their 
relationship with the club. Meire, a lawyer with no previous football 
experience, last year expressed confusion that fans felt “ownership” of the 
club and compared them to patrons of cinemas, among other gaffes.

“Supporters will never take Meire seriously,” says Rick Everitt, editor of the 
Voice of the Valley fanzine. “Never be accepted, never be respected, never be 
believed.” Incidents such asthe statement issued by Duchâtelet 
<http://www.cafc.co.uk/news/article/statement-3009419.aspx> that suggested some 
fans “want the club to fail”, orthe letter sent to one fan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/charlton-athletic-letter-forcing-fans-social-media>
 in August, warning him about his behaviour at the Valley but also about social 
media posts deemed “not constructive”, do not help either.

This disenfranchisement is even more sad at a club such as Charlton. In the 
1990 Greenwich council elections, 14,838 votes were cast for the Valley Party, 
a group with no political affiliation but whose sole aim was to bring their 
beloved Charlton back to their home, which they had been forced to leave five 
years earlier. They did not win any seats but they did achieve their aim: in 
1992 Charlton returned to the Valley, the help of their fans vital, and a 
plaque just inside reception at the ground acknowledges this as being the case.

“It’s the first thing you’re told when you start supporting Charlton,” says 
Kyle Andrews, a fan who runs the blogChris Powell’s Flat Cap 
<https://chrispowellsflatcap.com/>. “The most important thing in Charlton’s 
history isn’t a cup final or a play-off win, it’s that Charlton fans got their 
club back to the Valley. I think there’s a greater bond and a greater 
connection that goes beyond just wanting a side to win a game of football, than 
at other clubs.”

Now fans are displaying their disenfranchisement by not turning up to the 
ground many of them fought so hard to reclaim a quarter of a century ago. 
Season-ticket sales are down to 6,297 from 10,278 at the same stage last year 
and, while some of that can be accounted for by the drop in division, plenty 
more are boycotting. Wendy Perfect was one of the candidates who stood in those 
1990 elections, but after supporting Charlton for more than 30 years, this 
season she is refusing to buy tickets for home games. “Charlton’s a big part of 
our community,” says Perfect. “It’s part of our life. It’s a bit like going to 
church really, isn’t it? When you support a football club, you buy into the 
vision of the club, [you want it to be] something you can get behind. You can’t 
get behind something like this. It’s part of our lives and DNA but we can’t put 
up with the nonsense anymore. We’re so disenfranchised.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcharlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1d91bb1505580fa8d75d6d49ae685691eb17e0d%2F168_40_1512_907%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlton%20aiming%20to%20rise%20again%20against%20backdrop%20of%20fury%20and%20boycotts%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcharlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlton%20aiming%20to%20rise%20again%20against%20backdrop%20of%20fury%20and%20boycotts%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcharlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1d91bb1505580fa8d75d6d49ae685691eb17e0d%2F168_40_1512_907%2F1512.jpg>
 Russell Slade, the Charlton manager, admits it will take time for trust 
between the club and the fans to be rebuilt. Photograph: Ian 
Tuttle/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
It’s a similar story for David Sturge, who went to his first game in 1962. He 
cannot bring himself to enter the ground and instead joins in with protests 
outside the Valley, largely conducted and organised by the Coalition Against 
Roland Duchâtelet (Card). Sturge says: “I go down and help with the pre-match 
demonstrations, then follow the match on Charlton Life [a club message board] 
or on my phone. I’ll be back like a shot when these people have gone … It 
breaks my heart because I’ve been going such a long time and I’ve got so many 
mates there.”

Supporting a football club is about a sense of belonging and these fans feel 
they do not belong there any more, but the protests seem to replace that for 
some. “I really felt as if I was doing something positive,” says Sturge. “There 
were so many like-minded people there. I’ve made the decision and even if we 
get promoted I won’t be going back. Even if we draw Manchester United in the FA 
Cup at the Valley, I wouldn’t go [until a change in ownership].”

That last hope looks forlorn, as there seems very little chance of Duchâtelet 
selling up. The most likely candidate to lead a takeover bid is Peter Varney, a 
Charlton fan and their former chief executive. Varney has approached Duchâtelet 
on behalf of third-party investors a few times but they have all come to 
nothing. The chances of Duchâtelet leaving soon seem slim.

But the protests continue and they have certainly been eye-catching. During a 
couple of games last season fans threw assorted objects on to the pitch to stop 
proceedings and make their cause heard, and a mock funeral procession was held, 
lamenting the death of the club as they knew it. But while protests have mostly 
been peaceful, some have taken things too far, and Meire claims she has 
suffered “extreme abuse”, which is easy to believe and something Card is 
careful to discourage.

Slade calls the fans this season “absolutely terrific” and it is worth 
pointing out that those protesting do not represent all Charlton supporters. 
“Certainly, I wouldn’t like to be criticising the very people we depend on to 
support us,” says a spokesperson for the East Kent Addicks, one of the club’s 
official supporters’ groups. “We have an excellent relationship with the club 
and we have regular attendance from players and the manager at our meetings. I 
won’t say I’ve bought into everything but I think there’s been too many attacks 
on the ownership.

“I’ve been going since 1952, and Duchâtelet has put more money into the club 
than any other owner, but he’s had more stick than any other. I think that’s 
down to social media.”

The signs are certainly a little better this season. Slade, a manager with 
plenty of experience of English football (unlike his predecessors), has been 
allowed to recruit players who also know their way around the Football League. 
The club will also run fan surveys and last year started “Target 20k”, an 
initiative to bring more fans to the Valley. They are also holding regular 
Q&As, with official supporters’ groups meeting Meire and other members of the 
hierarchy, the latest of which saw the East Kent Addicks take part in an 
“informal” discussion (chairs in a group, no top table or restrictions on 
questions) before the home game against Bolton. “People felt that Katrien was 
talking to them one on one,” said the spokesperson.

The owners have also, crucially, admitted past mistakes – not that they could 
really deny them, but it is a start. “Definitely,” says Slade when asked if 
these mistakes had been brought up before he arrived. “They wanted a new 
philosophy and a new strategy. I don’t think any of the previous coaches had 
been given a three-year contract at the club so I think they were looking for 
stability and sustainability.” His side are 10th going into Saturday’s game at 
Fleetwood, but with a game in hand after international call-ups led to the 
visit of Scunthorpe scheduled for last weekend being postponed.

The club seem to be listening but whether they take in what they hear and 
genuinely do change remains to be seen. The fans have certainly heard 
platitudes before and for some it will not be enough. “It’s reached a point 
where there’s nothing they can do to fix the damage they’ve caused,” says 
Andrews.

The fans will carry on, though. “Because we’ve had so much involvement 
there’ll be a nucleus that won’t give up,” Perfect says. “There’s enough of us 
that care enough, that we won’t give up without a fight.”
 