
It sums up the twitchy state of the voluntary sector that PDSA 
<https://www.pdsa.org.uk/>, the UK’s leading veterinary charity, enters 2017 
looking forward to celebrating its centenary yet fearing censure for breaching 
fundraising data rules.

Next November will mark 100 years since Maria Dickin, PDSA’s founder, opened 
its first animal clinic in a cellar in east London. Today, the charity runs 430 
pet hospitals and practices, spending in excess of £100m without a penny of 
government funding.

But a cloud has lingered over PDSA since the fundraising scandals that rocked 
the sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/10/everything-you-need-to-know-charity-fundraising-crisis>
 in 2015. Although the charity insists it no longer shares donors’ personal 
data with other organisations, it is one of several leading charities that have 
been under investigation by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) over
accusations 
<http://www.prweek.com/article/1362316/charities-rebut-accusations-wrongdoing-fundraising-privacy-expose>
 that it has done just that in the past.

In December 2016, the RSPCA and British Heart Foundation were fined 
<https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2016/12/ico-investigation-reveals-how-charities-have-been-exploiting-supporters/>
 £25,000 and £18,000 respectively by the ICO for contravening the Data 
Protection Act. Further rulings are imminent.

In October, meanwhile, PDSA suspended 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/pdsa-suspends-face-to-face-fundraising-programme-rest-year/fundraising/article/1413401>
 [paywall] all face-to-face fundraising activity after it held an internal 
investigation into complaints about an agency it used. It wanted, it said, to 
review and if necessary update its procedures in light of a rapidly changing 
fundraising environment.

For PDSA read the wider charitable sector as it contemplates the new year: 
still chastened by events from the dark days of 2015; still coming to terms 
with the consequent regulatory changes hammered out in 2016; looking to 2017 to 
regain a sense of equilibrium and find its place in Brexit Britain.

The evidence is mixed as to whether the damage of fundraising scandals and 
governance failings has run its course

The evidence is mixed as to whether the damage of the fundraising scandals, 
and of governance failings exposed by the Kids Company affair, has run its 
course. The Charity Commission says public trust in charitiesis at a record low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/trust-in-charities-at-record-low-after-scandals>
 and pollster IpsosMori says charity chief executives now rank only16th of 24 
professions 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/publications/1896/Enough-of-Experts-Ipsos-MORI-Veracity-Index-2016.aspx>
 in public estimation of trustworthiness – below lawyers, NHS managers and 
economists. Yet research agency nfpSynergy reports public trust at itshighest 
for three years 
<http://nfpsynergy.net/press-release/nfpsynergy-trust-charities-report-december-2016>
.

Voluntary sector outlook for 2017 - chief executives share their views
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/dec/28/voluntary-sector-2017-chief-executives>
The new year will bring a fresh focus on governance, the Charity Futures review
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/stephen-bubb-acevo-stepping-down-charity-leaders>
 being one of several probes into whether the traditional trustee board is the 
right model for charities of all shapes and sizes in the 21st century.

Regulation will remain in the spotlight, not least in how the commission 
should work with the ICO and thenew Fundraising Regulator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/21/michael-grade-success-no-business-charity-fundraising-regulator>
. And the commission faces the tricky task of improving its often strained 
relations with the sector while gaining support for its ambitionto introduce 
registration fees 
<https://www.gmcvo.org.uk/charity-commission-sets-out-ideas-charging-charities> 
for charities.

Sector leaders will go into 2017 encouraged by new measures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/putting-small-charities-at-the-heart-of-public-services>
 announced by charities minister Rob Wilson to help smaller charities overcome 
barriers in the service commissioning process – a welcome sign, perhaps, that 
concerns are being heard in government.

Children in Need shows why charities need to be fully open about costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/nov/16/bbc-children-in-need-charities-costs>
But the big challenge is Brexit. Many charities face the loss of European 
funding and, particularly in the medical sphere, research partnerships. On the 
upside, though, leaving the EU could reopen the possibility of VAT relief for 
charities, a longstanding sector goal.


More fundamental is how the sector chooses to position itself in an era of new 
and unstable populism. Does it seek to stay close to the state or create 
distance from it by burnishing outsider credentials?

In that context, the troubles of the past 18 months may have been salutary. As 
one sector leader puts it: “We’d been having a bit of a free ride, to be 
honest, so it’s no bad thing we’ve been called to account. If we were facing 
all this weirdness without having started to do some introspection, we would be 
in a far worse place.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 