
Urgent action is needed to stop the cheetah – the world’s fastest land animal –
becoming extinct, experts have warned.

Scientists estimate that only 7,100 of the fleet-footed cats remain in the 
wild, occupying 9% of the territory they once lived in. Asiatic populations 
have been hit the hardest, with fewer than 50 surviving in Iran, according to 
an investigation led by the Zoological Society of London (ZSL) and Wildlife
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society 
(WCS).

In Zimbabwe, cheetah numbers have plummeted by 85% in little more than a 
decade.

The cheetah’s dramatic decline has prompted calls for the animal’s status to 
be upgraded from “vulnerable” to “endangered” on the International Union for 
the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of threatened species.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%2C%20warn%20experts%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%2C%20warn%20experts%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report&media=>
Giraffes facing extinction, warn experts – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/dec/08/giraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report>
Dr Sarah Durant, from ZSL and WCS, the project leader for the Rangewide 
conservation programme, said: “This study represents the most comprehensive 
analysis of cheetah status to date. Given the secretive nature of this elusive 
cat, it has been difficult to gather hard information on the species, leading 
to its plight being overlooked. Our findings show that the large space 
requirements for cheetah, coupled with the complex range of threats faced by 
the species in the wild, mean that it is likely to be much more vulnerable to 
extinction than was previously thought.”

The cheetah is one of the world’s most wide-ranging carnivores and needs a lot 
of space. Partly because of this, 77% of its remaining habitat falls outside 
protected areas, leaving the animal especially vulnerable to human impacts.

Even within well-managed parks and reserves the cats have suffered as a result 
of humans hunting their prey, habitat loss, illegal trafficking of cheetah 
parts, and the exotic pet trade, say the researchers writing in the journal 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

In Zimbabwe, these pressures have seen the cheetah population plunge from 
1,200 to a maximum of only 170 animals in 16 years, a decline of 85%.

The experts want a new approach to cheetah conservation focusing on the 
landscape that transcends national borders and incorporates coordinated 
regional strategies. It would involve motivating both governments and local 
communities to protect the animal and promoting the sustainable co-existence of 
humans and wildlife.

Dr Kim Young-Overton, from the wild cat conservation organisation Panthera, 
said: “We’ve just hit the reset button in our understanding of how close 
cheetahs are to extinction. The takeaway from this pinnacle study is that 
securing protected areas alone is not enough. We must think bigger, conserving 
across the mosaic of protected and unprotected landscapes that these 
far-reaching cats inhabit, If we are to avert the otherwise certain loss of the 
cheetah forever.”
 