
Chelsea’s pursuit of defensive reinforcements looks like finally making some 
progress after they agreed a deal withAugsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> for Baba Rahman.

The Ghana left-back, 21, has been earmarked as a long-term replacement for 
Filipe Luís, who was sold back to Atlético Madrid after only a season at 
Stamford Bridge. Negotiations have been continuing for weeks, with the Premier 
League champions having a bid of £17.2m (€25m)rejected over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/08/chelsea-25m-baba-rahman-augsburg>
. Augsburg had been holding out for a fee closer to €30m but with Rahman having 
already agreed personal terms for his move to Stamford Bridge, the Bundesliga 
side have now reached a settlement over the structure of payments.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are expected to pay 
around £14m up front, with several significant bonus payments up to £6m due 
should he play more than 100 matches. The player and his agent have already 
travelled to London and a medical is planned for this week.

Augsburg, who recorded their highest finish of fifth in the Bundesliga last 
season, completed the purchase of a replacement for Rahman last week in the 
form of Philipp Max from Karlsruhe.

Rahman, who only signed from Greuther Fürth last summer, made what appears to 
be his last appearance for Augsburg on Friday in the cup victory over 
fourth-division Elversberg. He performed a lap of honour afterwards to say 
goodbye to supporters.

“I would like to continue working with all players, but when you sign someone 
like Baba from the second division and he’s on Chelsea’s radar 12 months later, 
it does make the coaching staff proud,” said the Augsburg coach, Markus 
Weinzierl.

Chelsea were alerted to Rahman’s promise by their former manager Avram Grant, 
who coaches Ghana. Rahman was a member of the squad who reachedthe final of the 
Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/feb/08/africa-cup-of-nations-final-ivory-coast-v-ghana-live>
 in February.
 