
Chelsea are close to agreeing a deal with Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> for Marcos Alonso, with 
Antonio Conte’s side expected to pay a fee of around £23m (€27m).

Transfer window live: Hart's agent confirms Torino move, Zaha, Wilshere and 
more!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/30/transfer-window-live-wilshere-hart-chambers-berahino-and-more>
The Chelsea manager has been keen to add a new left-back to his squad after 
allowing the Ghana international Baba Rahman tojoin Schalke on loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/baba-rahman-joins-schalke-chelsea>
 this month, with the former Real Madrid and Bolton Wanderers defender Alonso 
now identified as his primary target.

Negotiations have been continuing for days, with Fiorentina expected to accept 
a renewed offer for the 25-year-old. Alonso is understood to have agreed 
personal terms and is keen on a return to the Premier League.Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have allowed the winger turned 
left-back Kenedy to join Watford on loan for the season.

Chelsea’s search for a new central defender remains unresolved after bids for 
Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly andMilan’s Alessio Romagnoli were rejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/milan-reject-chelseas-35m-offer-for-alessio-romagnoli>
. They may now attempt to bring in a player on loan to provide short-term 
cover. The young Chelsea centre-back Keneth Omeruo is joining Alanyaspor on 
loan for the season.

Juan Cuadrado will also depart Stamford Bridge and join Juventus on loan. The 
Colombia winger joined Chelsea last year for an initial £23.3m but struggled to 
make an impact under José Mourinho and spent last season in Turin.

Diego Costa has admitted he wanted to leave Chelsea to return to Atlético 
Madrid this summer. The striker has been regularly linked with rejoining Diego 
Simeone at Atlético since moving to Stamford Bridge in a £32m deal two years 
ago.

Chelsea have always insisted they would not entertain a bid and that Costa was 
happy - although he says he did wish to return to Madrid.

“The truth is that I had hopes of returning [to Atlético] – I won’t lie,” 
Costa told the Spanish television station Movistar. “Everyone knew there was 
the possibility to return; it wasn’t to be because of some details.

“I’m always grateful to the fans of Atléti, and to Cholo [Simeone], who has 
always placed his confidence in me.

“Right now I’m at Chelsea, I’m happy there and the league has started. I hope 
Atléti do very well like last season and win some titles.”
 