
Nantes have confirmed their Senegal international centre-half Papy Djilobodji 
has joinedChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> for around 
£2.7m, with the defender signing a four-year contract at Stamford Bridge.

Chelsea set to sign Reading defender Michael Hector for £4m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/01/chelsea-reading-defender-michael-hector>
Djilobodji, who had been tracked by the champions’ recruitment department over 
the last two years, had undergone a medical on Monday and will offer cover at 
centre-half for John Terry, Gary Cahill and Kurt Zouma. The Senegalese had 
entered the final 12 months of his deal atNantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes> and, having made clear his desire 
to depart this summer, had been training with the development squad at the 
French club over recent weeks.

The 26-year-old, who had moved to France in January 2009 and played 171 times 
for Nantes, can also play in defensive midfield. He had initially agitated for 
a switch to Celta Vigo, with the Turkish club Trabzonspor and Celtic having 
also bid for his services. However, Chelsea trumped the Scottish champions’ 
offer, believed to have been worth around £1.9m, as they moved to secure the 
player over the weekend.

While Djilobodjli has impressed over a five-year stay in Ligue 1, he will be 
considered a stopgap signing at Stamford Bridge with Chelsea retaining a 
long-term interest in the Everton defender John Stones. Four bids were lodged 
this summer for the England international, who handed in awritten transfer 
request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/27/everton-john-stones-bill-kenwright-transfer-request>
 as he attempted to force through a move, with all rebuffed by the Merseyside 
club.

The urgency for Stones was clear given Chelsea’s current back-line has creaked 
to date this term, conceding nine times in four Premier League matches. Once it 
was clear no deal would be struck, the champions made inquiries for other 
potential recruits. They sounded out Zenit St Petersburg over the Argentinian 
defender Ezequiel Garay, Monaco’s Aymen Abdennour – who subsequently joined 
Valencia – Paris Saint-Germain over Marquinhos and Roma for the Greek defender, 
Kostas Manolas.

Similarly, it became clear that any deal for Athletic Bilbao’s French defender 
Aymeric Laporte, 21, would prove expensive to complete given he has a £37m 
release clause in his contract. Djilobodji, in contrast, represented a cheaper 
option to pursue and, while the Senegalese has signed a long contract, there 
would be scope to revisit other targets either in January or next summer.
 