
Chelsea will make a €35m (£30m) bid for the Milan centre-back Alessio 
Romagnoli on Wednesday asAntonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> tries to add depth to his 
squad before the transfer window closes next week, with another €5m in 
performance-related add-ons.

The Serie A club are desperate to hold on to the 21-year-old Italy under-21 
international but could be tempted to sell this summer if the current owner, 
Silvio Berlusconi, as wellas the future owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/milan-silvio-berlusconi-serie-a-club-sale-chinese-investors>
, Haixa Capital, who will take over the club in November, believe they can get 
an adequate replacement for Romagnoli before the window closes. They are 
interested in signing São Paulo’s Rodrigo Caio.

Michy Batshuayi leads Chelsea past Bristol Rovers and into third round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/chelsea-bristol-rovers-efl-cup-match-report>
Conte is keen to sign a defender, a striker and a reserve goalkeeper before 
the window shuts next week and the Italian sees Romagnoli as a long-term 
replacement for John Terry. The former England captain has started the first 
two Premier League games forChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> alongside Gary Cahill but with 
Kurt Zouma injured the Italian manager feels he is a player short in that 
position, despite the fact that Branislav Ivanovic can also play at centre-back.

Romagnoli, who arrived from Roma for €25m last summer, has a contract to 2020 
and is earning around €2m a year. Chelsea are likely to offer in the region of 
€3.5m a year.

Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> would be short of quality 
players in central defence, however, if they decided to sell Romagnoli.

They also have Gabriel Paletta, Gustavo Gómez and Cristián Zapata in that 
position but the latter is injured while two other central defenders, Rodrigo 
Ely and Jehrson Vergara, are way down the manager Vincenzo Montella’s pecking 
order and unlikely to play much this season.
 