
Chelsea are set to bring back David Luiz from Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> after confirming they 
have struck a deal for the defender. The fee is understood to be an initial 
£38m. David Luiz has agreed personal terms and is due to have his medical in 
London on Wednesday evening.

David Luiz departed Stamford Bridge two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/13/paris-saint-germain-confirm-signing-of-david-luiz-from-chelsea>
 in a deal worth £50m if various add-ons were triggered. Chelsea were initially 
reluctant to re-sign the 29-year-old when it was first mooted on Tuesday but, 
havingfailed to secure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/antonio-conte-chelsea-kalidou-koulibaly-alessio-romagnoli>
 Napoli’s Kalidou Kouliably or Alessio Romagnoli from Milan, Antonio Conte is 
believed to have given the green light for interest to be stepped up in the 
Brazilian. He has been eager to add to his central defensive ranks.

Transfer news: Joe Hart deal confirmed, Tottenham start Sissoko talks – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/31/transfer-deadline-day-news-jack-wilshere-shkodran-mustafi-and-more-live>
A first offer worth £30m was quickly rejected by PSG, who were initially 
adamant David Luiz would not be sold in this window. Yet that stance softened, 
with the French champions apparently aware of the player’s willingness to leave 
Parc des Princes, and a deal was struck.

“Chelsea Football Club and Paris Saint-Germain have agreed terms for the 
transfer of David Luiz back to London,” Chelsea saidin a statement 
<http://www.chelseafc.com/news/latest-news/2016/08/david-luiz-move-agreed.html>
. “The move is now subject to him agreeing personal terms and passing a 
medical.” Those terms have in fact been agreed.

Chelsea had also spoken with Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> over the possible loan of Aymen 
Abdennour as a backup option.

Placing so much faith in David Luiz, an FA Cup, Champions League and Europa 
League winner with Chelsea during his first spell at the club, would appear a 
surprising move from Conte given the player’s erratic form. Yet it perhaps 
reflects the club’s desperation in a difficult market. Marcos Alonso, once of 
Bolton Wanderers and Sunderland, completed a£25m move from Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/chelsea-marcos-alonso-fiorentina-signing>
, joining N’Golo Kanté, Michy Batshuayi and Eduardo Carvalho as the club’s 
summer purchases.

Juventus have announced that the Chelsea winger Juan Cuadrado has rejoined 
them on a three-year loan deal for an annual fee of €5m (£4.25m), with the 
option for the transfer to be made permanent for €25m. The 28-year-old spent 
last season on loan with the Turin side and this arrangement takes him to the 
end of the four-and-a-half-year contract he signed on joiningChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in February 2015.
 