
More than a century of lament died for the Chicago Cubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-cubs> on a ground ball. Given the 
moment, it was an anticlimactic ending.

After a 108-year narrative that cast them as perennial losers, they took this 
one with an 8-7 victory over theCleveland Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-indians> that took 10 innings and 
one monumental collapse before it was over. History will say the Cubs hero is 
Ben Zobrist, best known as a utility player, who hit the 10th-inning double 
that ended generations of heartbreak.

In the stands, thousands of Cubs fans hugged and wept and waved white flags 
with the team’s iconic blue “W” signifying a victory. And yet as they 
celebrated their team’s monumental comeback from 3-1 down in this series, they 
had the unsettling task of doing so in front of the Indians fans who have 
endured their own drought – their lastWorld Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/world-series> title was back in 1948. They 
also had to know just how close their Cubs had come to writing yet another 
painful chapter in an inglorious history.

Chicago Cubs end most storied title drought in American sporting folklore | 
Bryan Armen Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/03/chicago-cubs-title-drought-american-sporting-folklore-world-series>
They won this title after Aroldis Chapman, the relief pitcher brought in at 
midseason to make sure this truly would be “The Year”, gave up a game-tying 
home run to Cleveland’s Rajai Davis just four outs from the title. Perhaps that 
made the victory even more satisfying. The franchise that has failed so many 
times, livinga silly curse 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_the_Billy_Goat> named for a billy goat, 
whose enduring image had been the fanwho supposedly cost them a trip to the 
World Series <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Bartman_incident> in 2003, 
won even after their most reliable pitcher had failed.

“Do you believe in miracles?” read one fan’s sign after the game. Later, in 
the clubhouse, as champagne flew around him, Cubs shortstop Addison Russell 
smiled. “This team thrives on being able to communicate with the fans and the 
community,” he said. “I’m just glad that today is the day.”

The elusive championship was far from easy. For much of the night the Cubs 
controlled the game. Their first batter, Dexter Fowler, hit a home run just 
four pitches into the game and they built up a 5-1 lead through the first five 
innings.

But they couldn’t hold it. All night, Cubs manager Joe Maddon had tried to 
maneuver his pitchers through more outs than they could probably give. He got 
four strong innings from starter Kyle Hendricks but went to his most dependable 
postseason pitcher Jon Lester with two outs in the fifth, despite the fact 
Lester had started and won Game 5 just three days before. At first it looked 
like a dreadful decision. Lester, unaccustomed to coming into the middle 
innings of games, threw a wild pitch with runners on second and third. The ball 
bounded so far away both runners scored, making the score 5-3.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46f79bf6bcd5a08202e098013c3c553090c34b1%2F0_165_4775_2867%2F4775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20Cubs%20defeat%20Cleveland%20Indians%20to%20win%20first%20World%20Series%20title%20since%201908&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20Cubs%20defeat%20Cleveland%20Indians%20to%20win%20first%20World%20Series%20title%20since%201908&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46f79bf6bcd5a08202e098013c3c553090c34b1%2F0_165_4775_2867%2F4775.jpg>
 Cleveland Indians relief pitcher Andrew Miller reacts after giving up a home 
run to David Ross during the sixth inning. Photograph: Matt Slocum/AP 
But then Lester got through the sixth and the seventh and even managed two 
outs in the eighth before Jose Ramirez hit a single and Maddon called for his 
closer, Chapman. The moment was too much for Chapman who had thrown 2 2/3 
innings on Sunday and another 1 1/3 innings on Tuesday. His fastball, nearly 
always over 100mph, was in the high 90s and that little difference made him 
easier to hit.

As the crowd mocked him with a sing-song “Chaaaapmannnnn,” he gave up a double 
to Brandon Guyer to score Ramirez making the score 6-4, bringing up Davis who 
fouled off four times before getting one last fastball over the plate.

When Davis sent that pitch high toward the left field corner the roar inside 
this stadium was incredible. Indians fans bellowed into the night, throwing 
shirts and hats and empty bottles into the air. Fireworks exploded behind the 
center field stands. The Indians, left for dead, had found a miraculous life.

Suddenly this was a new game. The crowd was alive. The roar continued into the 
ninth. Then came the rain.

The first shower was small, a short burst that didn’t delay the game, but a 
bigger squall arrived at the end of the ninth. It sent the groundskeepers 
running onto the field.

The Cubs called a players-only meeting in a gym next to their clubhouse. The 
purpose was to support Chapman, but also to rally the players after they had 
lost a lead that had once seemed insurmountable. Pitcher Jake Arrieta spoke 
passionately as did others. At times it was emotional. Several players cried.

“Grown men talking about stuff doesn’t happen,” Russell said. “And for it to 
happen in the World Series...”

He shook his head.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8faf726f3a5cf048e65d906c3ab0598913f8706e%2F0_0_4793_3266%2F4793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20Cubs%20defeat%20Cleveland%20Indians%20to%20win%20first%20World%20Series%20title%20since%201908&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20Cubs%20defeat%20Cleveland%20Indians%20to%20win%20first%20World%20Series%20title%20since%201908&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fworld-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8faf726f3a5cf048e65d906c3ab0598913f8706e%2F0_0_4793_3266%2F4793.jpg>
 A fan react after the Cubs won Game 7. Photograph: Charlie Riedel/AP 
Pitcher Mike Montgomery, who would get the final out for the Cubs and place 
himself in history, missed the meeting. He had been in the bullpen and the 
clubhouse was a long walk for him. But when he finally arrived in the room he 
was startled to see the players shouting and screaming: “We got this!”

“I thought everyone would be all down,” Montgomery said.

World Series 2016 Game 7: Chicago Cubs beat Cleveland Indians – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/02/world-series-2016-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-live>
When the 10th inning began 17 minutes later, the Cubs were unstoppable. They 
scored two runs on three hits, the biggest being Zobrist’s go-ahead double. The 
Cubs fans who waited an extra 90 minutes to celebrate a title they were on the 
verge of winning in the eighth howled with joy.Cleveland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cleveland> scored a final run but couldn’t 
muster any more. The little grounder, picked up by Bryant, was the Indians’ 
final gasp.

The Cubs celebrated hard, jumping around on the field and then whooping in the 
clubhouse. More than an hour after the game’s end, some 3,000Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> fans remained in the stands as 
several of the players and team executives came out onto the field to wave to 
them. A steady rain had developing, pummeling the grass and turning the 
basepaths into mud. The Cubs danced in the dirt. They didn’t care. This kind of 
thing only happens once every 108 years

Outside the streets were silent. A clock above the left-field stands said it 
was 2.15am and the calendar of Indians’ misery had just turned from 68 years to 
69.

• This article was amended on 4 November 2016. An earlier version said that 
the Cleveland Indians’ last appearance in the World Series was in 1948. That 
was the last time they won the championship.

 