
Stadium: Stadio Marc'Antonio Bentegodi, 1963, capacity 38,402

The StadioMarc'Antonio Bentegodi is one of Italy's iconic stadiums. Built in 
1963 the venue's only fault is that it may be too big forChievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> and Hellas Verona, the teams it 
houses.

The ground was renovated for the World Cup in 1990 and became a superb arena 
for football, with an extra tier, a new roof, better visibility and fantastic 
transport connections to and from the city of Verona. In 2000, work began on 
the bottom tier as new improvements were needed, but unfortunately these were 
never finished.

In Italia 90 the stadium hosted games in Group E which contained Spain, South 
Korea, Uruguay and Belgium. The venue also hosted Yugoslavia's enthralling 2-1 
victory over Spain in the second round.

Historically the stadium was home solely to Hellas Verona, but after Chievo's 
promotion in 1986 the two clubs started to share the ground. Chievo's Ultras 
hold the Curva Sud Inferior and, despite being small in number compared to 
their city rivals, they are no less proud.

The Ultras

Key Ultra Groups: North Side 94

Other fan groups: Ultras Chievo, Cani Sciolti (Wild Dogs or Bad Boys), Chievo 
1929, Gate 7,Mussi Volanti (Flying Donkeys), Gioventù Clivense (Chievo Youth), 
Gruppo Milano (Milan Group), La Fossa dei Pandorini (The Pandora's Den), Brulè 
Boys (Grill Boys), The Friends.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxziZndMMoj8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxziZndMMoj8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxziZndMMoj8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"Come si scrive Ciampion Lig" ("How do you write Ciampion Lig") … certainly 
not like that. Of course it was tongue-in-cheek, an ironic gesture emphasising 
the Chievo fans' own incredulity at their team's success, success that saw them 
on course for a Champions League spot during their first ever season in Italy's 
top flight.

In the end, it wasn't to be, with the Flying Donkeys finishing fifth in the 
2001-02 season and outside of the Champions League spots. Just five years 
later, with a little help from the Calciopoli scandal that led to Juventus, 
Milan, Fiorentina and Lazio all being banned from Europe, spelling "Ciampion 
Lig" was the least of Chievo's worries; they were in it – well, at least the 
preliminary stage.

It was an astounding achievement for a club whose existence was for so long 
peripheral, even non-existent in the eyes of their powerful overweening 
neighbours Hellas Verona. This was Chievo's time and their fans were keen to 
remind their city bedfellows.

In a game against Livorno the Clivensi (Chievo supporters) produced a banner 
that read: "Chievo frazione di Verona, provincia d'Europa" ("Chievo district of 
Verona, province of Europe"). A club from a tiny suburb of Verona that is home 
to 3,000 inhabitants were competing in Europe's premier football competition. 
Their success became known as the "Chievo phenomenon" and how theVeronesi 
loathed it.

Writing in the Guardian back in October 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/oct/26/sport.europeanfootball>, Tim 
Parks, the author ofA Season with Verona 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Season-With-Verona-Tim-Parks/dp/0099422670>, gave his 
own account of the Chievo area "I'd lived in Verona more than 10 years before I 
stumbled across it, a miserable case of working-class suburb overflowing into 
declining semi-industrialised fenland".

Parks conveys the haughtiness that every Verona loyalist expresses towards 
Chievo, both the place and the team. Chievo's nickname in Veneto dialect is "Ceo
" which means kid. Their story is certainly a child's fairytale: the ugly 
duckling that blossomed and became a swan, flaunting its feathers among 
Calcio's elite. It is fanciful but not far from the truth. Chievo fans may be 
maligned by their city rivals for their miniscule fanbase and they are not 
renowned across Italy, but they have still played their part in Chievo's 
romance.

Some regard Chievo's North Side as the "the only real group of Ultras". 
Apparently a few boys formed the group over a beer in 1994, in a bid to start a 
movement of ardent fandom that would help their cause of claiming theCurva Nord 
as their own domain. Normally residing in theCurva Sud inferiore of the Stadio 
Bentegodi, they move to theCurva Nord on derby days to accomodate the greater 
number of visiting Verona fans.

In the early years, the group's symbol became the Looney Tunes character 
Marvin the Martian <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marvin_the_Martian>, who, as a 
member describes, "encapsulates Chievo and above all the North Side who were 
aliens in the world of professional football".

When Chievo faced Napoli in 2000 an overly offensive banner abusing the 
visitors (the content of which remains elusive) led to five members of the 
North Side being expelled, creating profound divisions. New leadership 
re-asserted the group's basic ideals, including a non-violent, apolitical 
stance and a rejection of official twinnings and rivalries. These are not the 
usual Ultras and this episode best captures their idiosyncrasies.

Later that year Chievo's promotion to Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> saw the North Side 
flourish and the Flying Donkeys were followed more feverishly than ever before. 
As a result various sub-groups formed. These include Ultras Chievo (1999), who 
have now dissolved but were allegedly '"ess good-natured" than North Side, 
Chievo 1929 and Gate 7, who were formed as recently as 2013.

Although the North Side Ultras profess to have no rivals, Chievo's prominence 
has seen Verona develop a new-found hatred for their once "fictitious" 
neighbours. The return of theMastini to Serie A in 2013 saw the first Derby 
della Scala in over a decade. 

There were murmurings of trouble and stories than the Clivensi had thrown 
objects and sticks at the Verona team bus. But as many of theVeronesi will tell 
you, historically this is not the Veneto derby they get worked up about. The
Veronesi never believed this rivalry would materialise, as demonstrated by the 
banner they unfurled during their 1995 derby in Serie B: "When donkeys fly we 
will play this derby in Serie A". Needless to say Chievo's success and Verona's 
struggles in the last decade have allowed theClivensi to revel in a touch of 
schadenfreude.

Having written about Catania's Ultras last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/feb/07/catania-serie-club-guide-ground-ultras-mascara>
, the contrast is striking. If you were to juxtapose Chievo with the Sicilians, 
you would have to say they are the saints of the Ultra world. The Chievo story 
is unique and in a small way their fans have left an indelible mark on the 
pages of the club's history. Whether you call them magnanimous Ultras or just 
fans, theClivensi offer a passionate and loyal support that follow and fly with 
their donkeys wherever they can.

Classic player: Sergio Pellissier
 Sergio Pellissier in action for of Chievo against AC Siena in April 2013. 
Photograph: Gabriele Maltinti/Getty Images 
Chievo's rise to power was born with the new millennium. Unlike the great 
teams of the past, such as Genoa or Torino, or the more constant Juventus and 
Milan, their history is not as prominent. One man who has embodied this 
mesmeric, intriguing and unlikely journey is Sergio Pellissier. Over the past 
decade and a half he has created Chievo's history and more remarkably has 
helped them hold on to (or regain) their Serie A status.

Starting his career in Turin in 1996, the rugged forward was loaned out to 
Varese for two seasons before eventually being sold to Chievo from Torino in 
2000. After two more years on loan at SPAL, a club in northern Italy, he was 
back in Verona, this time ready to prove that he was worthy of his place.

Pellissier has some pace and skill, but his main strengths are his 
persistence, his movement and his opportunism. He has scored some truly 
outstanding goals, but his bread and butter usually have the same familiar 
patterns.

Perhaps one could describe him as an archetypal "Grande Bomber", who only need 
a moment to sum up a situation before heading or rocketing the ball past a 
despairing goalkeeper from inside the box. If you ever find yourself in the 
bizarre act of trawling through the archives of Chievo's best goals, you will 
find a very similar trait when it comes to Pellissier.

The reoccurring theme is that he managed to hit almost everything that comes 
to him first time. His instinct is truly superb and he certainly can lay claim 
to being one of those rare breeds of strikers that simply wants to find the net.

His goalscoring average is impressive, havinging managed to score on average 
10 goals a season in a team that has rarely given him the best supply. Would he 
have done better for a larger club? Who knows, but his value for Chievo has 
been second to none.

The Chievo captain is now 34 years of age and his appearances are not as 
frequent as they were. When looking back over time there is no doubt that his 
goals and drive have kept the team in the division. He may not have the 
universal appeal of Paolo Maldini or Javier Zanetti, but to fans of the Flying 
Donkeys he is just as important. When Calcio ruled the world, Pellissier was 
just getting started at Chievo.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 