
When you train as a teacher, one thing you rarely consider is what you’d do if 
you were confronted with say a confused teenager convinced they were a 
religious prophet, or being on a school trip and finding a student carving the 
word DIE into their forearm. Any job that exposes you to the great stream of 
humanity will force you into proximity with the misery that runs through it. 
And the problem is, as a teacher you’re expected to do something about it. Few, 
in my experience, do.

Are mental health problems among the young getting worse? In 2014 the Commons 
health committee reported that data was so out of date that those planning and 
operating child and adolescent mental health services (Camhs) wereoperating in 
a fog 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/health-committee/news/14-11-04-camhs-report-substantive/>
. Some indicators, like 2016 reports by NHS Digital ofself-harm rates among 16- 
to 24-year-olds increasing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/29/self-harm-ptsd-and-mental-illness-soaring-among-young-women-in-england-survey>
 between 2007 and 2014, might suggest things are getting worse. Others, like UK 
suicide rates, which have beendecreasing for the last 30 years especially in 
the young 
<https://www.samaritans.org/sites/default/files/kcfinder/files/Samaritans%20suicide%20statistics%20report%202016.pdf>
 [pdf], might suggest things are getting better.

Maybe, as Dr Stanley Kutcher, an expert in adolescent mental health and leader 
in mental health research in Canada, puts it, “we’re tending to confuse mental 
distress ... with mental illness”.

I hate that a child has to be at high risk of suicide before we can help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/08/child-suicide-camhs-overstretched>
As a lone teacher, your personal experience will vary from your colleagues. I 
worked with mental health services three times in one year, while the teacher 
next door didn’t. Whenever I’ve needed them, they’ve been fantastic, but 
because funding is so scarce at a local level for this kind of provision it 
usually takes something dramatic before a school will lift the phone. And in 
many ways who can blame them? Identifying, assessing and treating mental 
illnesses are some of the most specialised, highly trained professions 
imaginable. This isn’t an area for amateurs, however well-meaning. We only 
usually notice when students have gone beyond struggling. Even then, it isn’t 
easy to tell.

As a teacher you can feel so helpless; what pupils need is so much more than 
just a teacher who cares. They need specialist help, and there are very few 
ways we can spot and help students in advance of the chronic phase of a mental 
illness. One of the best, sweetest students I’d ever taught, sank into a 
depression. He was rational, and good as ever, but the world had no colour for 
him, and watching him drift out of his studies when he had been so alert, nerdy 
and fascinated by everything broke my heart, mainly because I could do nothing.

What can schools do? There are no simple solutions to a complex, society-wide 
problem. We find it just as hard to spot mental health problems in school as we 
do in society at large. Teacher training is often cited as good place to start, 
but from experience I know how packed that is. Certainly, some basic awareness 
of early signs, strategies and procedures would be useful. Schools usually 
funnel these issues through their child-protection officer, a designated and 
trained adult responsible for communicating with external agencies. Any 
training needs to be focused on that role.

I almost lost my daughter because of her mental health problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/dec/05/almost-lost-daughter-mental-health-problems-camhs>
Sadly, I’ve never seen a school intervention based on wellbeing, positive 
thinking and self-esteem demonstrably improve matters for staff, long-term. 
That’s because the pressures on teachers are real, not a matter of self-belief. 
The Scylla and Charybdis are workload and behaviour management. Crazy in-school 
policies on book marking have made things even harder for teachers. But one of 
the ways we could reboot this battlefield of bruised ghosts would be through a 
report I’m working on right now with the DfE: finding and sharing best practice 
on how leaders create calm, civil school cultures. Many schools do amazing work 
to protect the dignity and safety of all of their members. And when children 
are less anonymous, subtle warning cues can be caught rather than missed.

Schools could use more robust research into this field, commissioned by the NHS
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to better understand the real needs 
of the school community, and a requirement that only trained professionals be 
allowed to work with pupils and staff in this misunderstood field. Few schools 
retain a nurse anymore, but perhaps we should look into mental health visitors 
as an intermediary device to facilitate better communication between providers 
and need.

Changing societies is a long game. But real change for the better takes time. 

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 