
Children are reportedly trapped inside a building under attack in besieged 
Aleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, the UN’s children agency has 
said, amid reports that forces loyal to the regime of Bashar al-Assad are 
carrying out extrajudicial killings in areas of the city recently reclaimed 
from the Syrian opposition.

“According to alarming reports from a doctor in the city, many children, 
possibly more than 100, unaccompanied or separated from their families, are 
trapped in a building, under heavy attack in east Aleppo,” Unicef said in a 
statement. “We urge all parties to the conflict to allow the safe and immediate 
evacuation of all children.”


Aleppo’s people are being slaughtered. Did we learn nothing from Srebrenica? | 
Nedžad Avdić
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/aleppo-people-slaughtered-srebrenica-genocides-atrocities-syria>
The UN’s human rights office said earlier there were reliable accounts that 
pro-Syrian regime forces have been entering homes in the last remaining rebel 
strongholds in eastern Aleppo and killing civilians on the spot.

Multiple sources told the UN that 82 civilians had been killed across four 
different neighbourhoods. “The reports we had are of people being shot in the 
street trying to flee and shot in their homes,” Rupert Colville, a UN 
spokesman, said. “There could be many more.”

Unverified accounts of extrajudicial killings by forces loyal to Assad, as 
well as mass detentions and arrests, have surfaced in recent days. In one image 
circulated by a pro-government parliamentarian, dozens of Syrian men and boys 
from east Aleppo stand in a detention camp in front of Syrian army soldiers.


 The Turkish foreign ministry said it was horrified and outraged by what it 
described as a massacre of civilians, in serious breach of international law.

“We’re seeing the most cruel form of savagery in Aleppo, and the regime and 
its supporters are responsible for this,” foreign minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu 
said, adding that his country was was negotiating with Russia to implement a 
ceasefire. “The wounded are not being let out and people are dying of 
starvation,” he told a news conference in Ankara. 

Fight for Aleppo is almost over – but a new chapter of misery begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/fight-for-aleppo-is-almost-over-but-a-new-phase-of-misery-begins>
Meanwhile, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was fed up 
of calls from the US to halt the fighting. “We are tired of hearing this 
whining from our American colleagues in the current administration,” he told 
journalists. The US was urging Russia to halt military action while doing 
nothing to separate moderate rebels from “terrorists” in Aleppo, he added.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Voices%20from%20Aleppo%3A%20the%20situation%20is%20apocalyptic%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Voices%20from%20Aleppo%3A%20the%20situation%20is%20apocalyptic%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report&media=>
Voices from Aleppo: the situation is apocalyptic – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/13/voices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report>
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said there were corpses abandoned in 
the streets with residents too terrified by the shelling to bury them. Real 
massacres were taking place in the city, the war monitor said. Jens Laerke, a 
UN spokesman, said it looked like there had been a “complete meltdown of 
humanity” in the city.

The Red Cross has urgently appealed for civilians in east Aleppo to be 
protected “before it is too late”, adding that it was ready to help with 
evacuations if an agreement could be reached as Assad’s forces closed in on 
remaining opposition enclaves.

“We need to act now,” said Pawel Krzysiek, the head of communications at the 
international committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), who is in Aleppo. “We need to 
depoliticise the process of protecting civilians. We need to put their lives 
first. And we need to do it now before it is not too late.”
Latest map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/aleppo_update_13dec-zip/giv-3902WPPQ1ynm11kc/>
Tens of thousands of civilians remain trapped in a shrinking patch of 
opposition territory in east Aleppo, weeks into an offensive led by Assad’s 
military and Iranian-backed militias, and supported by Russian airpower, that 
has brought them within reach of a key victory in the war.

People in east Aleppo, who have issued distress calls and appeals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
 to the international community to rescue them from retribution, continued to 
post farewell messages overnight and into Tuesday morning, predicting they 
would either die by the ongoing bombardment or be tortured and killed if they 
surrendered.

“Please just tell our stories to the world, please let my son be proud of his 
father,” said one resident of east Aleppo in a text message.

A doctor described the situation as “beyond a tragedy”, with corpses in the 
street and people attempting to flee to government-held areas as a result of 
hunger and cold.

“We are besieged from all sides and death is coming from the air,” he said. 
“Remember that there was once a city called Aleppo that the world erased from 
the camp and from history. This is a farewell message [from a doctor] whose 
fate along with that of his companions is death or arrest at any moment.”

One resident said the airstrikes had subsided by Tuesday morning due to lower 
visibility and rain, offering a brief respite to civilians who were still on 
the move and seeking shelter in the rebel districts. Some of those attempting 
to find shelter away from the frontlines were carrying blood and IV drips as 
they marched through rebel-held districts, another resident said.

The Syrian army and its allies are in the “last moments before declaring 
victory” in Aleppo, a Syrian military source told Reuters, after rebel defences 
collapsed on Monday, leaving insurgents in a tiny, heavily bombarded pocket of 
ground.

The battle for eastern Aleppo in maps: how rebel territory is shrinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/nov/30/battle-eastern-aleppo-maps-rebel-territory-shrinking>
The bombardment of rebel areas of the city continued nonstop on Monday during 
the day in what residents called a “doomsday” scenario.

“The battle in eastern Aleppo should end quickly. They [rebels] don’t have 
much time. They either have to surrender or die,” Lieut Gen Zaid al-Saleh, the 
head of the government’s Aleppo security committee, told reporters in the 
recaptured Sheikh Saeed district of the city.

The ICRC said: “Thousands of civilians’ lives are in danger as frontlines 
close in around them in eastern Aleppo. As the battle reaches new peaks and the 
area is plunged into chaos, thousands with no part in the violence have 
literally nowhere safe to run.

“A deepening humanitarian catastrophe and further loss of life can be averted 
only if the basic rules of warfare – and of humanity – are applied.”
 