
My lightbulb moment came when I was working as a foster care manager at the 
charityTact 
<http://www.tactcare.org.uk/foster-with-us/?gclid=Cj0KEQiAvNrBBRDe3IOwzLn6_O4BEiQAmbK-DoxmwpLD8J8Zs_4H50d0s66eoBMWFkSa60mBLmgqFhwaAmte8P8HAQ>
. I had seen too many instances of looked-after children (those in care) where 
decisions about where they should live in the long-term were put on hold – what 
we call “drift and delay” – for a variety of complex reasons. I had seen this 
repeatedly happening for eight years of my career, and I thought: enough; let’s 
pick up the pace for children reaching their permanent home.


In England, the notion of permanence usually means a form of adoption or 
fostering (ie care outside the family home), whereas inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/scotland> we use a broader 
definition: keeping the child at home with family support; returning the child 
to the family home with support from professionals; kinship care where the 
child is cared for by another family member; long-term permanence fostering; 
residential care or adoption.

Related: Children in care: it’s not how you live, but where 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/children-in-care-its-not-how-you-live-but-where>

I started to consider the root causes of drift and delay. There are many 
individuals and professional groups involved in a child’s life – parents, 
social workers, health workers, teachers, foster carers, advocacy workers, to 
name a few. What was missing for me was more purposeful and joined-up dialogue.

Research evidence is clear that delaying decisions on a child’s permanent home 
can seriously hamper their life chances. Narrowing the gap in the time it takes 
to settle a child in a stable home can improve what they achieve in life. When 
a child’s wellbeing is compromised within their birth family, for whatever 
reason, we need to act early with thorough and robust assessments, sensitive 
support for parents and children and effective decision making. The clock on 
that child’s childhood never stops ticking, and it’s all of our jobs to ensure 
alarm bells keep clanging all the way to early physical, emotional and legal 
permanence. Issues are many and complicated and we need everyone working 
together to get it right.

I am passionate about making sure we get decisions about a child’s permanence 
option assessed, evidenced and agreed in partnership with parents and the team 
around the child.Getting it right for every child 
<http://www.gov.scot/Topics/People/Young-People/gettingitright> is the Scottish 
government’s holistic wellbeing policy blueprint, which enables this to happen.

Recently, I wrote in the Scottish Journal of Residential Child Care 
<https://www.celcis.org/files/9714/6054/8505/009._2016_Vol_15_1_Nicol_From_Residential_Unit.pdf>
 (pdf) about Keiran, whose permanent option eventually became long-term 
permanent foster care. The team around Keiran worked hard with him, his family, 
his foster carer and his teachers to make the move as smooth as possible, and 
was managed in such a way as to minimise distress or trauma for him. There was 
fantastic whole-system working, but it had taken Keiran several years to be 
settled in his family of permanence.

Related: I look after children in care, but don't tell them I've been there too
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/feb/24/children-home-foster-care-support-worker>

 My role at Celcis <https://www.celcis.org/> has allowed me to turn my 
lightbulb moment into positive action. We believe that once we have given 
families all possible opportunities and support to care for a child and if they 
are still unable to do so, the child should be provided with a settled, secure 
and permanent place to live with minimum disruption to their life.

 We are working with the Scottish government on the Permanence and Care 
Excellence 
<https://www.celcis.org/our-work/key-areas/permanence/our-permanence-work/> 
(Pace) programme, aimed at developing innovative and rigorous approaches to 
reduce drift and delay in permanence decision making for looked-after children. 
In Aberdeenshire, the permanence process has almost halved in time, which has 
exceeded the original aim.

 The Pace programme is underway in 10 local authorities and will be rolled out 
to every local authority in Scotland. Pace is built around a whole-system 
improvement approach including social workers, colleagues from education, 
health, legal and data services,Children’s Hearing Scotland 
<http://www.chscotland.gov.uk/>, third sector agencies and the Scottish 
government all coming together in partnership to make informed decisions about 
the future of looked-after children. At last, the much needed cohesion and 
dialogue required for improvement!

 I have been encouraged by what Pace has achieved so far. It has been great to 
observe groups of individuals involved in a child’s life plan communicating 
with each other, and understanding each other’s viewpoints. Clearly, there is 
strong motivation and commitment to improving life chances of looked-after 
children, with permanence being a crucial focus of this process. There are 
exciting, creative and energetic initiatives happening, and working, in local 
practice throughout the country. But there is still a long way to go to ensure 
we are getting this right for every looked-after child. We all have our role to 
play here.

• Aileen Nicol is permanence and care lead at the Centre for Excellence for 
Looked After Children in Scotland <https://www.celcis.org/> (Celcis). Read more 
about permanence work in a special edition ofReach magazine 
<https://www.celcis.org/knowledge-bank/reach/issue-8-autumn-2016/>. 


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.



 