
China has criticised “extreme” tariffs on its exports amid concerns in Beijing 
thatDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will embark 
on a policy of protectionism as US president.

Trump has pledged to hit Chinese goods with tariffs of up to 45% and said 
cheap imports are “killing” US manufacturers.

The president-elect has also appointed one of China’s fiercest critics to key 
trade post and said he will label the Asian country a currency manipulator on 
his first day in office, 20 January.

But China’s ministry of commerce says it has already been hit with a record 
number of retaliatory trade measures from rival economies and trading blocs in 
2016.

These included an increase in European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> steel tariffs as Brussels moved to 
protect thestruggling industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/hopes-rise-for-tata-steel-rescue-deal>
 from “dumping” of cheap Chinese product.

“Trade disputes are becoming increasingly politicised, measures are 
increasingly extreme and final tariff rates are relatively high,” said ministry 
spokesman Sun Jiwen.

He singled out measures taken against China’s steel, solar panel, ceramics and 
tyre industries.

Fears of a trade war between China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
and the US have been heightened by Trump’s appointments to key White House 
trade posts.

Economist Peter Navarro, author of books including Death By China and The 
Coming China Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
, will lead Trump’s White House National Trade Council, and will also serve as 
director of trade and industrial policy.

'Brutal, amoral, ruthless, cheating': how Trump's new trade tsar sees China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
Navarro has described China as a nightmarish realm characterised by “the raw 
stench of a gut-wrenching, sweat-stained fear”.

The Harvard-educated hardliner accused “cheating China” of destroying both 
American factories and lives by flooding the US with illegally subsidised and 
“contaminated, defective and cancerous” exports.


American politicians must “aggressively and comprehensively address the China 
problem” before it leads to full-blown conflict, Navarro has written.

In a 2012 Netflix documentary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mMlmjXtnIXI> 
based on Death by China, whichTrump has described as “right on” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/trumps-muse-on-u-s-trade-with-china>
, Navarro blames Beijing for the loss of 57,000 American factories and 25m jobs.

While Trump has repeatedly blamed China for undermining US manufacturing, 
European officials have also accused the People’s Republic of unfair trade 
practices, such asflooding the market with cheap goods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/uk-and-eu-urged-to-act-on-chinese-steel-dumping-after-us-hikes-duty-on-imports>
 backed by state subsidies.

The accusations have been particularly loud in Europe’s struggling steel 
industry, leading to Brusselsslapping some Chinese imports with tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/european-union-import-duties-chinese-steel-port-talbot-tata>
 of up to 74% in October last year.

Business minister Sajid Javid faced fierce criticism in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/sajid-javid-uk-blocked-higher-eu-steel-tariffs-fearing-shoe-price-rises>
 for opposing the EU’s plans to protect steelmakers, asTata Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> flirted with collapse.

China highlighted a raft of barriers it said had been erected to protect 
foreign firms from its exports.

The commerce ministry said 2016 saw 27 countries and regions impose 119 
separate trade policies against China, to a value of $14.34bn, up 76% from the 
previous year.

Twenty-one countries and regions took 49 remedies against Chinese steel, which 
it said cost $7.9bn, up 63.1% from 2015.
 