
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has doubled 
down on his plans to transform US trade policy, picking a longtime China critic 
and protectionist to be America’s next chief trade negotiator.


Robert Lighthizer, 69, has advocated for increasing tariffs and repeatedly 
criticisedChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for failing to adhere 
to international trade practices, saying tougher methods were needed to change 
the system.

The move is likely to further alarm Beijing, where state-controlled media said 
on Wednesday“Trump is just fixated on trade” 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1026989.shtml> and warned the president 
elect “not try to boss China around” on economic and security issues.

'Brutal, amoral, ruthless, cheating': how Trump's new trade tsar sees China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
“May the arrogant Americans realise that the United States of America is 
perhaps just a shooting star in the ample sky of history,” said an editorial in 
the Communist party-affiliated Global Times newspaper.

It follows the selection by Trump last month of Peter Navarro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
 to lead a new presidential office for US trade and industrial policy. Navarro 
has previously described China’s government as a “despicable, parasitic, 
brutal, brass-knuckled, crass, callous, amoral, ruthless and totally 
totalitarian imperialist power”.

Trump has packed his cabinet with tycoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
, vowed to renegotiate trade deals and crack down on what he says are China’s 
unfair policies.

Lighthizer is a former Reagan-era trade official and had a previous stint in 
theOffice of the US Trade Representative <https://ustr.gov/>, where he 
travelled the world negotiating deals to curb steel imports. He then went on to 
a career as a trade lawyer, representing giants such as US Steel Corp working 
to fend off foreign imports.

In 2011, he wrote in an opinion piece 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2011/may/9/donald-trump-is-no-liberal-on-trade/>
 for the Washington Times: “How does allowing China to constantly rig trade in 
its favour advance the core conservative goal of making markets more efficient? 
Markets do not run better when manufacturing shifts to China largely because of 
the actions of its government.”

Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>
While less prone to bombast than Navarro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
, he and Lighthizer share the view that China’s economic policies are 
fundamentally flawed. “Years of passivity and drift among US policymakers have 
allowed the US-­China trade deficit to grow to the point where it is widely 
recognised as a major threat to our economy,”Lighthizer wrote 
<http://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/6.9.10Lighthizer.pdf>. “Going forward, 
US policymakers should take these problems more seriously, and should take a 
much more aggressive approach in dealing with China.”

Many policies Lighthizer has advocated are the same that experts worry will 
spark a trade war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/10/china-trade-war-trump-tariffs-exports>
 between the world’s two largest economies, and he joins an economic team 
disposed to taking a hard line with China.

Trump said Lighthizer would “fight for good trade deals that put the American 
worker first”. “He will do an amazing job helping turn around the failed trade 
policies which have robbed so many Americans of prosperity,” Trump said in 
announcing Lighthizer’s return to the trade office after a three-decade absence.

Shen Dingli, the head of the centre for American studies at Shanghai’s Fudan 
University. “Everyone needs to calm down and be tranquil and allow 
international organisations like the World Trade Organisation to resolve issues.

“As long as China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> isn’t breaking the 
rules, it has nothing to fear from America’s hard line.”

But those rules may be set to change as Trump reshapes economic policies. He 
hassaid he will withdraw from the Trans Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
, a signature trade deal of Barack Obama’s presidency, on his first day in 
office.

Louis Kuijs, the head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics and a former 
senior China economist at the World Bank, said: “There is almost no guessing, 
economic policy under Trump will become more nationalistic and more 
interventionist. It’s very clear their policies will be especially tough on 
China.”


Trump will be much more involved in the minutia of trade policy, Kuijs said, a 
dramatic shift away from the past three administrations which generally saw 
free trade as something beneficial to the economy and where presidents simply 
set the broad strokes of policy.

“The Trump administration will put very little effort into multilateral trade 
agreements,” Kuijis added. “It will be hard to sit around a table with Trump’s 
team and agree on mutually beneficial deals.”

His appointment still needs to be confirmed by the Senate, and Orrin Hatch, 
the Republican head of the finance committee,said he 
<https://www.ft.com/content/e1487162-d170-11e6-9341-7393bb2e1b51> looked 
“forward to a vigorous discussion of Bob’s trade philosophy and priorities”.

Additional reporting by Christy Yao.
 