
One warm April weekend, Chloë Sevigny arranges a boot sale in the heart of 
Manhattan’s East Village. She empties her wardrobe, batches up her belongings 
and operates the cash register on the corner of Avenue C. Vintage clothes, hats 
and shoes: they all have to go. The actor is embarking on a spot of 
spring-cleaning, shedding some of the baggage from her own wild years. In so 
doing, she is maybe shedding a piece of New York history as well.

In the early 1990s, the grungy East Village was Sevigny’s natural habitat, her 
happy hunting ground. She first came here as a callow Catholic teenager and was 
adopted by the freaks, geeks and skaters who haunted the neighbourhood around 
Tompkins Square Park. These streets defined her and she, in turn, defined them. 
She was the ingénue turned model turned indie mainstay; “the coolest girl in 
the world”, according toJay McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jay-mcinerney>, who trailed her around town 
for a 1994 New Yorker profile 
<http://longform.org/stories/chloes-scene-jay-mcinerney>. Since then, the 
district and its muse appear to have outgrown each other.

‘Those in power are fully aware of the sexism’: readers on working in film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/those-in-power-are-fully-aware-of-the-sexism-readers-on-working-in-film>
“The East Village, it’s lost,” Sevigny says with a snort. “Have you seen Astor 
Place? Starbucks, Citibank, Kmart, and that’s about it. Some of the streets are 
still holding out – you can still find a few of the old mom-and-pop stores. The 
avenues? Forget it. They’re gone for good.” She is only 41, but speaks like an 
old-timer, casting her eyes back to a sepia-toned era.

The boot sale has been busy, which means Sevigny has been stuck on the till. 
She arrives 15 minutes late at the wood-panelled hotel lobby, where an open 
fire blazes in the grate and wedding guests gather for formal photographs by 
the hearth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcffe7d03522dc73c3800d2e3d39d6ca00128b288%2F82_575_4968_6207%2F4968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcffe7d03522dc73c3800d2e3d39d6ca00128b288%2F82_575_4968_6207%2F4968.jpg>
 Dress and boots: LRS. Bow tie blouse (top): Philosophy di Lorenzo Serafini. 
Styling: Priscilla Kwateng. Hair: Jeff Francis. Makeup: Tsipporah Liebman. 
Photograph: Jody Rogac for the Guardian 
We find a quiet spot in the corner and Sevigny whips off her sunglasses, 
smooths down her print dress and dips instantly into conspiratorial 
conversation. She is talking about the sale, her friends, her new base in 
Brooklyn, just across the East river. She is hard not to warm to, jumping from 
topic to topic. Her voice is as low and hardboiled as that of a film noir femme 
fatale, but her freewheeling air is pure 1930s screwball.

I’m guessing she moved out because the new-look Manhattan was not to her 
taste, but Sevigny says this was not quite the case. “I got out, in all 
honesty, because of rats. AfterHurricane Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-sandy>, my street was overrun 
and I couldn’t handle it. The 10th Street Association are going to hate me for 
saying that. But yes, the rats are all over the East Village, they’re in 
Tompkins Square. And I lived on the ground floor with the garden, and I could 
hear them scratching outside the window and I just couldn’t cope.” Abruptly, 
she frowns. “I read they were going to put some sterilisation, some form of 
birth control, in the poison to manage the population. So they can’t reproduce.”

But if they eat the poison, they’re dead: they can’t reproduce anyway. “They 
can, though,” she insists. “They can, because they reproduce at such a crazy 
rate. They’re always screwing. They screw when they’re dying. It’s shocking to 
me.”

So the rat eats the poison and then has a brief window of opportunity before 
the strychnine kicks in?

“Hey,” she barks, “I’m not a scientist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb413b93722eb8ebd1dffdef94c7ff990149d90fd%2F188_13_2763_1658%2F2763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb413b93722eb8ebd1dffdef94c7ff990149d90fd%2F188_13_2763_1658%2F2763.jpg>
 In Love & Friendship with Kate Beckinsale. Photograph: Westerly Films/Photoshot
In her new film, Love & Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/love-friendship-review-kate-beckinsale-devious-delight-sundance>
, Sevigny plays an American expat living in the home counties in the late 18th 
century. Mrs Alicia Johnson is the heroine’s confidante, forever in fear of 
being sent back to Connecticut by her husband, played byStephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry>. The movie is based on an 
unfinished Jane Austen novella,Lady Susan 
<http://www.pemberley.com/janeinfo/ladysusn.html>, and reunites Sevigny with 
co-star Kate Beckinsale and writer-director Whit Stillman, both of whom she 
worked with onThe Last Days Of Disco 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWRixrvgADI> back in 1998. In true Stillman 
style, Love & Friendship is a weightless and witty affair, pitting hapless, 
stuffed-shirted gentlemen against wily, capricious women as it skips between 
stately homes. Sevigny, for her part, was delighted to do it. “Not many people 
are knocking on my door to do period,” she says ruefully. “Not many people are 
knocking generally.” Her tone is drily self-deprecating, and I suspect she’s 
not being entirely serious.

I was shy back then. I was never the one doing drugs. I would just watch it 
all going on, back to being the good girl

Sevigny adores Stillman, and the two have kept in touch down the years. But on 
this occasion he did annoy her, in that her role was originally that of an 
Englishwoman and she worked hard on the accent, only to find the script being 
renosed at the very last minute. “He said, ‘Oh no, I think it will be funnier 
this way’ and I said, ‘But people are going to think I couldn’t do the accent.’ 
But he was very interested in that whole expat thing.” She pulls a face. “He’s 
the director. He’s the writer. I’m only the actor, so what do I know?”

I call Stillman later for an explanation and he insists Sevigny’s accent was 
fine, fit for purpose; it is simply that if an actor is known as coming from 
one country, the audience is constantly listening for false notes. So he 
retailored the part. “In the novel, the character is scared of being exiled to 
an English country village. Whereas here it’s Connecticut, which is an in-joke 
between us, because we both have Connecticut heritage. Mine is ancient, hers is 
more recent.”

Connecticut, Stillman adds, may be the key to the Sevigny mystique. “She comes 
from a place calledDarien <http://www.darienct.gov/>, which is the prettiest 
town in the world and incredibly affluent. But the thing to realise is that her 
father was the local art teacher, which meant her family were like the poor 
bohemians in this extremely prosperous neighbourhood. And she continues to 
carry all of that with her. These days, she’s seen as this cool New York 
hipster, but at heart she’s a nice Connecticut girl.”

Sevigny’s father died in 1996, but her mother still lives in Darien. The actor 
visits regularly, although she doesn’t much like it; again, the place is not 
what it was. “Change freaks me out,” she says. “The town used to be really 
charming. Now it’s the whole post McMansion thing, and everybody cuts down the 
trees because they don’t want to deal with the leaves. And they floodlight 
everything, and knock down the colonial homes, and put up these big, ugly, 
boxy-looking things that are very on trend.” She sighs once again, like an aged 
pioneer. “Everything used to be wilder and more romantic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe247cbe9143906e9ea2ad7c592e9f38598199c94%2F402_1078_4448_5555%2F4448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe247cbe9143906e9ea2ad7c592e9f38598199c94%2F402_1078_4448_5555%2F4448.jpg>
 Red chiffon dress: Miu Miu. Boots: LRS. Photograph: Jody Rogac for the Guardian
She was the good girl at school: acted in class productions; went to theatre 
camp every year. Then she began smoking dope and mislaid her sense of 
direction. “I didn’t want to do anything. I just wanted to smoke pot. But I 
think it’s best to get that out of your system as a teenager. I’ve known a lot 
of people who did it later and it kind of destroyed them. They weren’t much use 
after that.”

Even so, Sevigny finds herself wishing her parents had been stricter; they let 
her get away with murder. She recalls that she used to drive her Volkswagen 
camper up to rural Vermont for days on end (sometimes with friends, 
occasionally solo) and sleep every night at the side of the road. Only the 
other week, she was marvelling to her mother about how her dad had allowed it. 
But apparently he would shrug and say, “There’s more good in the world than 
bad.” She accepts, on balance, that this is probably true.

She began spending weekends in Manhattan, crash-landing at Grand Central 
station like Dorothy arriving in Oz. At 17, she was plucked off the street to 
become an intern (and occasional model) atSassy magazine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sassy_(magazine)>, now 20 years in the grave. A 
gangly gamine with full, heavy features, America’s sweetheart as painted by 
Modigliani, it was small wonder the city’s stylists all fell for Sevigny. She 
went on to appear in promos forSonic Youth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RIIEbrMXs20> and the Lemonheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/aug/26/the-lemonheads-10-of-the-best>
, and was working at the Liquid Sky boutique on Lafayette Street when her first 
film,Kids <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113540/>, was unleashed in 1995.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ea136ec6e333c75373b15845328c86b126909d0%2F498_316_2212_1327%2F2212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ea136ec6e333c75373b15845328c86b126909d0%2F498_316_2212_1327%2F2212.jpg>
 With Harmony Korine in 1996. Photograph: Catherine McGann/Getty Images 
Directed by Larry Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/film/larry-clark> and 
scripted by Sevigny’s then boyfriend,Harmony Korine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harmony-korine>, Kids cast her as 15-year-old 
Jennie, who contracts HIV from a one-night stand. At once unflinching and 
excitable, revelling in the antics of its non-professional performers, Kids 
caused an uproar and found itself slapped with a prohibitive NC-17 rating. The 
New York Times critic Janet Maslin called it “a wake-up call to the modern 
world”.

All of which must have made for a heady experience, though it seems Sevigny 
had already lived the Kids and largely flushed it from her system. “Oh, I don’t 
know,” she says. “I feel I was more shy back then. I have a friend,Rita 
Ackermann <http://www.hauserwirth.com/artists/56/rita-ackermann/biography/>, 
who’s an artist, and we were friends almost pre-Kids. And we were out the other 
night, and she was talking about me at that time and how I was never the one 
doing drugs. I would just be sitting quietly, watching it all going on. Back to 
being the good girl at school.”

Vincent enjoyed the hysteria but it was not fun for me – not then and not now

In the wake of Kids, Sevigny’s acting career took off. I loved her as the 
neighbourhood nymphet who beguiles Steve Buscemi in 1996’sTrees Lounge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lMQLclxC7bU>, and as the sombre young graduate 
drawn to the glitterball in The Last Days Of Disco. (“What’s sensational about 
Chloë is that she is always natural in the moment,” Stillman tells me. “She 
does this wonderful, expressive thing with her eyes. She’s always perfect in 
comedy. She’s always great in drama.”)

When Sevigny was Oscar-nominated for her turn in the 1999 indie drama Boys 
Don’t Cry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aOarssJWHhI>, as the girl with whom 
Hilary Swank <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hilaryswank> falls in love, it 
looked as though mainstream stardom might be hers for the taking. Sevigny 
scoffs when I say this; she doesn’t think anything is “there for the taking”. 
But the fact remains that she turned down the sidekick role taken by Selma 
Blair inLegally Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/oct/26/culture.reviews1> (“which might 
have made me some money”) and a raft of similar offers. “A few little things 
like that, more comedic, and it probably wouldn’t have hurt to have done them.” 
She wrinkles her nose. “But I was very purist back then.”

I wonder, though, how much control she exerted, particularly in those early 
days. Her attraction to controversial projects, aka her purist sensibility, has 
led her down some wild rabbit holes. Sevigny has modelled forthe US 
photographer Terry Richardson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UrbakYbzvk> 
(dressed as him, kissing him); she has worked with Larry Clark andLars von Trier
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> (on Dogville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/dec/23/best-films-noughties-dogville>
 andManderlay <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/mar/03/2>). All of 
these men have, in their time, been accused of exploiting their (invariably 
youthful, female) subjects.

“I don’t know if I’d call them exploiters,” Sevigny says carefully. “What I 
would say is that the most damaging thing about working with so-called auteurs 
is that I now have a total disdain for directors.” She grimaces. “And it’s very 
strong, very deep. It’s made me not enjoy acting so much any more. 
Writer-directors, in particular, are really hard to work with. And for so many 
years, that’s who I worked with.”

In 2003, she took a supporting role in The Brown Bunny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/dec/15/2003inreview>, which bowed out at 
the Cannes film festival to a torrent of catcalls. Notoriously, the script 
called on her to perform oral sex on Vincent Gallo, the film’s star, writer and 
director (and, reputedly, a former lover). Sevigny has saidshe has no regrets  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/03/chloe-sevigny-interview>about 
making the film, but the fallout was intense and she was caught in the 
crossfire. I’ve read that her US agency, William Morris, couldn’t drop her 
quickly enough.

This, Sevigny says, is not true at all. What happened was that her original 
representative left to become a manager and she didn’t hit it off with the 
agent who stepped in. “I mean, I really liked this new guy, but he treated me 
like a kid sister, and his tastes were different from mine, and we couldn’t 
find a dialogue. So I left,” she says flatly. “I mean, I left them. They didn’t 
fire me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93b7d26b7f4ea16668f64ed111fcb14ee8ab6eeb%2F94_528_4964_6203%2F4964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%AB%20Sevigny%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20now%20have%20total%20disdain%20for%20directors%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fchloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93b7d26b7f4ea16668f64ed111fcb14ee8ab6eeb%2F94_528_4964_6203%2F4964.jpg>
 Coat: Miu Miu. Swimsuit: Rachel Comey. Boots: LRS. Photograph: Jody Rogac for 
the Guardian 
So there were no genuine repercussions, just a lot of manufactured media 
hysteria? “Yeah,” Sevigny says. “I think Vincent is very good at whipping up 
hysteria. He enjoys all that, but it was not so much fun for me. Not fun when 
it was happening and still not so fun now. Really not.”

In any case, she claims her career did just fine in the wake of The Brown 
Bunny. She landed interesting roles where she could, and if some sneaked past 
her, well, that’s the nature of the business. Despite her aversion to 
writer-directors, she says she would like to work with Von Trier again. She 
wanted to play the Uma Thurman role inNymphomaniac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/nymphomaniac-volumes-1-and-2-von-trier-bradshaw-review>
: the wronged wife turned shrill, avenging angel. “I mean, I love Uma, she’s 
epic and I’m so glad she got that part. But yeah, I would have liked it for 
myself.”

These days, Sevigny generally prefers working in television. TV is more of a 
writer’s or producer’s medium; it clips the wings of a director and prevents 
them from behaving like tinpot dictators. In recent years, she has cropped up 
in the Netflix thrillerBloodline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bloodline>, played a lustful inmate in
American Horror Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/15/american-horror-story-box-set-review>
 and won a Golden Globe for her role as a Mormon wife inBig Love 
<http://www.hbo.com/big-love>. The latter finally earned her some money, too.

“That’s the other problem with indie movies: you’re not banking big bucks. So 
I lived cheque to cheque until Big Love came along. I keep all the stubs in the 
dresser up at my mom’s house.”

Sevigny jokes that the American indie movie industry has fallen on hard times; 
she remembers a point when she could barely move for new scripts. But the 
evidence suggests her own work rate is picking up. She was recently in Norway, 
shooting an adaptation of Snowman, a Jo Nesbø crime novel, with the Swedish 
film-maker Tomas Alfredson, who madeLet The Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/10/let-the-right-one-in-vampires-film-review>
. She’s about to make a film with director Alex Ross Perry, the man behind 
2014’sListen Up Philip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/listen-up-philip-review-jason-schwartzman-indie-romcom>
. And on top of thatshe’s directed a film 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/04/chloe-sevignys-kitty-cannes.html#>, her first, 
which will be unveiled at Cannes next week.

Kitty, Sevigny explains, is a mere six minutes long, drawn from a Paul Bowles 
short story and spinning the tale of a small girl who turns into a cat. I ask 
if she wrote the script, and she snorts with embarrassment; she can hardly 
claim credit. “Well, y’know,” she splutters, “I just, like, copied the story 
out on to the page.”

It was play. It was dressing up. I was playing parts, putting on hats. It was 
more a way of adorning myself

There was a time when Sevigny risked becoming tabloid fodder, but she has 
learned to keep her private life under wraps. She has datedJarvis Cocker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jarvis-cocker>, Jason Segel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jason-segel>, noise-rocker Matt McAuley and 
is currently linked toRicky Saiz <http://www.rickysaiz.com/home/>, a director 
of music promos. At some point she wants children, and she’d like to make some 
more decent movies. “Now I have a comfortable home that’s all paid for, it 
gives me some freedom. I figure I can do what I want.”

When Sevigny first landed in New York, she thought she would probably wind up 
working in fashion. Clothes were her first love and, after the first flush of 
fame, she was able to juggle the acting day job with a designing gig for the 
fashion brandOpening Ceremony <https://www.openingceremony.com>. “It was play,” 
she explains with a shrug. “It was dressing up. I was playing parts, putting on 
hats. So it was more a way of adorning myself. To make myself feel more 
interesting than I was.” She’s no longer sure she wants to pursue this: she has 
qualms about the fashion industry. “It’s just producing more stuff, and that’s 
always been a hard thing for me to accept. The one thing the world doesn’t 
need.”

Back in the hotel lobby, the fire has burned itself out and the wedding party 
moved on. We step out on to the bright, busy street, and Sevigny lowers her 
voice. “Watch out for the rats,” she says. Her boot sale, it transpires, goes 
on until seven that evening and she’s wanted back at the till. She explains 
that most of the clothes on the stall have seen better days. Associated with a 
particular time and place in her life, they have a slight sentimental value, 
but not much more.

“It’s stuff I’ve had for years and don’t wear any more,” she says. “And I 
quite like the thought of it finding a new home somewhere else.” Whichever side 
of the camera, whichever side of the river, I like the thought that Sevigny 
has, too.

• Love & Friendship is released on 27 May.
 