
Chris Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-coleman> is fast 
emerging as the leading contender to take over at Swansea City as the club’s 
board seek to whittle down their shortlist and step up their pursuit of the 
club’s third manager of the season. Ryan Giggs and Gary Rowett are among the 
names also under consideration, with Swansea keen to weigh up all available 
options, but Coleman ticks a number of boxes and could soon find himself at the 
centre of a club versus country tug-of-war for his services.

Bob Bradley could not escape the stigma against a US coach in British football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/28/bob-bradley-swansea-city-fired-manager-premier-league>
Swansea want to make an appointment swiftly. They have placed Alan Curtis, the 
first-team coach, and Paul Williams, the assistant manager, in charge of the 
team for Bournemouth’s visit on Saturday but hope to nameBob Bradley’s 
replacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
 in time for Tuesday’s game at Crystal Palace. At this stage Coleman, the Wales 
manager, is the clear frontrunner.

Coleman has managed in the Premier League before, Swansea is his hometown 
club, which means the 46-year-old would be a popular choice with the 
supporters, and his reputation in the game is high on the back of leadingWales 
to the European Championship semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the summer.

The situation with Coleman, however, is far from straightforward. The Football 
Association of Wales refused to grant Colemanpermission to speak to Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/hull-city-approach-chris-coleman-rejected-welsh-fa>
 in the summer and would not want to lose their manager halfway through their 
qualification campaign for the 2018 World Cup.

Although Coleman stressed in September that he had unfinished business with 
Wales and was motivated by the prospect of trying to take his country to the 
2018 finals in Russia – his contract expires at the end of the qualification 
campaign – he also admitted managing in the Premier League once more.

Coleman did not feel strongly enough about pursuing Hull’s interest to rock 
the boat with the FAW, yet it is unclear whether he would take the same view if 
Swansea came calling and put together a financial package that would be well 
beyond what the governing body could offer.

Giggs, Coleman’s former Wales team-mate, is also under consideration. Huw 
Jenkins, the Swansea chairman, is a strong admirer of the former Manchester 
United player, who missed out on the Swansea job when Bradley was appointed. 
Yet Stephen Kaplan and Jason Levien, the Welsh club’s majority shareholders, 
may need persuading about the merits of turning to a man with no managerial 
experience. It is also unclear how Giggs would feel about taking a position he 
recently missed out on, one that represents a bigger challenge now than when he 
was interviewed in October.

Rowett, who was sacked by Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
 a fortnight ago with the side seventh in the Championship, fits the old 
Swansea prototype of a young, ambitious manager seen as having a promising 
future, but he has no Premier League experience and it would be a leap of faith 
to ask him to turn round the fortunes of a club that sits second from bottom in 
the Premier League table, four points and 16 goals short of safety.
 