
Representatives for Chris Brown remain hopeful the R&B singer will be allowed 
to tour Australia, despite the immigration minister,Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, saying the 
government intended to deny him a visa.

Chris Brown denied visa to tour Australia on character grounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/chris-brown-denied-visa-to-tour-australia-on-character-grounds-reports>
Dutton on Sunday released a statement saying Brown, who was convicted of a 
2009 assault on his then girlfriend, Rihanna,had to prove why he should be 
allowed into the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/chris-brown-denied-visa-to-tour-australia-on-character-grounds-reports>
.

“I can confirm that a notice of intention to consider refusal has been 
issued,” the statement said. “People to whom these notices are issued have 28 
days to present material as to why they should be given a visa to enter 
Australia.

“Decisions on whether a visa will or will not be issued are made after that 
timeframe and consideration of the material presented to the Department of 
Immigration and Border Protection,” it said.




Brown was due to visit Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth in December as 
part of the One Hell of a Nite tour. Tickets for the gigs went on sale on 
Monday.

His Australian tour representatives, Castor and Ford tours, remained hopeful 
that the event would go on as planned.

“Contrary to media reports, Chris Brown’s request to enter Australia on tour 
has not been denied. This request is currently being considered by the office 
of the immigration minister,” a spokeswoman said.

“We respect their right to review this request and have faith that a decision 
will be made with the full consideration of his continued personal growth, 
ongoing philanthropic endeavours and desire to perform for his fans,” she said. 
“Since 2009,Chris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> has 
visited Australia on two separate occasions and is looking forward to returning 
in December.”

It is unusual for visas to be granted in high-profile cases after a notice of 
intention has been issued. The UK has recently denied him a visa, and the 
government of New Zealand has indicated he will not be allowed there, either.

Brown, who has a string of violent incidents behind him but has managed to 
avoid jail time, says he has reformed his bad boy ways.

A GetUp petition calling for Brown to be denied 
<https://www.getup.org.au/campaigns/surge/australians-say-no-to-violence/no-chris-brown-you-re-not-welcome-in-australia>
 a visa in order to send the message that domestic violence will not be 
tolerated, had more than 14,100 signatures by Monday afternoon.

 * This story was amended on 29 September to remove a reference to posts on 
social media attributed to Chris Brown. The posts were not on his official 
pages.  