
Christine Lagarde has survived as managing director of the International 
Monetary Fund <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf>, which is clearly what 
thecourt in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/christine-lagarde-avoids-sentence-despite-guilty-verdict-in-negligence-trial>
 wanted. The intention was to wound rather than to kill, to embarrass the 
former French finance minister but leave her in place.

Christine Lagarde avoids sentence despite guilty verdict in negligence trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/christine-lagarde-avoids-sentence-despite-guilty-verdict-in-negligence-trial>
The court has got its way but at some cost, because it would be naive to 
imagine that Lagarde has not suffered damage as a result of the trial. It will 
make her job tougher because she will find it more difficult to command respect 
when the IMF is taking decisions. It will lay her open to the charge that she 
is a member of the global elite, living by different rules to everybody else.

As one IMF observer put it: “Her support on the board will be narrower and 
more contingent. It will be harder for her to stand up to the Europeans over 
debt relief to Greece because the Europeans are going to be the ones keeping 
her in her job.”

In different circumstances, the IMF’s board might have given Lagarde the push 
even though the French court decided not to impose any punishment afterfinding 
her guilty of showing negligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/christine-lagarde-avoids-sentence-despite-guilty-verdict-in-negligence-trial>
 over apayout to the businessman Barnard Tapie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/christine-lagarde-imf-chief-in-court-over-400m-payout-to-french-tycoon>
.

But the 24-strong board of the Washington-based organisation had little 
appetite for what would be a fraught selection process. The global economy has 
never really recovered from the deep financial crisis of 2008-09. There are 
fears aboutBrexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, Italian 
banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
,Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and a possible trade war 
between China and the United States afterDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> takes over at the White House 
next month.

If she had been pushed out, Lagarde would have been the second successive 
leader of the organisation to exit under a cloud.Dominique Strauss-Kahn 
resigned in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/19/dominique-strauss-kahn-resigns-imf>
 after being put on trail in New York City for attacking a maid in his hotel 
room. To misquote Oscar Wilde, to lose one managing director may be regarded as 
a misfortune, to have lost two would have looked like carelessness. The IMF 
board did not want to give the impression that it had chosen the wrong person a 
second time.

Lagarde had three things going for her. She is well liked in Washington and 
the IMF’s staff is loyal to her. Second, there has been something of a show 
trial about the legal proceedings in Paris. Even the prosecution admitted that 
the evidence against the former French finance minister was flimsy. It would 
have been a different matter had the court imposed a prison sentence, but there 
was never the remotest prospect of that. Significantly, the French government 
said at the trial’s conclusion that it retained confidence in her.


Finally, a decision to oust Lagarde would have resulted in considerable 
pressure on the IMF’s European shareholders to support a replacement nominated 
by a developing country. There would be two obvious non-European candidates:
Agustin Carstens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/03/mexico-contingency-plan-donald-trump-presidency>
 of Mexico, the newly appointed managing director of the Bank for International 
Settlements, and Raghuram Rajan, who recently stepped down as the central bank 
governor of India. The IMF’s leading European shareholders are keen to avoid 
that battle for as long as possible.

So Lagarde survives, still maintaining that she did nothing wrong, pledging to 
get back to work, but a little diminished nonetheless.
 