
The new minister for women, Michaelia Cash, has indicated that US singer Chris 
Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> may not be allowed into 
Australia due to assault convictions stemming from a domestic violence incident.

Chris Brown must be denied entry to Australia, says activist petition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/23/chris-brown-must-be-denied-entry-to-australia-says-activist-petition>
In 2009, Brown pleaded guilty to assault charges after attacking his then 
girlfriend, pop starRihanna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna>.

Cash, who was appointed as the minister for women on Monday, intimated that 
Brown would be denied a visa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/23/chris-brown-must-be-denied-entry-to-australia-says-activist-petition>
 for an upcoming tour of Australia on character grounds.

“I can assure you that the minister for immigration and border protection will 
be looking at this very, very seriously,” Cash said. “I am clearly not going to 
pre-empt a decision by the minister, however, I can assure you what my strong 
recommendation would be.”

Cash was in Melbourne with the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, heads of the 
Council of Australian Governments (Coag) advisory council, Australian of the 
year Rosie Batty, and former Victorian police chief Ken Lay, to announce$100m 
worth of anti-domestic violence measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/malcolm-turnbull-announces-new-strategies-to-tackle-domestic-violence>
.

“People need to understand if you are going to commit domestic violence and 
then you want to travel around the world, there are going to be countries that 
say to you ‘You cannot come in because you are not of the character we expect 
in Australia,’ and certainly, without pre-empting the decision of the minister, 
I can assure you it is something that the minister is looking at,” Cash said, 
referring to the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, who has ultimate say in 
the decision to deny visas on character grounds.

On Friday, advocacy group GetUp created an online petition 
<https://www.getup.org.au/campaigns/surge/australians-say-no-to-violence/no-chris-brown-you-re-not-welcome-in-australia>
 calling on Dutton to deny Brown a visa. By Thursday morning, about 9,700 
people had signed it.

“If we stand by and do nothing while he performs around the country … we are 
implicitly sending the message that if you brutally beat a woman, in a short 
amount of time you will be forgiven, or even celebrated,” the petition said.


Tyler, the Creator cancels Australian tour after visa ban campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/10/us-rap-artist-tyler-the-creator-cancels-australian-tour-after-visa-ban-campaign>
Brown’s planned December tour would take in shows in New Zealand, but his past 
conviction means he will have to apply for a special visa to get into the 
country.

Brown, who was sentenced to five years’ probation for assaulting Rihanna in 
2009, has visited Australia twice since the sentencing, in 2011 and 2012.

In February, boxer Floyd Mayweather was denied a visa to enter Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/04/floyd-mayweather-australia-visa-delay>
 due to his criminal record. He had been jailed in 2012 for assaulting his 
ex-partner in front of their children.


Cash referred to Mayweather’s visa denial as an example of the government not 
being “afraid to say no”.

“I don’t believe we are afraid to exercise that discretion,” she said.
 