
The US singer Chris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> has 
had his visa application to tour in Australia formally denied on character 
grounds, the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, has confirmed.

Chris Brown should not be allowed into Australia, says minister for women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/chris-brown-should-not-be-allowed-into-australia-says-minister-for-women>
Brown pleaded guilty to attacking his then girlfriend, the pop singer Rihanna, 
in 2009.

The performer was issued with a formal notice that his visa application would 
be denied on Friday night, Dutton said. He has 28 days to appeal.

“People to whom these notices are issued have 28 days to present material as 
to why they should be given a visa to enter Australia,” the minister said. 
“Decisions on whether a visa will or will not be issued are made after that 
timeframe and consideration of the material presented to the Department of 
Immigration and Border Protection.”

On Thursday the newly appointed women’s minister, Michaelia Cash, indicated 
that Brown would not be let in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/chris-brown-should-not-be-allowed-into-australia-says-minister-for-women>
. “I can assure you that the minister for immigration and border protection 
will be looking at this very, very seriously,” she said.

“I am clearly not going to pre-empt a decision by the minister, however, I can 
assure you what my strong recommendation would be.”

The immigration minister has ultimate discretion on whether people who have 
had prior convictions can be granted a visa to enter Australia.

Cash said: “People need to understand if you are going to commit domestic 
violence and then you want to travel around the world, there are going to be 
countries that say to you, ‘You cannot come in because you are not of the 
character we expect in Australia,’ and certainly, without pre-empting the 
decision of the minister, I can assure you it is something that the minister is 
looking at.”

Banning Chris Brown would only distract from the fight against domestic 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/25/banning-chris-brown-would-only-distract-from-the-fight-against-domestic-violence>
Brown was due to tour Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth in December as 
part of his One Hell of a Nite tour. Tickets for the shows go on sale on 
Monday. A spokeswoman for Brown’s touring company would not answer any of 
Guardian Australia’s questions on the matter, offering only: “No comment”.

The advocacy group GetUp created an online petition this month calling for 
Brown to be banned from entering the country, saying that allowing him to tour 
would send the message that Australia does not take domestic violence seriously.

“Chris Brown is not the point of this campaign,” a senior campaigner for 
GetUp, Kelsey Cooke, told Sky News on Sunday. “It is about domestic violence 
and taking that seriously, rather than turning a blind eye.”

Cooke said the “high-profile example” of Brown having his visa denied was a 
“good sign of the times changing”.


Brown has toured in Australia twice since his conviction, in 2011 and 2012.
 