
Chris Coleman could have flat-batted the question and trotted out that tired 
cliche about looking no further ahead than the next game but the Wales manager 
knew he would have been kidding nobody. Wales are savouring the view fromthe 
top of Group B <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016-qualifiers/table>
, within touching distance of qualifying for their first major tournament since 
1958, and for the man on the verge of writing his name into the record books it 
is impossible not to dream.

Wales climb to ninth in Fifa rankings, their highest ever position
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/wales-climb-ninth-fifa-rankings-highest-ever-position>
“I don’t actually think about going down in history. I only allow myself to 
think what it would be like if we were playing in a full house at the Stade de 
France,” Coleman says. “I was out there watchingBelgium beat France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/07/marouane-fellaini-france-belgium-friendly>
 and I thought: ‘What I would give to be here with Wales.’ We know what our 
fans are like. We would take thousands. I do think like that and I can’t help 
it. I am a human being and you can’t help but imagine what it would be like.”

Nothing, however, is being taken for granted. Wales take on Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cyprus> in the sweltering heat of Nicosia 
on Thursday night before hosting Israel in Cardiff on Sunday and Coleman has 
been involved in football long enough to recognise the perils of getting into a 
discussion on the six points in 72 hours that would seal qualification for Euro 
2016 with two fixtures to spare.

At the same time the former Fulham manager can be forgiven for allowing his 
mind to wander during a friendly in Paris on a Sunday afternoon, especially 
when the path to France for Wales seems like the road to redemption for him.
Sacked by Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/04/chris-coleman-coventry-city-sacked>
 in 2010, Coleman was working in the Greek second division when the Wales job 
became available in such tragic circumstances followingthe death of Gary Speed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/nov/27/wales-manager-gary-speed>, 
his friend and former international team-mate, in November 2011.

The response to Coleman’s appointment was lukewarm at best. “A lot of people 
didn’t want me. I think there is also the Swansea-Cardiff thing, so a lot of 
people will never like me – I understand the geography behind it,” says 
Coleman, who was born in Swansea and played for the club. “It took me a lot of 
time as well to really man up and start doing things how I wanted to do it. I 
was doing things the way I thought Speedy wanted. I got burnt badly by that and 
slowly it has gone well since.”

The first few years were tough. There was a humiliating 6-1 defeat in Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/11/wales-serbia-world-cup-qualifier-report>
 in September 2012 and 12 months later Coleman was caught up in an 
embarrassment of a different kind afterhe lost his passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/05/chris-coleman-wales-macedonia-passport>
 before a game in Macedonia and was unable to fly out with the team. Even this 
campaign started with boos when Andorra took the lead and Wales risked becoming 
the first team to fail to beat them in 45 competitive games until Gareth Bale – 
who else? –scored late on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/09/andorra-wales-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
.

Everything, however, has spectacularly clicked into place for Coleman and 
Wales since, culminating in thatmemorable 1-0 victory over Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/12/wales-belgium-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
 at a raucous Cardiff City Stadium in June, when Bale’s goal opened up a 
three-point lead at the top of the group and made a nation believe something 
truly special was happening.

Ranked 117th in the world four years ago, when they were sandwiched between 
Haiti and Grenada,Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> are now 
ninth. Optimism abounds and Coleman, pointing to the “Together Stronger” 
marketing slogan that has become much more than a throwaway line, is keen to 
stress that it has been a collective effort. What he finds hard to accept, 
however, is the idea that anyone and everyone can lay claim to relighting the 
flame of Welsh football.

“Even when Wales are in the top 10 in the rankings and top of the group with 
four games to play, I still see certain people want to take credit for things – 
people who haven’t been with us for a long time,” Coleman says. “I never saw 
anybody wanting a piece of it when we weren’t winning. I never saw anybody 
stepping forward saying: ‘I am responsible for this’ when we lost 6-1 to 
Serbia. I never saw anybody say: ‘It is down to me’ when we finished fifth in 
the last campaign. Now it has been reversed and we are top – we still haven’t 
qualified but good things are happening – and certain people want to take a 
little stake. Let them get on with it.”

It is tempting to wonder if Coleman is referring to Bobby Gould, and possibly 
John Toshack as well, given that both men managed Wales and have recently 
spoken about their part in the nation’s emergence from the wilderness. “Just 
take a look. I am not going to mention names,” Coleman says. “It doesn’t make 
me angry. It makes me laugh how people quickly jump on a bandwagon where not so 
long ago everyone was under the radar.”

What is indisputable is that Coleman has rebuilt his own managerial reputation 
after losing his way following such a promising start at Fulham. His dismissal 
at Coventry was a particularly low ebb. “I could sit here and tell you a story 
about Coventry and how they let me down financially, not me personally but 
investing in players like we agreed, but when I really think about it, it’s a 
sob story. Whatever they did, that was up to them. I shouldn’t have let that 
affect me, and I did,” he says.

“I then went to Larissa in Greece, thinking they were going to be in the Super 
League. They got relegated but because of corruption they said they were going 
to retain their status. But when I got there, there were three different court 
hearings and eventually they did get relegated. So from three years previously 
being in the Premier League, I was in the second division in Greece. You think: 
‘How does that happen? Three years ago I was manager of Fulham against 
Chelsea.’”

Gareth Bale will be stronger for his Real experiences, says Wales manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/26/gareth-bale-real-madrid-wales-euro-2016>
In many ways Coleman and Wales have helped to put each other back on the 
football map. Older and wiser, Coleman says he has “matured more in this job 
than in any other” and he also talks about how he has learned to manage the 
balancing act between home life – he got married to Charlotte Jackson, the Sky 
Sports presenter, in May and they have an eight-month-old son together – and 
football.

“Through experience I try as much as I can not to let the football side of it 
dictate my happiness, whereas maybe once upon a time it did a lot more,” he 
says. “If I had done that in my first campaign, God knows where I would have 
ended up. There were a lot of bad times and bad defeats. I tried to stay as 
stable as I can. Don’t get me wrong, I do go into fight mode, Charlotte will 
tell you building up to a camp that my mood changes and my demeanour changes. I 
can’t help that. But as much as I possibly can I try to hang on to a little bit 
of normality.”

While the majority of the Welsh public have now warmed to Coleman, he knows 
from the ambassadorial work that comes with the job that he is fighting a 
losing battle with some die-hard Cardiff fans. “In most cases 99% of people are 
fantastic. But we have been to one or two places where there has been an 
element within the establishment who have been looking at me as if I have 
stolen their children,” Coleman says, smiling.

“I get the Swansea-Cardiff thing, I was a Swansea player, I loved playing 
against Cardiff. But when I played for Wales and played with Jason Perry or 
Nathan Blake, I never saw them as blue and white and me as black and white. We 
were playing for Wales, that was all finished, and it was all about getting a 
result. But some people will never ever get over that unfortunately and that is 
a shame for them.”

It is a measure of how much Coleman has turned things around that his own 
future, and whether he stays on for the 2018 World Cup qualification campaign, 
is now high on the agenda. “I never played in a World Cup. I wasn’t good 
enough. I never played in aEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship>. I wasn’t good 
enough. So to have the opportunity and to have a crack at that, I think it 
would be difficult for me not to [take it], if I am honest,” he says. “But 
because there is so much at stake right now, I haven’t even thought that far.”
 