
Australian activist group GetUp has called on the immigration minister to bar 
US musicianChris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> from 
entering the country due to his conviction for assault.


Ink stink: why Chris Brown's Venus de Milo tattoo might end in a Greek tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/aug/28/chris-brown-tattoo-head-venus-de-milo>
GetUp launched an online petition 
<https://www.getup.org.au/campaigns/surge/australians-say-no-to-violence/no-chris-brown-you-re-not-welcome-in-australia>
 requesting immigration minister Peter Dutton refuse the Grammy-winning 
singer-songwriter entry when his One Hell of A Nite tour visits Australia in 
December.

Brown, 26, was sentenced to five years’ probation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/25/rihanna-chris-brown-sentence>, 
one year of domestic violence counselling, and 180 days of community labour for 
assaulting his then-girlfriend Rihanna in 2009. Since then, he was implicated in
an alleged assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/05/chris-brown-accused-of-fight-during-basketball-game-in-las-vegas>
 during a basketball game in May, andnarrowly escaped a prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/17/chris-brown-bodyguard-skip-prison-sentence-assault>
 over another assault in Washington in 2014.

Allowing the tour to go ahead would send the implicit message that “if you 
brutally beat a woman, in a short amount of time you will be forgiven, or even 
celebrated,” the GetUp petition states.


“Chris Brown is an extremely influential figure, particularly among young 
people. Allowing his entry into Australia sends the message that the Turnbull 
government does not place significant weight and condemnation on men’s violence 
against women.”

The group speculates that Brown’s conviction of felony assault means he is in 
breach of the Australian visa character test for having “a substantial criminal 
record”.

But Brown has already performed to Australian audiences since his conviction, 
opening his 2011 concert tour F.A.M.E. with shows in Adelaide, Melbourne, 
Sydney and Brisbane.

Brown’s record label in Australia and Australian immigration has been 
contacted for comment.

Greg Hunt accuses GetUp of 'ignoring the truth' in its Great Barrier Reef 
lawsuit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/09/greg-hunt-accuses-getup-of-ignoring-the-truth-in-its-great-barrier-reef-lawsuit>
Brown has also announced a concert in New Zealand, where he performed two 
sold-out shows in 2008. New Zealand immigration told theNew Zealand Herald 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/entertainment/news/article.cfm?c_id=1501119&objectid=11514541>
 while they have not yet received any application from Brown, he would be 
ineligible to be granted a visa in light of his having beenbarred from the 
United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/08/chris-brown-denied-uk-visa-rihanna>
 in 2010, although exceptions to this rule are sometimes granted.

A poster promoting Brown’s concert bearing the sticker “I beat women” was 
spotted in Melbourne 
<http://junkee.com/which-one-of-you-clever-melburnians-did-this-to-chris-browns-new-tour-poster3/65948>
 this week.
 