
Neither Chris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> nor his 
bodyguard will go to jail in connection with their assault of a man in October 
2013. Although bodyguard Christopher Hollosy was convicted of misdemeanour 
assault and Brown pleaded guilty to misdemeanour assault and was sentenced to 
time served, a Washington, DC, superior court has ruled that they will not have 
to serve any more time behind bars.

On 16 December, Judge Patricia Wynn sentenced Christopher Hollosy to 90 days 
in jail for his misdemeanour assault of Parker Adams outsideWashington’s W Hotel
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/02/chris-brown-pleads-guilty-washington-assault>
. But Wynn also suspended the sentence, meaning that Hollosy remains free 
unless he violates his one-year probation. Brown was also spared jail time: he 
pleaded guilty to the samecharge in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/02/chris-brown-pleads-guilty-washington-assault>
, receiving a sentence of time served.

Brown and Hollosy both reportedly punched Adams when the fan tried to take a 
photo with the singer. “I’m not down with that gay shit,” Brown allegedly told 
Adams, according to a police report. Adams was later treated for a fractured 
nose.

“This all started over a photograph. Something went wrong,” prosecutor Kendra 
Briggs told theWashington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/crime/chris-browns-bodyguard-sentenced-to-probation-community-service-in-13-assault/2014/12/16/6fc8aec4-8561-11e4-b9b7-b8632ae73d25_story.html>
. For Brown, the stakes were high: he is still on probation for his 2009 
assault of Rihanna. Hollosy asked for special dispensation from the judge, 
given that he had no prior criminal record and that he had recently been 
injured in a car crash. “We acknowledge what happened in this case,” his lawyer 
said.

In addition to the criminal case, Adams also launched a civil suit against 
Brown and Hollosy, seeking $3m (£1.9m) in damages. They settled for a reported 
$100,000 (£64,000) in October.
 