
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> is a time for 
joy, celebration and bringing together family and friends to share this 
merriment. While taking nothing away from this much needed festivity, spare a 
thought for those who are less advantaged – particularly those with mental 
health problems.




Mental illness transcends all ages and backgrounds. Almost one in four adults 
have a mental illness at some point in their lives, such as stress, anxiety, 
depression or psychosis.

An individual’s emotional health can also have a great impact on physical 
health, and poor mental health can lead to problems such asalcohol and drug 
abuse <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substance_abuse>. 

And so, at a time when the rest of the nation is busy celebrating, there are 
many who just cannot, rather than will not, be able to do so because of their 
mental ill health. Indeed their inability to join in on the fun can exacerbate 
their isolation.

Loneliness at Christmas: how are you tackling it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/13/loneliness-at-christmas-how-are-you-tackling-it>


The environment we live in plays a crucial role in the genesis of mental 
illness. Austerity is certainly not good for mental health; it affects those in 
lower income brackets, and those at particular risk of mental disorders, the 
hardest. Public spending cuts have hit some of the most vulnerable sections of 
society – those in receipt of social care or on pension credits, and disabled 
and unemployed people.

So where might someone go, if their mental health is failing? NHS 
commissioning for mental health services has been nothing short of a disaster 
and an abject failure in many places.

The Independent Mental Health Services Alliance found that high demand and 
mounting financial constraints has resulted in theaverage deficit of NHS mental 
health trusts increasing by 6.3% 
<http://www.imhsa.org.uk/policy-press/10-press-releases/36-new-research-reveals-financial-pressure-on-mental-healthcare-and-need-for-nhs-and-independent-sector-to-work-together>
 over the last two years. The King’s Fund concluded in its analysis of services 
across England thataround 40% of mental health trusts experienced a cut in 
income in 2013-14 and 2014-15 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/mental-health-services-patient-care>
.

A leaked report by a government taskforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/mental-health-services-crisis-britain-revealed-leaked-report>
 uncovered the scale of the crisis in England’s mental health services..

But here’s the double whammy. In austere times, commissioners do not pump more 
money into the system; rather they tend to raid mental health budgets to plug 
the growing deficits in the acute hospital sector.

Despite the crucial importance of mental health services, they have always 
been the poor relation in any health system in general and the NHS in 
particular. These services, which are underfunded, demoralised and struggling 
with demand, are not to be seen and preferably not to be heard.

This may sound dramatic, but the reality is that there has been long-term 
neglect in addressing the many problems that most NHS mental services and their 
patients are faced with – access to timely appointments, access to local beds, 
services that are joined up and in one place like other NHS services are, and 
enough doctors and nurses in the system. The list goes on.

The scale of the mental health challenge has been underestimated. NHS England 
has set out its plan for achieving recommendations made in itsFive Year Forward 
View for Mental Health 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 (pdf) to improve mental healthcare by 2020-21. It has committed to 
transforming mental health services with an extra £1bn a year. Those at the 
coalface know this is yesterday’s money – demand is ever increasing, and the 
historic deficit in funding can only be addressed if politicians and senior 
managers can have frank conversations.

My Christmas shift showed me the human connection behind medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/19/christmas-shift-human-connection-behind-medicine>
Back to Christmas then. Though this is a challenging time for those with 
mental illnesses, statutory and voluntary organisations are there to support 
these individuals and therefore it is vitally important to ask for help.

Despite the pressures on the system, services are there for those who need 
urgent help or are facing a crisis – the doors won’t close to them.

And for those with less serious issues, there are measures that can be taken 
without resorting to statutory and voluntary services. Family, friends and 
individuals can watch out for abnormal behaviour, such as panic attacks, and 
try to restore calmness by getting away from noisy, busy places and doing 
breathing exercises.

Avoid having an argument, the tension will almost certainly ease.

Finding a place for shelter, a warm meal, and ensuring youngsters are 
protected are not impossible goals, though at times it might seem like that.


Depression and stress can make one unnecessarily pessimistic, although simple 
measures such as not indulging in alcohol and drugs or spending within means 
can reduce the plight of those who are not in a good place.

An uplifted spirit will bring back that joy and hope, and trigger off a 
feelgood factor that can be the springboard to happiness. Good mental health 
brings with it a whole lot of goodies in Santa’s stocking, because after all, 
physical fitness and wealth are meaningless without it. And let’s hope Santa 
has something for struggling mental health services.



Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 