
Las Vegas police are investigating an allegation of battery against R&B singer 
Chris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown>.

Authorities received a call shortly before 10.30am Saturday about the alleged 
battery at the Palms casino resort, Lt Jeff Goodwin said. A police statement 
Saturday evening said an altercation took place in a room at the resort where a 
party was taking place.

“An altercation took place in the room over a cellphone when the victim went 
to take a picture of 26-year-old recording artist Chris Brown,”Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> police said in the statement. 
“The victim was alleged to have been battered by Brown, who at the same time 
took her cellphone.”

Detectives tried to speak with Brown at his hotel room, but were initially 
barred entry and eventually learned that the singer had left before police 
arrived.

After “a verbal altercation”, the police continued, “the victim was escorted 
out of the room by private security and into the hallway”. The woman “appeared 
to have minor injuries sustained as a result of a battery”.


A crime report has been taken for misdemeanor theft and misdemeanor battery 
listing Brown as a suspect, police said.

Nicole Perna, publicist for Brown, issued a statement Saturday night calling 
the woman’s charges “unequivocally untrue”.

The woman “was escorted out of the private after party at the Palms Casino 
Resort for being disruptive and out of control”, Perna said.

“Once she was in the hallway, while waiting for Chris Brown’s security to 
bring out her phone, she had a total meltdown – throwing her purse to the 
ground and claiming that she ‘could buy everyone in the hotel’ – as witnessed 
by numerous people waiting to get into the party. The Palms Casino Resort 
security also saw her wild behavior via hotel security cameras and immediately 
came up to the hallway to escort her out of the hotel.”

“Her claim that she had her phone in her possession inside the after party and 
was able to take a photo causing an altercation with Chris Brown is a complete 
fabrication,” Perna said.

Brown performed Friday at Drai’s nightclub at the Cromwell Las Vegas, where he 
appears regularly.

Brown was freed from felony probation last year, more than six years after he 
attacked then girlfriend Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/23/chris-brown-pleads-guilty>. The 
singer pleaded guilty to felony assault in that case. In 2014, the singer plead 
guilty to assaulting a man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/02/chris-brown-pleads-guilty-washington-assault>
outside a Washington hotel and was sentenced to time served after two days in 
jail.
 