
Chris Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> has cancelled his 
tour of Australia and New Zealand seven days before his first show was due to 
take place.

Ticketek released a statement on Wednesday morning announcing the American 
singer’s cancellation.

Chris Brown denied visa to tour Australia on character grounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/chris-brown-denied-visa-to-tour-australia-on-character-grounds-reports>
Brown was told by the immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, in late September 
that his visa application would be denied unless he could show cause why it 
should not be within 28 days. It is not known whether he did so – or even if he 
applied for a visa in the first instance.

A spokeswoman for the Department of Border Control and Immigration said it 
would not discuss any material provided to the minister by either Brown or his 
representative for reasons of privacy.


Brown had applied for a work visa 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/news/national/290442/chris-brown-applies-for-nz-work-visa>
 to perform in New Zealand last week.

Tickets were still on sale for the Australian leg of the One Hell of a Nite 
tour, due to start at the Perth Arena on 9 December, as recently as Tuesday.


Brown was also due to perform at Melbourne’s Rod Laver Arena on 12 December, 
Allphones Arena in Sydney on 14 December and Brisbane Entertainment Centre on 
16 December, before a show in Auckland on 18 December.

“Mr Brown and the promoters both remain positive that the tour will take place 
in the near future,” the statementposted to Ticketek’s website 
<http://premier.ticketek.com.au/shows/show.aspx?sh=CHRISBRO15> said.


“Mr Brown wishes to express his deepest gratitude to the fans for their 
support and looks forward to a successful tour in the near future.”

Banning Chris Brown would only distract from the fight against domestic 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/25/banning-chris-brown-would-only-distract-from-the-fight-against-domestic-violence>
Refunds were offered to those who had bought tickets. Advance ticket sale 
numbers for the tour are not known.

The tour’s viability was thrown into doubt in September, when the advocacy 
groupGetUp! petitioned for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/23/chris-brown-must-be-denied-entry-to-australia-says-activist-petition>
 Brown to be refused entry to Australia over his conviction for domestic 
violence. Brown pleaded guilty to attacking his then-girlfriend Rihanna in 2009.

But GetUp! later retracted its campaign 
<https://www.getup.org.au/campaigns/surge/australians-say-no-to-violence/apology-for-some-aspects-of-the-chris-brown-campaign>
 after it was criticised for hypocrisy in failing to target other artists 
convicted of similar offences. GetUp! acknowledged it had “supported a racist 
narrative that sees men of colour unfairly targeted, and stereotyped as more 
violent than their white counterparts”.

In late September Brown tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648841918961442816> that he would be 
“more than grateful to come to Australia to raise awareness about domestic 
violence”.

The immigration minister has ultimate discretion on whether people with 
convictions can be granted a visa.

Brown has toured in Australia twice since his conviction, in 2011 and 2012.

Ticketek and Brown’s promoter have been contacted for comment.
 