
Chris Brown has left the Philippines after being stranded for three days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/chris-brown-prevented-from-leaving-manila-fraud-allegations>
 due to a fraud complaint against him for a cancelled concert last New Year’s 
Eve.

The 26-year-old R&B artist had been barred from leaving the country after 
performing at a packed concert in Manila on Tuesday. The restriction came after 
the Maligaya Development Corp alleged Brown and his promoter, John Michael Pio 
Roda, cancelled a gig after being paid in full for a $1m (£650,000) contract.

The complaint meant Brown needed emigration clearance to leave the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>. He obtained it late on Friday, 
said Elaine Tan, a spokeswoman for the immigration bureau.

His plane left at 9.04pm (1404 BST) for Hong Kong, a civil aviation authority 
spokesman, Eric Apolonio, said. He and about 10 other people were seen walking 
to the private plane at an airport hangar.

Chris Brown posts video rant while trapped in Philippines over fraud claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/chris-brown-posts-video-rant-while-trapped-in-philippines-over-claim>
Tan said the clearance was given after “verifying that Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> has no other derogatory record 
apart from the [immigration lookout bulletin]”, which had been issued on 
Wednesday.

Earlier on Friday, Brown tweeted: “This is a very serious situation and 
someone needs to be held accountable for mixing my name up in all this. I’ve 
done nothing wrong.”

He said he returned to Manila to make up for the cancelled concert. The 
initial performance was set to be at the 55,000-seat Philippine arena, operated 
by the Maligaya Corporation, which is owned by the politically influential 
Iglesia ni Cristo religious group.

The justice secretary, Leila de Lima, said on Friday that state prosecutors 
would summon Brown for a preliminary investigation into the complaint, but his 
presence at that stage could be waived. Charges will be filed in court if 
prosecutors find probable cause to charge Brown and the promoter.

In several postings on social media, Brown has addressed the travel delay. He 
pleaded in one Instagram post late on Thursday: “Please, please let me leave, 
please.”

Some of the postings have been removed. Pio Roda could not be contacted to 
address the specifics of the complaint. A cancelled concert in Hong Kong this 
week has not yet been rescheduled.
 