
The R&B singer Chris Brown was arrested on suspicion of assault with a deadly 
weapon following an hours-long standoff on Tuesday at hisLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> home, police said.


Police had been called to Brown’s home at 3am local time on Tuesday morning 
after a woman called police for assistance. The womantold the Los Angeles Times 
 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-chris-brown-gun-20160830-snap-story.html>
that Brown had pointed a gun at her before she ran away, and that later one of 
his associates asked her to sign a nondisclosure agreement.

Baylee Curran told the newspaper that she and two acquaintances were at 
Brown’s home to discuss future projects. A man Curran did not know was 
showcasing jewelry in the home, and Curran said the conflict started when she 
stopped to look at the jewelry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c521bf7b3d00a35deafabbd8d03d74664a7dec5%2F0_156_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Brown%20arrested%20on%20suspicion%20of%20assault%20after%20hours-long%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Brown%20arrested%20on%20suspicion%20of%20assault%20after%20hours-long%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c521bf7b3d00a35deafabbd8d03d74664a7dec5%2F0_156_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 A Los Angeles police department representative briefs the media as they wait 
outside the home of singer Chris Brown on Tuesday in California. Photograph: 
Bob Riha Jr/Reuters 
“I don’t know if it was Chris’ friend or how he was related, but that’s when 
he told me to back away from the diamond necklace and started cussing me out 
and calling me names,” she told the Times. “That’s when Chris pulled his gun 
and told me to ‘Get out,’ he said. ‘I’m sick of you girls, get the … out!’”

Curran and a friend ran from the home and waited by the property’s gate while 
an associate of Brown’s retrieved her phone, she said. The associate reportedly 
said he’d only give her the phone if she agreed to sign a nondisclosure 
agreement. Curran said she refused, grabbed her phone and ran to a neighbor’s 
property while the man gave chase. The neighbor called police, according to the 
Los Angeles Times.

A search warrant was served on the property just before 1pm on Tuesday, nearly 
nine hours after the 911 call was made.

Throughout the hours-long standoff, Brown posted online videos declaring his 
innocence. In one Instagram video Brown, waving a cigarette and looking at the 
camera, said if and when police obtained the search warrant, they would find 
nothing at the home. He dismissed TV reports that he was barricaded inside.

According to the celebrity news site TMZ 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/08/30/chris-brown-weapons-drugs-seized-gun-assault/>, 
police retrieved a duffel bag Brown threw out of the window of his home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab34eb47952ffd568f0de3b866532d8f48ba12f%2F0_194_7740_4644%2F7740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Brown%20arrested%20on%20suspicion%20of%20assault%20after%20hours-long%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Brown%20arrested%20on%20suspicion%20of%20assault%20after%20hours-long%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fchris-brown-police-los-angeles-home-woman-911-call-instagram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab34eb47952ffd568f0de3b866532d8f48ba12f%2F0_194_7740_4644%2F7740.jpg>
 Chris Brown performs at Drai’s Beach Club on 1 January 2016 in Las Vegas, 
Nevada. Photograph: Bryan Steffy/Getty Images 
Brown was released on $250,000 bail and is scheduled to appear in court on 20 
September, according to jail records. He awaits formal charges and will be 
arraigned in September, the Los Angeles Timesreported 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-chris-brown-gun-20160830-snap-story.html>
.

Calls to representatives for Brown were not immediately returned on Tuesday. 

Brown has denied any wrongdoing through his longtime attorney Mark Geragos, who
wrote on Twitter <https://twitter.com/markgeragos/status/770871841225269248> 
that the accusations against Brown were “demonstrably false”.

The Grammy-winning singer has had multiple run-ins with law enforcement. He 
spent six years on probation afterpleading guilty to attacking his girlfriend 
at the time, Rihanna, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/01/chris-brown-rihanna-assault> in 
2009.
 