
The former Chelsea midfielder Claude Makelele has been appointed assistant 
coach at Swansea, signing a deal until the end of the season to link up with 
his “mentor” Paul Clement, having worked with him during his playing stint at 
Chelsea and as a coach with Paris Saint-Germain.

Clement succeeded Bob Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/bayern-munich-give-swansea-permission-to-speak-with-paul-clement>
 as Swansea manager last week and immediately recruited Nigel Gibbs and Karl 
Halabi from Tottenham’s coaching staff. But the 45-year-old former Chelsea, 
PSG, Real Madrid and Bayern Munich assistant manager was keen to make another 
appointment with club stalwart Alan Curtis taking on another role.

Makelele fitted the bill despite a coaching career which has yet to hit the 
heights of his playing days.

“I am really excited to be here and I am happy to start working at Swansea,” 
Makelele said. “Paul is my mentor. He has taught me a lot of things in my time 
working with him. When I heard he was back working in the Premier League, I 
phoned him and asked if I could help him at Swansea.

“Paul has given me the opportunity to come back to the Premier League, and I’m 
very grateful because I’ve really missed it. I know him very well and he knows 
me too. I think I have a lot to give, and hopefully I can help Paul and 
Swansea.” As a player, Zaire-born Makelele almost defined the role of a holding 
midfielder in winning 71 caps for France and helping them to the 2006 World Cup 
final in Germany.

His position became known as the ‘Makelele role’ and he helped his first club 
Nantes win the Ligue 1 title and reach the Champions League semi-final. He then 
had spells at Marseille and Celta Vigo in Spain before joining Real Madrid in 
2000.

In three years at the Bernabéu he won seven pieces of silverware, including 
the Champions League and two La Liga titles.

Golden Goal: Claude Makélélé for Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur (2006) | Michael 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/golden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006>
Makelele then moved on to Chelsea – where Clement was working his way through 
the coaching ranks – and helped the Blues win two Premier League titles, two 
League Cups and the FA Cup. He left Chelsea in 2008 and spent the last three 
years of his playing career at PSG.

It was there he became Carlo Ancelotti’s assistant, a position subsequently 
taken up by Clement, before stepping into management with the French club 
Bastia in May 2014. However, he only lasted six months at the Corsican club 
before being sacked in November 2014, having won only three of his 13 games in 
charge. Makelele later took up a technical director role with Monaco.

Meanwhile, Swansea have been dealt a blow in their survival fight after the 
Wales international Neil Taylor fractured his cheekbone during training on 
Wednesday morning. The 27-year-old defender went to hospital and will require 
surgery. Reports have linked Swansea with a £5m move for Norwich’s Sweden 
defender Martin Olsson, whose contract expires in the summer. The Holland 
winger Luciano Narsingh, 26, is also expected to join for around £4m from PSV 
Eindhoven as Clement seeks to improve his squad for their relegation battle.

Swansea have conceded the most goals by a Premier League club so far this 
season – 45 in 20 games – and face a tough run of fixtures, with Arsenal, 
Southampton and Leicester City all due to visit south Wales before March, while 
their next three away games are at Liverpool, Manchester City and Chelsea.
 