
Even on the open slopes above the cliff, the air was hot and humid, making the 
steeper sections of the coast path seem more of a trudge than usual. South of 
Aberaeron, in westWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, the route was 
almost deserted – so the sensation of being watched was unexpected.

As I struggled past a tangled mass of gorse 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/gorse>, I realised that I was being 
observed by astonechat 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/s/stonechat/>
 perched on a bracken frond. My plodding approach hadn’t alarmed him enough to 
make him retreat and as I returned his gaze I realised that at least three 
others, perhaps a family, were nearby. They began to exchange the sharply 
characteristic calls that sound uncannily like two pebbles being tapped 
together, and which give the species its name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fcliffs-and-teeming-clefts-in-the-coastal-landscape-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57292d9e5159e2841ea0ed90bda35bc06c024df9%2F0_0_2000_1362%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cliffs%20and%20teeming%20clefts%20in%20the%20coastal%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fcliffs-and-teeming-clefts-in-the-coastal-landscape-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cliffs%20and%20teeming%20clefts%20in%20the%20coastal%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fcliffs-and-teeming-clefts-in-the-coastal-landscape-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57292d9e5159e2841ea0ed90bda35bc06c024df9%2F0_0_2000_1362%2F2000.jpg>
 A stonechat among the bracken, with Cardigan Bay in the background. 
Photograph: John Gilbey 
The spot I was heading for was further away than I remembered, so it was a 
relief to clamber down into the narrow valley and rest for a moment on a rock 
by the stream. The steeply dipping beds of blockymudstone 
<https://www.geolsoc.org.uk/ks3/gsl/education/resources/rockcycle/page3458.html>
 give an interesting asymmetry to this miniature canyon, with the smooth 
erosion surface on the southern side countered by jagged exposed strata to the 
north.

Clumps of thrift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/oct/19/plant-of-week-sea-pink> 
have established themselves in cracks between the bands of harder rock, while a 
diverse selection of lichen has colonised the exposed stone. At the seaward 
end, the brook feeds a small waterfall, sluicing over the rock step into a 
sheltered pool perhaps a metre deep, from which a solitary bather – or two if 
they were good friends – might watch the setting sun.

Barely a dozen metres across, the valley gives the impression of a carefully 
crafted rock garden and water feature prepared for exhibition at a show.

Thunder clouds began to bubble up inland, eventually blocking the direct 
sunshine. With regret, I headed north again across slopes swathed in bracken 
and gorse. From out across Cardigan Bay, a Hercules military transport plane 
swung idly towards the coast, spooking a group ofcurlew 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/c/curlew/>
, which lifted over the cliff edge from the foreshore, their familiar whistles 
merging with that of the turboprop engines overhead.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 