
Eighty years ago the cliff-land here was thronged with curious sightseers, 
including my grandfather and uncle who drove from St Dominic to viewthe wreck 
of the Herzogin Cecilie <http://www.marinearchaeology.org/hezogin%20cecille.htm>
 with its masts towering towards the spectators. This Finnish windjammer – a 
four-masted barque loaded with thousands of tons of grain – had reached 
Falmouth from the Boston Island anchorage in south Australia in just 86 days, 
but on the last lap towards Ipswich it foundered on theHam Stone 
<http://mapcarta.com/18766560> off Soar Mill Cove.

Hosegoods, the Plymouth grain merchants, salvaged damp wheat, and my 
grandfather bought some cheaply for delivery to Cotehele Mill via the river 
Tamar and his barge, the Myrtle. It was mixed with extra-dry Persian barley, 
made into pig and poultry meal, and sold to local farmers.

High point with a sea view
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/24/country-diary-dorset-jurassic-coast>
Later, in 1943, when Uncle Peter was in military hospital in South Africa he 
met the captain’s wife,Pamela Eriksson 
<https://openlibrary.org/authors/OL2304148A/Pamela_Bourne_Eriksson>, who had 
been on board during that fateful voyage. I have a copy of her bookThe Duchess 
<https://openlibrary.org/works/OL7534140W/The_life_and_death_of_the_Duchess>, 
published in 1958, describing that voyage and the way of life connected with 
those awesome merchant sailing ships based in the Åland islands.

Today, on a cloudy afternoon, the flattest fields are overlooked by the 
billowing air-sock ofa private airfield <http://www.boltheadairfield.co.uk/>. 
Large agricultural machinery is driven fast to cut and pick up grass in this 
rare dry interlude. A few swallows course low above patchy crops of ripening 
barley, and luxury bell tents await occupants atEast Soar 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/east-soar> with its flowery meadows, ponds, 
twittering sparrows and hedgerows of bramble flowers.

Old slate gate-posts and pillars of a restored barn are miniature versions of 
the pinnacles and jagged rocks on the cliffs aroundStarehole Bay 
<http://www.southhams.com/explore/beaches/starehole-bay> and on Bolt Head. 
Swirls of coastal mist seep upwards and across the cliff-tops wherepurple 
selfheal <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/selfheal>, yellow vetch and 
cream wood sage thrive among the intense greenness of gorse, bracken and sheep 
pasture.

Out to sea, a strip of bright sky encroaches from the south-west and casts a 
pink glow on cliffs beyond the entrance toSalcombe 
<http://www.salcombeinformation.co.uk/>. Inland, the song of skylarks is heard 
again, louder than the swish of distant sea.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 