
Ninety per cent of people living in rural and regional Australia believe they 
are already experiencing the impacts of climate change and 46% believe 
coal-fired power stations should be phased out, according to a new study.

A poll of 2,000 people conducted by the Climate Institute found that 82% of 
respondents in rural and regional Australia and 81% of those in capital cities 
were concerned about increased droughts, flooding and destruction of theGreat 
Barrier Reef <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef> due 
to climate change, and 78% of all respondents were concerned there would be 
more bushfires.

About three quarters of all respondents – 76% in capital cities and 74% in 
rural or regional areas – said ignoring climate change would make the situation 
worse and about two-thirds said they believed the federal government should 
take a leading role.
 See the full visual 
However, only a third of respondents said the federal government should be 
contributing to action on climate change.

Instead, two-thirds, (67% in capital cities and 71% in regional areas) said 
individuals should be contributing to action on climate change and about half 
said state and local governments and businesses should be contributing to 
action on climate change.

Related: Adani coalmine activists gear up to fight: ‘This will dwarf the 
Franklin blockade’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/14/adani-coalmine-activists-gear-up-to-fight-this-will-dwarf-the-franklin-blockade>

The majority of people – 59% in capital cities and 53% in regional areas – 
said solar was their preferred energy source, followed by wind and hydro.

Only 3% of respondents in the city and 4% in regional areas said coal was 
their preferred energy source.

Nicky Ison, the director of the Community Power Agency, which represents 80 
grassroots groups, said the results showed that concern about climate change 
was not limited to inner-city suburbs.

“I think there’s a misconception that concern is mainly held in the city and I 
think there are some strong voices, particularly in rural and regional 
Australia, that have exaggerated or stoked that misconception,” Ison said.

“A vocal minority gets a lot of traction, probably because they have a greater 
access to megaphones.”
 See the full visual 
Matthew Charles-Jones is a co-president of Totally Renewable Yackandandah, a 
community-run initiative that aims to make the small town, 300km north-east of 
Melbourne, entirely run on renewable power by 2022.

Charles-Jones said the group was motivated by energy security and rising 
electricity costs but members were also concerned about the effects of climate 
change.

“We have been threatened by bushfire roughly every three years for the last 
decade,” he said.

The last bushfire was in December 2015. “It’s very real for us in 
Yackandandah,” Charles-Jones said.
 