
Climate change is disrupting the seasonal behaviour of Britain’s plants and 
animals, with rising temperatures having an impact on species at different 
levels of the food chain,new research shows 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature18608>.


The result could be widespread “desynchronisation” between species and their 
phenological events – seasonal biological cycles such as breeding and migration 
– that could affect the functioning of entire ecosystems, according to the
large-scale study published this week <http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature18608> 
in the journal Nature.


It also warns of changes in the key seasonal interactions between species that 
could disrupt relationships between predators and prey and affect their 
breeding success and survival.

The study, led by Dr Stephen Thackeray from the Centre for Ecology and 
Hydrology in collaboration with 17 other organisations, analysed 10,003 long 
term phenological data sets of 812 of the UK’s marine, freshwater and 
land-based plant and animal species collected between 1960-2012 on everything 
from fish spawning to plant flowering.

The data was split into three levels of the food chain and spatially matched 
with local temperature and rainfall data, and models of seasonal timing and 
climatic variables, to show the variation in which species at different 
“trophic” levels are sensitive climate change.

“This is the largest study of the climatic sensitivity of UK plant and animal 
seasonal behaviour to date. Our results show the potential for climate change 
to disrupt the relationships between plants and animals, and now it is 
crucially important that we try to understand the consequences of these 
changes,” Thackeray said.

He said the findings highlighted the importance of managing ecosystems within 
a “safe operating space” that considered the likely impacts of projected 
climate change.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fclimate-change-is-disrupting-seasonal-behaviour-of-britains-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05dd68875ae9c54ad5d5af8abc48ceb05a0780aa%2F0_382_4800_2881%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20is%20disrupting%20seasonal%20behaviour%20of%20Britain's%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fclimate-change-is-disrupting-seasonal-behaviour-of-britains-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20is%20disrupting%20seasonal%20behaviour%20of%20Britain%27s%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fclimate-change-is-disrupting-seasonal-behaviour-of-britains-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05dd68875ae9c54ad5d5af8abc48ceb05a0780aa%2F0_382_4800_2881%2F4800.jpg>
 The UK has a rich history of biological recording by scientists and ‘citizen 
scientists’ who document the first signs of spring. Photograph: Alamy 
The study shows that seasonal events - including flowers blooming, leaves 
falling or animals hibernating - are generally more sensitive to temperature 
rises brought about by climate change than to changes in precipitation or 
snowfall.


But the “direction, magnitude and timing of climate sensitivity” varies 
significantly among species in different groups or levels of the food chain, 
the study showed.

Secondary consumers (such as predatory birds, fish and mammals) were 
consistently less sensitive to climate variations than species at the base of 
the chain (such as seed-eating birds and herbivorous insects), which were twice 
as sensitive to temperature.



Using estimates, the study predicted that by 2050, these primary consumers 
will have shifted their seasonal timing by more than twice as much as species 
at other levels of the food chain — an average of 6.2 days earlier compared to 
2.5­­–2.9 days earlier.


Many long-term ecological changes have been attributed to climate change, and 
shifts in the seasonal timing of reproduction and migration have been 
well-documented. Themost recent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/ipcc-climate-report-wildlife-impact>
 from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) found that in recent 
decades, many plant and animal species have moved their range, changed numbers 
or shifted their seasonal activities as a result of warmer temperatures.

The UK has a rich history of biological recording by scientists and “citizen 
scientists”, with data stretching to 1736 when Robert Marsham, the “founding 
father of phenology”, began recording the first signs of spring. Almost 50,000 
people across the UK are now involved with the annualNature’s Calendar survey 
<http://www.naturescalendar.org.uk/>, coordinated by the Woodland Trust, which 
provided the data the new study analysed.

Co-author Dr Deborah Hemming, from the Met Office, said: “By quantifying the 
relationships between these phenological records and climate data across the 
UK, we identify many phenological events that are extremely sensitive to 
climate variations. These provide ideal early indicators, or sentinels, for 
monitoring and responding to the impacts of climate variability and change on 
nature.”


Co-author Sian Atkinson, senior conservation advisor with the Woodland Trust, 
said: “This piece of research demonstrates how very valuable such records are 
in helping us to build a picture of the likely impacts of climate change for 
our wildlife.”

Species being disrupted by climate change

Early spider orchids and solitary miner bees
The solitary miner bee (Andrena nigroaenea) has been found to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/06/climate-change-is-disrupting-flower-pollination-research-shows>
 more affected by climate change than the early spider orchid that it 
pollinates. Although both orchids and bees are both affected by temperature 
rises, they have a greater impact on the bees, the females of which emerge 
earlier, meaning that the males are less likely visit the orchids for 
pseudocopulation.

Oak buds and winter moths
Research has shown <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1088605/> that 
an increase in spring temperatures without a decrease in the incidences of 
freezing spells in winter leads to poor synchronicity between the winter moth (
Operophtera brumata) caterpillars and the oak tree (Quercus robur) buds on 
which they feed.

Cuckoos and their host species
While the common cuckoo (Cuculus canorus) has only advanced its migration 
slightly in response to earlier springs,many of its host species 
<http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/sowb/casestudy/287> (the nests of which the 
cuckoo lays its eggs in) have begun to migrate much earlier, and are arriving 
at the breeding grounds well before the cuckoos.

 * Additional reporting by Anna Menin  