
When asked by Ellen DeGeneres what her spirit animal is, Hillary Clinton had a 
surprising answer: the elephant.

Although the symbol of the GOP, Clinton spoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWAJQEuYbTA> on the Ellen DeGeneres Show this 
May with rare passion about the need to protect real elephants from a poaching 
crisis that has killed at least 110,000 of them over the past decade, pushing 
the world’s largest land animals – especiallyforest elephants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/jul/23/forest-elephants-evidence-science-species-ivory-crisis>
 – closer to extinction.

“I love the way…the matriarch of the family looks for everybody, I just have 
such a sense of connection to elephants and it just breaks my heart that they 
are being poached and murdered and babies being left to fend for themselves,” 
Clinton said on a portion of the show that only aired on Facebook.

Clinton’s affinity for elephants is not widely known or reported. But during 
her tenure as Secretary of State in the Obama Administration, she helped bring 
the issue of global wildlife trafficking out of obscurity.


“International criminal syndicates are orchestrating the slaughter of many of 
the world’s iconic wildlife species and profiteering by marketing ivory, 
rhinoceros horn, and other wildlife parts in the U.S., Asia, and Europe,” said 
Jorge Silva, a spokesperson for the Clinton Campaign. “Many of the criminal 
syndicates have ties with, and are helping to fund, terrorist groups around the 
world, and also are engaged in human, drug, and arms trafficking.”


Experts believe that groups like the Lord’s Resistance Army, Al-Shabaab and 
even ISIS may be in partfunded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/africa-wild/2015/aug/30/case-proven-ivory-trafficking-funds-terrorism>
 by the illicit sale of ivory and other wildlife parts.

Clinton’s personal love for elephants springs out of a trip to Tanzania in 
1997 as first lady. Her daughter, Chelsea, accompanied her, and since then 
mother and daughter have shared a passion for pachyderms. During the period, 
Bill Clinton’s administration opposed any opening of the ivory trade. Despite 
this, Cites began approving one-off trades in elephant ivory in 1999, 2002 and 
2008. Experts have linked the current poaching crisis to the approval of these 
trades, especially the last one.

Clinton has also worked to combat elephant poaching through the family’s 
foundation. In 2013, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton brought together various 
conservation groups to partner on a new $80 million programme to fight elephant 
poaching through the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI).

Silva said that if elected president Clinton would amp up the fight against 
the illegal wildlife trade.

“[She will] forge partnerships with the private sector and non-profit 
community to shut down the U.S. market for illegal wildlife products; deploy 
U.S. intelligence and enforcement assets to catch and imprison the kingpins 
that are controlling this multi-billion dollar criminal enterprise; raise the 
legal penalties for illegal wildlife traffickers; and impose trade sanctions 
when appropriate on nations that fail to crack down on the illegal killing and 
marketing of wildlife and wildlife products.”

Scientists: we are 'condemning' forest elephants by ignoring evidence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/jul/23/forest-elephants-evidence-science-species-ivory-crisis>
Such a global crackdown may be necessary to save the world’s largest land 
animals from extinction. This year,the Great Elephant Census  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
– a thorough, groundbreaking survey across 18 countries – found that 
populations of savanna elephants have fallen by 30% in just seven years. The 
news was even worse than many conservationists feared. But the situation is 
even more dire for forest elephants.


Inhabiting the thick jungles of Central and West Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, forest elephants are more difficult 
to survey. But last year, scientists estimated that 65% of forest elephant have 
been slaughtered for their ivory since 2003. A number of recent studies have 
also argued that forest elephants are indeed a distinct species based on 
genetic, physical and behavioral differences.

The Trump campaign did not respond to repeated requests for its position on 
elephant conservation or the global wildlife trade, but its website mentions 
neither. This is not surprising given the website lists very few positions 
regarding any environmental issues, including making no mention of climate 
change – although Donald Trump has claimed that climate change was a hoax 
invented by the Chinese.


In 2012, media leaked photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
 of Donald Trump’s sons, Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump, taken during a big 
game hunt safari in Zimbabwe. In one image, Donald Trump Jr. stands next to an 
elephant he shot to death and holds up its severed tail. Cutting off an 
elephant’s tail is traditional in some African cultures where the hair is made 
into a bracelet.

A longtime trophy hunter, Donald Trump Jr. has stated that he would be 
interested in working in the Department of the Interior if his father is 
elected president.

“The way our society treats animals is a reflection of our humanity,” reads 
the Clinton campaign website. If elected president, Clinton also promises 
further action on wildlife and animal rights issues such as combating the 
overuse of antibiotics in farm animals, eliminating the consumption of horses 
and toughening regulations on puppy mills.

 