
What a glorious thing pressure is. In the days following their limp opening 
day loss to Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/04/usa-beaten-colombia-copa-america-jurgen-klinsmann>
, in which they saw a lot of the ball and did nothing with it, it might have 
been easy for the US’s players to succumb to the gloom engulfing all discussion 
of football in this country. Losing to Colombia caused allthe frustrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/04/us-soccer-copa-america-jurgen-klinsmann-options-colombia>
 associated with five years of halting progress under Jürgen Klinsmann to come 
suppurating out: the big off-field promises, the meager on-field outcomes, the 
enervating Jürgenvness – all hand-waving and hoping for the best – of the 
coach’s management of a playing group of inconsistent quality. The
football-supporting public was at breaking point 
<http://www.espnfc.us/united-states/story/2839714/banner-promoting-jurgen-klinsmann-firing-flies-over-us-game>
.

But succumb the team did not. Just the opposite, in fact: with their 
tournament on the line, their coach in danger of losing his job, their very 
identity as a team in question, the embarrassment of exiting a tournament on 
home soil in the first round looming, anxiety over the quality of the next 
generation of playing talent at a pitch, the public angry and impatient at the 
enduring stasis of the national team, and the future of the sport in America, 
seemingly, in the balance,the US men’s national team thrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/copa-america-usa-costa-rica-match-report>
. They delivered the kind of quick-witted, counter-punching performance that 
has been often pledged, and seldom delivered, during Klinsmann’s reign. If this 
is what this team can do with their backs to the wall, it may be wise to keep 
the wall within reach.

USA use style and guile to thrash Costa Rica in Copa América
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/copa-america-usa-costa-rica-match-report>
This was a performance that mixed the best of US football’s traditional 
combativeness with a new set of qualities: mobility, clever movement off the 
ball, width, and lethal finishing. This victory was built on more than just 
lumping the ball forward and hoping for the best; it wasn’t about big men 
crashing through or wearing the opponent down through superior physicality. 
There was genuine craft and guile to the team’s play, the goals, and the way 
they were constructed. Old Soccer, meet New Football.

There had been considerable clamor for Klinsmann to change his starting lineup 
from the 11 players who had labored through the torpor of the opening match. 
Klinsmann ignored the crowd and stuck to his convictions, convinced as he was 
that the US had in fact played well against Colombia – the two goals conceded 
aside. Does Jürgen know? On the evidence of last night, he does – because this 
was a victory built on the contributions of those most under pressure following 
the loss on Friday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D81YtZ0QQN3g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D81YtZ0QQN3g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D81YtZ0QQN3g&media=>
There were impressive displays from Gyasi Zardes and Bobby Wood, but this was 
a victory, above all, for the team’s veteran wing: if last night proves 
anything, it’s that in the US men’s national team, the old dudes are 
definitively back. Michael Bradley, who’s only 28 but has been an established 
presence in the national team for a decade, was less influential in this game 
than he had been against Colombia, but that’s a good thing, because his 
influence on Friday had been almost totally negative. Here Bradley tidied up 
his defensive game and offered small glimmers of quality going forward: his 
raking, 50-yard cross-field pass in the buildup to Wood’s goal, in particular, 
was a thing of no small beauty. 29-year-old Alejandro Bedoya brought an elastic 
enthusiasm to the wing that had been almost completely absent in the narrow, 
plodding, possession-for-possession’s-sake display the US midfield gave against 
Colombia. At his best the Nantes winger, bulge-eyed and scurry-footed in his 
darts down the flank, reminds me of a particularly well-paid marmot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fusa-costa-rica-copa-america-clint-dempsey-soccer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada992755b7e19ec601005190d655627a37c6602%2F0_71_3993_2397%2F3993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clint%20Dempsey's%20wile%20for%20USA%20in%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20shows%20old%20dudes%20do%20it%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fusa-costa-rica-copa-america-clint-dempsey-soccer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clint%20Dempsey%27s%20wile%20for%20USA%20in%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20shows%20old%20dudes%20do%20it%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fusa-costa-rica-copa-america-clint-dempsey-soccer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada992755b7e19ec601005190d655627a37c6602%2F0_71_3993_2397%2F3993.jpg>
 Graham Zusi put the icing on the cake for the US on Tuesday, with the team’s 
fourth goal. Photograph: Mike Dinovo/USA Today Sports 
Mainly, though, it was Jermaine Jones and Clint Dempsey – at 34 and 33, both 
by now authentic geriatrics – who provided the most emphatic rebuttal to the 
team’s many boo boys. FromJimmy Connors at the 1991 US Open 
<http://www.si.com/more-sports/2011/08/30/jimmy-connors> to latter Three-Peat 
Michael Jordan, Late Federer or – better still –Late Pirlo 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/104330/pirlos-renaissance>, the spectacle of 
old guys scaling the athletic heightsprovides sport with one of its most 
instantly engaging narratives.

Jones and Dempsey have a way to go before they join that august company, but 
on the evidence of Tuesday night, they’re well on the way. A chopstick in the 
spokes of any forward movement from Los Ticos’ midfield, Jones hustled 
energetically from box to box all night, sniping and swarming and harassing and 
haranguing with all the energy of an airport cabbie in a country with lax taxi 
regulations. He capped his display with a precise, first-time finish for the 
second goal, but it says everything that he created the chance, essentially, 
himself, via some determined pressing when Costa Rica had the ball and a 
lung-busting run to provide support in the final third. Never has a middle-aged 
man in dreadlocks performed better on a football field.

Dempsey, meanwhile, seemed liberated by the early penalty and produced some of 
his best moments in a US shirt throughout the first half. The formerFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> star has never been an 
out-and-out striker; even during his salad days he operated more often as a 
hybrid forward-playmaker, an all-purpose creator-in-chief with the license to 
roam across the front line and into the space behind. Klinsmann’s plan, we can 
assume, was to use him in a similar way. Against Colombia, this failed 
spectacularly. Dempsey’s creative spirit was shackled by the leadenness and 
ineptitude of those around him; eventually he was left with little option but 
to try his luck from distance. Last night, by contrast, he finally had a 
willing support cast out of midfield to enable his passing artistry to 
flourish. And flourish it did, with thrilling efficiency.

Saturday interview: Clint Dempsey
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/nov/24/newsstory.fulham>
Earlier in his career Dempsey had the neat hair, easy skills and sunny charm 
of a southern matinee idol. The Texan drawl and the buzzcut endure, but now 
there’s a darkness to the veteran front man, an edge of cynicism perhaps: the 
eyes sink deeper, his face is more gaunt and lined, and he stands over every 
dead ball, watchful and still, as if meditating on some dark conspiracy. In 
many respects he is the closest thing this US team has to a character off Game 
of Thrones – a master schemer plotting from the shadows. Here he was at the 
peak of his powers, and little of what made this such a complete performance 
from the US – the pressing, the lightning counter-attacks, the ball rotation, 
the snappy combination plays – would have been possible without him. If Bradley 
is the US team’s heart, Dempsey is its brain.

A word of caution, and a trite one at that: this victory alone does not solve 
everything that ails the US national team. Klinsmann’s substitutions and 
formation changes continue to baffle. Individual errors cost the team on 
Friday, but their simple inverse – individual brilliance – won the day against 
Costa Rica. This was a victory in the mode Klinsmann likes: a victory for 
individual virtuosity rather than tactics or the collective plan. Depending on 
veterans to defy the years and recapture the zest of old is not, in any event, 
a viable tactical strategy – in the long run or even, really, or the remainder 
of the Copa.

Besides, sharper finishing from Los Ticos might have made things a little 
edgier in the opening stages of the second half. Costa Rica demand respect: 
they’re a team with two top attacking talents – Bryan Ruiz and Joel Campbell – 
and they gave amore than respectable account of themselves 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/25285190> in Brazil two years ago. But 
they were also, let’s not forget, comfortably outplayed in their first game in 
this tournament, against Paraguay – the final scoreline notwithstanding. Los 
Guaraníes will present a sterner test thanLos Ticos did last night.

If the US can recapture this form on Saturday, they will advance from the 
group comfortably. But consistency has always been the great weakness of this 
team, which is perhaps why it always seems either on the brink of despair or 
bound for glory. If the US’s results too often get thrown into the kind of 
reductive filter that deprives analysis of any nuance – Jürgen bad! Jürgen 
good! Jones past it! Jones world-class! – that’s because the results and 
performances of the team under Klinsmann have themselves been similarly 
helter-skelter. Which US team will we see at Lincoln Financial Field on 
Saturday: the team that dawdles on the ball, gets caught in possession and 
appears clueless in the final third, or the team from Tuesday night? It’s 
impossible to predict, but in the meantime, the team’s veterans – like their 
maligned coach – can drink long on the satisfaction that their obsolescence, 
long declared and much welcomed, has not dawned just yet. This dog do, in fact, 
hunt.
 