

Bill Clinton's cryptic crossword for the New York Times magazine. Photograph: 
TheNew York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times>

Bill Clinton has compiled a crossword 
<http://www.nytimes.com/ref/crosswords/clintonpuz.html> for the New York Times 
magazine. It's one of their more cryptic ones, appearing in the Sunday edition 
of the paper, which makes it a little more interesting than the average 
American crossword. The puzzle of interlocking words was invented there around 
80 years ago, but with rare exceptions, the Americans never got used to the 
kind ofcryptic crossword so popular in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weekend/story/0,3605,880719,00.html> - except in 
occasional places, such as Harper's magazine, and most weeks in the Sunday NY 
Times. British compilers - except those creating the popular quick crosswords, 
designed to be knocked off in a coffee break - would certainly turn their noses 
up at clues such as "Modernize" (REMODEL) and "Fall month" (OCT). Crosswords 
that list only definitions or demand examples (such as "Bird (5)" and "City 
(4)") are much harder than those which also provide a cryptic clue. One of the 
best-loved clues in the Guardian over the past few years was Bunthorne's 
"Amundsen's forwarding address (4)" to which the answer is MUSH. An American 
crossword might just give "sloppy food", which is far harder.

So I suspect that one of our top professional compilers, such as John Graham, 
who isAraucaria for the Guardian 
<http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/product_10401_25501_46593_100_25604_25604_category_>
 and has several other outlets, would not be at all impressed by Clinton's 
efforts. One problem with the American-style crossword is that the letters 
often come in great blocks, reading up and down, which means that the compiler 
has to use some very strange words. "Young men are told to go in the direction 
opposite of this, Sp." has four letters. You have to work out that the answer 
is the Spanish for east, that is, ESTE. That's a deeply clumsy clue, as is the 
quote from Hamlet: "----take arms against..." which gives us ORTO, or 
"Mid-sixth century year", which is, believe it or not, DLII - the Latin 
numbering of 552.

But Clinton has made his crossword slightly more beguiling by including many 
clues such as this: "Boomer's update of a 1962 Neil Sedaka hit". The baby 
boomers are now assumed to be old, so it's quite easy to work out that the 
answers are all punning re-writes of old song titles, turned into titles about 
ageing - in this case WAKING UP IS HARD TO DO. Johnny Nash's best-known song 
becomes I CAN'T SEE CLEARLY NOW, and Judy Collins's Amazing Grace 
transliterates to AMAZING GRAYS. Otis Redding is remembered for THE DOC OF THE 
DAY. Not exactly rib-burstingly funny, but certainly more amusing than 
"Religious post", or POPE.

Clinton is not the only head of government to have dabbled in crosswords. In 
fact, like writing children's books, everyone thinks they can compile 
crosswords; most people are wrong. Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who was British prime 
minister for one year from 1963-64, used to produce crosswords for the Times of 
London, back in the 1930s. Once he was sitting next to someone on a train who 
was struggling with a crossword he had compiled. The man asked for help, and 
was deeply impressed when his companion got all the answers, apparently without 
a moment's thought.
 