
Not enough research has been done on the close relationship of our gathering 
for Christmas dinner to the classic waterholes of the world’s great deserts. 
Even the omniscient David Attenborough has been slow to examine the connection. 
Inhis current multi-part survey of the planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/07/planet-earth-ii-bbc1-most-watched-natural-history-show-for-15-years>
, there is a constant theme hammering: the deadly dangers facing animals that 
gather anywhere in order to drink. They might eat each other. Indeed, if they 
are on camera, they almost certainly will, thereby triggering Attenborough’s 
most plangently recurring threnody: “Yet this can be a dangerous place in which 
to linger.”

I speak as one in no need of education about the level of violence in the 
natural world. At Uluru once, I had a close-up of a plague of centipedes. A 
close-up was unavoidable, because they got into even your hotel room, probably 
through the airconditioning system. Most of the year, they aren’t visible. When 
they are, nobody has ever seen fewer than a million of them. What scared me 
most was the noise they made. I suppose their descendants are still making it. 
It was a kind of sizzling fizz, like bacon fat.

Roll forward a few decades, and I switch on the television to be confronted 
with the dauntless face of the male sand grouse 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b084ftll/planet-earth-ii-4-deserts>. My 
notes go a bit haywire at this point, but I think the waterhole is somewhere in 
Africa. The remarkable thing, though, is that the grouse is at the waterhole 
at all. His family is camped 60 miles away, but it’s his turn to fly to the 
waterhole and pick up the water supply for the whole bunch of them. He loads up 
with water by splashing it into his chest feathers, which are fluffily adapted 
to carry half his body weight in liquid. Then, after heeding Attenborough’s 
warning about the dangerous place in which to linger, he takes off for the 
60-mile flight back to his thirsty family. One need hardly note that a good 
three-quarters of the other species gathered around the waterhole are well 
equipped to make mincemeat of him.

Clive James: ‘My idea of a speed thrill is turning up the gas on a mower'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/clive-james-speed-thrill-damon-hill>
Attenborough hasn’t time actually to tell us this, but one imagines that a 
good few millennia of evolutionary experience went into the grouse’s decision 
that 60 miles was about the right distance to be away from the waterhole. 
Similarly, my own behaviour at theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> table is based on the 
judicious application of hard-won learning. From my early life onwards, I took 
it to be mandatory that I should be as entertaining as possible, so as 
to ensure being given first crack at the goose’s leg. Time has at last 
taught me that if I sit there in silence, my chances of being awarded the 
goose’s leg will go up, not down.
 