
A generous friend has given me a Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> subscription and hence, probably, 
destroyed the rest of my life. When my fallback viewing consisted mainly of 
seeing whether Die Hard With A Fixed Pout was on again for the 10th time, there 
was some hope of turning off the set and reading a book. But now I have to cope 
with the adhesive properties ofThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
, and then cope again with the horrible information that they haven’t even 
finished making it.

Also on Netflix, the series Shooter <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80109194>
, withRyan Phillippe <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000202/>, is mainly a remake 
of the already ageingmovie of that title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/15/actionandadventure.philipfrench>. 
I find Phillippe a more engaging male star thanMark Wahlberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-wahlberg> in the same role, but the 
movie hadKate Mara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/14/kate-mara-if-we-were-up-for-the-same-job-our-agents-wouldnt-tell-us>
 and the series hasn’t, so I can almost leave it alone.

But only almost. Even the most trite Netflix drama is too slickly done to be 
easily switched off. Starring inDesignated Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/21/designated-survivor-review-kiefer-sutherland>
, Kiefer Sutherland, you would think, has already done too much time in24 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24> to be an interesting draftee 
president after all the other politicians get wiped out, but in fact he is 
quite good, nobly reining in his usual imitation of an angry horse gritting its 
teeth.

In the show he is married to Natasha McElhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/10/bereavement-family>, who 
proves that she can be almost as interesting in a pack of cliches as she was in
Californication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/nov/13/david-duchovny-californication-box-set>
. Designated Survivor is a gathering point for all the weary shows about 
Washington power politics coming home to roost at once. But who says that isn’t 
reality?

Clive James: ‘At 16, my dress sense was in the first full flower of its 
baroque glory’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/10/clive-james-16-my-dress-sense-baroque-glory>
Meanwhile, only a click away in the Netflix bundle of thrillers, none other 
thanEmily Blunt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-blunt>, in Sicario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
, is fighting the drugs war against the Latino heavies. Apart from the presence 
of her magic talent, it doesn’t sound too promising, but neither didTraffic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/jan/26/1> on paper. Yet in Traffic even 
the grinding teeth ofMichael Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-douglas> as the principal goodie 
could not offset the amoral glamour ofCatherine Zeta-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinezetajones> as the principal baddie, 
and Blunt brings much of the same oomph to the sweaty war against the drug 
lords.

Much of the sweat, we are led to believe, has accumulated in Blunt’s 
restricted range of military vests. Her personal fragrance might have suffered 
from her fierce dedication to the task. It’s like being told that a honeybee 
has spent too much time assaulting the blossoms. There she is, looking fraught 
but drawing her gun for battle.

And there, right along with her, bathing in her gaze, is Benicio del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/beniciodeltoro>, growing old in the role of 
the moral man compromised in the toils of the drugs war. At that rate, 
everybody might as well be compromised. Pass me the cocaine. Better, though, 
surely, to be hooked on Netflix.
 