
Hopes that half of the world’s 48 least developed nations  
<http://unctad.org/en/pages/aldc/Least%20Developed%20Countries/UN-list-of-Least-Developed-Countries.aspx>
could emerge from extreme poverty by the end of the decade have been dashed 
after a UN body reported the weakest year of growth in more than 20 years.

The UN conference on trade and development (Unctad) said plunging commodity 
prices had hit the group of least developed countries hard, with 13 of them 
suffering a fall in living standards in 2015.

A 2011 UN action plan  
<http://unohrlls.org/about-ldcs/istanbul-programme-of-action/>set a target of 
7% growth per year for least developed countries’ economic growth over the 
subsequent decade but the Unctad report said the goal had only been achieved 
once, in 2012. The reliance of many of the world’s poorest nations on exports 
of commodities meant that growth slowed to 3.6% in 2015 – the weakest since 
1994 – as the prices of oil and industrial metals fell sharply.

UN warns over global fallout from debt crisis in poor countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/united-nations-unctadwarns-debt-crisis-poor-developing-countries-oil-prices>
“Thirteen LDCs [least developed countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/29/least-developed-countries-sustainable-development-goals-sudan-zambia-uganda>
] experienced a decline in gross domestic product (per capita) in 2015,” Unctad 
said in its 2016 least developed country report. “This performance has been 
strongly influenced by the sharp decline in commodity prices, which has 
particularly affected African LDCs. Such weak economic growth is a serious 
obstacle to generating and mobilising domestic resources for structural 
transformation and investment in the development of productive capacities.”

Unctad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unctad> said the weak performance of 
LDCs hampered progress towards the UN sustainable development targets – a 
series of goals for human development intended to be achieved by 2030.

The UN classifies a country as an LDC if it has low per capita income of just 
over $1,000 a year, is perceived as economically vulnerable and scores badly on 
a range of human indicators, including nutrition, child mortality and enrolment 
in schools. Graduation is only possible if a country shows a sustained 
improvement in two of the three categories.

Since the term LDC was coined 45 years ago, only four countries have 
graduated: Botswana (1994), Cabo Verde (2007), Maldives (2011) and Samoa 
(2014). Other countries, such as Equatorial Guinea, Tuvalu and Angola will 
graduate over the next few years.

Unctad said the number of graduations in the coming years was likely to fall 
well short of the 2011 target, “showing only 10 countries as meeting the 
graduation criteria by 2020, against a target of 24. By 2025, only 16 countries 
are projected to have graduated”.

It said LDCs were affected by three vicious circles.

“First, many LDCs suffer from a poverty trap, with low income and limited 
economic growth giving rise to high levels of poverty, which in turn act as a 
brake on economic growth.


“Second, many LDCs suffer from a commodity trap, as they depend heavily on 
commodity production and trade for employment, income, savings and foreign 
exchange. In the overwhelming majority of LDCs (38 of the 47 for which data are 
available), commodities accounted for more than two-thirds of merchandise 
exports in 2013–2015.


“Third, weak productive bases and limited export diversification in LDCs give 
rise to a very high import content in production and consumption, and chronic 
current account deficits. These factors in turn result in aid dependence and 
the accumulation of foreign debt.”

 