
A company boss who has given nearly £1m to the Conservative party and 
long-serving MPs from across the Commons head the list of political figures who 
receive a knighthood in this year’s New Year honours list.

David Ord, who becomes a knight in the new year, is a co-owner of Bristol 
ports and a member of the Conservative party’s Leaders’ Group, who were granted 
exclusive access to cabinet ministers underDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and George Osborne. He has 
given more than £930,000 to the party since 2013.

Ord, a major opponent of the Severn Barrage, was once embroiled in a donations 
row after it emerged in 2014 that Bristol North West MP Charlotte Leslie had
failed to declare 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/conservative-mp-unspeakably-sorry-over-6940256>
the port owner’s 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/conservative-mp-unspeakably-sorry-over-6940256>
 donations to her local party 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/conservative-mp-unspeakably-sorry-over-6940256>
 on time, despite making numerous parliamentary interventions about the 
project. She apologised and was cleared of wrongdoing by the parliamentary 
watchdog.

Jeremy Corbyn said the honours for Tory donors were an insult to those who had 
been rewarded for charitable work or achievements. “TheConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are making a mockery of 
our honours system,” the Labour leader’s spokesperson said. “Every crony 
appointment is an insult to the incredible people from right across Britain who 
are rewarded for the great contributions they make to our national life.”

Hillsborough campaigner Prof Phil Scraton turns down OBE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/hillsborough-prof-phil-scraton-turns-down-obe>
A Downing Street source defended the honours for Conservative donors, saying: 
“Being involved in political parties is generally considered to be an important 
part of civic society, and the alternative is having state funding for 
political parties, which is not where the consensus lies. When people dedicate 
their time and service to civil society it’s appropriate they can be honoured.”

Two veteran sitting MPs were knighted. Conservative MP Julian Brazier and 
Labour’s David Crausby, a former member the HS2 select committee, which sat for 
almost 100 days over eight months taking evidence from up to 40 petitioners a 
day.


Former Lib Dem minister Steve Webb, one of the architects of the coalition’s 
“triple-lock” pension guarantee and auto-enrolment in workplace pensions, has 
also been knighted.

Vera Baird, the former Labour MP who is now Northumbria police and crime 
commissioner, has been made a dame for services to women and equality. The 
former QC, who was solicitor general under Gordon Brown, was honoured for her 
role in the Equality Act 2010. Baird said she saw the honour as “giving the 
cause of equality a boost”.

Politicians receiving the highest honours included Liberal Democrat peer 
Shirley Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shirley-williams>, who 
has been made a companion of honour to mark more than 50 years in political 
life. Lady Williams, a former Labour education secretary under James Callaghan, 
was one of the so-called gang of four of influential Labour politicians who 
split to form the Social Democrat party, which later merged with the Liberal 
party to form the Lib Dems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcompany-boss-david-ord-tory-donor-receives-knighthood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d11fed96b563d2986f5efbb2fb8d7bb6328413a%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Company%20boss%20who%20gave%20%C2%A3930%2C000%20to%20Tory%20party%20receives%20knighthood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcompany-boss-david-ord-tory-donor-receives-knighthood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Company%20boss%20who%20gave%20%C2%A3930%2C000%20to%20Tory%20party%20receives%20knighthood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcompany-boss-david-ord-tory-donor-receives-knighthood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d11fed96b563d2986f5efbb2fb8d7bb6328413a%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Renowned Labour, SDP and Liberal Democrat politician Shirley Williams. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod/the Guardian 
Other Tory donors receiving honours this year include associate party 
treasurer Dominic Johnson, who lent the Cameron family his west London 
townhouse rent-free when the former prime minister resigned and left No 10.

The register of MPs’ interests shows that the family stayed in the Chelsea 
property until the end of October before they moved back into their Notting 
Hill home, which had been rented out.

M&C Saatchi founding director Jeremy Sinclair, credited as the brains behind 
the famous Conservative campaign poster showing Tony Blair with “demon eyes”, 
also receives a CBE.

Key members of Conservative party headquarters have also been honoured, 
including director of campaigning Darren Mott, who received an OBE, with 
Alexandra Broadrick, chief of staff to the party chairman, and Louise Goodall, 
the deputy head of fundraising, receiving MBEs.

Whitehall staff also received dozens of awards, including 14 for Home Office 
officials who served under Theresa May when she led the department. However, 
some critics questioned the number of awards handed out to staff fromHMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>, given the recent poor performance 
of the department.

Staff received the honours for their work on tackling tax non-compliance and 
tax avoidance, as well as for customer service. The department was recently 
criticised by the National Audit Office for pursuing only one successful 
criminal prosecution despite a new specialist unit identifying almost £2bn in 
tax evasion and avoidance by the super-rich.

The Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, said the honours for HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> investigators “dishonour the 
honours system” given the department’s poor performance on tax evasion and 
delays on consumer hotlines.

“HMRC have had the worst year; not only billions of pounds not collected from 
the biggest tax dodgers, but the average punter has been made to wait for hours 
on the phone on hold,” he said. “It’s a farce. I thought this was a joke, but 
it’s not.”


A government source said it had a “proud record of tackling tax evasion, one 
of the toughest in the developed world, and not only are these civil servants 
being rewarded for their work, the service itself is doing good work.”
 