
For three years, Conor McGregor and the UFC have been very good for each 
other. McGregor’s searing wit and feisty charm mixed with an uncanny ability to 
predict –most of the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
 – exactly what he would do in the octagon has helped thrust the league into 
the mainstream. And the UFC has made a plumber’s apprentice from Dublin 
wealthier than he could ever dream.

But eventually McGregor’s ambitions were going to rub against the UFC’s 
proclivity for tight control. In the days before hisloss to Nate Diaz at last 
month’s UFC 196 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
 McGregor dropped hints that he wanted to be bigger than the organization that 
made him. Now, with both fighter and league at their most popular, the two 
sides seem to have collided with no certainty that they will ever fit back 
together again.

Jon Jones ready to come to rescue at UFC 200 in Conor McGregor’s absence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/jon-jones-ufc-200-main-event-conor-mcgregor-ovince-saint-preux>
It’s hard to know if McGregor’s tweeted retirement announcement 
<https://twitter.com/TheNotoriousMMA/status/722492455732584448> on Tuesday is 
truly a farewell to UFC. He left no other clues about his intentions. For a 
fighter whose mind and words are weapons as effective as his fists, the tweet 
did not have an air of finality. He did not take shots at the UFC or their 
leaders. He did not burn a path back to the cage. He simply said he was gone.

The explanation UFC president Dana White offered to ESPN a few hours later 
<http://espn.go.com/video/clip?id=espn:15274805>, that McGregor had been pulled 
from 9 July’s UFC 200 for what amounts to insubordination, spoke even more to a 
power struggle. White said McGregor refused to appear at a press conference 
later this week in Las Vegas to promote UFC 200 and also shoot the traditional 
pre-fight video that the organization has uses to market their signature events.

“You can’t decide to not show up to the [promotional] events,” White said. 
“You have to do it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fufc-president-conor-mcgregor-retirement-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UFC%20president%20discusses%20Conor%20McGregor%E2%80%99s%20future%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fufc-president-conor-mcgregor-retirement-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UFC%20president%20discusses%20Conor%20McGregor%E2%80%99s%20future%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fufc-president-conor-mcgregor-retirement-video&media=>
UFC president Dana White talks about the organisation’s decision to pull 
fighter Conor McGregor from his upcoming fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/20/ufc-president-conor-mcgregor-retirement-video>
White said he had several conversations with McGregor over the past several 
days and reported that the fighter would not leave a training camp in Iceland 
for the press conference. After hours of haggling, White said, he told McGregor 
that the UFC had booked a seat for him on a 2pm flight. If he wasn’t on that 
plane he would be yanked fromUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 200. 
Not long after, McGregor tweeted his retirement.

“Is Conor retiring? Only Conor can answer that question,” White said. “But 
he’s not fighting in UFC 200.”

McGregor’s intentions remain a mystery. No fighter today, aside from maybe 
boxerFloyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, can 
manufacture drama – and attention – like McGregor. In the weeks since his loss 
to Diaz alone he has suggested any number of fights for 200, accepted a rematch 
with Diaz and now apparently retired just months before what White has heralded 
as the UFC’s signature event to be held in Las Vegas’s new T-Mobile Arena.

Conor McGregor: 'I have decided to retire young'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/ufc-star-conor-mcgregor-i-have-decided-to-retire-young>
The coming weeks will be undoubtedly be filled with carefully constructed 
public barbs between McGregor and the UFC. Unconfirmed reports on Tuesday night 
suggested that McGregor wanted significantly more money than White was willing 
to give to headline UFC 200.

Fighter pay has long been a sensitive subject for the MMA’s top league. Part 
of the league’s appeal is that it is tightly controlled, with White choosing 
fight cards that maximize interest, removing all the dysfunction of boxing’s 
myriad organizations and belts. But the UFC is also notorious for low pay. An
Outside the Lines report in 2012 
<http://espn.go.com/espn/otl/story/_/page/UFCpay/ufc-fighters-say-low-pay-most-painful-hit-all>
 quoted several UFC fighters as saying they made tiny sums for their bouts and 
refrained from complaining out of fear they would be banned from the league.

The UFC has always paid a handful of fighters much better than others, but 
even the biggest paydays are minute compared to the riches boxing promoters 
hand out. A common refrain is that the UFC gets rich on the backs of those who 
are shedding their blood. McGregor set aMMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> record when he was paid a guaranteed 
$1m for UFC 196 along with a piece of the pay-per-view proceeds that added 
several million more. But it paled in comparison to the more than $200m 
Mayweather earned in his May 2015 fight against Manny Pacquiao, held in the 
same arena (the MGM Grand Garden) as UFC 196.

McGregor has seemed to be testing the UFC’s structure for several months now. 
After his 13-second knockout of Jose Aldo last December he began to talk about 
his newfound power. At the post-fight press conference he said he might have 
built enough capital in the organization to dictate where his fights will be 
held. Then in the run-up to UFC 196 he chided White a few times in public 
appearances, said he did not like fighting in Las Vegas and said the pre-fight 
promotional videos – like the one he refused to do on Tuesday – were stale. He 
hinted at a desire for more power in an organization that doesn’t surrender 
authority.

Conor McGregor pulled from Nate Diaz rematch after UFC retirement tweet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/20/conor-mcgregor-pulled-from-nate-diaz-rematch-after-ufc-retirement-hint>
He had become increasingly difficult for the UFC to handle. Attempts to corral 
him to do traditional interviews in March were fruitless. He balked at an 
appearance on Conan O’Brien’s late-night TV show and yet was a fantastic guest 
when he relented. It seemed clear, even with his loss to Diaz, that McGregor 
was going to keep pushing against the UFC’s structure.

At 27, with the potential to make many millions more, McGregor doesn’t seem a 
likely candidate to walk away from fighting. His sudden following of a handful 
of WWE executives on Twitter along with recent Twitter posts of his Iceland 
training look almost like challenges to the UFC to put on July’s big show 
without him and top female draw Ronda Rousey, who is still recovering from 
injuries sustained in her last fight.

Others have noticed, with one fighter, Jamie Varner, using McGregor’s 
announcement to call for a UFC union 
<https://twitter.com/jamievarner/status/722558298541531136>.

The UFC will have their big press conference for UFC 200 at the end of this 
week. They can’t have a public unveiling of the entire card without their 
headline fighter. A replacement will have to be named. But plenty of time 
remains before 9 July and White and McGregor and a lot of money is at stake for 
both McGregor and the UFC.

“I get accused of coddling Conor all the time, but at the end of the day Conor 
is a guy I respect,” White told ESPN on Tuesday, careful to say nothing too 
toxic about his biggest star. “He’s taken fights on short notice and literally 
saved the show at times. But it doesn’t make you exempt from showing up for the 
press conference and the pre-promotional events. We paid a lot of money for 
this stuff. It’s mandatory.”

Now his biggest fighter is testing the meaning of what exactly is mandatory in 
the UFC.
 