
So a couple of days after the UFC controversially stripped its lightweight 
champion of his featherweight strap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/conor-mcgregor-gives-up-ufc-featherweight-title-jose-aldo>
, Conor McGregor has received a boxing licence from the state of California. 
Cue a biblical flood of opprobrium from the boxing world.

When it comes to blurring the lines between MMA and the sweet science, the 
boxing fraternity can be a particularly precious bunch. It sometimes feels as 
if we represent the fighting equivalent of late-1980s Liverpool, aghast at Dana 
White’s UFC coming hard up the track, intent on knocking usright off our effing 
perch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/08/sir-alex-ferguson-best-quotes>
. There is an inherent fear that MMA’s every gain is at boxing’s fatal expense, 
that this town ain’t big enough for the both of us.

The news broke earlier this morning and the scorn followed soon after. “A 
60-year-old Sugar Ray Leonard would batter him in the boxing ring 
<https://twitter.com/vinnie_paz/status/804153375797420033>,” was one reaction. “
He couldn’t win an Irish title 
<https://twitter.com/LoveIrishBoxing/status/804236799036063744>,” added the 
respected Irish boxing site LoveIrishBoxing. The hashtag# 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FightersThatCanBeatMcGregor?src=hash>
FightersThatCanBeatMcGregor 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fightersthatcanbeatmcgregor&src=typd> then 
appeared and the thread was peppered with an array of comically sarcastic 
suggestions, some in better taste than others.

Conor McGregor gains boxing licence but Mayweather fight remains unlikely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/conor-mcgregor-boxing-licence-floyd-mayweather>
It has been suggested that McGregor could face the undefeated, and retired, 
Floyd Mayweather. “Congratulations to him 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/boxing/2016/12/01/floyd-mayweather-conor-mcgregor-boxing-license-leonard-ellerbe-ufc/94717102/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
,” offered Leonard Ellerbe, the CEO of Mayweather Promotions, who pointed out 
that McGregor’s contract with the UFC precludes a fight with Mayweather, before 
adding that the Irishman “would get his ass beat from pillar to post” if they 
did meet in the ring.

Of course he would. McGregor wouldn’t lay a glove on Floyd’s pretty face. 
Mayweather is a one-in-a-generation boxer, a defensive genius in the ring. Look 
down the list of future hall-of-famers on his résumé and consider the calibre 
he has handled with ease. Mayweather fought Manny Pacquiao, Canelo Álvarez, 
Diego Corrales, Genaro Hernández and none of them troubled him in the slightest.

Arguments can be made that Oscar De La Hoya and Miguel Cotto were competitive, 
that Zab Judah’s hand speed kept it interesting for a few rounds, that Marcos 
Maidana’s roughhouse tactics unsettled him, and some even swear that José Luis 
Castillo deserved the decision first time around. But these are relatively 
minor points when considered in the overall context of a flawless 49-fight, 
19-year, five-division, multi-title winning career.

Mayweather has been largely untouchable against the best the sport of boxing 
has produced in the last two decades. So, unless he has aged dramatically in 
the 14 months since he last fought, suggesting that an athlete from a different 
sport could challenge him is illogical at best. Perhaps the only thing more 
ludicrous is thinking Mayweather would survive past 30 seconds underMMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> rules with McGregor. I’m sure they 
would put on a hell of a show if it ever happened, but from the point of view 
of a competitive sporting contest it would be a non-event.

But, if we move past Mayweather and the current elite around 147-154 pounds, a 
sensible if totally hypothetical conversation can be had on the subject of 
McGregor lacing up boxing gloves. McGregor is an incredibly gifted athlete 
operating in a sport that will have given him transferable skills.

When I first watched MMA a decade ago I was like the other boxing 
fundamentalists who only see exposed chins and ineffective striking, but the 
entire sport has evolved since then. Back then fighters with a wrestling 
background were still in charge as the sprawl-and-brawlers arrived to counter 
the once-dominant ground-and-pounders. Today, however, theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> is basking in an age of effective 
striking and McGregor is one of those leading the way.

The Irishman is a mixed martial artist in the truest sense of the word, but 
while most MMA fighters have developed from a Brazilian jiu-jitsu, or 
wrestling, or taekwondo, or Muay Thai background, McGregor grew up boxing. The 
art was first hardwired into his fighting brain when he walked into Crumlin 
AmateurBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Club as a 12-year old 
scrapper. He learned how to throw every punch, how to cover up, how to control 
the distance, how to switch his stance, and everything else required to win a 
few novice titles. He was known as an elusive target in the ring and an 
intelligent fighter who was adept at figuring out opponents. By the age of 16 
he was lost to the world of kicking and grappling in a cage, but he has never 
forgotten what coach Phil Sutcliffe taught him in the Dublin gym.

UFC fighters make first steps to unionize: 'It’s a fight for what's right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/ufc-fighters-union-wme-img-better-treatment>
Boxing fans scoff at that suggestion and pick holes in his style and technique 
every time he performs in the Octagon, but viewing an MMA fight through a 
boxing lens is a totally pointless exercise. I have spent the last four months 
ghostwriting Dan Hardy’s book and it took about 30 seconds for the UFC fighter 
and analyst to put me straight on that account by stating the blindingly 
obvious. Watching guys spar in the gym and then taking in my first MMA fights 
from cage-side only educated me further.

The distinct demands of MMA make comparisons with boxing as sensible as 
contrasting rugby and the NFL, but a couple of quick and pertinent points can 
be made. The crux of the matter is that, quite simply, there are so many more 
ways to get hurt and lose in an MMA bout. There are so many more forms of 
attack and defence to be aware of. A standard, side-on boxing stance is rarely 
advisable inside the Octagon because the front leg is too exposed to kicks and 
the shape of the body makes it more difficult to defend takedown attempts.

Neither can an MMA fighter normally commit to throwing a perfect boxing punch, 
starting at the feet with all the rotation and turning of the shoulders that 
such a blow entails, for fear of leaving themselves vulnerable to all sorts of 
counters, with fist and knee and foot and elbow, or takedowns if it doesn’t 
land clean. Finally, the possibility of covering up and letting eight-ounce 
gloves absorb blows, or even leaning back against the ropes to avoid an 
incoming punch, are two more ’luxuries’ denied inside the cage.

And yet, even allowing for the myriad risk involved in bringing boxing 
techniques into an MMA arena, watching McGregor fight it is clear that he does 
just that. Although it is an exaggerated long stance, he is generally happy to 
approach his opponents side on. In recent bouts his punches have been tighter, 
crisper, more efficient, and apparently still as hurtful as both Nate Diaz and 
Eddie Alvarez made repeated trips to the canvas when hit. McGregor is also, 
when he has manoeuvred his man far enough to his right and at an angle that 
greatly negates the danger of being countered, prepared to rotate his hips and 
put his full body weight behind left hands directed at his rival’s chin. Would 
he last long fighting this exact way in a boxing ring? Of course not. But the 
point is that he is a few steps closer to a prizefighter’s style than every 
elite MMA fighter before him.

A few steps closer, but still a million miles away? Perhaps, but one man who 
doesn’t think so is six-time All-Ireland champion Conor Wallace. The Newry-born 
Wallace was chosen to replicate Nate Diaz’s style in the build-up to that 
famous rematch and spent eight weeks in Vegas helping prepare McGregor for his 
sweet revenge.

“One thing that stood out from Conor,” Wallace told me today, “is that he is 
an incredibly fast learner. He is shown something and he picks it up 
immediately. I was only with him for a couple of months, but in that time I saw 
a massive improvement in his boxing. The other thing to bear in mind is that he 
has the one thing that is vitally important in professional boxing and that is 
a big punch. He has a lot of power in that left hand and opponents feel that 
when it lands. Given the chance to dedicate his time to boxing, rather than 
sharing it with Brazilian jiu-jitsu and grappling and Muay Thai and all the 
rest, I don’t see why Conor couldn’t be fighting for domestic titles at the 
very least.”

Plenty disagree, of course. One of the many boxers who has frequently 
rubbished McGregor’s chances in a ring 
<https://twitter.com/woodhousecurtis/status/767321450957144064> is the 
ex-British super lightweight champion, Curtis Woodhouse. Woodhouse retired 
without successfully defending that belt and ended with a 22-7 record. 
Woodhouse, it should be noted, was also a top-level professional footballer 
with no experience of boxing until the age of 26. I have always had the utmost 
respect for Woodhouse’s achievements. It clearly takes a special athlete and a 
lot of hard work and dedication to compete at the highest level of football and 
boxing in the UK and he deserves all the plaudits he receives.

But, if Woodhouse transitioned to boxing, why couldn’t McGregor do likewise? 
When a teenage Woodhouse was kicking a ball, McGregor was in one of the top 
amateur boxing clubs in Dublin, learning that trade. At the stage of life when 
Woodhouse was playing in the Premier League with Birmingham City, McGregor was 
knocking out top MMA fighters such as José Aldo and Alvarez with his fists. The 
ex-footballer won his British title at the age of 33 in the 28th bout of an 
eight-year career. Is it so ridiculous to think that McGregor, now 28, could 
refocus on boxing and achieve something similar?

How to look good while fighting, by Conor McGregor's strength coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-balls-of-wrath/2016/nov/10/conor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc>
My guess is we’ll probably never know. Ellerbe’s nonchalant reaction is 
probably one of the more rational we’ll see today. McGregor is known for a 
business acumen as sharp as his suits and an uncanny knack of guaranteeing 
himself a few column inches, regardless of whether the content is positive or 
negative. This could very well be nothing more than the shifting of a pawn in 
advance of future negotiations with his new UFC overlords. Or maybe it was just 
a cheap and cheerful way to cause a bit of a stir in social media in an 
otherwise slow day.

And even if his intentions to box are genuine, does he have the patience to 
start at a relatively low rung and work his way up as any boxing trainer with 
an ounce of sense will advise? And does he have the willpower to forsake the 
guaranteed millions on offer inside the Octagon in the next couple of years to 
take a huge risk in another sport?

It seems unlikely and, in that unfortunate light, the best chance of seeing 
McGregor in a boxing ring could well be the circus of a big payday against 
Mayweather after all.

• This article appeared first on The Balls of Wrath 
<http://theballsofwrath.com/>
• Follow The Balls of Wrath <https://twitter.com/PaulieDGibson> on Twitter
 