
Conor McGregor has spoken at length about his “publicized civil war” with UFC 
in a lengthy interview with ESPN 
<http://espn.go.com/mma/story/_/id/15648276/conor-mcgregor-opens-ufc-relationship>
.

The disagreement between UFC and its biggest star came in April when McGregor 
announced his retirement on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/ufc-star-conor-mcgregor-i-have-decided-to-retire-young>
. McGregor believed that his publicity duties ahead of UFC 200 were getting in 
the way of his training schedule. McGregor was due to fight Nate Diaz,who he 
had lost to at UFC 196 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
.

“I’ll tell you what, [the retirement announcement on Twitter] blew up,” 
McGregor told ESPN. “I was kind of having fun to start, half-hearted. Then all 
of a sudden it’s, ‘you’re off 200!’ I was like, ‘alright, well fuck you too, 
then.’

“All said and done, there were times [I thought], ‘I should have just jumped 
on the damn flight [and done the publicity tour].’ But sometimes you’ve got to 
do what’s right for you and not what’s right for everybody else, especially if 
you’ve done what’s right for everyone else a million times over.”

McGregor has since rowed back on his retirement announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/conor-mcgregor-not-retired-ufc-mma>
 and said he has held talks with the UFC president, Dana White. He added that 
his relationship with the organization is “good”.

Will Conor McGregor's absence hurt UFC 200? It's debatable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/29/ufc-200-conor-mcgregor-jon-jones-mma>
“I’m committed to the fight game,” McGregor said. “I enjoy competition. I 
enjoy challenges. If a challenge is in front of me and it appeals to me, I will 
go ahead and conquer it.

“Did I do all the media? Did I dance like a monkey? No. Am I still here? Am I 
still fighting? Am I still collecting? Yeah. So, [UFC] saved face, I saved face 
– there was no loser. We all won in a way. I had them realistically, but they 
couldn’t bow down, so there was no loser. I was over here, they were there and 
now we’re in the middle. We’re in a good spot.”

McGregor added that his reluctance to go on the publicity tour in April had 
been influenced bythe death of MMA fighter Joao Carvalho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/12/mma-fighter-joao-carvalho-dies-dublin-tko>
 at a fight in Ireland. Carvalho’s death came a week before his retirement 
tweet and McGregor said the death had affected him.

“I had fucking journalists knocking down my mother’s door, you know what I 
mean?” McGregor said. “That’s not what I signed up to do – have people knocking 
on my mother’s door, talking about a kid dying. It’s not nice to see a kid die 
like that. It does something to you. And there’s been show after show canceled 
in Ireland since that. It’s fucked up to be a part of it, and I didn’t want to 
bring it back up and put it more on a public scale.

“After all that, I did not want to be put in front of a camera and made to 
dance. I just wasn’t feeling it.”

In the ESPN interview McGregor also dismissed rumors of a fight with retired 
boxing legend Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/09/floyd-mayweather-conor-mcgregor-fight-boxing-ufc>
, saying the sums involved were beneath him.

“I hear [Mayweather] talking. The leak came out, it was him that leaked the 
rumor and it said he gets $100m and I get $7m – that’s a pay cut to me. I don’t 
take pay cuts. I thought boxing was where the money was at. The $7m is 
absolutely laughable. He’s talking $100m – I’m also talking $100m,” McGregor 
said. “I’m 27 years of age and I’m just about halfway through a $100m contract. 
At 27 years of age,Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> was on Oscar De La Hoya’s 
undercard.

“Who doesn’t want to conquer both worlds? He’s getting old now. He needs me, I 
don’t need him. Who else can he fight?”
 