
Conor McGregor may act like an unrepentant lout at times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/10/conor-mcgregor-eddie-alvarez-ufc-205>
. He may taunt, scorn and torment his opponents, the way he played with Eddie 
Alvarez beforefinishing him off early Sunday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/conor-mcgregor-eddie-alvarez-ufc-new-york>
. He may drive you nuts. But he has turned the UFC into his own little game, in 
which he makes the rules and picks the prizes. At some point you have to shake 
your head and marvel.

Well after midnight on Sunday morning, UFC president Dana White glowed as he 
sat at a table beneath the stands and saidUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 205 took in a gate of $17.7m – a record 
for Madison Square Garden. And while the windfall was a result of perhaps the 
greatest fight card ever assembled, with three title match-ups in a single 
event, the reality of the money is that it was there because of McGregor. 
Without him the first UFC’s first New York City event would have been a good 
night of fighting but nothing transcendent.

“Listen, I’ve never dealt with anybody like this kid,” White said shaking his 
head in part awe and part frustration.

Conor McGregor KOs Eddie Alvarez to become UFC's first two-class champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/conor-mcgregor-eddie-alvarez-ufc-new-york>
On Sunday morning, McGregor became the first UFC fighter to hold two titles 
simultaneouslyby beating Alvarez 
<https://twitter.com/ufc/status/797686210609041408> for the lightweight 
championship and refusing to give up the featherweight belt he won last 
December. He should not be able to do this. In fact, White himself has said 
that McGregor wouldn’t be able to do this. By now, McGregor should have had to 
defend the featherweight title, perhaps with another fight against José Aldo, 
whohe knocked out in 13 seconds at UFC 194 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/conor-mcgregor-stuns-jose-aldo-in-13-seconds-to-take-ufc-featherweight-title>
. But McGregor has refused featherweight fights, choosing to chase the dual 
belts. Instead, he stood in the octagon after taking Alvarez’s belt and 
screamed for it back so he could hold the two belts together.
#UFC205 (@ufc) 
OHHHHHHHHH the #CelticCross <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CelticCross?src=hash> 
lands and drops Alvarez!!!#UFC205 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/UFC205?src=hash> 
#UFCNYC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/UFCNYC?src=hash> https://t.co/L43rTtgAOd 
<https://t.co/L43rTtgAOd>
 <https://twitter.com/ufc/status/797686210609041408> November 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ufc/status/797686210609041408> 
The UFC had to chase down current welterweight champion Tyron Woodley, who had 
won his title defense earlier on Saturday, to see if they could let McGregor 
borrow it. One look at Woodley’s face after the fight said he did not like this 
arrangement. But what choice did he have? McGregor needed a belt to hold and 
Woodley’s was the closest. Woodley gave up the belt.

Then McGregor walked up to the same press conference table where White had 
raved about the money eared in UFC 205 and said he wanted a piece of the UFC. 
The organization was sold for a reported $4bn this summer, and McGregor 
believes – probably correctly – thathe helped drive up the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/ufc-sale-4bn-dana-white-wme-img>
. The purchasers, WME-IMG, have already added celebrities like Tom Brady, Ben 
Affleck, LL Cool J and Conan O’Brienas minority owners 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/sports/patriots/2016/09/30/brady-kraft-among-investors-ufc-ownership-group/hudBCthdrOq3PrTf1kv3QP/story.html>
, so early on Sunday McGregor asked for his piece too.

“Conan is the owner of the UFC,” he said. “The new owners better call me.”

“I want my equity,” he added.

Then he dropped a surprise. He’s going to be a father next year. He was 
sketchy on the details, but at some point in the first half of 2017 he will be 
a family man. And a family man needs a stable source of income – even one who
claims to have earned $40m in the past 12 months 
<http://mmajunkie.com/2016/09/ufc-champ-conor-mcgregor-says-hell-make-40-million-in-2016-then-mocks-broke-bum-eddie-alvarez>
. And, well, why hasn’t the UFC given him an ownership stake too? Hasn’t he 
earned it?

The fact is the new owners, may as well cut McGregor in on their new money 
machine. He’s doing whatever he wants anyway. If the owners needed any reminder 
of what UFC 205 would have looked like without McGregor, all they had to do was 
look at the last time the organization tried to control the Irishman. That was 
this summer at UFC 200, which was supposed to be White’s signature event, until 
he pulled McGregor from the card for not properly promoting the event. Revenue 
from the event subsequently fell.

Since flattening Aldo, McGregor has done everything to avoid defending his 
featherweight belt. Now that he has taken the lightweight belt in a fight with 
Alvarez that was so lopsided he actually put his hands behind his back and 
dared the champion to hit him before ending the fight with a flurry of punches, 
he is dropping suggestions that he wants Woodley’s title too.

He later chuckled at the memory of strutting from the arena floor lugging 
Woodley’s belt pretending it to be the featherweight title that the UFC says he 
can’t keep.

“Maybe that’s a sign of things to come,” he said.

If he wants to fight for it the UFC will probably say yes( and on Sunday 
morning, Woodley said he would sign up immediately for a fight if McGregor 
wanted one). It seems he’s calling all the shots. In less than a year he has 
made a complete mockery of the organization and their standards. He has won the 
featherweight belt, run off to fight Nate Diaz twice and taken the lightweight 
belt, what’s to stop him from trying to grab the middleweight championship too? 
Who’s going to tell him no?

Last night he stood in the octagon after beating Alvarez and surveyed yet 
another favored opponent vanquished and listened to the roar of another 
capacity crowd. He screamed for his two belts and then climbed the cage to wave 
them. When he took the microphone to talk to the crowd later,his voice softened 
and for a moment he sounded conciliatory 
<https://twitter.com/ufc?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
: “I’d like to take this chance to apologize … to absolutely nobody!”

Why should he? He’s making up the rules as he goes along. And everyone else, 
including the UFC, is following them.
 