
As combinations go, Conor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/conor-mcgregor> and Nate Diaz are 
combustible. The fighters’ collective efforts proved that point once more on 
Saturday night, as McGregor exacted a measure of revenge at the T-Mobile Arena 
in Las Vegas by taking a majority decision over Diaz in one of the most 
compelling main events in UFC history.

The result evened their head-to-head record at 1-1, and teed up a lucrative 
trilogy-making contest when the time is right.

The two fighters took away record purses from their UFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 202 main event clash (McGregor earned a 
guaranteed $3m and Diaz $2m). They earned every penny over the course of a 
25-minute war of attrition that tested the acumen of the judges and frayed the 
nerves of fans around the world.

“Surprise, surprise! The king is back!” McGregor said. “If you want this 
trilogy, it’s on my terms. I came up to 170 [pounds], now you’ll come back to 
155 and we’ll finish what we’ve started. I knew what I had to do this time 
around and I did it.”

Win or learn. That was the mantra put forth by McGregor, the UFC featherweight 
champion, after Diaz surprised him in March by holding firm against an 
onslaught of punches before turning the tide and finishing the smaller Irishman 
with a rear-naked choke.

Conor McGregor beats Nate Diaz at UFC 202 and calls for rematch – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/20/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-ufc-202-updates>
Win it was.

Judges Jeff Mullen and Derek Cleary saw the brawl 48-47 in favor of McGregor, 
siding with him in the first, second and fourth rounds. Glenn Trowbridge had it 
47-47 due to a 10-8 round for Diaz in the third. The Guardian judged the 
contest 48-47 for Diaz, giving him the second, third and fifth rounds.

Regardless of how the bout was tallied round-by-round, the energy expelled by 
both men made it an inspiring and exhausting experience.

After falling short in the spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
, the onus was on McGregor (20-3) to adjust against a naturally larger opponent 
who possessed edges in experience and durability, and whose skills were potent 
enough to make him a mainstay in the Octagon for the last decade.
UFC (@ufc) 
We have a Trilogy to look forward to! #UFC202 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UFC202?src=hash> https://t.co/2KyVzxvqoh 
<https://t.co/2KyVzxvqoh>
 <https://twitter.com/ufc/status/767217839019134978> August 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ufc/status/767217839019134978> 
Expected to show up in much better physical condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/20/ufc-202-conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-fight-mma>
 following a full training camp, Diaz still started slow. McGregor’s opening 
round was measured and effective. He added leg kicks into his attack that hurt 
Diaz, and followed them up with strong left hands. What he did not do was force 
anything. In the first contest, McGregor appeared eager and overconfident, 
fighting for a finish instead of letting it come to him. Rather than loading up 
with power this time, McGregor unfurled smooth combinations that generated 
enough weight behind them to damage Diaz.

The first of several knockdowns came two minutes into the fight, yet having 
seen Diaz handle his punches in their previous fight, McGregor held back from 
any temptation to push for an early finish. Still, he appeared to breathe 
heavily as Diaz made moves in the second stanza. This was reminiscent of their 
previous clash, when he wilted under the strain of his own actions and Diaz’s 
ability to cope and respond. McGregor’s predictions of a stoppage within two 
rounds went by the wayside, and the bout remained tightly contested all the way 
through.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fconor-mcgregor-and-nate-diazs-pre-weigh-in-before-ufc-rematch-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conor%20McGregor%20and%20Nate%20Diaz%E2%80%99s%20pre%20weigh%20in%20before%20UFC%20rematch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fconor-mcgregor-and-nate-diazs-pre-weigh-in-before-ufc-rematch-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conor%20McGregor%20and%20Nate%20Diaz%E2%80%99s%20pre%20weigh%20in%20before%20UFC%20rematch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fconor-mcgregor-and-nate-diazs-pre-weigh-in-before-ufc-rematch-video&media=>
Conor McGregor and Nate Diaz’s pre weigh in before UFC rematch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/conor-mcgregor-and-nate-diazs-pre-weigh-in-before-ufc-rematch-video>
Diaz picked up momentum in round three, taunted McGregor as momentum swung in 
his favor, and took an overly generous 10-8 from Trowbridge that made the final 
score a draw on his card. Diaz looked ready to put McGregor away in the fourth, 
but the 145lb champion found himself and regrouped. Easing off the pedal in the 
early going allowed him to find a second wind when he needed it most.

How UFC's $4bn sale marked a journey from the shadows to the mainstream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/11/ufc-sale-dana-white-wme-img-lorenzo-fertitta>
“I stayed calm with it,” McGregor said after the fight. “I didn’t exchange 
with him. I bounced the shots off the shoulders.”

Diaz absorbed his share of McGregor’s attacks, and his face was a mess by the 
midway point in the fight. He had several cuts to his face, including above his 
right eye, which made for a ghoulish scene as the two tied up in clinches along 
the fence and blood and sweat mingled.

The final round belonged to Diaz (19-11), however he fell short of pushing 
McGregor past a breaking point. There were many people coming into the contest 
who wondered if the 28-year-old Dubliner could manage to clear the mental 
hurdles that might come with facing a man who took his best and gave it back in 
the worst ways. McGregor certainly did that and more.

The 31-year-old said he deserved the victory. “I came here to fight. I want 
No. 3, I gave him No. 2, so let’s do it,” Diaz said.

Diaz indicated he won’t return to UFC unless McGregor — and another huge 
payday— are on the docket.

What comes next is the UFC’s call, though the result is easily the best track 
the promoter could have hoped for. Another Diaz victory would have sunk any 
possibility of another massive moneymaker, and it might have severely damaged 
McGregor’s longterm status as the company’s top draw. As it is, McGregor holds 
the featherweight belt, although has seemed less than eager to cut the weight 
required to defend it for the first time.

The welterweight main event outshone every other bout on the card, which 
featured several violent finishes.

In the co-main event, a light heavyweight title eliminator ended in 13 seconds 
when Anthony “Rumble” Johnson flattened Brazil’s Glover Teixeira with a sneaky 
uppercut to the jaw. One of the hardest hitters in the UFC appears to have 
earned another fight with current UFC light heavyweight champion Daniel 
Cormier, who finished him in May of last year with a rear-naked choke.

“I’m coming for you Daniel,” Johnson said, speaking to current light 
heavyweight champion Cormier, who was seated near the cage.

UFC 202 represented the first event under a new ownership structure headed by 
WME-IMG, which closedits $4bn purchase of the global fight brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/ufc-sale-4bn-dana-white-wme-img> 
this week.
 