
Sometime before Saturday night Conor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/conor-mcgregor> found his fighting soul 
again. He went five exhausting rounds in a second bout with Nate Diaz and there 
would be no cocksure bravado or head wagging or slithering around the canvas 
like an anaconda on the prowl. This was a battle. A test of desire. No talk 
about money. Just a dirty, ugly scrap that was a refusal to relent.

He was the plumber’s apprentice from Dublin again, swinging for a life. Only 
this time he was trying to save the life he had built for himself. And that 
meant he had to be hungry, brutal and smart. When the fight was over and the 
referee had raised McGregor’s arm, bringing hima five-round redemption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/ufc-202-conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-fight-report-rematch>
 in UFC 202, he yelled: “Surprise, surprise motherfuckers: the king is back!” 
Then he descended from the cage, marching triumphant across the arena floor 
until he got to the tunnel and nearly collapsed.


Conor McGregor beats Nate Diaz in UFC 202 epic and calls for rematch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/ufc-202-conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-fight-report-rematch>
His shin throbbed, his ankle – hurt days ago – ached. He hobbled toward his 
locker room needing strong men to hold him up. But he refused to let the crowd 
see him that way. Later, he was on crutches and headed to the hospital. He had 
fought until he couldn’t walk. And there was pride in that. One even bigger than
that 13 second knockout of Jose Aldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/conor-mcgregor-stuns-jose-aldo-in-13-seconds-to-take-ufc-featherweight-title>
 that had set him on the path of hubris.


“It was a hell of a fight,” he said of Saturday’s contest.


He was tired. His leg hurt and the hospital trip awaited. But he said he had 
learned a lot about fighting Diaz that he didn’t knowwhen he lost by submission 
in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
. He had studied and practiced. He knew now that Diaz had a deceptively long 
reach, that the optics of battling this would lure him closer where Diaz would 
be able to hit him, grab him and pull him down, taking the fight to the canvas 
where the Californian is stronger. He eyed Diaz warily, careful to stay far 
away, to not make that one mistake that Diaz would see and exploit. He made 
sure to punch because that’s what McGregor does best.


Eventually he had sliced open a cut on Diaz’s face and then he hit it again 
and again until he was wearing his opponent’s blood. Diaz fell to the ground 
and each time McGregor assessed the situation and realized he couldn’t fall for 
a fight fought on the American’s strengths. Each time he knocked Diaz down, 
Diaz got back up.


“He’s a tough motherfucker,” McGregor said. “He took all my shots, I dropped 
him multiple times.”


McGregor came into the fight expecting it would go the distance. Somehow he 
knew he wouldn’t be able to end things quickly this time. In many ways, the 
Aldo fight inUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 196 had ruined him. 
Back then he talked a lot about all the cars and he would buy and the money he 
was making. It was as if McGregor the fighter had been overtaken by McGregor 
the celebrity. The Irishman almost seemed to care more about the money than the 
fighting.

Through his recent “retirement” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/20/conor-mcgregor-retirement-ufc-200>
 andthe decision to pull him from the UFC 200 card 
<http://www.mmafighting.com/2016/4/19/11464766/dana-white-conor-mcgregor-pulled-from-ufc-200-because-he-wouldnt>
, he clearly had focused on the second Diaz fight, assessing it to be a war on 
the Las Vegas Strip. He talked about the weeks of work he had put in, the extra 
coaches he had hired to help him get ready for Diaz. This was something his 
opponent later laughed about – part in admiration, part in scorn. “He followed 
the leader and he hired all the people who did a great job,” Diaz said.

There will be some who hated this fight, who thought McGregor danced away from 
Diaz too much. Diaz became flustered and waved his middle finger McGregor’s 
way. But McGregor would not get lured by the siren song of a taunting Diaz who 
wanted to bring the fight to his strengths.

Later McGregor talked about a rematch that everyone in the arena seemed to 
want. Then finally the man who had been serious became a little more like the 
showman. He smiled - a bit. “Shit is about to hit the fan ... so we will see,” 
he said.

Still this McGregor was not the McGregor of earlier this year. He held back, 
he was careful.After he lost to Diaz before he looked at all the comments from 
other fighters who said he was finished and his rise to the top was done. “I 
tell you, it lit the fire a little bit,” he said.

And the old Conor McGregor came back. The one who fought hungry, who wanted a 
win on Saturday like he wanted wins so many years ago. Nate Diaz didn’t give 
up. But neither did he.
 