
Conor McGregor would not stay quiet for long after the UFC stripped him of one 
of the two title belts he hoped to defend simultaneously. Just days after the 
organization said it wastaking away his featherweight title belt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/conor-mcgregor-gives-up-ufc-featherweight-title-jose-aldo>
, McGregor replied in the most typical way: by obtaining a boxing licence.

On Wednesday, the California state athletic commission confirmed that McGregor 
hasobtained a boxing licence in the state.  
<http://www.espn.com/mma/story/_/id/18176293/conor-mcgregor-ufc-issued-boxing-license-california>
This presumably paves the way for the fight with Floyd Mayweather that McGregor 
has talked about for months.

UFC fighters unite to demand better treatment: 'It’s a fight for what's right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/ufc-fighters-union-wme-img-better-treatment>
However, the chances of a McGregor-Mayweather bout taking place are remote. 
Talk of that fight first surfaced last spring when McGregor was pulled from the 
UFC 200 card for not doing the pre-fight promotions demanded by theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc>.

Once his rematch for Nate Diaz was rescheduled for August’s UFC 202, the 
Mayweather discussions went away. On, Wednesday, Mayweather Promotions CEO 
Leonard Ellerbe scoffed at the idea of a McGregor-Mayweather fight,telling ESPN:
 
<http://www.espn.com/mma/story/_/id/18176293/conor-mcgregor-ufc-issued-boxing-license-california>
 “It’s all a game. It’s all calculated to get more fans.”

Ellerbe said: “It’s another creative way to create more interest. Nobody is 
mad, but it’s a con job trying to make people think this is real – and even 
mentioning him and [Mayweather] in the same breath is disrespectful, completely 
disrespectful.”

Still, McGregor does have the licence, and it is ballast he can use against 
the UFC as he plots a fight for next year. Although UFC president Dana White 
had repeatedly said McGregor would not be able to defend the featherweight belt 
he won last December and the lightweight title he won from Eddie Alvarez 
earlier this month, McGregor carried on as if he was going to keep both. He 
even went as far as to have UFC officials grab another fighter’s belt to 
replicate the featherweight title as he paraded around the ring.

Ironically, that belt belonged to welterweight champion Tyron Woodley, who 
happened to be standing closest to the frantic official looking for an extra 
belt that night. After defeating Alvarez, McGregor hinted at wanting to go 
after Woodley next, and be able to to say he is the champion in three weight 
classes. He has also talked about a third fight with Diaz after the two split 
their first two bouts.

After the Alvarez fight, White said: “I’ve never dealt with anyone like this 
kid.” He added that McGregor is the only fighter who will step out of the cage 
following one of his bouts and tell White exactly who he wants to fight next.

McGregor seemed to have little interest in defending the featherweight title 
against Jose Aldo, the man he knocked out in 13 seconds to win the title back 
in December. That the UFC vacated the championship, giving it back to Aldo, who 
had been the interim belt-holder, was not a surprise. But the act wasn’t going 
to go without some kind of response.

Conor McGregor now makes the rules in UFC ... and everyone else follows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/13/conor-mcgregor-ufc-205-mma> 
McGregor isn’t expected to fight until May at the soonest, with his longtime 
girlfriend expecting a baby early next year. While he could set up a boxing 
match in California with either Mayweather or someone else, his name and fame 
remains the biggest inMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> fighting. And 
after every threat to leave in the past has ended with him signing on for 
another UFC bout, it will be hard to see this latest move as anything but a 
maneuver to wrestle more leverage from that organization.

Ellerbe said: “He got a boxing licence. Congratulations to him. Conor McGregor 
can say anything he wants to, but he has a boss, and his name is (UFC 
president) Dana White. He is under contract to the UFC, and if he wanted to 
fightFloyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> in a 
boxing match he can’t because his bosses wouldn’t allow that to happen.


“The brass [from WME-IMG] who recently purchased the UFC are very smart 
people, and they would never – and put this in bold caps – let him step into a 
boxing ring with Floyd Mayweather, because everyone knows what the outcome 
would be. He would get his ass beat from pillar to post.”
 