
At first glance it’s just another construction site. On one side of the yard, 
a group of men in hard hats stand around a large electric saw, watching the 
foreman demonstrate how it works. Further along, another group are wielding 
hand saws. The sound of banging and clashing comes from inside a half-finished 
wooden structure.

But this isn’t your average building site and these are no regular builders. 
They’re patients on day release from three low secure mental health facilities 
within the Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University (ABMU) health board inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/wales>.

 The group is here at Down To Earth, a not-for-profit education organisation 
based near Swansea, as part of the Building Community project, funded by the 
Big Lottery’s people and places grant, which aims to engage hard to reach and 
vulnerable adults and young people through participation in practical, 
educational and community-based activity.

Paul, who didn’t want to tell the Guardian his surname, is one of today’s 
workers. It’s his fifth time on site, and so far he’s enjoyed learning skills 
such as sawing, measuring and team work, all of which are designed to boost 
confidence and mental wellbeing.

 “It makes me feel better,” he says. “I feel like I’ve done something 
worthwhile.”

 His occupational therapist technician, Freya Jones, from the Taith Newydd 
mental health unit at Glanrhyd hospital, says it’s having a huge benefit on the 
group. “I’ve really seen an improvement in confidence in the guys since they’ve 
been here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69eacb8deb2c40a08b719151b62c0fb42cc74af4%2F0_60_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Construction%20project%20rebuilds%20lives%20after%20brain%20injury%20and%20mental%20illness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Construction%20project%20rebuilds%20lives%20after%20brain%20injury%20and%20mental%20illness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69eacb8deb2c40a08b719151b62c0fb42cc74af4%2F0_60_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
 ‘Wellbeing can be delivered through an educational and community regeneration 
approach ...’ Composite: Down to Earth 
 This anecdotal evidence is supported by clinical research funded by ABMU and 
Swansea University, which is measuring the effectiveness of this kind of work 
on both psychological and physiological wellbeing, as well as the healthcare 
impact of the project’s approach.

 “Wellbeing and healthcare isn’t just doing some gardening or singing in a 
community choir,” says Down To Earth founder Mark McKenna.

 “We want to show that wellbeing can be delivered through an educational and 
community regeneration approach, so you don’t separate out healthcare from 
education or healthcare and education from community regeneration. It’s an 
integrated, cross-sector approach.”

Westminster: wealth, opulence and socially isolated new mothers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/05/westminster-wealth-opulence-isolated-mothers-mental-health>
Another study is being undertaken with a group of brain injury patients from 
Morriston hospital in Swansea. In their case, the emphasis is on 
neuro-rehabilitation, with four factors under consideration: depression and 
anxiety levels, quality of life and wellbeing. In all four areas, the results 
have been significant and positive.

 Alan Gee is a prime example of the project’s success. Just over three years 
ago, the 56-year-old father of four fell from a height while cleaning the 
stables at his home in Pembrokeshire. He landed headfirst on the concrete 
floor, fracturing his skull in 12 places.

 Less than a fortnight later he was discharged from hospital, but the recovery 
process was only just beginning. Battling memory loss, slow mental processing, 
fatigue and mood swings, Gee spent a year doing little more than lying on the 
sofa, heavily medicated with painkillers.

Then, in 2014, he was referred to Down To Earth and joined the first group of 
brain injury patients to work on the construction of the training centre. The 
experience is one he believes transformed his life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6174994031fd6887928fe6a15ab280edd485b031%2F0_60_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Construction%20project%20rebuilds%20lives%20after%20brain%20injury%20and%20mental%20illness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Construction%20project%20rebuilds%20lives%20after%20brain%20injury%20and%20mental%20illness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fconstruction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6174994031fd6887928fe6a15ab280edd485b031%2F0_60_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
 Everyone in the project hopes it will be the start of a new way of providing 
practical community-based healthcare solutions. Photograph: Down to Earth 
“It’s like coming in and having an arm put round you and someone saying it’s 
alright,” he says. “People understood. A lot of people with serious brain 
injury become defined by it. People stick them in a box. Projects like this get 
you out of that box. You become the new you – you don’t have to be ‘the brain 
injury person’.”

 His neuropsychologist, Dr Zoe Fisher, has nothing but praise for the work 
Down To Earth is doing.

 “It’s really bridging the gap between the health service and the community,” 
she says. “Usually, we’re confined to a hospital; if you don’t have access to 
real life situations, you can’t help people through them.

 “You can’t do neuropsychology to someone, you do it with them. There’s no 
them and us in this project, everybody just gets involved. It helps us achieve 
the same objectives in a more holistic way than in the hospital.”

 Everyone involved in the project hopes it will be the start of a new way of 
providing practical community-based healthcare solutions – including Gee’s 
wife, Michelle.

 “It wasn’t just somewhere Alan came to spend some time,” she says. “The way 
he was when he came home each time, to me that growth was rapid. We could start 
to see him finding himself again.

 “This shouldn’t be seen as alternative; it’s the future. It has to be. 
Medication is fantastic and it has a time and a place, but it doesn’t create 
the future.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 