
Fifa 15 is set to be released later this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/08/football-50-best-footballers-fifa-15>
 and with state-of-the-art graphics and enhanced gameplay, the video game has 
never been better at mimicking real life football. But it appears that the 
oldest incarnation of the franchise – Fifa 94, otherwise known as Fifa 
International Soccer – has itself proved an inspiration for Granada’s Allan 
Nyom, who remembered the canny trick of outrunning the referee in order to 
avoid a booking.

After careering into a Villarreal player during his side’s 0-0 draw on Sunday, 
Nyom craftily sprinted down the other end of the pitch in blatant disregard of 
Carlos del Cerro Grande, the La Liga referee who was left trailing in his wake. 
The official did eventually catch up with Nyom to issue him with a yellow card.

This was a tactic for Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> ‘94 
gamers, who could avoid a yellow card, as long as they kept out of arm’s reach 
of the referee.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7w1crw8MCEc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7w1crw8MCEc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7w1crw8MCEc&media=>
This is not the first time that situations in computer games have been copied 
on a football field in real life. Another glitch in Fifa ‘94 was simply to 
stand in front of the goalkeeper when he is about to take a long kick up-field.

Lechia Gdansk’s Maciej Makuszewski – perhaps a keen retro gamer – stood in 
front of Podbeskidzie Bielsko-Biala’s goalkeeper Richard Zajac for a clearance 
in the Polish league in July, helping his team to a narrow 1-0 win in the 
process.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_41HlTi2ouU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_41HlTi2ouU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_41HlTi2ouU&media=>
An EA Sports employee, Marius Hjerpseth, even took it upon himself to 
re-create an entire Fifa video game in real life earlier this year –complete 
with camera angles, commentary and celebrations 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T2X4zBaJEYk>.

Are there any more examples of video games inspiring real-life sport? Post 
your tips in the comments section below.
 