
As Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack testified before the House Agriculture 
Committee this week on the upcoming 2015 Dietary Guidelines, a debate inside 
and outside the Capitol continues about whether the dietary benefits of low-fat 
milk are as significant as they have been portrayed by both major health 
organizations and the dairy industry. The guidelines, which are updated every 
five years and will be released later this calendar year by the Department of
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Human Services and 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), are expected to tout vegetables, fruits, 
whole grains, legumes, nuts, seafood and “low- or non-fat dairy” as part of a 
“healthy dietary pattern”, according to an advisory report released in advance 
of this year’s full guidelines.

But there is little evidence that low-fat milk is a healthier dietary choice. 
In fact, an increasing body of evidence seems to indicate that whole fat milk 
could be a better choice.

Skim, low-fat and whole milks are all processed similarly in the US. The cream 
is separated from the whey and then added back in – or not in the case of skim 
milk. Low-fat milks may contain 1% or 2% fat, while whole milk contains 3.25% 
fat. Cup for cup, whole fat milk contains fewer carbohydrates than low-fat or 
skim because more of its volume is made up of fat, which does not contain 
lactose. It also has slightly less protein.

Several prominent nutrition researchers, including Walter Willett, who is 
known for his ongoing, long term health studies, and David Ludwig, who like 
Willett teaches at the Harvard School of Public Health, have been questioning 
dietary guidelines that promote low-fat and skim milk over whole milk. Often, 
flavorings such as chocolate and strawberry and sugars are added to low-fat and 
skim milk to make up for the loss of taste when the fat is removed. In those 
cases, the sugar content can increase by as much as14g per cup 
<http://www.naturaleater.com/science-articles/136-Three-daily-servings-Milk-Really-Ludwig-JAMA-2013.pdf>
. Studies are increasingly indicating that sugar can lead to heart disease and 
other health problems, even in individuals who are not overweight.

Other nutrition experts see skim milk as a less attractive option because it 
does not have as desirable a balance of fat to sugar to protein. “I don’t know 
anyone who would recommend skim,” said Suzanne Rostler, a registered dietician 
and co-author with Ludwig of Ending the Food Fight.

Lower fat milks gained in popularity beginning in the 1960s because of the 
move against saturated fats, which were believed to lead to weight gain and 
because saturated fat raised LDL, and LDL was tied to heart disease, according 
to Robert Lustig, Professor of Pediatrics in the Division of Endocrinology at 
the University of California, San Francisco and author of Fat Chance: Beating 
the Odds Against Sugar, Processed Foods, Obesity, and Disease. “These two facts 
started the skim milk craze,” he said in an email.

Between 1975 and 2014, sales of whole fat milk have decreased by nearly 61%, 
while sales of 2% milk have increased nearly 106%. Sales of 1% and skim milk 
have increased by around 170% and 156%, respectively, according to data from 
the USDA.

But subsequent research has shown that because fat is more satiating, or 
filling, eating some higher fat foods can lead to lower calorie intake overall. 
Cow’s milk, including whole milk, also does not cause a significant insulin 
response, which is what leads to weight gain, according to Lustig. It also 
turns out that saturated fats in dairy can protect against certain diseases and 
are not associated with heart disease, as previously thought. “In any case, the 
entire dairy/saturated fat hypothesis has been completely debunked,” Lustig 
said. (See:American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Siri-Tarino+Meta-analysis+of+prospective+cohort+studies>
 andAnnals of Internal Medicine 
<http://annals.org/article.aspx?articleid=1846638>.)

Lorrene Ritchie, Director of the Nutrition Policy Institute, a research 
organization, said by email that she believes low-fat or skim milk is still 
preferable to whole milk because liquid calories are not as filling as 
equivalent calories from solid foods and nationwide, the goal for most people 
should be to reduce calorie intake. “Until we decrease calorie intake on a 
population level, we are unlikely to see much reversal in the obesity 
epidemic,” she said.

Alan Sugar: ‘I don't know the price of a pint of milk’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/03/lord-alan-sugar-british-poverty-out-of-touch>
However, several recent studies in the European Journal of Nutrition 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22810464> and Scandinavian Journal of 
Primary Health Care <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3656401/> have 
shown that consumption of high-fat dairy foods are inversely associated with 
obesity.

A September report 
<http://publications.credit-suisse.com/tasks/render/file/index.cfm?fileid=9163B920-CAEF-91FB-EE5769786A03D76E>
 from the Credit Suisse Research Institute describes fat itself as “The New 
Health Paradigm”, and predicts that fat intake will grow to 31% of calorie 
intake from 26% by 2030, with saturated fat growing the fastest. In terms of 
dairy and its effect on cardiovascular disease (CVD), the report states: “Out 
of 18 studies published between 2010 and 2013, eight suggest that dairy lowers 
CVD risk, nine suggest no effect and only one points to a slight risk linked to 
dairy consumption.”

Consumers may decide what type of milk is best for them personally based on 
their preferred balance of calories to fat to protein to carbohydrates specific 
to their health history and their genetics. Either way, no one should be 
drinking enough milk for the type of that milk to make much of a difference on 
his or her health overall.

“In nutrition, there are no absolutes, only relative statements in the context 
of everything else someone eats,” said Marion Nestle, a professor of nutrition 
at New York University and author of What to Eat, and Food Politics.

“I don’t think the kind of milk or milk at all matters if the overall diet is 
reasonable. Everything in moderation.”
 