
Donald Trump has sent some mixed signals on China. One minute they are 
“raping” America, the next they are his best clients. Even the way he says the 
word –and he says it a lot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RDrfE9I8_hs> – 
seeds confusion. Sometimes the president-elect spits it out like poison, 
sometimes he exclaims the word as if greeting a favoured child. Whatever his 
real attitude, those that study the world’s second-largest economy believe 
US-China relations are in for a rocky time when Trump reaches the White House – 
and the global consequences could be dire.


Trump excoriated China’s trade policies during his election campaign and 
succeeded in needling Beijing intothreats of retaliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/china-threatens-to-cut-sales-of-iphones-and-us-cars-if-naive-trump-pursues-trade-war>
 after pledging to whack a 45% tariff on Chinese imports.


The president-elect rattled Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/trump-tantrums-signal-trouble-for-china-us-relations-state-media>
 again earlier this month after taking a call from Taiwanese president Tsai 
Ing-wen – the first communication between top officials from the two 
governments in nearly 40 years.

Last week he seemed to be attempting to mend fences, appointing Iowa governor 
Terry Branstad, “an old friend of the Chinese people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-administration-terry-branstad-ambassador-china>
” according to Beijing officials, as his ambassador to China. But such a signal 
has not been enough to head off worries of a looming trade war between China 
and the US that would send shockwaves across the globe.

“The initial signs are not good,” said Minxin Pei, professor of government at 
Claremont McKenna College in California and author of the book China’s Crony 
Capitalism.

The US has recognised Taiwan as part of China since 1979 and its status is 
“non-negotiable”, said Pei. Branstad is an interesting pick and “shows a 
gesture that he wants to keep the relationship on an even keel”. But Pei said 
descriptions of Branstad as a longtime friend of Chinese leader Xi Jinpin were 
overblown. “That’s a very American way of describing friendship. Very few 
Chinese leaders have longtime friends,” he said. “WhatChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> really values in an ambassador is not 
his relationship with them but his relationship with the White House.”


Those doing business with the two trading powers will have a lot invested in 
the pro-trade Branstad’s powers of persuasion. Academic studies have already 
shown the consequences of political spats with Beijing. In 2010 the University 
of Gottingen in Germany coined the term “the Dalai Lama effect 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/BUSINESS/11/04/dalai.lama.trade.china/>” after its 
study found countries whose top leadership met with Tibet’s exiled spiritual 
leader lost on average 8.1% in exports to China in the two years following the 
meeting.

The first true test of the Trump White House’s relationship with China may 
come in April, when the US Treasury releases a report looking at China’s 
currency. Trump has long maintained that China has been devaluing its currency 
in order to stack the deck on exports in its favour.


“If he wants to impose tariffs on China, he needs a procedural excuse. He 
can’t just get into the White House and the next day announce a tariff 
increase, it wouldn’t look good,” said Pei.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&media=>
China dismisses Trump call with Taiwan as ‘small trick’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/03/china-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Allegations of Chinese currency manipulation are out of date and largely 
incorrect, according to Pei. In fact, Beijing has been burning through its 
currency reserves in an attempt to prop up the value of the yuan. “But for
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> that doesn’t 
matter. Intellectual rigour is not one of his concerns.”

Louis Kuijs, head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics and a former senior 
China economist at the World Bank, said it was “more legitimate now than at 
anytime in the last 10 years to talk about the risk of something pretty close 
to a trade war”, he said.

“Anyone with a stake in Chinese exports, especially to the US, should be 
worried,” said Kuijs, adding that US and European companies that assemble 
products in China would also see their bottom lines affected.


If a trade war starts, it is likely to start with targeted hits, said Pei. If 
Trump wants to placate his base in the midwest he could target Chinese steel, 
for example. China is engaging “in at least questionable” practices in the 
steel industry, says Pei. “The industry has so much overcapacity and they are 
exporting a lot of cheap steel and that is disrupting.”

If the moves are small enough, China might chose to ignore them and 
concentrate on the bigger picture. But past at a certain point, Beijing will 
retaliate and would likely target large American firms, Boeing or Apple for 
example, that increasingly rely on China.

Both sides have a lot to lose in a trade war. China is currently the US’s 
largest goods trading partner 
<https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/china-mongolia-taiwan/peoples-republic-china>
. Trade between the two was worth $598bn in total during 2015, with US exports 
to China totalling $116bn and imports totalling $482bn. China has more to lose 
but the types of goods it sells to the US are harder to source elsewhere.


The three largest categories of goods China buys from the US are soybeans, 
cars and aircraft, all of which China could source from elsewhere.

The three largest categories that the US imports from China are mobile phones, 
tablets/laptops and network equipment. “In each case, China is the dominant 
global supplier, producing about 70% of global output. A high tariff would end 
up as effectively a tax on US purchases of consumer electronics,” Capital 
Economics’ chief Asia economist wrote in a recent note to investors.


Tariffs on those goods would also disrupt trade right across the Asia Pacific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> region, said Pei. Some 35% of 
China’s exports in 2015 was “processing trade”, where China imports components 
from other countries and assembles them for exports. A trade war with China on 
those goods would cause collateral damage on imports from Japan, South Korea, 
Taiwan and others.

While both sides would suffer, China’s economy is more reliant on US exports 
and a serious spat would rock the economy at a time ofsluggish growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/chinas-property-frenzy-and-surging-debt-raises-red-flag-for-economy>
. Household debt has soared as property prices have increased, and millions of 
workers are set to lose their jobs as the government seeks to rebalance the 
economy away from state-led investments.

Not all factory owners in China are worried about an upcoming trade war. 
“Trump’s grandstanding performances during the campaign were for publicity, but 
he’s a successful businessman and therefore should be very rational in his 
thinking,” said Sun Sijun, chief executive of Uptop Group in southern China, 
which exports between $150m-$200m worth of Samsonite suitcases and Walmart 
shoes to the US every year. “Rationally, the basic interests are not to make 
enemies, and to ultimately not harm yourself,” he said.

“Trump’s talk of increasing tariffs is in the hope of increasing employment in 
America,” Sun said. “But there’s a very small probability you can bring these 
labour-intensive industries back to the US. Labour-intensive industries flowed 
to third world, and they won’t return to America.”


But other producers in China see only dark clouds on the horizon. Chen Yadong 
also sells to Walmart. His company, Indena, makes computer mice and bluetooth 
speakers, sending more than 1m mice to the US each year.


“I’m extremely worried,” Chen said from the electronics manufacturing hub of 
Shenzhen in southern China. “The US is the largest market for export-oriented 
companies here. If Trump increases tariffs, then this business will become 
increasingly difficult.”


China’s leaders don’t know what to think of Trump quite yet, said Pei. But 
they do understand the consequences of a trade war. “The Chinese have a 
proverb: ‘you lift a rock only to drop it on your own foot.’”

Additional reporting by Christy Yao

 