 Drifts of dry beech leaves from last autumn still edged the stone steps in the 
woods above Llangorwen. Strong winds had brought down circles of acorns beneath 
the oaks, and they popped freshly underfoot. The leaves of the horse chestnuts 
were starting to gather patches of richer colour, while the spines on the 
conkers still felt soft to the touch. The hedges of the lane held a few 
honeysuckle and red campion flowers, although the sloes in their white bloom 
had passed their prime. The old stone track down to the coast was deserted 
apart from two combatant robins. The elderberries looked perfect - rich and 
dark. The track descends the valley and opens out beside the overgrown stream 
on to the shore at Wallog. The fine stone house, the arched lime kiln on the 
shoreline and the robust sea wall spell out a prosperous past - when coastal 
craft grounded here to unload the limestone which, when processed, would help 
feed the bitter upland soil.
The most impressive feature is the great pebble bank that juts out into the 
sea. Sarn Gynfelyn, a spur of rounded cobbles, extends more than five miles out 
into the bay - although only the first few hundred feet are visible. "Sarn" can 
be translated from the Welsh as "causeway" - a hint at a lore that speaks of 
ancient sunken lands. And although logic dictates that this is morainic 
material once entrained within a westward flowing glacier, on a still, sunny 
day the sense of a built structure was hard to shake. I stood for a while 
enjoying the sun and the quiet but the dark cloud moving in from the south-west 
suggested that I had chosen the right day to celebrate summer's end.
 