
Lawyers for the Scottish and Welsh governments have been allowed to take part 
in the supreme court case over Theresa May’s decision to bar MPs from voting on 
Brexit.

In an unprecedented hearing, all 11 supreme court judges will convene in early 
December to rule on whether the Commons must be allowed to vote on triggering 
the article 50 process, against the UK government’s wishes.

The supreme court confirmed on Friday that the chief law officers for the 
Scottish and Welsh governments would be allowed to intervene, broadening the 
case into a legal battle over the role and status of three parliaments in the 
process.

Meanwhile in Belfast, a campaigner for victims of paramilitary violence has 
won the right to a hearing in the supreme court aimed at blocking Northern 
Ireland from leaving the EU. The high court ruled that Raymond McCord’s legal 
challenge against Brexit could be heard in London.

This month three high court judges in London ruled that the prime minister did 
not have the power to use the royal prerogative to invoke article 50 without 
parliamentary approval, a ruling now being challenged by May.


The UK government has rejected Scottish claims that Holyrood should have a 
direct say in triggering article 50. It argues that foreign affairs and legal 
treaties are matters entirely reserved for the UK government.

A UK government spokesman said it was up to the court who was allowed to take 
part. “The UK government’s position remains the same, and we will be taking 
strong legal arguments to court next month,” he said.

The supreme court’s statement on Friday suggested the Scottish government 
would play a relatively limited role in the hearings, and would be asked to 
focus on areas of Scottish law that were relevant and new to the case.


James Wolffe, Scotland’s lord advocate, has been asked “to address in their 
skeleton arguments the relevance of points of Scots law, so far as they do not 
also form part of the law of England andWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, to the determination of the present 
proceedings.”

A court spokesman said there had been no Scottish court proceedings on Brexit 
in which these arguments had been aired. The issues under English law had 
already been debated in the earlier judicial review.

The court also said the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain, a new 
trade union formed to represent contract staff and “gig economy” workers such 
as couriers, would also be allowed to intervene on the Scottish law element. A 
fourth applicant, named as the “Expat Interveners, George Birnie and others”, 
was also allowed to take part.


Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/08/scottish-parliament-nicola-sturgeon-article-50-case>
 that invoking article 50 raised substantial questions about the rights of the 
Scottish parliament since it had clear legally defined powers and duties in 
areas directly affected by the EU.


“The Scottish government is clear that triggering article 50 will directly 
affect devolved interests and rights inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,” she said. “And triggering article 
50 will inevitably deprive Scottish people and Scottish businesses of rights 
and freedoms which they currently enjoy.


“It simply cannot be right that those rights can be removed by the UK 
government on the say-so of a prime minister without parliamentary debate, 
scrutiny or consent.”

The lord advocate’s submission to the supreme court said leaving the EU would 
lead to Scottish residents and businesses including EU citizens now resident in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> “losing rights and freedoms 
which they currently enjoy.”

It would also result in a significant change to the Scottish parliament’s 
powers and functions, and potentially sidestep the convention where Holyrood’s 
consent to such changes should be sought.

Scottish and Welsh government lawyers sat in as observers on the first 
judicial review that led to next month’s supreme court hearing.

Mike Russell, the Scottish government’s Brexit minister, urged May to drop the 
supreme court appeal and allow Westminster to vote on article 50.

“Parliament has the right to determine the triggering of article 50,” Russell 
said. “We recognise the decision of people in England and Wales to support 
Brexit, but the views of people in Scotland cannot simply be brushed aside.”

The Welsh government was the first to call for the right to intervene, on 4 
November, but it, unlike the Scottish government, has accepted the decision to 
leave the EU, after Wales voted narrowly in favour of Brexit.

Mick Antoniw, counsel general for Wales, said the article 50 hearing “raise[s] 
issues of profound importance” for the devolved nations. The Welsh government 
is also anxious to ensure its voice is not drowned out in the coming months.

“This case is not about whether the UK leaves the EU or not,” Antoniw said on 
Friday. “The people have voted for the UK to leave the EU, and the UK will 
leave. The sole legal question at issue is whether the UK government can, as a 
matter of constitutional law, use the prerogative powers to give notice of 
withdrawal from the European Union.”
 