
Coventry City’s defender Chris Stokes has been handed a one-game ban and fined 
£1,000 by the Football Association for posting a homophobic remark on Twitter.

Stokes will also attend an FA education course after he admitted breaching FA 
rules which relate to the use of social media.

“After an internal club and FA investigation, Coventry City defender Chris 
Stokes will receive a one match suspension and (is) ordered to attend an FA 
education course after he admitted breaching FA Rules which relate to the use 
of social media,”Coventry said in a statement on their official website 
<http://www.ccfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/chris-stokes-fa-charge-coventry-city-3139892.aspx>
. “The penalty is in relation to an incident that took place in May, when 
commenting on the Premier League fixture between Chelsea and Tottenham via 
Twitter.

“Stokes has been charged for a remark he made which was abusive and/or 
insulting and/or improper. It was further alleged that it was an ’aggravated 
breach’ as it included a reference to sexual orientation. Following an 
Independent Regulatory Commission hearing ... Stokes has been also fined 
£1,000.”

The statement added: “Coventry City FC expect the highest level of 
professionalism from our players as we’re a family club and we want our players 
to act as role models in the Coventry and Warwickshire community. Stokes has 
received training from representatives from Kick It Out andCoventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> FC will continue to work 
alongside all members of the club to ensure they are versed in proper conduct.”

Stokes sent a message on Twitter towards Chelsea and Tottenham players during 
their2-2 draw on 2 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/03/chelsea-tottenham-talking-points-leicester-win-title>
. The resultconfirmed Leicester City as Premier League champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
.

The 25-year-old tweeted: “This games embarrassing to watch! Bunch of faggots”.

He later posted an apology on Twitter, and in a 3 May statement said on 
Coventry’s website: “I’d like to apologise for any offence I’ve caused. It was 
a brainless moment from me and I’m really disappointed in myself for using that 
term, I’m not homophobic at all.

“However, I know it is not acceptable by any means and I’m really sorry to any 
of our supporters or anyone in the wider public who have been offended by the 
remark.”
 