
It was unconvincing at times, but North Queensland have tuned up for the 
finals with a 42-12 mauling of theGold Coast Titans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gold-coast-titans>.


The game was in the balance with the Cowboys leading 20-12 midway through the 
second half before hooker Jake Granville sparked his side to five more tries to 
put the Titans away.


His effort in the 67th minute showcased the No.9’s skills.


He darted out of dummy half, grubbered ahead and then batted the ball just 
before it went dead, crashing into the advertising signage just as Antonio 
Winterstein was grounding the ball.


Granville then put the icing on the cake with a try of his own three minutes 
later, while late tries to James Tamou and Kane Linnett sealed the rout.


The win could have been much greater had the Cowboys not missed six goals 
through the boot of skipper Johnathan Thurston, Kyle Feldt and Ethan Lowe.


The Titans had stunned the third-placed Cowboys by bolting out to 12-0 lead.


The visitors had a completion rate of 90 per cent in the first half as they 
played with plenty of enthusiasm.


North Queensland launched a comeback typical of their style in 2015, but still 
had to weather an onslaught of attacking raids from the Titans early in the 
second half.


The Titans were denied a try in bizarre circumstances in the sixth minute.


An Agnatius Paasi bust was seemingly shut down when Cowboys winger Kyle Feldt 
stripped him of the ball, only for Paasi to pinch it right back and cross in 
the left corner.


But video referee Jared Maxwell ruled the initial strip was illegal.


The visitors made sure of it in the next set, a Daniel Mortimer bomb finding 
flying winger Kalifa Faifai Loa for the first points of the match.


Minutes later the Titans were in again as Josh Hoffman streaked away off the 
back of a rare Thurston error.


North Queensland needed a spark, and they found it through Michael Morgan’s 
deputy Ray Thompson who waltzed through some slack defence.


Back-to-back penalties gave the Cowboys prime field position and they made it 
count, Linnett scoring his first try of the night and his ninth for the season.


Thurston’s conversion levelled the scores.


Nene Macdonald kicked out on the full straight afterwards, which led to a 
Winterstein try and the Cowboys started to punch holes in the Titans’ defence 
at will.


The momentum swung squarely back in the Gold Coast’s favour off the back of 
four consecutive penalties, prompting Henry Perenara to give Thurston a talking 
to about his side’s discipline.


Dave Taylor crossed, but he knocked the ball on trying to ground it and 
releasing the pressure.


Ryan James knocked on in the first set of the second half allowing Cowboys 
fullback Lachlan Coote to cross, pushing the lead out to 20-12.


When Gavin Cooper scored in the 62nd minute, the Titans resistance was all but 
over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1568fa4028ef72445a863a51bc8764927494b6%2F0_197_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cowboys%20in%20cruise%20control%20as%20St%20George%20defy%20Wests%20Tigers%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cowboys%20in%20cruise%20control%20as%20St%20George%20defy%20Wests%20Tigers%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1568fa4028ef72445a863a51bc8764927494b6%2F0_197_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
 Benji Marshall of the Dragons makes a break during the Round 26 NRL match 
between the St George Illawarra Dragons and the Wests Tigers at ANZ Stadium. 
Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
St George Illawarra have stumbled into the NRL finals series, surviving an 
incredible comeback from theWests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> to prevail 32-30 in golden 
point at ANZ Stadium.


Fullback Josh Dugan slotted a penalty goal from 18 metres out and right in 
front after the siren for the first half of extra time after referee Matt 
Cecchin pinged the Tigers’ markers for not being square.


The Dragons led 30-8 with 20 minutes remaining before the Tigers scored four 
tries in quick succession, including a runaway intercept to winger David 
Nofoaluma with a minute remaining.


In a frantic golden-point shootout, Benji Marshall and Tigers winger Pat 
Richards both missed shots at field goal.


In the end, Marshall was the star for the Dragons, helping his side to a first 
finals appearance since 2011 against his former team.


In what’s likely to be his good friend and Tigers skipper Robbie Farah’s last 
game for the club, halfback Marshall produced an outstanding display of 
tactical kicking in the 12-try thriller.


The victory locked in eighth spot for the Dragons to set up an elimination 
final next week with the fifth-placed side - Cronulla or Melbourne.


Marshall came up with a lovely play in the 47th minute, producing a pin-point 
grubber kick for winger Jason Nightingale to dive on out wide.


Missing his halves partner Gareth Widdop to injury (quadriceps), Marshall’s 
passing game was also superb.


Marshall, who won a premiership with Farah and the Tigers in 2005, put centre 
Euan Aitken over for his second try of the night in the 60th minute with a nice 
short ball and did the same to send back-rower Tyson Frizell in for the final 
try of the first half.


The Dragons went to the break leading 20-8 after Luke Brooks sent a scare 
through the Dragons with an intercept try in the second minute.


The home side hit back with quick tries to Josh Dugan, Eto Nabuli and Aitken.


A bright note for the Tigers was departing winger Richards scoring two tries, 
taking his tally to 17 for the season in his final game for the club before 
continuing his career overseas along with fellow Tigers stalwart Keith Galloway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb728115645727f24dfbaa638dffe85f7921b8ce9%2F0_0_3285_1972%2F3285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cowboys%20in%20cruise%20control%20as%20St%20George%20defy%20Wests%20Tigers%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cowboys%20in%20cruise%20control%20as%20St%20George%20defy%20Wests%20Tigers%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fnrl-round-26-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb728115645727f24dfbaa638dffe85f7921b8ce9%2F0_0_3285_1972%2F3285.jpg>
 A fight breaks out between the Panthers and the Knights during their round 26 
NRL match at Pepper Stadium in Sydney. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
Newcastle have finished with the wooden spoon after being shut out in the 
second half of their 30-12NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> defeat to 
Penrith.

The Knights led 12-8 at halftime but, led by Dean Whare and Tyrone Peachey, 
the Panthers crossed for four tries to none in a dominant second-half 
performance.

Despite missing 10 regular first-graders, the Panthers staved off a last-place 
finish with a hearty performance in front of a crowd of 8,936, temporarily 
lifting themselves to 11th spot on the ladder.

For the Knights, the spoon sums up a disappointing campaign including the 
sacking of coach Rick Stone.

It was also the final Knights’ match for Super League-bound skipper Kurt 
Gidley.

Penrith’s Chris Smith opened the scoring for the home side when he sliced 
through some arm-grabbing defence in the 5th minute, before the lively fullback 
kicked them out to an 8-0 lead with a penalty goal.

Stand-in skipper David Simmons almost pulled off a miracle try in his farewell 
match but planted the ball on the in-goal line.

The Knights slowly began to turn momentum and it was retiring forward Clint 
Newton who posted first points for the visitors, crashing over from close range 
for his first try in almost two years.

Then fullback Jake Mamo gave his side a 12-8 lead at the break when he soared 
to take a Tyrone Roberts kick in the 37th minute.

Penrith centre Whare, who was a late inclusion in the side, regained the lead 
when he steamed onto an inside ball in the 46th minute.

The Knights threatened to hit back when Panthers debutant Smith intercepted a 
Roberts pass and ran 70 metres, before Peachey leapt over on the next play.

A brawl erupted in the 65th minute when Newcastle’s Nathan Ross dumped Whare 
on his head without the ball, before Panthers winger Josh Mansour put the 
result beyond doubt five minutes later.

A 77th-minute try to Peachey sealed the win, giving the retiring Simmons a 
goal in his 200th and final match of his NRL career.

Newcastle forward Tariq Sims was put on report for a shoulder charge early in 
the first half.
 