
As if being trounced 34-18 by premiers North Queensland wasn’t enough, Manly 
have lost star Dylan Walker to a leg injury.


Already down on numbers before his departure, the Sea Eagles were outmuscled 
by the Cowboys in front of 11,734 fans at Brookvale Oval.


The home side lost Brett Stewart, Tom Trbojevic and Api Koroisau before kick 
off, causing a major reshuffle but had another spoke thrown in the wheel when 
Walker left the field midway through the second half.


Despite Manly officials insisting he was fine and that he was only taken off 
as a precaution, their star recruit spent most of the second half on the bench.


With their line up in disarray, the Sea Eagles offered little resistance as 
the Cowboys’ stars ran riot to record their seventh win from nine rounds.


Importantly, it equalled the club’s best start to a season, matching the 7-2 
opening to their 2006 campaign.


The tone was set when Kyle Feldt crossed for a double inside in the first 15 
minutes.


The Cowboys made the home side pay for ill discipline with their first three 
tries coming off the back of penalties.


Antonio Winterstein’s 19th minute try summed up the match with the Cowboys 
pulling off a crisp run-around which made the Manly defensive line look 
disorganised.


The Cowboys were controversially denied a try to Michael Morgan because of 
interference by Kane Linnett on Jamie Lyon. While it had no affect on the 
result, replays revealed the Sea Eagles’ skipper had milked the penalty.


Despite playing in a badly beaten side, halfback Daly Cherry-Evans was at his 
scheming best, scoring a consolation second-half try, setting up Jamie Lyon 
with a neat grubber, almost scoring off a Steve Matai charge-down and pulling 
off a memorable try-saver on Gavin Cooper.


The Cowboys’ forwards as a unit were immense, with James Tamou, Matt Scott, 
Ethan Lowe, Jason Taumalolo and Ben Hannant all running for more than 100 
metres.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2e2a271fdf63cf7015af7d39ffc1f2c8b04eb4%2F0_76_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cowboys%20clip%20Sea%20Eagles%2C%20as%20Roosters%20and%20Panthers%20grab%20key%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cowboys%20clip%20Sea%20Eagles%2C%20as%20Roosters%20and%20Panthers%20grab%20key%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2e2a271fdf63cf7015af7d39ffc1f2c8b04eb4%2F0_76_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mitchell Pearce celebrates with team mates following a try during the round 
nine NRL match between the Sydney Roosters and the Newcastle Knights. 
Photograph: Mark Metcalfe/Getty Images 
Mitchell Pearce has breathed fresh life into the Sydney Roosters’ NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> season with an inspired return from his 
eight-match suspension.


Playing his first match of the year, Pearce guided the Roosters to a crushing 
– and desperately needed – 38-0 victory over Newcastle at Allianz Stadium.


Pearce admitted his unwanted stint on the sideline had been challenging.


“But, to be honest, it has been one of the best things that has happened to 
me,” he told Fox Sports.


“It sounds kind of weird saying that, but I’ve been through a lot and come out 
the other side.


“Just to get back and play well tonight, play well as a team, it’s been good.”


Pearce received a standing ovation after having a hand or foot in three of his 
side’s six tries and scoring one himself to help drag the Roosters off the 
bottom of the ladder, above the hapless Knights, with just their second win 
from nine starts in 2016.


Eels shrug off loss of captain Kieran Foran to beat Bulldogs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/eels-shrug-off-loss-of-captain-kieran-foran-to-beat-bulldogs>
Minor premiers for the past three years, the Roosters still have a mountain to 
climb to make the finals but have certainly given their fans reason for hope.


Inspirational prop Jared Waerea-Hargreaves also made a successful comeback 
after missing the first nine games with a knee injury, leaving coach Trent 
Robinson at last with virtually a full-strength line-up after fellow hardman 
Boyd Cordner’s return from a pectoral tear last week.


Pearce, though, has undoubtedly been the Roosters’ missing link and wasted no 
time proving so in a dominant display that would have also impressed NSW State 
of Origin coach Laurie Daley.


NSW’s incumbent No.6 totally outplayed the Blues’ current No.7 Trent 
Hodkinson, who was powerless to prevent the Knights from being kept scoreless 
for the second time in three games.

Blake Ferguson scored a hat-trick, his first coming in the 16th minute when he 
finished off a play initiated by Pearce before the influential halfback crossed 
himself following a Cordner bust and offload inside his own half.


With a 14-0 lead at the break, the Roosters were in control and all but sealed 
victory when lock Isaac Liu charged over 15 minutes into the second half.


It was Pearce’s rushing defence that forced a Knights error in the lead-up to 
Ferguson’s second four-pointer before the classy playmaker’s crossfield kick 
completed the centre’s try-scoring treble.


Korbin Sims being placed on report for heavy shoulder contact with the head of 
Roosters winger Joe Burgess only added to Newcastle’s woes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dc6ed81abcdfa83d0c7715027b96cb5a0d7235a%2F0_0_2988_1794%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cowboys%20clip%20Sea%20Eagles%2C%20as%20Roosters%20and%20Panthers%20grab%20key%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cowboys%20clip%20Sea%20Eagles%2C%20as%20Roosters%20and%20Panthers%20grab%20key%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fnrl-round-nine-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dc6ed81abcdfa83d0c7715027b96cb5a0d7235a%2F0_0_2988_1794%2F2988.jpg>
 Bryce Cartwright celebrates victory during the round nine NRL match between 
the Penrith Panthers and the Canberra Raiders. Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty 
Images 
Earlier, a 79th-minute field goal to Peter Wallace has given Penrith a 
thrilling 19-18 NRL win over Canberra, continuing their remarkable recent run 
of close contests.

The Panthers looked headed for a second straight heartbreaking defeat when 
Jordan Rapana levelled the score with his second try in the 74th minute.

Both Aidan Sezer and Jamie Soward missed field goal attempts in the final five 
minutes, before Wallace nailed the 25-metre game-winner in Bathurst.

His one-pointer comes two years after tearing his ACL on the same ground.

Down 18-6 with 11 minutes remaining, Raiders forward Paul Vaughan started the 
comeback with a try from close range, before Rapana soared over Peta Hiku to 
give the visitors all the momentum.

But the Panthers held on for a thrilling win, meaning all nine of their games 
this season have been decided in the final five minutes.

The Panthers did their best to keep the Raiders in the game, turning the ball 
over four times in a row in sets coming off their own line in the second half.

Twice the Raiders were held up over the line, while Edrick Lee also spurned a 
third opportunity when he dropped a Jarrod Croker offload with the tryline in 
sight.

He was denied a controversial late try as well, due to a double movement.

Panthers second-rower Bryce Cartwright earlier set up a 12-6 halftime lead by 
scoring the first and setting up a second try for makeshift centre Tyrone 
Peachey.

He opened the scoring by racing 80 metres after picking up an airswing by 
returning Raiders star Blake Austin.

The Raiders replied through Rapana, who accepted a miracle offload from Joseph 
Leilua in the 14th minute, before Cartwright regained the lead with a similar 
effort in the 24th.
 