
PSG warmed up for the latest match in their fight against relegation with a 
team-bonding trip to the go-kart track. Unsurprisingly, Jérôme Rothen, 
currently serving a three-year ban for driving at 245kph in a 110kph zone (and 
bored of his lifts to training in Péguy Luyindula's Smart car) was the fastest 
player. The trip was arranged on the day thatLe Parisien asked, "Would a spell 
in Ligue 2 be good for PSG?" so the chat between coach Paul le Guen and striker 
Pedro Pauleta, teamed up together in the two-man time-trial pairing, might have 
been interesting.

It didn't do the trick, though: PSG needed a late goal from Pauleta to salvage 
a 1-1 draw <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwfMX5nkpyA> at home to 
Valenciennes, the team with Ligue 1's worst away record. The result was the 
least PSG deserved - and if Amara Diané had put away some of his chances, could 
have been better - but it still only keeps them out of the relegation places on 
goal difference. The teams fighting for survival below them, Sochaux and, two 
points back, Toulouse, also both drew so it's as you were at the bottom.

"We deserved more luck," said Pauleta who, like PSG's other big earners Mario 
Yepes and Bernard Mendy, is out of contract at the end of the season and will 
be leaving the club whatever happens. "At least we came back and equalised," 
added Rothen. "We were better [than we have been] on every level, and I'm 
confident we will fight our way out of the situation."

The one thing that could save PSG is the worrying slide of newly-promoted 
Caen. The team thatbeat Bordeaux 5-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=laIn8cmZgkE&feature=related> and Lyon 1-0 in 
December <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDf7sPCEVws> (and were even competing 
for the European places) haven't won a single match in 2008, a run in which 
they havelost 6-1 to Marseille <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=irkd6zJOWks>, 
4-1 at home to Lens <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSPCiBYL9nY> and 2-1 to 
rock-bottom Metz <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fHCamIRrnqk> (who have now 
done the double over them).

This weekend, they lost 5-0 at Lille 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4qbo8_lille-50-caen-day-29_sport>. "If you 
look at our current run, then you might think the house is on fire, but when 
you think of our objective at the start of the season, there is no fire," said 
coach Franck Dumas, back at the club where he started and ended his playing 
career before joining as director of football in 2004. One year later, he was 
appointed coach (with no Uefa badges) to stave off relegation with four games 
left. Caen won three of them but still went down.

"I would never have thought he would end up as a manager," his former Caen 
team-mate Hippolyte Dangbeto toldSo Foot magazine. "Frankie was a very good car 
salesman, he once flogged me a beige Mercedes. If he's coaching today, it's 
because he has a special passion forCaen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen>."

This is Caen's first season back in the top flight and Dumas has been an 
outspoken addition to Ligue 1. He has attacked referees: "Last year Marc Coué 
said Caen would stay in Ligue 2 and told one of my players to go and fuck 
himself, while when Éric Poulat does our matches, he wears out our 
centre-circle as he never moves." And he has attacked journalists: "I would 
have once liked to have had a chance in the France team but I have a problem in 
sucking journalists' dicks." He refuses to take offhis earring 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Xml/Football/Dossiers/Media/071207_FDumas.jpg> ("you 
need to get results to prove you can wear an earring and succeed in football," 
said Gilles Grimandi, a former team-mate from the 1997 title-winning Monaco 
side) and insists that his young and enthusiastic team continue to play decent 
passing football.

That's all very well when things are going well, but Caen are not a physical 
side built to scrap for points. They need a figure like Dumas the player 
(though not inhis brief Newcastle days 
<http://cache.viewimages.com/xc/1009820.jpg?v=1&c=ViewImages&k=2&d=17A4AD9FDB9CF19390335F8FA9CA92A64D2DD0C47DFC59019930FDCFC4C15FBB>
) in their ranks. You could say that Dumas has been let down by three of his 
musketeers: top scorerYoann Gouffran 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B880eh_qZms>, who decided against joining PSG 
in January (despite the clubs agreeing a 5.5m (£4.3m) deal for him), has only 
scored once in the last 12 games;goalkeeper Vincent Planté 
<http://tv.jubii.co.uk/video/iLyROoaftCiy.html> is out of the side with a urine 
infection (no piss-taking, please) and his replacement, 20-year-old Benoît 
Costil, was sent off after an hour against Lille; and then there was Elliott 
Grandin, sold to Marseille in January after falling out with the coach.

"I don't need to take lessons from a guy who lost all his money in the 
casino," Grandin was quoted as saying, to which Dumas replied: "Elliot is 
incapable of putting three words together so I doubt that came from him. Off 
the field, the guy is a mess. As for the casinos, I don't want to talk about 
that: it would have been more interesting if he said that I was always treating 
myself to prostitutes."

Which brings us nicely to the top of the table, where easy scoring was the 
order of the day as Lyon coasted to acomfortable 3-0 win over Monaco 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8haT4s2mZ_k> for their first success in eight 
years at Stade Louis II. They remain six points clear at the top, but there are 
still negative noises coming from the club. The latest came with Sidney Govou 
tellingL'Equipe that the players are not friends off the pitch and the team 
lacks a leader. "No-one stands up and speaks out when things are going badly." 
Alain Perrin was not spared either: "He wanted to control everything and he 
wound up players by taking the mickey, often in public," said Govou.

Perrin's tactics 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2008/03/04/win_in_paris_cannot_hide_perri.html>
 were once again called into question elsewhere, this time by Zinedine Zidane. 
"Lyon could have beaten Manchester United in the Champions League if they had 
played the way they can and went out to attack but they didn't do that," Zidane 
toldCanal Plus after beating Christophe Dugarry in the latest of his sporting 
battles 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4i0hs_duga-zizou-au-detour-dun-tennis-can_sport>
, this time on the go-kart track. "He only won because this is his local track 
and he's always here with his kids," was Dugarry's take on proceedings.

Dugarry's former club Bordeaux kept in touch, just, with Lyon thanks to a 3-0 
win over Strasbourg 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4qlnt_bordeaux-30-strasbourg-29e-journee_sport>
, Brazilian defender Henrique scoring identikit goals from two corners before 
upsetting away fans by firing an imaginary machine-gun in their direction after 
each goal. "I did not mean to disrespect or provoke the fans and I'm sorry for 
the celebration," he said.

Marseille were 2-0 up at half-time but needed a last-minute equaliser from 
Djibril Cisséto earn a 3-3 draw <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJ-lIfS6FhU> 
against Lens in what, it turned out, was one of the games of the season. Lens 
were inspired by second-half substituteEric Carrière 
<http://ericcarriere.sports.fr/fr/toutsavoir/vie/region.asp>, but the point 
leaves them still hovering just above PSG as one of the eight teams separated 
by five points above second-from-bottom Toulouse.

The fight to survive will go to the wire but for PSG (whose last three games 
of the season are against relegation-fighting Toulouse, Saint-Etienne and 
Sochaux), it will probably get worse before it gets better: next week Le Guen 
will be reminded of more successful times as PSG travel to Lyon, the club he 
coached to three straight titles. Now those were happy days.Results, Week 29: 
Monaco 0-3 Lyon, Sochaux 1-1 Nancy, Le Mans 1-1 Rennes, Metz 1-2 Nice, Lorient 
1-1 Auxerre, PSG 1-1 Valenciennes, Lille 5-0 Caen, Saint-Etienne 0-0 Toulouse, 
Bordeaux 3-0 Strasbourg, Marseille 3-3 Lens
 