
With entries ranging from pwâkamo-pahkwêsikan, the Cree word for pizza – “the 
throw-up bread” in literal English – tomôniyâw-matotisân, a sauna or a 
“white-man sweat”, a crowdsourcing project documenting the vitality and 
evolution of the most widely spoken indigenous language inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> is about to be published.

Neal McLeod, a poet and indigenous studies professor at Trent University, set 
out to connect with other Cree speakers on Facebook, aiming to gather together 
classical Cree vocabulary and to “coin and develop” words relating to 
contemporary life. According to a2006 Canadian census 
<http://www12.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2006/as-sa/97-558/p19-eng.cfm>, 
there arearound 117,000 Cree speakers 
<https://books.google.no/books?id=CMEnCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA8&lpg=PA8&dq=cree+speakers+117000&source=bl&ots=fgX0tSTY0F&sig=Ork6q50eNJY-PllkNhcZjA4VMp8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjLiaC38JXNAhWBmiwKHYoSAAwQ6AEIJzAC#v=onepage&q=cree%20speakers%20117000&f=false>
.

McLeod, who is from the James Smith Cree First Nation 
<http://esask.uregina.ca/entry/james_smith_cree_nation.html> in Saskatchewan, 
received responses from across Canada and the US and, after working on the book 
with Arok Wolvengrey, will release 100 Days of Cree through the University of 
Regina Press later this week.

In his introduction to the book, McLeod writes that “one of the key things 
about learning a language is that people assist each other in the process”, but 
that “unfortunately, there have been many ruptures and breaks in the threads of 
our language through time: residential schools, collective trauma, and the 
influence of television and mass communication.

“Some of us no longer have grandparents – mosômak and kôhkomak – who can guide 
us in the process of learning language and stories. We need the stories and 
philosophy to drive and fuel our understanding of the language. It is by a 
collective effort that we can bring the power of the echo of the voices of the 
Old Ones, and the old stories, into the contemporary age,” he writes.

“All too often, people think that technology and television are negative 
factors leading to the decline of indigenous languages, including Cree. 
However, I would say the internet, including Facebook … can help with language 
retention. Social media played a key role in the writing of this book. Words 
were posted, and then people from all over Canada and the US contributed .”

Canadians like to tell ourselves we’re nice, but there's nothing in the 
historical record to demonstrate that's the case
Bruce Walsh, University of Regina Press 
The book contains sections on everything from household items and horses to 
Star Wars, poker, Facebook and Johnny Cash songs (wâsakâm-iskôtêwan is Ring of 
Fire andkwayask ê-pimohtêyân is I Walk the Line).

“One of the things on my bucket list … is to translate Star Wars Episode IV: A 
New Hope into Cree,” writes McLeod, before laying out Cree for Attack of the 
Clones:kâ-môskîstâkêcik aniki kâ-nipahi-nâh-naspitâtocik, “literally, ‘when the 
Ones who resemble each other in an uncanny fashion attack’”, andtâpwê 
mamâhtâwisiw awa, “the Force is strong with this one”.

McLeod hopes that the book will “make a small contribution to the continued 
vitality of the Cree language, and to help provide people interested in the 
language to be able to use it to describe the world around them”.

“Terms were developed for things such as internet use and computers, 
demonstrating the great flexibility and adaptability of the language. It is 
hoped these gathered terms will offer something to the new, large, emerging 
generation of Cree speakers, in whose minds and bodies the future of the 
language now rests,” he writes. “I am a poet, and in this book I have attempted 
to push the Cree language to its limits. To quote the old Cree expression,kâya 
pakicî! âhkamêyimo! (‘Don’t quit! Persevere!’).”

The book’s release comes a year after the publication of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/02/canada-indigenous-schools-cultural-genocide-report>
, which found that Canada had pursued a policy of “cultural genocide” against 
the country’s aboriginal people, and that children in residential schools were 
forbidden to speak their native languages.

The University of Regina Press, which launched three years ago, is attempting 
to address this in its own small way, with a programme that includes readers in 
different languages, as well as 100 Days of Cree. A mix of stories, prayers and 
essays, the readers provide the text in a native language and in English, and 
the publisher has worked with elders in communities to gain their approval. So 
far, it has published five readers, most recently one in Lillooet, which 
publisher Bruce Walsh says has around 200 speakers left. His goal is that the 
series will cover more than 60 aboriginal languages.

“Canadians like to tell ourselves that we’re nice, but there is nothing in the 
historical record to demonstrate that to be the case. We’re shaking things up, 
at a time when people are anxious to know the truth,” he said. “Some of the 
stories in the readers are quite funny and bawdy, which is a part of some 
indigenous traditions. The stories are both traditional and new, and can be 
used by a reader of any age – they’re the sort of thing an eight-year-old might 
sit with their aunt and read together, and they’re also being used in 
classrooms.”

Walsh hopes they will also have wider appeal. “We recently did an 800-unit 
print run in Blackfoot and it sold out. There are not a lot of Blackfoot 
speakers, but there are a lot of people who want to learn the language … These 
books are filling a need. And even if you’re not learning the language, you can 
read the stories in English. They’re so insightful.”
 