
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> has issued a 
rallying call to Real Madrid supporters before Tuesday’s crunch Champions 
League clash with Wolfsburg, urging them to play their part on what could be a 
“magical, perfect night” at the Bernabéu.

Madrid must overturn a 2-0 deficit from last week’s first leg in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/wolfsburg-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 if they are to reach the semi-finals of the competition for a sixth successive 
season.

Cristiano Ronaldo sets another La Liga goal record as Real Madrid thrash Eibar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/real-madrid-eibar-la-liga-match-report>
Recent history is against Madrid, with the Spanish giants having failed to 
recover from a first-leg away defeat on the last five occasions, but Ronaldo is 
confident it will be a different story this time.

“Tuesday will be a perfect night, it will be magical, with your [Real Madrid 
fans] support we’re going to give our best on the pitch and we’re going to get 
through the tie,” Ronaldo told the club’s website.

“Playing well, with the players on the pitch, those on the bench and with the 
80,000 people who I would love to see in the stadium supporting the team, 
because that’s going to give us a very big boost. I hope it will be a magical 
night, I’m really excited.”

First-half goals from Ricardo Rodríguez and Maximilian Arnold earned Wolfsburg 
a valuable lead in their first appearance in the last eight as Madrid were 
brought crashing back to earth following theirimpressive league win over 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
.

Madrid responded to the European setback with a 4-0 win over Eibar at the 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/real-madrid-eibar-la-liga-match-report>
, their seventh victory in eight games and a result that helped them move back 
to within four points of stuttering leaders Barça.

Ronaldo says morale is high in the camp but knows they need everything to come 
together if they are to get pastWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> and keep alive hopes of a 
record 11th European Cup title.

“The team have confidence, the coach has confidence and the fans have to have 
confidence as well,” he added. “It has to be a perfect night. All the different 
aspects are important. The players have to run, fight and be intense throughout 
the 90 minutes. Also, we have to have cool heads, patience and be prepared to 
suffer.”

The midfielder Toni Kroos added: “It will be important to get the upper hand 
early on. We don’t want it to still be 0-0 at half-time We have to play 
attacking football, without doubt, but we have to play wisely.”

Wolfsburg are bracing themselves for a Madrid onslaught but the forward André 
Schürrle believes the longer they can keep the game goalless the better it is 
likely to be for them.

“It’s going to be a brutally hard game,” said Schürrle, who has scored five of 
Wolfsburg’s last eight goals. “We’re going to have to run as if our lives 
depended on it.

“Real are warned. The atmosphere’s going to be electric and if we can get to 
half-time with the score at 0-0 or with us in front, I know their fans are 
going to get unsettled.”

Wolfsburg warmed up for the trip to Spain with a 1-1 draw at home to Mainz on 
Saturday, a result which left them eighth in the Bundesliga, nine points adrift 
of the top four.
 