
Cristiano Ronaldo was controversially sent off as 10-man Real Madrid were held 
to a 1-1 draw atAthletic Bilbao on Sunday at San Mamés.

The timing could not have been worse for Real as their city rivals Atlético 
went top of La Liga with a 4-0 victory overReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad>.

Ronaldo was sent off for reacting to a shove by Carlos Gurpegi and then a 
confrontation with Ander Iturraspe in the 75th minute, although he appeared to 
be more sinned against than sinner.

Only a minute earlier Athletic had scored a brilliant equaliser through the 
substitute Ibai with only his second touch after coming on, firing in a 
bouncing ball from the edge of the area.

Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> held on for a 
point, having gone ahead after 65 minutes through the striker Jesé on his first 
league start, but the loss of Ronaldo through suspension, for a possible three 
games, could well have an impact in the Primera Division title race.

These two dropped points left them three points behind Atlético and level with 
Barcelona.

Atlético Madrid took advantage of Barcelona's slip to go top of La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> with a 4-0 victory over 
Real Sociedadat the Calderón on Sunday, where fans gave an emotional send-off 
to the former coach and player Luis Aragonés, who died on Saturday.

The win lifted Atlético three points clear of Barcelona on 57 points after the 
Catalan side lost 3-2 to Valencia on Saturday. Real Madrid can also move ahead 
of the champions when they playAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> later on Sunday.

After a cagey opening David Villa put Atlético ahead on 38 minutes before 
going off injured. Second-half goals by Diego Costa, João Miranda and Diego 
sealed the win.

Earlier on Sunday Christian Herrera gave Elche a 1-0 win over Almería and a 
Rubén Castro double gave the bottom sideReal Betis a 2-0 victory against 
Espanyol.
 