
Cristiano Ronaldo hit back at his critics after a remarkable 35th career 
hat-trick fired Real Madrid past Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/real-madrid-wolfsburg-champions-league-match-report>
 in their Champions League quarter-final.

Although he has amassed 46 goals in all competitions this season and is top 
scorer in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> and La Liga, Ronaldo 
attracted criticism earlier in the campaign for not performing in the biggest 
games. The Portugal forward even walked out of a news conference in February 
after facing difficult questions.

Cristiano Ronaldo hat-trick takes Real Madrid into Champions League semis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/real-madrid-wolfsburg-champions-league-match-report>
“Considering this has been a ‘bad’ season for me it has not been that bad,” 
Ronaldo said after his goals led Real to a 3-0 second-leg win, securing a 3-2 
aggregate victory. People can criticise me but I just keep on going and the 
numbers are there for all to see. I am very happy and with a month left of the 
season I can get even better.

“It was not the best, but one of my best, European nights. It’s not bad is it? 
Goals are in my DNA and I want to keep scoring them for the team.”

Ronaldo has 16 goals in the Champions League this season and is on track to 
break his record of 17 set when Real won the competition in 2013-14. He managed 
an all-time high of 11 goals in this season’s group stages and againstWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> scored a fifth Champions 
League hat-trick, matching the record of Barcelona’s Lionel Messi.

Zinedine Zidane was full of praise for his striker. “What can I tell you about 
Cristiano?” said the Frenchman. “He is demonstrating how good he is.

“He is the best player in the world and nights like tonight make him a special 
player. Cristiano needs the whole team too but not everyone can score three 
goals in a game. He makes the difference.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hits-back-critics-real-goals-dna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1577e03339d3586009d31c997c8cd7649d7596%2F104_746_2513_1508%2F2513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20hits%20back%20at%20critics%20after%20hat-trick%3A%20%E2%80%98Goals%20are%20in%20my%20DNA%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hits-back-critics-real-goals-dna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20hits%20back%20at%20critics%20after%20hat-trick%3A%20%E2%80%98Goals%20are%20in%20my%20DNA%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hits-back-critics-real-goals-dna%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1577e03339d3586009d31c997c8cd7649d7596%2F104_746_2513_1508%2F2513.jpg>
 Cristiano Ronaldo makes his point, walking off the pitch with the ball under 
his shirt after scoring his 35th career hat-trick. Photograph: Pierre-Philippe 
Marcou/AFP/Getty Images 
Zidane called the comeback victory his best night as a coach so far.

“It has been my greatest thrill as a coach. It was not simple – it might seem 
it was when you see the score but it was not. It is incredible after a 2-0 in 
the first leg. The players have played amazing. It’s my best night.”

Cristiano Ronaldo’s remarkable Real Madrid goalscoring record in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/25/cristiano-ronaldos-remarkable-real-madrid-goalscoring-record-in-full>
The Wolfsburg coach Dieter Hecking was frustrated his team were not able to 
ride the early storm as they attempted to reach the last four for the first 
time.

He told his club’s website: “We didn’t go about the first 20 minutes as we 
should have. We knew what we had to expect, but when you are on the pitch, it’s 
only then you see what you have to deal with.

“After the two goals, we got into the game better, had more possession and had 
a couple of opportunities of our own. What we lacked was the ultimate 
determination.

“In the second half, Real waited for their opening, which was our chance to 
hit, but we didn’t manage that. What’s very frustrating is to lose 0-3 having 
conceded two goals from set pieces.”
 