
Mario Balotelli's goal gave the league leaders, Internazionale, a winning 
start to 2010 but the fractured skull suffered by the defender Cristian Chivu 
soured their 1-0 victory atChievo.

Balotelli scored the game's only goal in the 12th minute to settle the contest 
before a clash of heads between Chievo's captain, Sergio Pellissier, and Chivu 
in the opening moments of the second half led to the Inter defender being taken 
to hospital to relieve a haematoma and have bone fragments removed.

The Romanian's life is not in danger but he will have to stay under 
observation in Verona for some time. "Everything went normally and therefore we 
are quite confident the patient can recover without problems," doctor Sergio 
Turazzi said after the operation.

The victory moved Inter nine points clear of Juventus, who won 2-1 at Parma, 
and 11 clear ofMilan, who were still to face Genoa this evening.

An own goal in the 39th minute from Paolo Castellini helped Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, who were reduced to 10 men for 
the remaining 17 minutes of the second half, claim just their second win in 
seven games at the Stadio Ennio Tardini. The defender headed into his own goal 
after the hosts had failed to clear a corner.

Hasan Salihamidzic had headed Juve into an early lead before the veteran 
forward Nicola Amoruso grabbed an equaliser forParma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parma>, but they were unable to find 
another even after Martín Cáceres was sent off in the 73rd minute and slipped 
to sixth in the table.

Cagliari scored in the 90th minute and again in stoppage time to earn a 2-2 
draw and denyRoma the chance of moving up to third. A David Pizarro penalty and 
a Simone Perrotta effort had put the Giallorossi on course for all three points 
in the second half, but, not long after Luca Toni came on to make hisRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> debut, Diego López pulled one back 
for the Sardinians and Daniele Conti then equalised.

Napoli continued their push for European football next season by moving up to 
fourth with a 2-0 victory atAtalanta. Fabio Quagliarella scored the opening 
goal after seven minutes and Michele Pazienza made the points safe 13 minutes 
into the second half, asAtalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta>
 dropped to 19th.

Fiorentina won the Tuscan derby in style with a 5-1 hammering of bottom-placed 
Siena. Per Kroldrup, Mario Alberto Santana and Alberto Gilardino put the 
visitors in the driving seat in the first half before the returning Adrian Mutu 
and a second for Gilardino completed the rout. Massimo Maccarone's late penalty 
was barely any consolation forSiena <https://www.theguardian.com/football/siena>
.

Bari won 2-0 at home to Udinese thanks to a goal in each half from Riccardo 
Meggiorini and Vitor Barreto. Simone Pepe came closest to levelling for the 
visitors when he hit the crossbar just before the break. Sergio Floccari made 
an impressive debut forLazio by scoring twice in their 4-1 victory over Livorno.

Martin Bergvold put Livorno in front in the seventh minute before Floccari, 
signed on a six-month loan deal from Genoa this week, stole the show. The 
28-year-old levelled shortly after the restart and put his new team ahead in 
the 54th minute. The substitute Tommaso Rocchi and Aleksandar Kolarov with a 
penalty added further goals to make it a convincing win for Lazio.Livorno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livorno> had Romano Perticone sent off in 
the 90th minute.

Sampdoria came from behind to rescue a 1-1 draw at home to Palermo. Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> had won just once in their 
last eight fixtures coming into this game and found themselves trailing to 
Edison Cavani's strike five minutes before the interval. Palermo's lead was 
short-lived, though, with Antonio Cassano providing the perfect response a 
minute later.

Sinisa Mihajlovic saw his Catania side move up to third from bottom with a 1-0 
victory over his former clubBologna. Nicolas Spolli scored the only goal of the 
game nine minutes from time.
 