
Cronulla has gone into party mode, with over 10,000 fans packing out Southern 
Cross Group Stadium for the Sharks’NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
premiership celebration. The players looked bleary-eyed after Sunday night’s 
grand final triumph as they took to the stage at their home ground on Monday.

“It’s so good. This is what you do it for,” retiring hooker Michael Ennis 
said. To the strains of club song Up, Up Cronulla, the players were given a 
hero’s welcome by their fans. Coach Shane Flanagan and skipper Paul Gallen were 
given the key to the Sutherland Shire after masterminding the club’s 
drought-breaking title win.

NRL premiers Cronulla laughing long and hard for all the right reasons | Matt 
Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/nrl-premiers-cronulla-laughing-long-and-hard-for-all-the-right-reasons>
The massive crowd called for Ennis to stick around for one more year, breaking 
into the “Shark Clap” when he took the microphone. Last month the club’s No9 
caused a stir when he celebrated the Sharks’ qualifying win over Canberra by 
imitating the Raiders fans’ famous clap.

While his post-game celebration drew the ire of Canberra coach Ricky Stuart, 
the fans let him know they were squarely in his corner. “I kind of don’t want 
it to end,” Ennis said after admitting he only got a few hours sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcronulla-goes-into-party-mode-as-sharks-fans-flock-to-premiership-celebrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67846ede117eae464dbeab03f56b2a421129ce%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20goes%20into%20party%20mode%20as%20Sharks%20fans%20flock%20to%20premiership%20celebrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcronulla-goes-into-party-mode-as-sharks-fans-flock-to-premiership-celebrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20goes%20into%20party%20mode%20as%20Sharks%20fans%20flock%20to%20premiership%20celebrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcronulla-goes-into-party-mode-as-sharks-fans-flock-to-premiership-celebrations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67846ede117eae464dbeab03f56b2a421129ce%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Federal treasurer and Sharks No1 ticket holder Scott Morrison gives Cronulla 
fans the thumbs up during NRL premiership celebrations in Sydney. Photograph: 
Brendon Thorne/Getty Images 
“I never dreamed it would end like this. I remember being in the change room 
when Shane Webcke got his grand final win in 2006. It’s just such a special 
day. I’m not in Shane Webcke’s calibre but it’s pretty cool.”

After partying at Sharkies Leagues Club all night, many queued for over two 
hours along Captain Cook Drive to get into the ground for the club’s fan day 
and to catch a glimpse of their grand final heroes.

Some looked worse for wear, with one young man passing out in a deck chair 
with a beer in his hands on the back of a truck parked in the leagues club 
parking lot. When he was startled awake by a camera crew filming him, he 
instantly launched into a rendition of Up, Up Cronulla.

Cronulla's NRL premiership pays back the loyal fans of The Shire | Paul 
Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/cronullas-nrl-premiership-pays-back-the-loyal-fans-of-the-shire>
The club’s No1 ticket holder, local member and federal treasurer Scott 
Morrison said it was rich reward for the community. “I’m just so proud,” 
Morrison said. “I’ve been a fan for 10 years since I moved down here. The club 
embraced me and I embraced them.”
 