
Cronulla savaged a hopelessly out-classed Newcastle with a record 62-0 NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> rout at Hunter Stadium, stretching 
their winning streak to seven on a black day for the Knights.

The Sharks led 28-0 at half-time and ran in 11 tries to nil, handing the 
Knights their worst-ever loss on home soil, surpassing a 50-0 shut-out by 
Parramatta in 2005 amid Newcastle’s club-record 13-game losing streak.

NRL Indigenous round a 'celebratory' moment of cultural pride | Paul Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/nrl-indigenous-round-a-celebratory-moment-of-cultural-pride>
It was Newcastle’s second-worst loss anywhere, behind only a 71-6 thrashing 
from Brisbane at Suncorp Stadium in 2007, and displacing the 53-0 loss to the 
Broncos at Suncorp on April 16 this year.

On a day of records, the Sharks equalled their biggest-ever winning margin, 
matching a 68-6 victory over Manly in 2005. It was also Cronulla’s biggest win 
over Newcastle, going past the 64-14 hammering they handed out at Cronulla in 
2002.

The Sharks moved to second place on the ladder, behind leaders Brisbane only 
on percentage and also tied on 16 points with third-placed Melbourne. They left 
the Knights languishing at the bottom with just one win and a draw from 10 
matches.

Wing sensation Valentine Holmes scored three of his four tries in the first 26 
minutes as the Sharks attacked Newcastle’s brittle left-edge defence and reaped 
the rewards. Cronulla left winger Sosaia Feki scored a treble, back-rower Luke 
Lewis bagged a brace, fullback Ben Barba scored a try and was involved in the 
lead-up to several others and Wade Graham also crossed.

Newcastle were held scoreless for the second straight match after going down 
38-0 to Sydney Roosters at Allianz Stadium on April 30, making it a combined 
100-0 against in their past two games.

The Knights fielded the youngest halves pairing in their history because NSW 
hopeful Trent Hodkinson was ruled out with a knee injury and Jarrod Mullen is 
sidelined with a torn hamstring.

Eighteen-year-old Jack Cogger, the son of former Wests Magpies playmaker 
Trevor Cogger, became the 10th NRL debutant Knights coach Nathan Brown has 
blooded this season. He joined 19-year-old Brock Lamb, who made his NRL debut 
against the Roosters a fortnight earlier, in the halves against Cronulla’s 
experienced duo of James Maloney and Chad Townsend.

Maloney did his chances of a NSW Origin recall no harm by kicking nine goals 
from 11 attempts and helping Townsend, Barba and hooker Michael Ennis steer the 
Sharks around against the Knights.

Lamb and Cogger, who have formed a friendship and strong bond rising through 
Newcastle’s junior ranks together, became the youngest NRL halves in Knights 
history. They surpassed Mullen and Luke Walsh, who were both 20 when they 
teamed up against Canberra on June 18, 2007.

Nathan Ross suffered a hamstring injury in the warm-up, earning 18-year-old 
Cory Denniss a late call-up to the left wing and giving Newcastle seven players 
aged 20 or under in their starting side. Denniss joined Sione Matautia (19), 
Cogger, Lamb, 20-year-old twins Jacob and Daniel Saifiti and 19-year-old hooker 
Danny Levi in one of the youngest teams the Knights have ever put on the field.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcronulla-sharks-crush-sorry-newcastle-knights-in-record-victory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b76d7d7619ea8bc455d4a543520a10d6418b709%2F0_0_4680_3120%2F4680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20Sharks%20crush%20sorry%20Newcastle%20Knights%20in%20record%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcronulla-sharks-crush-sorry-newcastle-knights-in-record-victory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20Sharks%20crush%20sorry%20Newcastle%20Knights%20in%20record%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcronulla-sharks-crush-sorry-newcastle-knights-in-record-victory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b76d7d7619ea8bc455d4a543520a10d6418b709%2F0_0_4680_3120%2F4680.jpg>
 Robbie Farah’s State of Origin involvement is in doubt after he was knocked 
out by a collision with Josh Reynolds in the Tigers defeat to the Bulldogs. 
Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty Images 
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> hooker Robbie 
Farah was taken to hospital with a worrying head injury in his side’s 36-4 loss 
to Canterbury later on Sunday. Farah was knocked out after he collided with the 
hip of Josh Reynolds as the Bulldogs playmaker put in a kick during the first 
half in front of 20,936 at ANZ Stadium.

After being stretchered from the grounds, he was taken to hospital as a 
precaution however his involvement in next month’s State of Origin series 
opener is in jeopardy. With NSW to name their team for game one after next 
weekend’s round, Blues coach Laurie Daley will be sweating on Farah’s fitness 
but has in-form Cronulla rake Michael Ennis waiting in the wings.

After being inconsistent during the opening rounds, the Bulldogs looked well 
organised with their big men rolling over the top of the Tigers. The Tigers 
played the second half with just two men on the bench after Josh Aloiai failed 
a concussion test. Prop Sauaso Sue was an 11th hour withdrawal after injuring 
his ribs in the warm up.

The defeat was the Tigers’ eighth in nine games and reapplied the pressure to 
coach Jason Taylor. Tigers halfback Luke Brooks also came in for criticism from 
legends Peter Sterling and Andrew Johns in television commentary after his 
light involvement.

Winger Justin Hunt will come under the scrutiny of the match review committee 
after an ugly coathanger tackle on Dogs halfback Moses Mbye.


The Bulldogs shot out an 18-0 lead before returning Tigers skipper Aaron Woods 
put Mbye through a hole to score in the corner to give the home side a sniff. 
But when Josh Morris scored in the shadows of the break and Curtis Rona bagged 
his double 12 minutes after the resumption, the match was effectively over.
 