
St George Illawarra have caused one of the upsets of the season with a 32-18 
win over a Cronulla side, minus Paul Gallen, to all but end the Sharks’ minor 
premiership tilt.

In front of a vocal 13,167 crowd at Jubilee Oval, mid-season signing Tariq 
Sims played his best game for the Red V, breaking a heated local derby open by 
scoring two tries in the second half and setting up a third in the space of 10 
minutes.

Anthony Milford sparks Broncos to NRL win over Parramatta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/anthony-milford-sparks-broncos-to-nrl-win-over-parramatta>
The win ends a five-game losing streak for the Dragons but, more importantly, 
lifts them to 11th spot and within two points of eighth-placed Penrith.

For the Sharks, the loss leaves them without a win three games, and one point 
behind ladder leaders Melbourne, who play Canberra on Monday, raising serious 
questions about their premiership ambitions.

Gallen was a late withdrawal from the game, pulling out with a calf injury in 
the warm-up.

“We were getting a fair way into the warm-up and I felt a nick in my calf, 
strained my calf slightly. Had a quick ultrasound and there’s a slight tear. 
I’ll get a scan tomorrow,” he told Fox Sports during the game.

Down 12-6 at halftime, Sims kicked off his game-changing spurt in the 49th 
minute, trampling over James Maloney and offloading for Mitch Rein to level the 
scores.

The former Newcastle forward then gave his team the lead when he pounced on a 
Gareth Widdop grubber in the 54th minute, before powering over from close range.

A Ricky Leutele try and Maloney penalty reduced the gap to six with 10 minutes 
to play, however the Dragons held on for one of their most-impressive wins of 
the season.

The 32 points is a season-high, while it is also the first time in five weeks 
they have scored more than two tries.

The Dragons made their intentions clear from the kickoff, twice shifting wide 
in a set that also included two offloads and ended in an attacking position.

In an end-to-end opening to the match, Chad Townsend and Josh Dugan traded 
try-saving efforts before Benji Marshall chipped early in the tackle count for 
Euan Aitken to score.

The best try of the night went to Sharks fullback Ben Barba, who finished off 
a 95 metre effort that began with winger Sosaia Feki streaking away after an 
early shift in front of their own sticks.

Feki failed to come out of the sheds in the second half after succumbing to a 
groin injury, while forward Jesse Sene-Lefao could find himself in trouble for 
a high shot in the 52nd minute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fnrl-saturday-round-23-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411961b824bb09e2cebe0e4a50003f5b806fec52%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20stumble%2C%20Jarryd%20Hayne%20field%20goal%20fires%20Titans%20to%20key%20NRL%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fnrl-saturday-round-23-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20stumble%2C%20Jarryd%20Hayne%20field%20goal%20fires%20Titans%20to%20key%20NRL%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fnrl-saturday-round-23-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411961b824bb09e2cebe0e4a50003f5b806fec52%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jarryd Hayne celebrates with teammates after kicking a field goal to win the 
match. Photograph: Brendon Thorne/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, a Jarryd Hayne field goal has given Gold Coast a thrilling 19-18 
win overWests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> to keep 
his side’s top eight hopes alive.

On an afternoon of high drama at Campbelltown Stadium, in which Tigers 
fullback James Tedesco was taken from the field with a suspected broken jaw, 
Hayne booted a clutch 30-metre one-pointer to seal an important victory.

In just his second game back in rugby league after stints in the NFL and rugby 
sevens, Hayne proved he was ready to be a force in the back end of the season.

Like his debut, Hayne had a mixed day, booting out on the full with his first 
touch before setting up Anthony Don’s second try with a great bomb and sealing 
the match after Mitchell Moses and Ashley Taylor had both missed attempted 
one-pointers.

Tedesco was assisted from the field in the 59th minute with blood pouring from 
his mouth after being taken high by Titans skipper Ryan James.

Club doctors were also worried about his teeth being loose.

The loss of the side’s star No1 is a major blow heading into the final three 
weeks of the regular season.

James will come under scrutiny from the match review committee despite not 
being put on report or penalised – though the Tigers did receive a penalty from 
the play because James was ruled in front of the kicker.

The win moves the Titans back into the top eight while it could spell the end 
of the Tigers’ season.

The Titans looked headed for victory when Nene MacDonald intercepted a Kevin 
Naiqama bobble and ran 90 metres to make it 18-10 with 24 minutes remaining.

The loss of Tedesco appeared to be the final nail in the home side’s coffin, 
however two David Nofoaluma tries in five minutes put his side back on equal 
pegging.

A magic Naiqama pass set up Nofoaluma’s second and Moses’ sideline conversion 
bounced off the crossbar to miss.

The 16,783-strong crowd was baying for James’ blood when he took Jack 
Littlejohn high however Moses again missed the penalty attempt with Hayne’s 
field goal sealing the match.
 