
A staunch Cronulla ended Melbourne’s unbeaten start to the NRL season, 
knocking them from the top of theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
table with a 14-6 win at Shark Park.

While both sides failed to get out of second gear in attack in a game of 
varying quality, the Sharks out-muscled the Storm on Monday night and put them 
off their game.

Gareth Widdop lands clutch kick to give Dragons victory over Panthers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/gareth-widdop-lands-clutch-kick-to-give-dragons-victory-over-panthers>
Sharks winger Valentine Holmes provided what proved to be the match-winning 
play three minutes after half-time, when he burst through the middle of the 
field and sent halfback Chad Townsend under the posts.

Storm winger Marika Koroibete, who had been good all night marking Holmes, was 
put on report when he stuck a knee out at Townsend, with James Maloney potting 
the penalty conversion to make it 14-6 in the 62nd minute.

The win was just the Sharks’ second over the Storm in their past 12 meetings, 
and was their second victory of the year.

Both sides looked ordinary in attack in an error-riddled affair, with Cronulla 
completing 33 of 44 sets and the Storm 28 of 37.

Melbourne would have counted themselves lucky to lead 6-4 at half-time after 
the Sharks failed to take advantage of Will Chambers’ sin-binning and blew 
numerous opportunities.

When Chambers was given 10 minutes in the sin bin for a professional foul on 
Holmes, the Sharks looked to have the momentum but failed to convert it into 
points.

Just as Chambers emerged from the sheds, Felise Kaufusi barged over to give 
Melbourne a 6-0 lead after 19 minutes.

The Storm were reduced to just three men on the bench when 18-year-old centre 
Curtis Scott, who was a late inclusion for Kevin Proctor, was taken from the 
field with a shin injury.

The Storm looked out of sync in attack, with their set plays breaking down 
numerous times as the Sharks grabbed a valuable two points.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F790853789c3a3c843716f0d7f9cc62810fbf3bc9%2F0_98_3408_2046%2F3408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20Sharks%20inflict%20first%20defeat%20of%20NRL%20season%20on%20Melbourne%20Storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20Sharks%20inflict%20first%20defeat%20of%20NRL%20season%20on%20Melbourne%20Storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F790853789c3a3c843716f0d7f9cc62810fbf3bc9%2F0_98_3408_2046%2F3408.jpg>
 Manu Vatuvei was among the tryscorers in the Warriors’ comfortable win over 
the Knights in Auckland. Photograph: Hannah Peters/Getty Images 
Earlier, the Warriors ended their lengthy drought, an improved second-half 
display carrying them to a 40-18 win over Newcastle in Auckland. The victory 
was their first of the season and snapped a club record-equalling 11-match 
losing streak going back to July.

It came after an error-punctuated opening spell, when their attack stuttered. 
They were also twice denied by the bunker, once for a tight knock-on call and 
another for obstruction, but coming out at 12-12 for the second spell, the 
Warriors lifted their intensity in defence.

Their execution also improved and they swung the momentum firmly their way 
with three tries in the first 12 minutes of the half, as centre Blake Ayshford, 
and wingers Tuimoala Lolohea and Manu Vatuvei finished off some expansive play.

Five-eighth Shaun Johnson showed glimpses of his footwork of old to touch 
down, before Issac Luke got the Warriors’ seventh try with a darting run from 
dummy half.

Newcastle did get the last say through winger Nathan Ross’s late consolation 
effort but the result means the Knights remain winless this season, their 
single point coming from a draw with Canberra.

They were behind on the scoreboard early as the Warriors raced out of the 
blocks, centre Solomone Kata dotting down after being set up by fullback Roger 
Tuivasa-Sheck’s hit-and-spin linebreak. Tuivasa-Sheck was among the Warriors’ 
best and was a constant threat with ball in hand.

The Knights struck back twice, first through lock Sam Mataora, who busted some 
weak defence. When Warriors halfback Jeff Robson dropped the ball in his own 
half, the visitors took advantage by sending fullback Dane Gagai over.

The home side tied up the contest in the shadow of half-time when prop Ben 
Matulino powered past two defenders for a converted try.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61704712fc8e8303adc0aa496d9f5b44f983c0d%2F0_0_3609_2406%2F3609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20Sharks%20inflict%20first%20defeat%20of%20NRL%20season%20on%20Melbourne%20Storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20Sharks%20inflict%20first%20defeat%20of%20NRL%20season%20on%20Melbourne%20Storm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnrl-easter-monday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61704712fc8e8303adc0aa496d9f5b44f983c0d%2F0_0_3609_2406%2F3609.jpg>
 Aaron Woods holds off Corey Norman during the Tigers’ low-scoring defeat to 
the Eels at ANZ Stadium. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
A gutsy Parramatta ground their way to an 8-0 win over Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> in an entertaining but clumsy 
fixture at ANZ Stadium. The only points in the first half came through an early 
Michael Gordon penalty goal and Parramatta led 2-0 at the break before Junior 
Paulo scored the only try.

In a match dominated largely by stout defence and occasionally poor execution 
in attack, two try-saving tackles from Tigers fullback James Tedesco stood out. 
The first was on a rampaging Semi Radradra, who he cut down just short of the 
line early in the first stanza. Tedesco repeated the effort shortly after 
half-time when he held up Michael Jennings.

The only try came in the 55th minute when Paulo crossed after beating Luke 
Brooks in the defensive line and dragging Tedesco over the tryline with him. 
Referee Jared Maxwell called no try due to doubt over the grounding but the 
bunker confirmed downward pressure.

The Tigers had their chances to respond, but poor last-tackle options and lazy 
passing often let them down. Robbie Farah’s return didn’t help the Tigers 
attack as they spluttered through key moments in the match.

Tigers forward Kyle Lovett was put on report for a 53rd-minute high shot on 
Kenny Edwards and Eels forward Manu Ma’u could also be in the sights of the 
match review committee after being reported for dangerous contact on Josh 
Aloiai.

The Eels lost prop Tim Mannah early in the first half due to a shoulder injury 
and his Tigers opposite, Tim Grant, didn’t return after half-time either after 
failing a concussion test.

The win before 36,112 fans gives the Eels a 3-1 start to the year. The Tigers 
are 2-2 over the first month of the season.
 