
Welcome to a new feature on the Crossword blog, for anyone who's ever paused 
during a puzzle, peered at the setter's pseudonym and muttered: "Whois this 
ogre?"

So, are you ready to Meet the setter? I'm going to ask some of the compilers 
of broadsheet cryptics what makes them tick, what inspires them and where they 
get off making life difficult for the rest of us.

Some setters, of course, prefer the penumbra of pseudonymity. And I appreciate 
that some of you may not wish to Meet the setter, just asseeing Archers actors 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/features/the-archers/whos-who/family-tree> can 
spoil Ambridge, and just as a friend once implored me to listen to the music of 
- but never to look at a photograph of -Gomez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/304cdd9d-a04e-4eb2-865c-980a553a0efd>
. If this is the case, please avert your eyes and I'll see you on Monday. But I 
bet you peek.

Not least because our first guest is a setter who, appropriately enough, says 
it will be, "amazing for the solvers to finally get to 'meet' their torturers".
John Halpern <http://www.cryptica.co.uk/> sets for the Guardian three to four 
times a month as Paul, as Dada once a month inthe Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_toughie>, as Mudd two or 
three times a month inthe FT <http://www.ft.com/arts/crossword> and twice a 
month as one ofthe Times <https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/>
's anonymous setters.

I think of Paul's as one of the cheekier crosswords - sometimes risqué, 
bang-up-to-date with its references and often splutter-out-loud funny. It's a 
treat to have him as the first setter for whom the tables are turned, asI ask 
the questions.

When did you get the crossword bug?

My mum solved the Times crossword. One day I learned all the answers, then 
bought another copy of the Times and took it to a Brighton football match. I 
pulled the paper out five minutes before kick-off and completed the puzzle. I'm 
surprised no-one beat me up! Around this time - I think I was 20 years old - I 
began being fascinated in not just the clues, but the extraordinarily 
mysterious names who created them. It was another couple of years before I set 
about trying to become a setter.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles? 

From Guardian 22,915 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/22915>:

To make cheese, how do you milk a Welsh hedgehog? (10)

Answer: Caerphilly.

Where do you create your puzzles?

Currently in the sitting room at one end of the table, while my wife works at 
the other. I have a Mac computer, and a pile of dictionaries and a thesaurus 
around it. Bits of paper on which I've set clues and remnants of clues are 
strewn across the table. My wife and I try to avoid each other's glances and 
get our heads down to work; otherwise we'd constantly be off to coffee shops 
around Brighton. Discipline required! Sometimes when short of inspiration I 
wander the two minutes down to the coast, and stare at pebbles and waves until 
the creative juices flow again. Water of the sea aids the flow.

Where do you come up with your best clues?

When surrounded by words: in conversation; from books - but rarely from the 
telly.

How did you learn to set?

I spent thousands of hours practising alone, then when I thought I was ready, 
I sent a sample off to Araucaria. He invited me to lunch. The letter is framed 
and on the wall in our hall.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote? 

Solved, no. Wrote for the Guardian: 

Name sewn into footballers' underwear (8)

KNICKERS sort of set the tone.

Which other setters do you admire?

Araucaria <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria>
 for his fun, erudition and creativity. AlsoBrendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/brendan> and Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/shed> among others. 
My heroes when I got started wereAraucaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria>, Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/shed>, Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/enigmatist>, 
Bunthorne <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/bunthorne>,
Fawley <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/fawley> and Taupi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/taupi>.

What makes a successful clue?

The smile factor.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

When it's been written to show how clever the setter is.

How did you choose your pseudonyms?

Paul – see my website <http://www.cryptica.co.uk/realpaul.asp>. In the FT I 
used to be called Bats after an ex-girlfriend, whose surname was similar. But 
when we split, my name became Mudd. I always use a four-letter pseudonym. Dada 
in the Daily Telegraph – anti-war, anti-establishment, and in honour of my late 
Dad. And Punk in the Independent – the pun k(ing?). Actually, I'm not that 
great at puns.

Do your pseudonyms have different personalities?

Yes, a balance between house style and your own. The Times is pretty rigorous 
on what goes in and what doesn't, The Guardian less so. We adapt accordingly, 
or at least should do for the sake of editors, and more importantly, solvers.

Is it possible to tell which Times puzzles are yours?

Sometimes I get a text from a friend saying "You're in today, aren't you?". 
They're usually, but not always, right.

How do people respond when you tell them you're a crossword setter?

The usual response is "you must be clever". Little do they know – they haven't 
seen me try to wire a plug.

What are the tools of your trade?

Chambers Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
,Collins Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007290338>
,Roget 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140515039>
, OED,Chambers Crossword Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550103413>
, Crossword Compiler software.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

Younger than average, owning a Vespa, cat lover, naughty sense of humour. 

How are you as a solver?

I'm a really, really poor solver. I rarely complete a puzzle. I used to solve 
every day, all the papers, but now generally only do around one puzzle a week.

Paper or screen? 

Paper, of course! If newspapers go only digital, we must launch a crossword 
newspaper.

Your frame of reference tends to be a bit more Kurt Cobain and a bit less WG 
Grace than others ...

A balance must be struck to encourage new solvers, and to keep those with more 
experience. I attempt to address that, but we can't please all the people all 
the time.

One of your grids had a lot of rude words 
<http://crypticcrosswordplanet.wordpress.com/2011/04/26/ones-blue-period/>, not 
as answers, but hidden inside them. Did you get complaints?

No brickbats, only bouquets – thankfully.

What do you do for a living besides writing crosswords?

I'm full-time. 

What do you do in your spare time?

Walks along the Sussex coastline, season ticket holder at Brighton & Hove 
Albion FC (in the north stand with the louts!), Radio 4 listener, running my 
third London Marathon in April 2012, promoting the cause of the beautiful 
cryptic crossword, singing in the shower, writinga weekly blog 
<http://crypticcrosswordplanet.wordpress.com/>.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to
yourself or others?

My wife is forever being stopped in the street alongside words and asked
to rearrange them. She had trouble forming "gasometer" from "megastore"
the other day, but who wouldn't?!

If you weren't a crossword setter, what would you be?

Unhappy.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

More and more people will solve. Teaching aids will become far more accessible 
and fun than just the thick tomes we have had in the past.

Anything else?

Tell your friends about cryptic crosswords, and teach them. Share the fun! 
Thank you taking the time to read this, and to solve our puzzles.

Kudos to Paul for being the first setter met - who else would you like to get 
to know? And what would you like to ask them? Also, if you have any suggestions 
for Clue of the Week, please nominate them below.
 