
Anax <http://anaxcrosswords.wordpress.com/> is a very welcome contributor to 
the comments here and is among the setters who have brought wisdom and 
friendliness to the chats with me and other solvers.

That's not to say this setter is a pushover. Looking back at Anax clues 
mentioned in our weekly roundups, I findconcealed treats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/12/1>, 
gnomic-if-poppy themes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/03/crossword-roundup-blur-oasis>
 andseemingly arbitrary feats of technical construction 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/24/cryptic-crossword-roundup>
. "Perhaps Anax just likes making life difficult for himself,"I recently 
pondered 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/24/cryptic-crossword-roundup>
.

Paul says of Anax: "he reworks and reworks and reworks until you just can't 
see where the heck the definition is", which sounds about right. Said 
definition, though, is always there in plain sight, never unfair.

Known to some as Dean Mayer, he sets once a fortnight as Anax in the 
Independent; roughly once a month inthe Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_toughie> as Elkamere and 
the FT <http://www.ft.com/arts/crossword> as Loroso; occasionally in the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/> and once every three 
weeks inthe Sunday Times <https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/>. 

When did you get the crossword bug?

It was accidental. My aunt was a non-cryptic solver, and I was about four when 
I first watched her tackling puzzles. She never tried to introduce me to them, 
but something intrigued me and I wanted to make my own. One would expect a 
child of that age to change from one hobby to another, but this crossword bug 
was an infection without cure, and I don't think I ever had any desire to fight 
it.

The cryptics started when I was 14 or 15 and my form master at grammar school 
introduced me to a clue inthe Telegraph 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/index.php> on a train, about to set off on 
a school trip.

What makes a successful clue?

Only solvers know that, and it's complicated by the fact that solvers 
appreciate different things - a smooth surface, conciseness, plenty of 
anagrams, no flippin' anagrams, torture.

All have different needs. Personally, when writing a clue I always aim for a 
smooth surface reading, simply because it's what I enjoy most as a solver.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

Really, there can only be one thing. A clue is unsuccessful if it is 
technically wrong, whether that be a wonky definition or a wordplay failure. It 
can't be said that a clue is unsuccessful if it contains 20 words, or an 
obscure reference to a Dickens character, or golf. To many solvers these will 
be bonuses.

I think of you as a tough setter. Do you or other solvers agree?

Well, here's an apparently tangential reply. I play the bass and many years 
ago our guitarist bought a kitten; I happened to visit a few days later. He 
lived in Birmingham, I was in Manchester and my visits weren't that frequent.

It was a few months before I made the trip again, and I didn't recognise the 
cat. But he'd watched it grow daily, and those daily differences were 
imperceptible. My clues started out as complete rubbish and they have developed 
over 30-odd years, so to me they feel completely comfortable and accessible.

They will be hard to those solvers who have never tackled one of my puzzles 
before, but eventually most will latch onto my idiosyncrasies and understand 
how the clues work.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I've been asked this many times and still don't have a proper answer. The 
trouble is, there have been many occasions when a discovery has made me smile, 
but it's within the environment of setting a puzzle and the important thing has 
always been to move on to the next clue and get the crossword finished.

In addition, a clue can be satisfying because it's something you have created 
in a relaxed moment of inspiration, but sometimes it comes from desperation, 
when you have stared at an answer for ages and spotted zilch - then suddenly a 
really good idea hits you. The former can feel a bit... I don't know... 
"false": you haven't really had to sweat to find it. An example of the latter is
an old Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/28293a4697c64bfea01a1d831a1e1e07/print_solution/3>
:

11ac Charge traffic cops on departure (6,4)

I had been staring at EXPORT DUTY for what seemed like (and probably was) 
hours. It's an abysmal set of letters and I had useless scribblings over two or 
three sheets of A4. Then this cryptic definition popped into my head.

There is a favourite puzzle, though - and it's a favourite simply because it 
was huge fun to develop its pretty simple idea. It wasan Independent puzzle 
<http://fifteensquared.net/2010/04/23/saturday-prize-crossword-independent-7333-by-anax/>
 in which the only 15-letter answer was LET THERE BE LIGHT and the clue 
consisted entirely of numbers, each one referencing a grid answer. Combined, 
they provided all of the wordplay and the definition, and the answer seemed 
quite appropriate - a sort of light-bulb moment.

Which other setters do you admire?

It isn't diplomacy that makes me say "I admire them all" - I really mean it. 
Crosswords do not pay well, and anyone who is prepared to torture their own 
mind so that others can enjoy the simple pleasure of fun with words has my 
admiration.

I tend to solve - when I can - those whose approach feels familiar to my own - 
soBannsider <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/r.html#Richard-Rogan>, 
Alberich/Klingsor <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/s.html#Neil-Shepherd>, 
Arachne <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/arachne> and 
Orlando <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/b.html#Paul-Bringloe>Tees/Neo</a>; <a 
href=> always give pleasure, and I'm a big fan of Brian Greer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/brendan>. 

For different reasons I enjoy Don Manley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/pasquale> for his 
consistent accuracy and fairness coupled with low-to-moderate difficulty,Roger 
Squires <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/rufus> for 
almost single-handedly making cryptic crosswords accessible to everyone - and 
both for doing what they do despite an enormous workload.

How did you choose your pseudonyms?

The first, Anax, was easy. My daughter's name is Xana, based on a combination 
of screen names her mum and I had when we were on AOL. I could have just used 
Xana but even though it's an invented name, it's undoubtedly female, so I just 
reversed it. My daughter is 12 now, and the most beautiful, smart, responsible 
and kind person in existence, and I worship her. For my first pseudonym there 
was never any contest!

Loroso was odd(er). My parents live in Italy so I wanted something 
Italian-sounding, but Loroso is actually based on three pairs of opening 
letters of the road I live on. Elkamere uses the same pairs-of-letters trick, 
this time those of my nieces in Canada.

What are the tools of your trade?

I'm a software junkie. Crossword Compiler 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> is the main construction 
tool as it is a huge time-saver when filling a grid, although I never 
"auto-populate". But it's handy to be able to view all possible answers for a 
slot before selecting the one that looks promising.

I have WordWeb Pro <http://wordweb.info/FAQ.html>, the software's useful 
bolt-on dictionary and thesaurus, but I always keepChambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 andCollins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007290338>
 on the desk for those doubtful moments.

I also have Crosswordman <http://www.crosswordman.com/about.html> for its 
Wordplay Wizard <http://www.crosswordman.com/wiz.html> feature. I avoid its 
main function simply because I like to formulate my own wordplay components, 
but it quickly accesses single-/double-letter abbreviations and the way they 
are sorted helps me to decide whether they are too obscure for use.

Where do you create your puzzles?

With my family all living abroad, I have the luxury of a two-bedroom apartment 
with a lounge which isn't "offended" by its additional use as my workspace. So 
my computer is set up almost in the middle of the room, against the wall, with 
the TV to my left and bookcase at hand to the right.

The only small downside is that the window faces east, so even on a bright 
summer day I find myself needing to turn the lights on after about 1pm.

It is a very small downside, though. I'm doing the job I love and doing it 
from home - nothing could be better apart from the wages.

If you weren't a crossword setter, what would you be?

Desperate, I think. From my late teens I knew what I wanted to do, and in 
terms of gaining knowledge it's the only thing into which I've ever invested 
total energy and commitment.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

You know, I've never really thought about it. The ideal has always been to 
have a wide appeal, so I've never felt tempted to think of the 
Anax/Loroso/Elkamere solvership as being of a certain type. Pushed to answer, I 
suppose "fun-loving" must be the nearest description, but that has less to do 
with my style than my hope that solvers simply enjoy the fun of wordplay.

Paper or screen?

Paper if I'm out and about; screen at home. Sad Anax fact: if an online puzzle 
is available only in printable form, I open Crossword Compiler, recreate the 
grid and use that to solve while viewing the online puzzle.

Pencil or pen?

Pen, definitely. I only write an answer in the grid if I'm absolutely sure 
it's right.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

The growth <http://fifteensquared.net/about-2/> of solving 
<http://bigdave44.com/about/> blogs 
<http://times-xwd-times.livejournal.com/profile> over the past six years or so 
(they really are that recent) has massively increased both the visible 
solvership, the communication between solvers and setters and, of course, the 
access to information about how cryptic clues work.

Clue-writing forums such as my own DIY COW 
<http://www.ukpuzzle.com/phpBB3/index.php> have exposed some amazing talent 
too, and it is easier than ever to put potential new setters in touch with 
editors. In short, cryptic crosswords are in great shape and have formed an 
active, welcoming community which simply didn't exist a few years ago.

Is setting art or craft?

For me, neither - it's an exploration of language. Arts- and crafts- people 
invent, but crossword setters discover. The devices, indicators and definitions 
we use are finite. We are not re-writing language, not inventing new words. We 
are just taking what already exists and finding what we hope are new ways of 
stringing components together.

Anything else you want to say?

Yeah. I do go on a bit, don't I?

Maybe a bit. Thanks to Anax for taking part. If you have anything to get off 
your chest about his puzzles, or any general questions, please use the form 
below!
 