
What is “difficulty” when it comes to solving a crossword?

First, a happy thought. I sometimes mention a poll I commissioned, which 
suggested that, in the UK, over 7 million people decide which paper to buy at 
least in part on the basis of the crossword. I mention this, of course, because 
America’s free press is beingintimidated 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/opinion/no-trump-we-cant-just-get-along.html>
, and so it needs money. What I’m saying is thatsubscriptions to the New York 
Times crossword <http://www.nytimes.com/crosswords/index.html?page=home&_r=0> 
are the only thing holding at bay a four-year-long Cuban Missile Crisis, but 
this time with an unhappier ending.

So, some pressure on those hosting the NYT’s crossword to keep puzzlers 
interested. Here’sa recent innovation 
<http://www.puzzazz.com/puzzle-difficulty-index>: 

[W]e’ve added a Difficulty Index ... for every New York Times crossword going 
back to July 1st, 2015 and every future NYT crossword will have the Difficulty 
Index added to its leaderboard page automatically as soon as we have collected 
enough data to calculate one.

This is from a post from Puzzazz, an app that is one of the ways NYT 
subscribers can solve away from pencil and paper. Puzzazz’s boffins have been 
crunching away at their data showing how long solvers take; the headlines are: 
Thursday’s puzzles often demand more time than Friday’s, and the notion 
expressed by former puzzle editor Margaret Farrar – that Saturday’s paper host 
a “two-cups-of-coffee puzzle 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=156814226>” – 
holds today.

For me, the most interesting question is: do you, reader, measure a puzzle’s 
“difficulty” in terms of the time taken from first glance to a complete and 
correct grid?


The question teases out one difference between paper- and screen-solving. Any 
digital solves I do tend to be solo and in a single sitting. If anyone else 
gets involved, it’s always paper; and it’s only on paper that I leave a puzzle 
for a while. Thoughts of leaderboards and stopwatches can be put aside; my 
brain of later today may be able to tackle different clues to my brain of right 
now. Is any of this just me?

And for me, “time to completely solve” overlaps with but is not the same as 
“difficulty”. Dean Mayer’s puzzles in the Sunday Times (Meet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
 here) offer an example: it takes me an extraordinarily long time to see what 
some of the wordplay is doing, but I tend to finish them, having eventually 
understood every clue. They are “difficult” in a different sense to a puzzle 
where, say, I might rattle off most of the clues but find two intersecting 
entries are definitely words I’ve never met before. I might guess them right, 
and finish quicker than with a Dean Mayer – but I’ve found that crossword 
“difficult” in an equally powerful way.

Perhaps “average completion time” is a more meaningful metric for what Puzzazz 
is measuring, and any measure of “difficulty” should incorporate other factors (
we looked here at “crosswordiness” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/08/crossword-blog-word-puzzle-setters-love>
: the relative obscurity of language)? Again, reader: what about you?

None of this, I must add, is to quibble with what Puzzazz is trying out, or 
indeed anyone maintaining interest in puzzles. See the above aside about global 
annihilation.
 