
Boatman <http://www.boatmancryptics.co.uk/>'s puzzles always have a theme - 
but not necessarily a theme you need to know anything about. Also known as 
Ashley Knowles, he setsonce every month or two for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/boatman> and sometimes for the crossword 
magazineOne Across <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/1-across.html>. 

Boatman clues we've looked at in our roundups here include an Inspector Morse 
marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/aug/22/crossword-cryptic-roundup>
,some sneaky spacing for an appropriate TARPAULIN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/02/cryptic-crossword-cheating>
,a reference to crosswording jargon "& lit" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/07/crossword-roundup-loos-in-clues>
 anda couple with interrobangs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/14/crossword-roundup-eggs-chestnuts>
. In the comments underthe Morse puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25404>, he told solvers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12043290>:

My personal fantasy is of a puzzle in which all the solutions share a theme, 
all the clues have a related surface reading (which may or may not subvert the 
theme of the solutions) and the completed grid can be read to reveal a deeper 
meaning. As with all my pieces for the Guardian, you'd have to be able to solve 
the whole thing without being aware of the themes, of course. It goes without 
saying that this is unachievable... or is it?

Intriguing. Let's find out more.

Do you insist to yourself that every puzzle you set must be themed?

It's essential. The idea that a puzzle can have a meaning beyond a collection 
of word-games is very important to me - and gives me a starting point, so it's 
a lot more fun from my point of view. On a good day, I can have the basis of 
half the clues worked out before I start trying to squeeze the solutions into a 
grid.

Where do you create your puzzles?

I'm a reluctant commuter, and have an hour and a half to myself on the 
Brighton line every day, which is about right for working on a batch of clues 
or filling a grid.

The ideas can come at any time, and I've been keeping a notebook for the last 
10 years - from time to time, I realise that I have a couple of related clues 
that are halfway decent, or I read a word or a phrase that appeals, and I start 
looking for others to flesh out a theme.

If I have 15 or more of these seed words, I can usually fit a dozen of them 
into a grid, and that's the hard work done.

When did you get the crossword bug?

I can remember playing word games with my family in childhood, and we 
experimented with creating little crosswords for each other. I wasn't a solving 
prodigy in any way, but I could usually work out two or three clues inthe 
Telegraph puzzle <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/puzzle_tactics>, sitting 
in the back of my parents' car while we were out shopping.

Then, 15 years ago, my wife introduced me to Araucaria's work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria> and to the concept of themed 
crosswords. I was bowled over by the depth of charm and wit that could be 
worked into a word puzzle, and I suppose it was only a matter of time before I 
had to try it myself.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I don't know about a favourite exactly; it's the silly ones I remember, like 
"You may find gateaux on it, but not fruitcakes" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/24586> for TROLLEY (because 
fruitcakes are off it).

Which other setters do you admire?

Araucaria <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria> remains wonderful 
and incomparable, thoughPaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
's inventiveness and cheek come a close second ("Kinky full S&M" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/24903> for THOUSAND is my 
nomination for most rule-breaking clue of the last decade).Cyclops 
<http://www.btinternet.com/~ed.xword/index.html> is always fun, and I admired 
Bunthorne <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bunthorne> very much for his 
ability to disguise his constructions beneath flawless surface readings.

How did you choose your pseudonym?

When I started experimenting with compiling, we were living on a Dutch barge 
in Brighton marina, so it seemed natural to give myself a boat-ish name.

I realised fairly quickly that I could work boatman references into a puzzle 
in a number of different ways (which my regular victims will recognise) and 
that became an important part of my style, so the name stuck.

Boatman puzzles have a distinct style now, which crystallised in the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/24508> couple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/24556> of pieces I set for the 
Guardian -the editor Hugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update> was 
looking for puzzles that were not wilfully tricky, while I wanted to create 
themes and cross-references, and a sort of lightly-themed playfulness emerged 
as a compromise.

I tried setting for a national magazine under a different name, but that sense 
of fun never emerged. Odd.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

Of course. It's very irritating. "Charm offensive" can only mean MARCH, and 
everything's aSpoonerism 
<http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/2010/who-was-dr-spooner-of-spoonerism-fame>
 or a daft pun - it drives my wife crazy. That's her explanation, anyway.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's a 
Boatman puzzle?

I'm fairly sure it starts with something along the lines of "uh-oh, this is 
going to be trouble", but if they know they're going to have fun, and can keep 
going until they've finished, then I'm genuinely happy.

What are the tools of your trade?

Apart from the notebook, it's all software - Crossword Compiler 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/> (more or less obligatory for submitting to 
the Guardian, and an excellent tool for filling grids or finding anagrams and 
containers); the delightful implementation of Chambers 2008 now embedded in
WordWeb <http://wordweb.info/FAQ.html> (itself an interestingly quirky 
thesaurus) and MS Word for listing and colour-coding seed clues and synonyms 
before grid filling. And, no, I'm not joking about the colour-coding.

What are the perils of theming?

You have to remember that there are two types of theme - I've seen the terms 
"themed" and "thematic" suggested as a way of distinguishing between them, 
though I prefer to think of puzzles as lightly or heavily themed - depending on 
whether it's possible to solve the crossword without first solving the theme.

Creating a heavily themed puzzle is a high-risk activity: make the theme too 
easy or too difficult to uncover, and the whole puzzle fails. With (so far) one 
exception, my pieces for the Guardian are lightly themed, in the sense that the 
theme adds to the fun but doesn't get in the way of finishing the puzzle.

In fact, knowing how I build up a theme should make it easier to solve, since 
you'll know that if I once use, say"second in command" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25516> as a definition for 
DEPUTY, it's very likely that the next time you see the same phrase it'll be as 
part of the wordplay, perhaps indicating the letter O... or perhaps not. I 
allow myself to be more devious in theOne Across magazine 
<http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/1-across.html>.

If you weren't a crossword setter, what would you be?

Well, I don't see myself getting away from my day job, which involves 
financial analysis and suchlike, but if I weren't compiling I'd probably be 
spending more time thinking about music (and there's more to be said about 
parallels between writing music and compiling crosswords - chaos within 
structure, that sort of thing) or I have a book full of children's stories that 
need editing or forgetting - I don't have the time to decide which.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

I'm fairly sure that they think of me as an evil genius in my mountain lair, 
so I'm quite happy to see them as valiant James Bond-style adventurers. ("I 
don't expect you to die, Mr Bond, but I do expect you to get a mild headache.") 
And Bond always wins in the end.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

I imagine puzzles becoming more quirky and thoughtful and more frequently 
themed, perhaps containing the raw materials of imagined short stories or 
commenting on current affairs.

I see the libertarian approach 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2010/01/ximenean-vs-libertarian.html> 
developing and embracing new forms of cluing and new ways of allowing fluidity 
without breaking the one rule that really matters: to be fair.

Perhaps in a decade or two we could see libertarian crosswords published as a 
distinct form alongsideXimenean puzzles 
<http://www.alberichcrosswords.com/pages/id200.html>, in the same way that 
cryptic <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> and definitional
 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> crosswords are seen as 
distinct forms now.

I don't agonise over this at all: it seems inevitable - desirable, even - that 
any art form should develop. Definitional puzzles came first, then hybrids 
containing definitional clues alongside anagrams and double definitions, and 
then there were Ximenean puzzles. You might want to insert "finally" into the 
last part of that sentence, but I don't see any need to.

Is setting art or craft?

Both. To return to music as a metaphor: composing is clearly art, but playing 
contains a large element of craft.

Do you give your puzzles titles in your own mind?

Of course! See if you can find "A Drunken Boatman", "A Bunch of Flowers" and 
"Fish & Ships" inthe Guardian archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/boatman>.

Tell us about the Alphabetical Takeaway you've invented

The Alphabetical Takeaway is a singularly irritating device in which a 
different letter of the alphabet is ignored in the wordplay to each of 26 
clues: for instance, "I'm a superhero" might result in BOATMAN (a 
double-definition, if you ignore the "O" in one of them) and "Disney's first 
white-knuckle ride" might clue WALTZER (this time, ignoring the "Z").

I've tried this in One Across <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/1-across.html> 
a few times, where it's apparently floored some very highly-respected Times 
solvers, so I don't think I'll be introducing it into the Guardian just yet... 
or will I?

Tell us a joke.

Daft Twitter <https://twitter.com/#!/boatmancryptics> joke: A man goes to a 
black-tie reception wearing a fish costume because the invitation on Twitter 
mentioned a strict dress cod

What has been your biggest disappointment?

Realising that DALMATIAN isn't spelt with an O. It was so nearly an anagram of 
DOT ANIMAL.

Many thanks to Boatman. Want more? Leave a comment below, visit Ashley's site 
Cryptics by Boatman <http://www.boatmancryptics.co.uk/> or follow 
@boatmancryptics <https://twitter.com/#!/boatmancryptics> on Twitter. 
 