
As the crossword craze gripped the UK in the 1930s, prime minister Stanley 
Baldwin remarked: "I should think that 90% of the people believe that there was 
but one Roman emperor, and that his name was Nero."

Nero is the emperor most beloved of crossword setters, since the placement of 
that E, and in particular that O, make him handy when you really need a word 
with those vowels to fit with the other entries. That's not something you can 
say of Quintillus, Pertinax or Constantius Chlorus.

And of course, it's not just Nero. The vocabulary of crosswords is a version 
of the English language skewed in peculiar directions, where words find favour 
for completely different reasons from those that apply in literature or speech.

How different? As of this week, we have a better idea. At the Guardian Data 
Blog isa post by developer Noah Veltman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/feb/04/calculating-crossword-answers>
 about the words used in the New York Times puzzles.

Taking a newly published database <https://github.com/donohoe/nyt-crossword> 
of NYT clues and answers from 1996 to 2012, Veltman compared the frequency with 
which words appear in that paper's puzzle with how often they crop up in 
another context:Google's database of 20m books <http://books.google.com/ngrams>.

One word that doesn't seem to appear 
<http://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=crosswordiness&year_start=1800&year_end=2013&corpus=15&smoothing=3&share=>
 in any of those 20m books is "crosswordiness", Veltman's splendid term to 
describe the quality of appearing more often in a crossword than in real life 
(or at least, one measure of real life).

The word with the highest crosswordiness rating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/feb/04/calculating-crossword-answers#list>
 is ASEA, defined by Collins as "in a seaward manner or at or on the sea", 
followed by SMEE (a duck or a Peter Pan character) and URSA (as in the 
"extensive conspicuous constellation") and there ismuch more detail at 
noahveltman.com <http://noahveltman.com/crossword/>.

What's refreshing about this piece – and good data journalism in general – is 
the lack of judgment. Crosswordiness is not necessarily a quality to be 
avoided. Words such as EGAD ("a mild oath or expression of surprise") might not 
be recorded frequently in text, but they're useful, memorable and most 
importantly enjoyable. Veltman says that OLEO and OLIO are sentimental 
favourites of his because he hadn't met them before he started solving and so 
had to make sure he kept them in his head.

"I'm also fascinated by celebrities who achieved lasting fame by virtue of 
having a really crossword-friendly name," he adds, citingARLO Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/b8efe8ac-45db-4a71-bb51-c1503986172f> 
andEERO Saarinen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781938461019>
. "I'm sureESAI Morales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/jul/24/comic-con-battlestar-galactica-stargate>
 has had a reasonably successful acting career, but in the crossword universe 
he's Tom Hanks.BELLA Abzug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/jun/19/rio20-bring-change-women>
 really had a good gig all to herself until Twilight came out. Clearly the 
lesson for parents is: if you want to give your child a shot at pointless, 
perpetual, minor fame as a crossword answer, give them a short, rare first name 
with a lot of vowels." I was certainly pleased to see ALAN is the 25th 
crosswordiest word in the New York Times.

Another delightful high-scorer is PSST ("an exclamation of beckoning, esp one 
made surreptitiously"), which seems likely would come up more frequently in the 
non-crossword world if we were measuring that in terms of spoken rather than 
written English. There's no record of that, yet; to Veltman, the prospect of a 
dataset of the spoken word calls to mindthe Lewis Carroll character who exclaims
 <http://archive.org/details/sylviebrunoconcl00carriala>: "We actually made a 
map of the country, on the scale of a mile to the mile!"

"But in the real world," Veltman explains, "you usually can't get the data you 
want, so half the process is identifying the best proxy you can actually use. 
In the same way that Google Books content is a decent proxy for written 
language, I imagine you could get something similar for spoken language by, 
say, compiling YouTube closed captioning text in large quantities. It wouldn't 
be perfectly representative, but you could do lots of interesting stuff with 
that (and I wouldn't be surprised if Google already is)."

The prospect of Google making a record of everything we've said is no less 
chilling than it is plausible. For the moment, though, those 20m books are a 
very interesting yardstick for this kind of comparison and the UK solver is 
bound to start wondering what the equivalent results might be for the Guardian, 
Times, Telegraph, Independent and FT.

The developer Mark Longair <http://longair.net/mark/> has done some very 
interesting analysis of Guardian crosswords 
<http://www.mythic-beasts.com/~mark/random/guardian-crossword-trivia/> looking 
for a different quality among the answers: how often they appear in Guardian 
crosswords as a whole.

And, of course, some solvers keep stores of their own clues and answers – 
Rufus's is legendary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
 in the crosswording world andlast December's Archive on 4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01p2wd0> took us to Crispa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/crispa>'s archive of a quarter of a 
million clues.

It all makes you wonder whether UK crosswords would benefit from some common 
standard for storing clue, answer, grid, date, publication and setter. I 
suspect that nicely structured data would help to make crosswords accessible to 
those with visual impairments. It would certainly be of benefit to those of us 
who get obscenely excited at the kind of data produced by Veltman and Longair.

And it would help to decide which – by various measures – are the "easier" 
puzzles, in terms of setter, day or publication when would-be new solvers ask 
where to start. And this centenary year of the crossword, is a good time for 
that kind of evangelism.

PS: On Tuesday 5 February, Newsnight broadcast a feature on Araucaria 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-21347467>, including Stephen Smith's interview 
with the setter.
 