
The second compiler to join us for a chinwag is John Henderson, known to (and 
sometimes feared by) Guardian solvers asEnigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/enigmatist>.

John also sets as Nimrod for the Independent, as Io for the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/arts/crossword>, as Elgar for the Telegraph 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_toughie> and has set for 
the fiendishListener <http://www.listenercrossword.com/>. 

He's the crossword editor of the Saturday Independent's Inquisitor and has won 
the Times crossword championship. He also has a cracking theme intoday's 
Independent <http://www.independent.co.uk/extras/puzzles/crosswords/cryptic/> - 
more on that below!

When did you get the crossword bug?

Very early in life. Mum did the Daily Mail and Dad the Daily Telegraph - they 
taught me the ropes. On a family holiday once in rainy Herefordshire when I was 
about 13, the local newsagent had run out of both. So we bought the Guardian, 
which that day contained a puzzle by a setter calledAraucaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria> on the 
theme of cherry stones that I loved.

So I wrote to him ... Under his patient tutorship, I had a puzzle published by 
John Perkin in 1979 which I set at the age of 15 - and which looks awful now!

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I don't think I have a favourite, and I tend to forget my clues. A lot of 
people quote "I say nothing (3)" for EGO or "The real reason for the merger 
meeting of Volkswagen and Daimler? (6,6)" for HIDDEN AGENDA.

I did a puzzle for the Indy for my 42nd birthday on the meaning of life, and 
I'm quite pleased with the one I am setting for the Christmas DayTelegraph 
Toughie <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_toughie>.

Also, I'm a big fan of achieving "records" in grids. One of my Genius puzzles 
had only one across clue ("Slowly it wanders pauses - creeps ...") and I once 
held the record for the longest answer in a Guardian crossword ("Trailer for 
sale or rent ... King of the Road, Roger Miller") untilthe late great Taupi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/taupi> took up the 
challenge and fitted in the whole first paragraph of Catch 22. Curses!

My favourite clue of all time has to be "Mad, passionate lovers? (7)" from 
Spurius in the Independent.

I'll ask for the answer below. Where do you create your puzzles?

My "office" is a small table in the corner of a pub in Crouch End which I 
frequent six days a week from nine to five. Here I convert my jottings into 
crosswords and the week's pub quizzes.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

There's an old saying that it should be the aim of the compiler to enter into 
battle with the solver, but to - eventually - lose gracefully. If the solver 
smiles, even giggles a bit, then it's been worth it.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's an 
Enigmatist puzzle?

Judging by the blogs, they know there is a task ahead, and editors usually 
publish me later in the week! I hope, though, that they will enjoy the 
challenge.

How did you choose your pseudonyms?

Mainly by reference to the composer Elgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/1909/sep/27/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures>
, though Io was because I did a puzzle on the moons of Jupiter, and wasn't 
allowed two-letter answers.Biggles puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/biggles>, of course, 
are written byWE JOHNS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/dec/12/coulmn-hilary-mantel-biggles-review>
.

Which other setters do you admire?

Araucaria <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria>
, of course; the other members of the Biggles team,Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/shed> (John Young) 
andPaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
; the lateBunthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/bunthorne> (Bob 
Smithies); Virgilius/Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/brendan> (Brian 
Greer); the lateTaupi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/taupi> (Albie 
Fiore); Kea/Notabilis (Roger Philips) and the lateMike Laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/fawley>.

What makes a successful clue?

Ingenuity, solvability, laughability, mischievousness, maybe a little 
naughtiness!

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

Hackneyed usage and the reverse of the above. One that's been rolled out 
almost without thought.

Tell me about these 3D crosswords you're involved with

I've been working with Eric Westbrook <http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/>, 
promoting 3D crosswords on behalf of the RNIB.

Imagine a 7x7x7 cube with you looking at one of its faces - a square of 7x7, 
which can be turned into a simple crossword by blacking out alternate cells. 
One across and one down both have seven letters, starting as normal in the same 
NW corner square. As is conventional, two, three and four down lead down from 
one across, all also of seven letters, and then five, six and seven across from 
one down.

Now introduce an "away" direction to go with your existing two dimensions. The 
cube numbered "one" now works as the first letter of three answers - in three 
directions! And so on.

Believe it or not, Eric Westbrook, partially sighted, works these out in his 
head! Then he sends the answers to established setters, and we devise the 
clues. Several members of the Guardian team have been getting involved.

Recently, Eric masterminded the All-England 3D Crossword Championship 
<http://bigdave44.com/2011/08/21/the-first-all-england-rnib-3d-crosswords-cup/> 
which, as the first of its kind, was a great success.

My puzzle in today's Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/extras/puzzles/crosswords/cryptic/> will be 
signed by the people mentioned in it to make a presentation copy for auction or 
raffle.

You're a champion solver - how does the solver's brain differ from the 
setter's?

Good question! The processes are complementary, so probably tap different 
areas of the brain.

For me, one aids the other - letter and word patterns generate plausible 
word-fills from which to choose. Letter-counts are extremely important for 
advanced solvers.

What are the tools of your trade?

These days, computerised aids render paper dictionaries unnecessary, which is 
a pity - but it does make the rucksack lighter. I carry a battered old version 
ofChambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 for emergencies and a pad of paper to make notes as I go.

Paper or screen?

Absolutely no problem answering this one - paper forever!

Pencil or pen?

Pen for dailies, pencil for barred puzzles.

If you weren't a crossword setter, what would you be?

I couldn't imagine! As this mini-biography says 
<http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/h.html#John-Henderson>, I'd ticked most of 
the education boxes, and the lecturing job was no longer fulfilling - fewer 
lecturing hours and more boxes to fill - so I got out!

A crossword setter is the last person I would expect to hear complaining about 
filling boxes, but I take your point. What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

Rosy, I still believe - you learn loads from crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords> but little from sudoku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/sudoku>.

And what's the answer to that 'Mad, passionate lovers?' clue?

BONKERS. 

Many thanks to John for joining the setters met - who else would you like to 
get to know? And what would you like to ask them? Also, if you have any 
suggestions for Clue of the Week, please nominate them below.
 