
John Tabraham, better known to solvers as Qaos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/qaos>, sets for the Church Times 
<http://www.churchtimes.co.uk/articles/2012/21-september/features/crossword/crossword-no-1181-by-john-tabraham>
,the Magpie <http://www.piemag.com/about/>, 1 Across 
<http://www.crossword.org.uk/1across.htm>, Calendar Puzzles 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/> and had his sixth Guardian puzzle printed 
this week.

John, one of the six Johns who set for the Guardian, sneaks what he calls 
"ghost themes" into his puzzles. They're solvable without spotting the hidden 
extra connections between some of the clues, the ghosts including Rene 
Magritte, Apple computers and Liverpool FC.

He can be sneaky and funny but never unfair, and his clear cluing means he 
wouldn't be a bad choice to recommend to neophyte solvers. Let's meet Qaos.

When did you get the crossword bug?

I learned the crossword basics from my dad as a teenager and regularly tackled 
the Guardian's Saturday puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/prize> during my university years 
and beyond. The setting bug really caught me about five years ago after setting 
a few puzzles for friends and family.

What do you do besides writing crosswords?

I did an applied maths PhD on ice shelves and since then developed a Bayesian 
<http://www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/bandolier/painres/download/whatis/What_is_Bay_stats.pdf>
 search engine for an IT company. WhenTramp 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
 and I realised that we were both Guardian setters, were both mathematicians 
and had both worked with Bayesian statistics, the apt comment was: "What are 
the chances of that?"

Most important of all, I have a very loving family with a wife and daughter 
who are heaps of fun to spend time with.

What makes a successful clue?

Assuming the clue is logically "valid", I think a successful clue is witty and 
makes you smile. Or if there's a "penny-drop" moment where the setter has had 
you fooled for a bit, but you take great satisfaction in cracking it.

Having said that, I tend to see clues not in isolation, but as part of the 
whole. After all,a clue with a hidden answer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 may be superb in itself, but if it's the fourth hidden clue in a puzzle, it's 
not going to be as suitable for that crossword.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

When I write them, any clues that seem too clumsy and artificial, or if they 
require too many cryptic steps when solving.

'500,000,000,000' to indicate TRIL (half a trillion) was a new one on me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25754>: were you inspired by any 
other devious clues or is this pure Qaos?

I'm a mathematician at heart so I'm often on the lookout for ways to put a 
little maths into my clues. As to where the creative impulse comes from … if I 
knew, I'd bottle it and sell it.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's a Qaos 
puzzle?

I firmly believe that the most important aspect of solving crosswords is that 
it'sfun. So I would hope that anyone picking up the paper and reading "set by 
Qaos" would look forward to solving it.

In addition, I do like putting ghost themes into my puzzles (a compulsive 
impulse, you might say). So you can solve them "plain" but if you spot the 
hidden theme, you might get an extra sense of enjoyment. One of the modern 
benefits to using software to help create the grids, I guess.

Where do you create your puzzles?

I set the grids on computer at home, but compile clues anywhere and 
everywhere. Since I work full-time, I often end up writing clues over 
lunchtimes and whenever spare time permits. Even last thing at night – a 
sure-fire way to send my wife to sleep!

What are the tools of your trade?

Crossword Compiler software 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html>, Chambers Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 andThesaurus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102485>
 both in paper and onsmartphone, tablet etc 
<http://www.chambers.co.uk/apps/apps.php>. Then lots of paper and pen with 
lashings of coffee.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I often find that good clues seem to write themselves, in that the cryptic 
part I see suggests a natural surface. On those occasions, I feel I'm 
discovering the clue rather than creating it.

A perfect example happened just this week, when Guardian crossword editor Hugh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update> informed 
me that a nice&lit clue 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2008/08/and-literally-so.html> I'd written was 
very similar to another setter's clue from a year ago. Since I wasn't aware of 
the earlier clue, it goes to show that some words forms more natural cryptic 
clues than others!

Anyway, I digress. My favourite clue recently was the starting point for a 
crossword with many hidden Bond references 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25691>:

He said 'shaken, not stirred' – timeless Bond! (8)
ADHESION
(he,said*) + (not*) minus T

Again, the clue seemed to flow naturally from the definition "bond" with only 
the small job of making sure that 007's classic phrase was included nicely.

Which other setters do you admire?

I mainly solve Guardian puzzles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords>, so 
although it might sound like a cliche, I really do admire all of them.

They have different styles, backgrounds and ways of thinking which adds up to 
a very varied set of puzzles. If pressed to narrow that down, I'd say that 
those setting full-time get my extra admiration for being able to conjure up 
witty, creative clues consistently over a long period of time.

Is setting art or craft?

Setting is many things: art, craft and logic; linguistic, fun, creative and 
informative. I learn things when looking up references, and themes are often 
inspired by the world around. So I think setting crosswords is a bit of 
everything.

How do you pick your themes?

The world is an infinitely varied and interesting place, so themes often pick 
me depending on what I've done or seen recently.

Was writing your first prize puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25754> a different experience to 
setting dailies?

Actually, no. In fact, until Hugh sent me the proof, I had no idea that puzzle 
was going to be a prize one!

Since my setting remit is to produce puzzles at the more accessible end of the 
spectrum, my first thought was that I'd set too hard a puzzle. However, since 
the general feedback was that it was an "easier" Saturday one, maybe the level 
was OK after all. Did you spot the hidden theme, though?

I did, and and it was great to see 'alien' as a theme (in this case the scary 
movie) rather than a way to indicate ET in an answer. How do people respond if 
and when you tell them you're a crossword setter?

Before joining the Guardian, it was "what an unusual hobby", but producing 
anything for a national newspaper always sparks people's interest. It's better 
than the reply I normally get when they find out I'm a mathematician.

You take part in discussions at Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/> and have a Twitter presence 
<https://twitter.com/qaos_xword>. Is that part of the toolkit of the modern 
setter?

It's not essential, as those that stay away maintain a more mysterious air. 

But with the online crossword community so social these days through social 
media, I think it's great for setters and solvers alike to mix. While you can't 
please everyone all the time, it's also a very useful way to get feedback on 
your puzzles.

Tell us a joke.

At the moment, my six-year-old daughter seems to be channelling the spirit of 
Bob Monkhouse, so I'll tell you one of her latest:

Why did the bird go to the doctor?
To get tweetment.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

It's fair to say my mind is always active. Going into a coffee shop, my first 
thought is "Will a Scot serve me tacos here in Ascot by the coast, while Tosca 
plays in the background? At a cost, they will." I'll get my coats …

My lovely wife puts up with my crossword bug very kindly, although being 
Swedish she has never wanted to solve a single one!

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

With so many types of format and device and such a good online community, I 
think crosswords will be around for a long time yet.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

Sorry, I can't … too long ago! And my first written clues were unfair garbage.

How did you choose your pseudonym and its spelling?

It was that or Xaos …

I see. It certainly ensures relevant Google results. Anything else you want to 
say?

I must give a special thanks to Eric Westbrook 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/>, whose good work for the RNIB you've 
discussed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/10/three-dimensional-cryptic-crosswords>
here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/18/crossword-blog-3d-calendar-2013>
. In a funny way, I very much have Eric to thank for getting my setting career 
rolling.

Back in 2008, after I'd been setting for about 18 months, I'd created a simple 
website <http://www.qaos-crosswords.com/index.htm> where friends and family 
could download my latest puzzles. Eric sent me a nice email asking for a puzzle 
for his 3D Crossword Calendar 2009, addressed "Dear Mr James (Brummie) … "! One 
of the links on my website was to"Eddie James' Crossword Showcase" 
<http://www.eddiejames.co.uk/>, and Eric had used my email address by accident. 

Being an honest chap, I pointed out the case of mistaken identity and passed on
Brummie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/brummie>'s correct contact details. 
But as the project looked interesting and was for a good cause, I also offered 
my services as an amateur setter.

Being the generous person he is, Eric added a couple of extra months to the 3D 
Crossword Calendar and so my first published crossword was in print alongside 
my setting idols, such asAraucaria <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/araucaria>
,Enigmatist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 andPasquale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
 to name just three. Eric's generous action gave me confidence to submit 
puzzles to the Crossword Centre and Magpie soon afterwards and the rest, as 
they say, is history.

It's also wholly characteristic of Eric Westbrook to add extra months to the 
12 that the rest of us assume is the maximum. So thanks to him for sending Qaos 
in the direction of Guardian solvers – and thanks, of course, to Qaos for 
taking part.
 