
Tom Johnson is a setter whose puzzling seemingly cannot be constrained. He 
sets for Fleet Street and for magazines including the New Statesman and the 
Cricketer. He sets cryptics and general-knowledge puzzles, including Prospect's 
fearsome Generalist. He is the editor of the Spectator crossword and of1 Across 
<http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/1-across.html> magazine.

And he sets for two monthly county magazines, a bimonthly Scottish magazine 
and publications such as the Puzzler, Puzzle Compendium, Chat Crosswords and 
Chat Crosswords Select.

Tom has had a quiet influence on British crosswording for some time, and it's 
about time that we met the setter.

Hello Doc. How did you get involved with crosswords?

I am a Brummie and my parents regularly solved the Reader's Crossword in the 
Birmingham Mail. They explained definitional puzzles to me and what, for 
instance, "anagram" meant – I was only about eight years old.

I was soon bitten by the crossword bug and began submitting puzzles for 
possible publication. One of the Mail's crossword editors provided me with 
guidance when he realised how young I was. My first published puzzle was in 
this series, during my O-level year at King Edward's school, Birmingham, and I 
still recall how impressed my English teacher was.

Which other setters do you admire?

I recall attempting to solve cryptics from the age of about 14, usually in the 
Guardian, with school friends. It was very much a case of trying to solve a 
puzzle and looking at the solution the next day in an attempt to understand 
what we had missed.

Remember that this was before the books Ximenes on the Art of the Crossword 
and Alec Robins's Teach Yourself Crosswords had been published. Once compilers' 
pseudonyms appeared in the Guardian puzzles I realised thatAraucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/araucaria>'s thematic puzzles were what I 
had been enjoying the most and this style of crossword was to influence my 
career.

Bunthorne <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/bunthorne>
's puzzles remained impenetrable to me for a long time, but I loved to look at 
his solutions in an effort to crack his style. He became a good friend when he 
compiled for 1 Across magazine.

As a teenager I attempted a weekly cryptic by Leslie Stokes; again the 
learning process was to the fore. I still recall solving "It can cause an 
interruption to services (6-3)" and realising for the first time how one can 
"play" with English.

In the 70s Jac's puzzles in the Spectator were formative – of my solving 
ability and of my understanding of what a thematic cryptic crossword was and 
how cryptic clueing was done. I got to know Jac: we met once, probably one of 
the few occasions when he did meet other compilers, and towards the end of the 
decade, I championed his puzzles whenever I could in print. He then invited me 
to join the Spectator compiling team in 1981.

Among today's compilers, Michael Curl (Orlando/Cincinnus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/sep/13/crossword-blog-meet-setter-orlando>
) stands out. His puzzles never fail to delight me. His clues are witty, 
concise and always "paint a lovely picture". Most especially, Michael is a 
wizard anagram-maker. His regular Saturdaypuzzles in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/arts/crossword> are a testimony to his greatness.

But I have to put Lavatch 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=site%3Aguardian.co.uk+lavatch> at the top of 
my list of present-day inspirational compilers. I am very proud to claim that I 
"discovered" Lavatch about 10 years ago when he submitted a few unsolicited 
cryptic puzzles to 1 Across magazine. I knew immediately that Lavatch was going 
places.

It wasn't long before I invited him to join the Spectator team. His erudition, 
expertise in working a complex theme into a puzzle and his smooth and elegant 
clueing style mark him as the doyen of the younger British setters.

I'll give the answer to that clue at the end. How did you choose your 
pseudonyms? And do they have different characteristics?

I have never thought of this being the case. It is true that a Doc puzzle is 
very different from a Didymus puzzle, but my pseudonyms merely differentiate my 
various regular commitments. I haven't consciously thought that I adapt my 
style to suit each of the different newspapers and magazines for which I 
compile.

Doc is a snappy three-letter name to mirror Jac's importance in my career, as 
well as acknowledging the happy coincidence of my surname and Dr Samuel 
Johnson. Didymus was my second (therefore "twin") pseudonym, for myGeneralist 
puzzles in Prospect <http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/crossword/>.

My three other pseudonyms derive from my abiding interest in bus operations. 
When Colin Inman invited me to join the new team of FT Polymath compilers, I 
was on holiday on Gozo conducting research for mybook about Maltese and Gozitan 
buses 
<http://www.britishbuspublishing.co.uk/epages/BT2754.sf/en_GB/?ObjectPath=/Shops/BT2754/Products/MA2>
. This happy coincidence saw the birth of Gozo. When the Toughie series 
started, Busman was created; a few years laterOtterden 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jun/13/crossword-blog-meet-setter-otterden>
 invited me to join him as joint compiler for the New Statesman crosswords and, 
on the insistence of the family, I became Anorak!

What have you done for a living besides writing crosswords?

I was a modern language teacher at a local secondary school for over 30 years; 
during 20 of them I was also the school's examination officer, responsible for 
all aspects of the school's internal and external exams.

Where do you create your puzzles?

I work from home in south Cheshire, either compiling crosswords or, to a 
lesser extent, proofreading puzzle magazines. My wife Jean works full-time too 
but vice versa: proofreading more, compiling less.

We work in our office, often with our cat sitting alongside us on our desk, or 
in the dining room. Working in a public place, whether it be a library, cafe or 
pub, wouldn't suit us.

What are the tools of your trade?

List books, reference books and dictionaries line our office: Chambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
,Collins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007437863>
,Oxford 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199571123>
, language dictionaries,Brewer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550107640>
's various publications,ODQ 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199237173>
, crossword dictionaries, biographical dictionaries, atlases and numerous 
paperback reference books from Oxford and Chambers.

I use the Crossword Compiler program 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> more as an adjunct to my 
compiling than as my first port of call. I create the grid using CC, but the 
actual compiling is carried out using books and the words are then entered into 
the CC grid; I rarely use CC's word lists as my preliminary reference source. 
Only towards the end of compilation (especially with a Generalist) will I 
consult the CC's word lists, when all other reference books have done their bit.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

In the Spectator in particular, I have probably devised clues that I thought 
were good at the time, but all are soon forgotten. I have never recorded them 
in a notebook. I have recently tackled long "&lit 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2008/08/and-literally-so.html>" anagrams for 
the first time, in my Cricketer puzzles and a recent New Statesman puzzle. 
These have been great fun and very satisfying when they succeed. The NS puzzle 
contained these two anagrams which respectively lead to the first two lines of 
Gray's Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard:

Poet refers to nightfall (Duly thank clew)
Old Holstein wander. Where will they go?

As for favourite puzzles: my most recent Generalist is always my favourite 
until the next one, because I get a great kick out of creating a difficult and 
heavily cross-checked grid with as many interesting long words as possible.

One Spectator puzzle stands out from the 500 or so I have compiled. It was 
entitled Your Starter For 10. The
solution at 10 down was UNDER MILK WOOD and the unclued lights were the 
opening words of the radio play: "To begin at the beginning …", and so on -- 
all compiled on one of our standard Spectator grids!

How would you describe 1 Across magazine to any weekday solvers considering 
making the leap?

It is a privately published subscriber-only magazine created by Araucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/araucaria> just over 30 years ago. It 
contains a mixture of two original Araucaria puzzles, a specially commissioned 
prize puzzle and puzzles by aspiring amateur compilers.

In addition to Lavatch, I have encouraged and championed Gaff, Chalicea, 
Aardvark/Scorpion andBoatman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/05/crosswords-meet-the-setter-boatman>
. They are all now established compilers in national newspapers, but they all 
started with us!

The magazine is a pleasant mix of a challenging puzzle or two and, some less 
demanding items and a couple of pages of The Editor's Musings where I waffle on 
about crossword events, review books and comment on crossword milestones or 
anything that tickles my fancy.

Has increased internet use changed the way you think about your demanding 
knowledge-based puzzles?

Not so much as many would suspect, I reckon. Since much of my compiling is 
undertaken using books as reference tools, I remain confident that my puzzles 
can be solved without resorting to websites. Having said that, I know that many 
Generalist solvers go online to solve my puzzles and (unfairly?) exchange 
solutions with one another. That disappoints me, as it removes the personal 
challenge. (But then I am the Victor Meldrew of south Cheshire.)

I imagine that setting for the Cricketer – formerly known as the Wisden 
Cricketer – might allow a setter to plunge deep into sometimes abstruse 
cricketing lore – is that the case?

Many younger readers attempt the puzzles, I have been told, so I aim to remain 
fair to them. I make a point of keeping the principal cricketing references in 
each puzzle as contemporary or as well-known as possible. Only once have the 
demands of the cross-checking letters meant that I have resorted to a recherché 
reference: a Yorkshire batsman of the 1890s!

My clues are always as precise and as clear as possible with details of the 
county and/or country a cricketer played for in the definition of his name. So 
"Botham" would not be clued just as "all-rounder", but as "Somerset and England 
all-rounder". And all the solutions in each puzzle which are not 
cricket-orientated must have clues which include a cricketer reference.

One quirky aspect of all my puzzles so far is that the name of a Warwickshire 
cricketer has appeared in each, preferably as a solution rather than in a clue.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

Far from it. As a family we enjoy playing games with words; puns and nonsense 
terms are part of our daily conversations and emails with one another. We have 
silly pet names for one another which have stuck with us for years and all of 
them are really quite cleverly contrived!

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

Someone who is ready for a challenge with a store of reference books at his or 
her side. My solvers should have tea and coffee readily available during the 
day, a glass of wine alongside in the evening and a cat walking through, trying 
to help in its own way.

If you weren't a setter and editor, what would you be?

Fully retired, and extremely bored.

Understood and many thanks to Tom for the wide-ranging tour! Full details and 
a sample issue of 1 Across are available by sending a C5 SAE to 1 Across, The 
Old Chapel, Middleton Tyas, Richmond, North Yorkshire DL10 6PP. And "It can 
cause an interruption to services (6-3)" is TENNIS-NET.
 