
Tramp <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/tramp> is a new 
addition to the Guardian stable: his first cryptic was published in April and 
he has now contributed five, each packed with wit and allusion.

As we'll see below, Tramp - known in the non-crossword world as Neil Walker - 
was once referred to as "one Guardian solver" in a piece by Sandy Balfour for 
this paper. Eight years later, he's a setter - a cheeky and modern one, as 
those who've completed his puzzles can attest.

How did you choose your pseudonym?

I've always been partial to a bit of Supertramp 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/d2ff6b6b-fc30-48dc-8952-06f9d8fc64f8>; 
I like the name and the connotation with my surname.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I'm proud of "Must've? (5,7,2,3,3)" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25351> although I have to thank 
my twin brother Craig for helping polish the idea. I also like"Thieves empty 
bank? (4)" <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25351>, which I wrote 
after seeingFred Goodwin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/sir-fred-goodwin> 
on the news in front of a huge RBS sign.

My favourite puzzle is my first one in this paper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25308>, themed on Fawlty Towers. 
Although the clues are very long I'm quite proud of getting in all 12 episodes 
- admittedly sometimes with a large shoehorn. I have the front page and the 
crossword page framed in our box room. Unfortunately, the front page features a 
photo of Cameron and Osborne. Now, I'm no royalist but had my crossword 
appeared a day later, I'd have Kate Middleton looking down on me as I write 
crosswords and not the Tories' Chuckle Brothers.

I'll give the answers at the end. Your puzzles seem to inhabit a modern kind 
of world - George Michael and computer keyboards, say, rather than military and 
cricketing abbreviations. Is this a conscious thing?

It's just the way my little mind works. I like including modern elements: 
songs, films, brand names and the odd bit of smut or toilet humour. If I can't 
think of anything suitable, I revert to more traditional building blocks.

When did you get the crossword bug?

Like some of my clues, it's a long story. 

My dad's colleagues used to do cryptics at work and this led to him tackling 
them at home (Daily Telegraph <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/index.php> 
andDaily Mail <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/coffeebreak/puzzles/crossWord.html> - 
spits on floor). When I was 10, my brother Stephen introduced dad to the 
wonders ofAraucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria> et al 
during vacations from university.

They would tackle the Guardian's cryptic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/cryptic> together and it seemed 
like an exclusive club that I wanted to join. When I was about 17, I would try 
and help them.

Several years later, a group of fellow postgraduate friends used to do the 
Telegraph cryptic 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_cryptic>. I introduced 
them to the Guardian and before long we were doing up to three cryptics every 
day: that's where I got the bug. I distinctly remember tacklingPaul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
's debut puzzle.

Back at home after university, between trips to the jobcentre and rejection 
letter after rejection letter, the only thing that kept me sane was doing the 
Guardian crossword every day with my dad. When I struck lucky, got a job and 
moved to the Lake District, Dad remained my long-distance solving partner onthe 
weekend prize puzzle <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/prize>; he 
didn't get a paper during the week.

In 2003 I wrote to the crossword editor asking to see more of Taupi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/taupi> at weekends so 
that dad could enjoy his puzzles. On 11 October, for no obvious reason, all my 
family happened to visit mum and dad for the weekend. Amazingly,Taupi set the 
prize puzzle <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/22959> and I'd done 
most of it on the journey. Before I left, I remember dad querying me about one 
clue: "It involves serving at sea (4,6)".

I told him to stick at it and he'd get it. "It'll be hard though, pal," was 
his reply. We weren't to know how prophetic this would be as they were the last 
words I had with my dad. Hours later, he was taken ill and died shortly 
afterwards. I posted the story on the Guardian crossword talkboards andSandy 
Balfour included it in his X-Philes column 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/2003/nov/07/the-x-philes> and his book I 
Say Nothing (3).

By now, I was submitting the odd effort in clue-writing competitions on the 
Guardian talkboards, where I learned that some compilers were entering
University Challenge: The Professionals 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b009sdy2> and there was a crossword meet in 
Manchester around the event. I plucked up the courage and went to the filming. 
Here I met a lot of my heroes:Araucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/araucaria>, Bunthorne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/bunthorne>, Paul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 etc.

In 2004, I emailed Paul to say that I loved a Genius puzzle; he suggested I 
have a go at setting and sent me a Word file with all of the Guardian's grids. 
I hastily filled one in, wrote some clues and sent it to Paul for comments; it 
was rubbish.

The fact that he didn't completely slate it gave me hope - and I'd got the 
setting bug. He suggested I "tighten up my definitions" and submit a puzzle to 
Enigmatist. I was mentored by Paul and the great man himself and compiled 30 
puzzles at Enigmatist.com [no longer online].

I've been writing clues ever since, trying to get better. I've had a few in 
the Royal Statistical Society's Significance magazine 
<http://www.significancemagazine.org/view/index.html> but my ambition was to 
get published in the Indy or the Guardian. I wrotea tribute puzzle based on 
Paul's Genius 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/2011/feb/07/genius-crossword-annotated-solutions>
 and sent it to the editor. He liked it and that's how I got my break. I feel 
immensely lucky because there are brilliant setters out there who are much more 
deserving of a place on the Guardian team than me.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when he/she sees that it's a 
Tramp puzzle?

What? Without swearing? I hope most people wouldn't put the paper back on the 
rack.

Some of your clues are strikingly long on the page. Do you feel pressure from 
brevity-likers to rein them in?

I do notice when I'm writing a long clue but if I think the surface is good 
I'll stick with it.

When do you create your puzzles?

I work full-time as a statistician and have two young daughters who take up 
most of my spare time. I only get to set for an hour or so before bed and maybe 
the odd hour at weekends.

Which other setters do you admire?

Too many to list, but I'm indebted to the brilliant Paul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
,Enigmatist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 and Tyrus/Lato for their help.

What makes a successful clue?

It has to be entertaining. The best clues provide great penny-dropping moments 
when solved. Also, I feel the surface reading should set a scene.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

I dislike clues where the surface reading makes no sense.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

I think the current community is strong and agree with what Anax said here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
, that "cryptic crosswords are in great shape and have formed an active, 
welcoming community which simply didn't exist a few years ago".

However, that only applies to those who are already into crosswords; I worry 
that youngsters accustomed to battling with computer games see battling with a 
cryptic as mundane. I fear that unless we get the next generation into it, the 
art might die out. You don't see many under-50s doing crosswords.

Can you recommend a Supertramp track for those of us who only know Breakfast 
In America and Dreamer?

My favourite is Another Man's Woman 
<http://www.breakfastinspain.com/video-files-supertramp/bbc-1977-supertramp-live-another-mans-woman>
. If I had to recommend an album I would plump forParis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_(Supertramp_album)>, the double live album 
from 1980. Come on, chaps: let's have the DVD out in 2012.

Right, I'm off to Spotify. Thanks to Tramp for joining the Setters Met. Who 
should we meet next? The answers to the clues above, by the way, are THINK 
OUTSIDE OF THE BOX, ROBS and DECK TENNIS.
 