
Do people buy a newspaper for its crossword? As far as I know, the only 
research done on this is a YouGov survey I commissioned for the crossword’s 
100th birthday.

About three in 10 UK adults, I learned, attempt a crossword at least once a 
week. And among those who tackle a puzzle, more than one in five said that 
their choice of which print newspaper to buy is influenced by its crossword.

I wrote at the time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/two-girls-one-on-each-knee.html>:

So it looks to me like our country has 14.7 million people solving at least 
weekly – and 7.3 million making paper-buying decisions based at least in part 
on the crossword culture of the paper: the tone of the puzzles and the 
personalities of the setters.

So what happens to its crossword when a paper ceases print publication? 
Horribly,this question is no longer abstract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/independent-and-independent-on-sunday-closures-confirmed>
:
Nellie Thornley (@nellienorus) 
My dad buys the indy everyday to do the crossword- he lives alone and it 
genuinely means a lot to him and his daily routine.
 <https://twitter.com/nellienorus/status/698123974912434176> February 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nellienorus/status/698123974912434176> Alice Bartlett 
(@alicebartlett) 
Texting me mam about the indy closing. Her and Dad do the cryptic crossword 
each week. It’s a very big deal.
 <https://twitter.com/alicebartlett/status/698121153727066113> February 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/alicebartlett/status/698121153727066113> James Walsh 
(@jamesofwalsh) 
My 92 year old grandma buys the Indy every day - we tried to lure her to the 
Grauniad, but prefers the Indy's crossword. She'll be gutted
 <https://twitter.com/jamesofwalsh/status/698098821713305600> February 12, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/jamesofwalsh/status/698098821713305600> 
Those who solve only on paper will inevitably be bereft. All the UK 
broadsheets have some means of making their puzzles available online:the 
Independent’s is a JavaScript doodad that lets you solve within your browser 
<http://puzzles.independent.co.uk/games/cryptic-crossword-independent/#!201602> 
once you’ve watched an ad.

That’s one way of “monetising” the crossword – but big changes at newspapers 
can also mean restructuring, which can mean fewer departments.

It would be immensely cheering if the Indy were to lead the way in going 
digital while retaining its crosswords. No other paper’s puzzles are like the 
Independent’s: modern and playful, often with unexpected themes and hidden 
messages and the broad stable of setters (many of whom got their start at the 
paper) gives the solver a delightful range of difficulty. Like all decent 
puzzle series, these independently minded crosswords reflect the ethos of the 
paper and – as the survey shows – that comes bound up with reader loyalty.

That’s the short term; what about the long? If it were as easy as clicking a 
button, would you be prepared to make a “micropayment” for your daily solve, or 
are you more amenable to other ways of paying: ads, say, or subscriptions?

We’ll return to these topics here soon. In the meantime, for those concerned 
about the Independent puzzle,reader and solver Dave Tilley has started a 
petition to be sent to the Independent newspaper and its owner, Alexander 
Lebedev 
<https://www.change.org/p/the-independent-newspaper-and-its-owner-alexander-lebedev-the-independent-crossword>
.

We’re holding over the follow-up to the Bowie post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jan/25/crossword-roundup-cryptic-world-says-bye-to-david-bowie-tributes>
 for another week.The polling data is from a YouGov online survey of 2,045 
adults between 22 and 24 May 2013; the figures have been weighted and are 
representative of all GB adults (aged 18+).
 