
The news in clues

Other dictionaries are available, but Collins and Oxford have released their 
word of the year lists. Here at the crossword blog, we’ve celebrated the way in 
which crosswords are often quicker than dictionaries at picking up on new terms 
– in fact, there’s a solid argument that a good benchmark of a new word’s 
success is when a setter expects a solver to have come across it.

This year, however, only a few of the shortlisted words have popped up in 
puzzles. BREXITEER, fromthe Oxford list 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016>, is, 
of course, among them, such as whenthe Financial Times’ Julius 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/027911ec-5dbe-11e6-bb77-a121aa8abd95.pdf>
 ...

10ac Leading Brexiteer ‘entertaining comedian’ – papers (2,5)
[ nickname of a pro-leave MP, surrounding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 (‘entertaining’) synonym for ‘comedian’ ]
[ IDS surrounding CARD ]

... delightfully clued ID CARDS. UBERIZATION, from the Collins list 
<https://www.collinsdictionary.com/word-lovers-blog/new/top-10-collins-words-of-the-year-2016,323,HCB.html>
, has not yet been part of clues or answers as far as I know, althoughChalmie, 
also in the Financial Times 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/f67735c2-7951-11e6-97ae-647294649b28.pdf>
 ...

25ac They carry possibly jacketless potatoes (4)
[ term exemplified by ‘potatoes’ missing first and last letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
 (‘jacketless’) ]
[ TUBERS without first and last letter ]

... has certainly clued UBER. Other than that, though, crosswords have this 
year anticipated the words of the year much less than usual. I’m surprised not 
to have seen the Danish HYGGE, and I wouldn’t be surprised to be tackling 
wordplay for MIC DROP or ALT-RIGHT as wordplay in itself some time soon.

As for the rest, there are plenty of terms that I read for the first time in 
these lists themselves:JOMO 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016>, 
WOKER <https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016>
,LATINX 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016> and 
DUDE FOOD 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016>. And 
if theyhad appeared in puzzles, I would have raised at least a couple of 
eyebrows. They don’t meet that benchmark above – or perhaps you disagree?

And perhaps this year’s lists are more influenced than before by online 
subcultures that are as easy to miss as they are to spot; both lists also seem 
to be striving for coverage in American papers and websites. Personally, I’d 
rather see Oxford return to separate UK and US lists for each year.

The Oxford winner, though, does play on both sides of the Atlantic (although 
this paper’s Peter Bradshaw would prefer NORMALISATION 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/post-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump>
), and it brings us to our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue 
POST-TRUTH?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for VOTE FLIPPING 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/nov/07/crossword-roundup-clinton-and-trump-both-disappoint>
, the shoe that (so far) didn’t drop. I enjoyed the unflattering surfaces of 
Schroduck’s “Revolting VIP pig ‘Teflon Trump’’s alleged fraud” and GappyTooth’s 
“Cross bleeding candidate’s concerns”.

Chrisbeee had a pleasing acrostic in “Initial verdict of the election flawed – 
lousy if polling process is no good”, while MaleficOpus went for wordplay that 
would confirm the answer once deciphered: “The apparent problem with electing 
Trump implied by 18 internal letters”.

The runners-up are ComedyPseudonym’s arguably inaccurate (since the votes that 
were apparently “flipped out” did, we’re told, still count) “This results in an 
own goal after putting a cross into the box” and Artemiswolf’s sly “Booth’s 
errant actions may result in Johnson presidency”; the winner is Lizard’s 
“inverse reverse hidden”: “Feature of free-to-view presenting alleged problem 
for some interactive screen users”.

Kludos to Lizard; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

Especially given the puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/27043>’s themes of backstabbing 
and “balance”, Crucible’sclue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/27043#25-across> ...

25ac Fish go in mid-December, so strike now! (5,4)
[ type of ‘fish’, then synonym for ‘go’ inside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 middle letters of DECEMBER ]
[ CARP, then DIE inside EM ]

... for CARPE DIEM was inspiring on many levels. Illegitimi, as they say, non 
carborundum.
 