
Mick Hodgkin is of the cheeky school of setters, with puzzles in the 
Independent as Morph andTelegraph Toughies <> as Micawber. His cluing is witty 
and often topical and his commitment to crosswording is indicated by his 
sometime blogging atsolvers' site Fifteen Squared <http://fifteensquared.net> 
and his habit as a teenager of hand-delivering prize puzzles to newspapers "to 
save the price of a stamp".

Among his clues that we've enjoyed here are references to Lily Allen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/mar/05/crossword-roundup-pin-the-blame>
,Vince Cable 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/14/crossword-roundup-leveson>
 and theAmerican states 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/18/crossword-roundup-two-monkeys>
. So let's meet Morph. And Micawber.

What do you do for a living besides writing crosswords?

I edit news programmes on Al Jazeera English <http://www.aljazeera.com/> and 
before that I was atChannel 4 News <http://www.channel4.com/news/>. The 
greatest crossover with crosswords is making up the puns for the "when we come 
back..." on-screen tease.

We had a business story about Apple for which I wrote APPLE TURNOVER, which 
duly appeared in the next Morph puzzle with the clue "Sweet product of iPod 
sales?"

And I remember you also clued ICON as "Symbol of Apple's deception?" OK, so: 
you're a newsman - how easy is it, with schedules and lead times, to get a 
current-affairs clue into a puzzle?

Editors usually shift things round if you need to get something very topical 
into print. But it's often unnecessary. Stories with enough traction to be 
worthy of reference are usually still topical three or four weeks later. Look at
phone hacking <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/phone-hacking>.

When did you get the crossword bug?

I started doing crosswords as a teenager. Various members of my family do/did 
the odd puzzle, but it was my maternal grandparents who got me hooked. Their 
habit of retiring to the pub withthe Azed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/help/story/0,,1696517,00.html> of a Sunday 
lunchtime made it look a pleasurable pastime.

I then got a little distracted by other aspects of life (work, kids etc) and 
started getting serious about it again in my 40s.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

The first puzzle I had published was in the Church Times 
<http://www.churchtimes.co.uk/>. I'd been badgering Don Manley [Church Times 
crossword editor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
, aka Pasquale] via email about how I could break into setting, and he invited 
me to submit for the CT.

My first thought was that my religious knowledge wasn't up to it. My second 
thought was to make one across SEXBURGA, my favourite saint's name, which we 
had used as the working title for my first daughter while she was in the womb. 
The clue was "Anglo-Saxon saint loving fast-food, we hear"; this was amended as 
it was felt that using "loving" to indicate SEX was not appropriate for the CT.

Where do you create your puzzles?

I very rarely sit down and compose a puzzle in one go. I usually compile the 
grid in my living room on a laptop, starting with a few words I have ideas for, 
usingCrossword Compiler <http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> 
to suggest options for the rest. That takes anything from half an hour to a lot 
longer if it's thematic and complicated.

I then write clues at home, on the tube or in the park in my lunch break. My 
commute takes an hour, so that provides quite a lot of time.

What are the tools of your trade?

Crossword Compiler <http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html>, 
Chambers inhard copy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 andon the phone <http://www.chambers.co.uk/apps/apps.php>, and Collins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007437863>
 to try to justify abbreviations not in Chambers.

What are your favourites of your own clues or puzzles?

Some of Morph's politically themed crosswords stick out: the puzzle 
<http://fifteensquared.net/2007/06/27/independent-6457morph-stepping-down/> 
where BLAIR changed to BROWN word-ladder-style in the grid via 
BLAIN/BRAIN/BRAWN andthe one 
<http://fifteensquared.net/2009/06/01/independent-7059-morph/> featuring 
various items claimed on expenses by MPs: DUCK ISLAND and so on.

I've got a terrible memory for clues, including my own, but here's a recent 
topical one <http://fifteensquared.net/2012/05/03/7972-morph/> I liked:

1ac One under orders from minister Maude getting fuel container (10)

This was just after Francis Maude told us all to go and fill jerry cans in 
case of a fuel strike. I also lovehomophones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
, though I know not everyone agrees.This one 
<http://fifteensquared.net/2008/03/06/independent-6673morph/>...

26ac 'ardy girl 'ad no 'elp throwing caber, I 'ear - manly stuff! (12)

...was a favourite; as a commenter at Fifteen Squared observed 
<http://fifteensquared.net/2008/03/06/independent-6673morph/#comment-16246>: 
"the kind of word I'm sure you'd look at [as] a setter and then wonder if you 
could dare pull off such an outrageous homophone!".

I'll give the answers below. How did you choose your pseudonyms?

When Mike [Hutchinson <https://twitter.com/eimi_indy>, the Independent's 
crossword editor] took me on, I was working onMore Four 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/tags/more4/> News, so Morph, the pliable 
animated figure <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2005/oct/12/news.features11> 
seemed a good name, as well as containing my initials MOH. That didn't lead 
naturally to a clutch of stablemates, so I picked Micawber forthe Telegraph <> 
as an extension of Mick.

Yes, Chas was maybe too mischievous even for crosswords. Which other setters 
do you admire?

I like setters with a sense of humour, and am absolutely happy for them to 
mess with the conventions, so of courseAraucaria <>, Paul/Punk 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 andEnigmatist/Elgar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
.

I'm also enjoying fellow newish kids on the block like Arachne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
/Anarche 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/mar/15/crossword-blog-live-chat-arachne>
 andAnax 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
 a lot.

What makes a successful clue?

A successful clue should make you scratch your head, then furrow your brow, 
then split your sides.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

Unsuccessful clues come in many types: ones that can be guessed too easily 
without working out the wordplay can be a problem, or those that rely on 
obscure references. I tried to avoid the obvious I MOAN rev in cluing NAOMI
recently <http://fifteensquared.net/2012/07/16/independent-8035-by-morph/>, but 
found a lot of people had no idea David Bowie's wife is called IMAN!

I enjoyed the Squeeze misdirection in that clue, though. As @twitmericks 
<https://twitter.com/twitmericks>, you're a prolific writer of limericks - is 
there any overlap in the 'skill set'?

Certainly in the tools: I'm constantly using the searchable Chambers on my 
iPhone to search alternately for words going _I_E_R and for words rhyming with 
HUNT.

Also, both take a level of persistence in wrestling your initial clever idea 
into something that actually works within a particular structured format and 
grammar. I write my limericks on Twitter so they have to fit into 140 
characters, which often means reworking for ever greater conciseness.

Or concision, even. You seem to like modern references in your puzzles - is 
this a deliberate choice of style?

News references are what I'm steeped in for the day job, so they come 
naturally. I also feel that crosswords should keep moving gently along with the 
times, and include popular culture as well as classical references - though 
since the young turks of crosswording tend to be 40+, the popular culture 
referred to may already be 30 years old.

I do think it's time to ditch some old crossword cliches, such as Nancy 
Mitford's U and non-U 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/video/2010/jun/10/language-wordsandlanguage>
: more people now relate to "you" to clue the letter U than "acceptable", so 
let's embrace that.

Tell us a joke.

How many Group 4 staff does it take to change a light bulb? Four soldiers and 
a policeman.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's a Morph 
or a Micawber puzzle?

I think they expect a touch of topicality, a smattering of smut, some horrific 
homophones and a lorra laughs. I hope.

How do people respond if and when you tell them you're a crossword setter?

I get very varied reactions, from total lack of interest to genuine 
enthusiasm, via looks of extreme concern. Men are more likely to say "I can't 
do crosswords" and change the subject; women are more likely to say "I can't do 
crosswords, but I'd love to learn how".

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

Yes. I sometimes have to be prevented at work from employing puns in 
inappropriate contexts. And of course, my daughters associate me with bad puns. 
But to me, a bad pun is potentially a goodhomophone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

As long as people want to solve them, people will set them. I hope newspapers 
see them as key to readers' loyalty, and important to their brand - sorry, 
horrible concept. So long as newspapers keep going...

Anything else you want to say?

I started setting puzzles in 2007 because I was spending more and more time 
solving them, and wanted to try my hand, and see if I could make it a (modest) 
source of auxiliary income.

It took the help of editors such as Mike and Don, of course, but it also 
wouldn't have happened without the online community that has grown up over the 
last decade or so around sites likethe Crossword Centre 
<http://www.crossword.org.uk/> and Fifteen Squared <http://fifteensquared.net/>
, where I was blogging at the time. Out of such things come proper friendships, 
which is great.

Now setting crosswords is a part of the rich tapestry of my life, and though 
I'd be pushed to set more than a couple a month now alongside the demands of my 
job, the family and nowthe daily limericks <https://twitter.com/twitmericks>, I 
look forward to cranking up the output at some time in the future if things 
change.

Many thanks to Mick. The answers to the clues above are FRANCISCAN and 
TESTOSTERONE. Readers, what do you think about topicality and humour in puzzles?
 