
Sometimes, crosswords burst out of their box and into the news part of the 
newspaper.

So it was this week, with the Mirror reporting Frank Sinatra's love of the New 
York Times puzzle 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/top-stories/2011/09/28/womaniser-frank-sinatra-liked-nothing-more-than-sitting-down-to-do-a-crossword-115875-23450720/>
.

The hook is a recent Sinatra memorabilia auction 
<http://www.ebay.com/itm/Frank-Sinatra-signed-personal-letters-NY-Times-crossword-editor-Gene-Maleska-/160654548579>
, includinga 1989 typewritten love letter 
<http://www.lettersofnote.com/2011/09/frank-sinatra-on-crossword-puzzles.html> 
from crooner to crossword editor.

Sinatra describes how he got hooked, and how he made a regular challenge to 
himself to solve more quickly:

Today I would say a daily puzzle is completed in 30 to 40 minutes. The Sunday 
puzzle is completed in 90 to 120 minutes. What a wonderful way to pass the time 
and also learn new answers every day.

It's an arresting image: Ol' Clue Eyes asking Dean Martin for help with a 
sticky acrostic while shouting at Sammy Davis Jr for failing to fetch the 
Chairman of the Board his favourite pencil.

The Mirror plays the story as a surprise, headlining it Womaniser Frank 
Sinatra Liked Nothing More than Sitting Down to do a Crossword 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/top-stories/2011/09/28/womaniser-frank-sinatra-liked-nothing-more-than-sitting-down-to-do-a-crossword-115875-23450720/>
. For me, it's not surprising that Sinatra sat down sometimes, or that he 
enjoyed word puzzles. Who doesn't?

It's worth remembering that the New York Times puzzle is not made of the same 
stuff as British broadsheet cryptics. For the NYT, the solver needs a mix of 
approaches involving more general knowledge and non-English vocab, and much 
less wordplay. (There's a fascinating look at how the NYT puzzle comes together 
ina recent piece in the Atlantic about its indomitable editor Will Shortz 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2011/09/how-will-shortz-makes-a-new-york-times-crossword-puzzle/244733/>
.)

It would be invidious to privilege either the UK or the US style of 
crosswording; for better or worse, the ones Sinatra did would be more 
appropriate training for Who Wants To Be A Millionaire than they would for
Bletchley Park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/aug/25/crossword-blog-saving-the-world>
.

A more interesting difference is one of morality, or perhaps of manners.

British cryptics can offer all kinds of suggestive and salacious imagery, as 
spotted here each week in ourcrossword roundups 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/26/crossword-blog>
. The NYT, by contrast, is almost always on its best behaviour. In 2006, 
readers complained that standards had slipped when the answer to a 43d, clued 
as "Scoundrel", turned out to be SCUMBAG. Did you know that word was originally 
a slang term for a condom?
 'Scumbag' defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. 
Me neither. Lexicographer Jesse Sheidlower 
<http://www.jessesword.com/about.html>, covering the scandal 
<http://www.slate.com/id/2139453/>, noted how the crossword fits in with the 
Times's style as stated in its manual:

A larger concern is for the newspaper's character. The Times differentiates 
itself by taking a stand for civility in public discourse, sometimes at an 
acknowledged cost in the vividness of an article or two, and sometimes at the 
price of submitting to gibes.

The NYT puzzle is an institution within an institution, with a lively and 
compulsive dedicated blog <http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/>, a 
well-established <http://www.crosswordfiend.com/> fan 
<http://rexwordpuzzle.blogspot.com/> culture <http://www.nytcrossword.com/>, 
its ownmovie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2006/jul/05/wordonthestreet> and - 
better still -its own Simpsons episode 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/11/15/simpsons/>. Just as Slavoj Žižek 
is tempted <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v26/n17/slavoj-zizek/knee-deep> to see the 
differences between national mentalities reflected in the traditional toilet 
designs of the German, the French, etc, so am I tempted to find something 
ineffably American, British, French, etc in the cultures of the NYT puzzle, the 
Guardian cryptic andLe Monde's mots croisés 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/web/sequence/0,2-3280,1-0,0.html>, and to conclude that 
the UK is happier to see its institutions with theirKNICKERS 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 down, while America is more comfortable if its mental Medau is free from filth.

No, the surprise is not Sinatra enjoying a puzzle, but Sinatra enjoying the 
New York Times's - or rather, the company he keeps. In the 2006 movie mentioned 
above,Wordplay <http://www.wordplaythemovie.com/>, the aficionados interviewed 
includeJon Stewart <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/jon-stewart>, Ken Burns 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2001/jan/04/worlddispatch.michaelellison> and 
the Indigo Girls <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/indigogirls> - all of whom, 
it's fair to say, are easier to imagine wearing a Yes We Can button than 
Nixon's pal Sinatra.

And the biggest fan of all? Surely Bill Clinton, who went so far as to compile 
a music-themed puzzle in 2007 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/may/09/pressandpublishing.newmedia>. Two 
thoughts on that. First, surely the Mirror can see from this example that 
womanising is hardly a hurdle to enjoying crosswords. Second, when did we last 
see a British premier setting a cryptic? I'll tell you when: Alec Douglas-Home, 
who did 'em for the (London) Times - and that was in the 1930s, before his 
tenure. One-nil to the Americans there.

We'll return to non-UK crosswords another time. So how do you manage without a 
UK newsagent when abroad? Expensive 'world' editions? The internet? Perhaps you 
take a crossword book, or a bundle of scraps of recent newsprint. I normally 
have aListener <http://www.listenercrossword.com/> that needs some attention, 
but I try to sample the local fare. Do you?
 