
Arachne <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/arachne> - known in the 
non-crossword world as Sarah Hayes - setscryptics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic+profile/arachne> and 
quiptics <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quiptic+profile/arachne>
 at the Guardian and barred puzzles for the Inquisitor, Listener and Enigmatic 
Variations. Since August, she has also set cryptics in the Independent as 
Anarche. Her puzzles are beguiling, droll and at times provocative.

Among the Arachne/Anarche clues we've looked at here are a cheeky route to 
BONKERS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/24/cryptic-crossword-roundup>
, some indirect rudeness in a clue forMASTITIS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/28/crossword-roundup-tarp-neets>
, references toBan Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/19/crossword-roundup-beautiful-minds>
 and theBirther movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/10/cryptic-crossword-roundup>
 andour very first Clue of the Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/aug/18/crossword-blog-cryptic-puzzles>
.

What is it with spiders?

When I had my first puzzle published I was an enthusiastic amateur weaver 
("good at looming", a friend put it), so I took my name from Arachne in Greek 
mythology. She had the temerity to challenge Athene to a weaving contest, which 
got her changed into a spider - a bit headstrong, then.

I also like the image of slightly nervous victims becoming entangled in the 
web. Some of my best friends are spiders and every corner, cornice and light 
fitting of my house is bestrewn with cobwebs as it seems churlish to sweep them 
away. I work at home, surrounded by dusty books, and tend to resemble Miss 
Havisham's older sister or one of the less palatable senior members of the 
Addams family.

Anarche is, of course, an anagram of Arachne. I pronounce it with three 
syllables, and it may or may not be appropriate. I couldn't possibly comment.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I can't remember most of them. (Strange fact: once I've had a few days to 
forget the answers I can't even solve my own clues. I'm a terribly bad solver.) 
But a few bits and bobs stick in the memory, and my favourite puzzle, by a 
country mile, wasListener 3460, called Web 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/Years/Puzzles/L3/L34/L3460.html>, which was 
in the shape of a spider's web and had a wee drawing of Arachne the Spider in 
the middle.

As a cricket fanatic I was pretty pleased with a simple Quiptic clue from a 
few years ago <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quiptic/372>:

13ac Batsman's smashing cricket shot (11)

Marcus TRESCOTHICK is still playing smashing cricket shots for Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/21/marcus-trescothick-interview>. 
I'm a Lancashire girl, myself.

Here's a thing: not being a member of the MCC in the 1780s, I don't want to 
say 'I see you're a woman', but it's certainly the case that the world of 
setters is dominated by males.

People do occasionally notice that I'm a woman, and sometimes kindly point it 
out when they meet me. As a setter I didn't consider gender an issue until two 
years ago whena clue I wrote caused a bit of a hoo-ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/24830>:

24ac Woman in charge of automobile club (6)

As you can see, it's a simple double definition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/17/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-double-definitions>
 of DRIVER. But a dispiritingly large number of (mostly) male Guardian readers 
were flummoxed and looked high and low for explanations of the word "woman" - 
was I perhaps making some occult reference to Minnie Driver, or even Betty 
Driver? - and, worse, continued to feel affronted when it was pointed out that 
women do sometimes drive cars these days. Since then I have made a particular 
effort to use females in clues.

When did you get the crossword bug?

Rather unoriginally, at my father's knee. He didn't solve during the week, but 
we'd tackle the barred puzzles in the Sunday broadsheets - just the two of us 
and a copy ofChambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
. The perfect Sunday afternoon.

It taught me early on that it's possible to solve a really good clue from its 
wordplay even when the answer is so obscure you've never heard of it. To my 
shame, until earlier this year I was only solving barred puzzles at weekends, 
but I'm now getting huge pleasure from discovering the work of my brilliant 
colleagues in the daily papers.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

The first clue I solved was back in the Precambrian era, so I can't really 
remember it. But I do remember with clarity and pleasure my first published 
puzzle.

I had sent an unsolicited crossword to the late and much missed Harold 
Massingham 
<http://menmedia.co.uk/manchestereveningnews/news/s/1413025_farewell_to_mass_crossword_king_harold_massingham_dies_aged_78>
, then editor of the Independent Saturday Magazine's barred puzzle and a 
genuinely wonderful man. To my utter astonishment he accepted it pretty much 
without edit.

It was called Drop-outs, and was ISM Crossword No 51, published on 25 May 
1996. I occupied the lower half of page 45, lying languorously beneathAlix 
Sharkey <http://www.alixsharkey.com/>, which is the closest to hipness I've 
ever been. Alix plainly didn't enjoy the experience as much as I did and 
emigrated to America the following week.

What are the tools of your trade?

Dictionaries, black ink pens and good quality paper. I hate computers. A year 
or two ago I started usingCrossword Compiler software 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/> at the request of my Dear Leader Hugh 
Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update>; before 
that my grids were drawn with pen and ruler, black squares coloured in with a 
felt-tip pen, while words for the grid were entered in pencil.

Large amounts of rubbing out tended to go on in the last corner. Happy days.

Which other setters do you admire?

All of them. Seriously. My colleagues are, every single one, astonishingly 
ingenious, original and hardworking and I still can't believe I move in their 
orbits, albeit liminally. You notice the setters who seem to be on the same 
wavelength, however, and trying to do what you are trying to do yourself; in 
that camp I would particularly mention the wonderfulAnax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
,Philistine <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philistine> and Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/orlando>. I "get" them. Roger Squires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rufus> deserves a special mention for his 
brilliant humour: I'm a sucker for clues likethe classic 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/article_full_details?article_id=35>:

1d Two girls, one on each knee (7)

I'll give the answer below. What makes a successful clue?

Up to a point it's subjective. But a clue must be fair, and I can't quite 
shake off my early conviction that it should have two clear parts - wordplay 
and definition, a bit like the parts of an equation separated by the equals 
sign.

Since I started solving my colleagues' daily puzzles I've been rethinking the 
criteria, though, and started to experiment with cryptic definitions and those 
sorts of clues which kind of make your brain explode, where you seem to have to 
know the answer before you can, er, work out the answer, like this from Anarche 
in the Indy recently:

1d Break me? (4-4)

I'm using them, but still feel uneasy and am always keen to hear the views of 
solvers on issues of fairness (hint).

For me, surfaces are enormously important, and I try to polish mine over and 
over until they read as much like ordinary English as possible. This is going 
to sound unbelievably pseudish, but my model when writing clues is my beloved
Alexander Pushkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/06/alexander-pushkin-hero-elaine-feinstein>
, whose poetry I taught for many years. When you spend years dissecting and 
analysing the very best poetry, you come to value economy of language,le mot 
juste, and the sounds and rhythms of a line. I'm sure that no one has ever 
noticed, but a few of my clues actually scan. Sad.

It's also fun when a clue conjures up a visual image in the solver's head, 
like a scene from a story - or life, for that matter. I expect a lot of parents 
of small children will recognisethis picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25008>...

9ac Insincere heaving of tiny chest (9)

...and a lot of couples might flinch at 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25446>...

3d Married love entails endless argument in recurring pattern (5)

And how I mourn - only in crossword terms - the defenestration of George W Bush
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/12/george-w-bush-torture>. He 
figured in quite a few of my Guardian clues, and not in a good way. When I 
joined this paper,Hugh Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update> told me 
that he liked Guardian clues to have a distinctly Guardian flavour, so while 
some setters avoid politics, I use my puzzles to further my various vendettas, 
and have regularly had a pop at Bush, Blair,Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25390> and other wholly 
deserving targets.Two <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25057> 
clues <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25008> from the summer of 
2010:

10ac Tory in Lab disguise? (4,5)

7d Throw shoe! Bugger invaded Iraq! (6,4)

Your biography says you wrote 'a boring book on 18th-century Russian 
shipbuilding terminology'. I bet it wasn't boring. Raymond Chandler used to 
collect slang used by pickpockets and prisoners and that was interesting.

It's rather catchily called A Study of English Nautical Loanwords in the 
Russian Language of the Eighteenth Century and it includes the definition 
"Upper futtock: any futtock other than the ground or lower futtock". Now do you 
believe me?

No. Give us the most abstruse (or obscene) piece of 18th-century Russian 
shipbuilding terminology you know.

Apart from the various aforementioned futtocks, you might like to imagine 
being weeks at sea in Peter the Great's fledgling navy surrounded by the "ruder 
pis" (rudder piece), "batoksovaja linija" (buttocks line), "breshtuks" (breast 
hooks) and "gengen-knis" (hanging knees). The "tapsel-shit-bitsy" (topsail 
sheet bits) don't sound too salubrious, either.

What do you do for a living besides writing crosswords?

Having given up on academia in 1999 I've had many different jobs, the best of 
which was working on a burger van in a Kendal lay-by (the worst was toilet 
cleaner in a hotel full of OAPs with theNorwalk virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/01/tis-season-to-catch-norovirus>
). For the last few years my partner and I have been selling second-hand 
academic books on the internet but we've given that up - Nick in order to tend 
our allotment, me so as to spend more time with my crosswords.

If I weren't a crossword setter (and I thank my lucky stars every day that I 
am, because it's the best job in the world), seeing as it's too late for me to 
be the next Paula Radcliffe, I'd be a professional limerick writer. Loads of 
money in that.

Perhaps not Paula Radcliffe, but aren't you a world record holder?

In October at the Chester Marathon I knocked a full 20 minutes off the 
Guinness World Record for Running a Marathon Dressed as a Bottle (Female). Ran 
as a bottle of Loweswater Gold, a spiffing golden ale from Cumbrian Legendary 
Ales, and finished in 4 hours 33 minutes.

Many thanks to Arachne. The answers not given above are PATELLA, HALF-TIME, 
SYNTHETIC, MOTIF, TONY BLAIR and GEORGE BUSH.

Reader, what do you think about the fairness issue - or any other - mentioned 
above?
 