
The Greens and senator Nick Xenophon have vowed to push for reforms of 
parliamentary expenses after the Coalition’s travel controversies widened with 
revelations four ministers billed taxpayers to attend a New Year’s function 
hosted byMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>.

Sussan Ley, who stood stood aside as health minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 on Monday, will also face further questions after a report she inspected a 
Gold Coast property in September 2014 on a taxpayer-funded trip.

The Greens have called for a national anti-corruption body with a function to 
audit and advise on parliamentary expenses, while Xenophon has talked up 
increasing disclosure and penalties.

Bronwyn Bishop blames 'socialists' for criticising Sussan Ley over expenses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/bronwyn-bishop-blames-socialists-for-criticising-sussan-ley-over-expenses>
On Monday, SBS reported 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2017/01/09/ministers-bill-taxpayers-attend-pms-private-new-years-eve-function>
 that the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, the attorney general, George 
Brandis, and the communications minister, Mitch Fifield, claimed flights and 
Comcar costs to attend Malcolm Turnbull’s 2015 New Year’s Eve party.

Guardian Australia has confirmed from finance department records 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/parliamentarians-reporting/parliamentarians-expenditure-P38/>
 that the expenses were charged to taxpayers.

Dutton also incurred a $438 travel allowance to attend. The education 
minister, Simon Birmingham, claimed a $62.53 Cabcharge on 31 December 2015 but 
no other expenses.

A spokesman for Brandis said the costs were within the rules as they were to 
attend an official function, an account the other three ministers have backed.

A spokesman for Birmingham said he attended the official function at 
Kirribilli House with the prime minister while on a privately funded trip to 
Sydney.

 “The minister claimed a single cab charge for travel to a meeting during the 
afternoon of 31 December but all other aspects of the trip were self-funded by 
the minister.”

The other 18 ministers who attended the event did not charge taxpayers.

On Monday, Ley stood aside as health minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 pending an investigation into her travel, after the revelation she had charged 
taxpayers for a trip to the Gold Coast during which she boughta $795,000 
apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
 as an investment property.

On Tuesday the Herald Sun reported that Ley had twice inspected 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/sussan-ley-looked-at-gold-coast-properties-before-buying-on-a-whim/news-story/2c25001cb045fa549454de5f8b1c09d2>
 a different Gold Coast property in August and September 2014 and billed 
taxpayers for a trip to do so from 5 to 8 September.

Retired couple Adrienne and Stewart McEachran told the newspaper that Ley and 
her partner, Graham Johnston, inspected their home in Advancetown, in theGold 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> hinterland before 
unsuccessfully bidding to buy it.

Finance department documents confirm 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P35_LEY_Sussan.pdf> that Ley 
billed taxpayers more than $2,000 in travel costs for a long weekend on the 
Gold Coast from 5 to 8 September, 2014.

The costs included $720 for two nights of travel allowance, more than $1,000 
in flights to and from Coolangatta, and $271 for a hire car. The trip was 
listed as for “official business”.

On Tuesday the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, told Radio National that 
scandals over many years, includingthose that engulfed Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
,Labor’s Sam Dastyari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 andthe Coalition’s Stuart Robert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
, showed the need for a national anti-corruption watchdog.

He said the body should include “an independent parliamentary adviser to 
provide advice and audit entitlement claims to determine when they are outside 
the rules”.

Di Natale said parliamentarians encountered “grey areas” when they conducted 
both official business and met people outside their portfolio on the same trip, 
but the Department of Finance is not able to give definitive advice about 
whether expenses are within the rules.

The Greens leader said he “feared for the future of the country” because 
expenses scandals undermined faith in democracy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&media=>
Sussan Ley steps aside during investigation into taxpayer-funded travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video>
Xenophon told ABC’s AM he would reintroduce a bill for an independent 
watchdog, to give the public a right to make a complaint, mandate real-time 
disclosure of claims, and “hefty penalties” if politician make a wrongful claim.

Asked about the four ministers charging to attend Turnbull’s New Year’s event 
at Kirribilli, Xenophon said it “miserably fails the pub test”.


“This is why so many Australians hate so many politicians, because they don’t 
seem to be subject to what is colloquially known as the pub test.”

Multimillionaire Sarina Russo hosted Sussan Ley at New Year's Eve parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
Xenophon said the travel to the New Year’s function “may well be within the 
rules” but the rules needed to change.

Di Natale said he suspected some politicians arranged meetings to justify 
charging taxpayers to travel to attend events like the Australian Open and 
Melbourne Cup, but that was “absolutely not” how the system was designed to 
work.

He said rules needed to be overhauled so that politicians cannot claim 
expenses “if the primary purpose of their travel is not work”.

Guardian Australia revealed Ley twice travelled at taxpayer expense to the 
Gold Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> on New 
Year’s Eveto attend events with Sarina Russo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
, one of Australia’s richest women, whose companies won multimillion dollar 
contracts under the Abbott government.

A spokesman for Ley said her travel to the Gold Coast “is part of two 
independent reviews by the departments of prime minister and cabinet and 
finance”.

“Given that these reviews are underway it would be inappropriate to make any 
comment. We will await the findings of the reviews.”
 