
Pasquale <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/pasquale> has been setting 
cryptics for the Guardian for 23 years, but his crossword empire is larger than 
that: he sets for all the UK broadsheets and is the crossword editor of the
Church Times <http://www.churchtimes.co.uk/>.

His pseudonyms - among them Bradman, Duck, Giovanni and Quixote - each relate 
to the first part of his name, Don Manley. He writes smart, precise, fair clues 
in a time-honoured style, as befits the author of the Chambers Crossword Manual.

Though never anything like a pushover, Quixote was mentioned as one of the 
more accessible setters in our recent look atwhere beginners should start 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/31/crosswords-for-beginners-which-papers-are-easiest>
 and Manley clues that we've enjoyed here includean irritating political 
catchphrase 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/24/cryptic-crossword-roundup>
,an allusion to unfinished puzzles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/05/crossword-roundup-make-you-feel-my-love>
 andsome dietary advice 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/20/crossword-roundup-deja-clue>
. Ready to Meet the Setter?

Where do you create your puzzles?

In my study in Hayward Road, Oxford. I like to start early, at six or seven 
o'clock, and generally find the morning my most productive time. My office 
attire can often therefore be dressing gown and slippers.

It's a quiet cul-de-sac leading into a park on the northern fringe of Oxford. 
The paper shop is a few hundred yards away and I am sometimes able to tell a 
neighbour en route that it's my puzzle inthe Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic> today.

Oxford is a strange place but after 27 years I am coming to terms with it. A 
neighbour just the other side of the ring road isColin Dexter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/06/colin-dexter-honoured-contribution-crime-writing>
, for many years a rival clue-writer inthe Observer's Azed competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/help/story/0,,1696517,00.html>.

When did you get the crossword bug?

From my father, who was a commercial traveller visiting farms. He took the 
Telegraph <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/index.php>, the Express and the 
Mail. On Sunday afternoon we'd solve the Radio Times puzzle together.

My first experience of solving Guardian puzzles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/cryptic> was in a book, with him, 
in my mid-teens. I worked out the answer ELEEMOSYNARY. It's now my pleasure - I 
hope! - to introduce a new generation of Guardian solvers to new words.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

My first clue in a 15-by-15 grid in the national press was for the Radio Times 
in 1964: "Doctor refuses to work for TV series (10)".

I'll give the answer below. You set under many names 
<http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/m.html#Don-Manley>. Do their styles differ?

Indeed they do, though there is obviously a measure of overlap. Pasquale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/pasquale> is probably the hardest of my 
daily disguises. As Quixote in the Independent I try to produce something that 
might be a very quick solve for the experienced setter. When I set a puzzle I 
am very aware of who it is for and what the crossword editor will and won't 
tolerate.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

My favourite clue is usually the most recent one that I think is really good. 
At the moment it'sthe one for SNIFTER for which I won first prize in Azed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/2012/jul/21/azed-crossword-slip-2091>. 
It's a particular favourite because it was serendipity that led me tothe poem 
that inspired the clue 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34906/34906-h/34906-h.htm#JUMBLIES>. As far as 
whole puzzles go, I tend to forget them all too quickly.

Which other setters do you admire?

This suggests that I should provide a subset of my esteemed colleagues and I'm 
not prepared to do that. I will however make an exception for a retired 
clergyman.

No - not him(!) but the Rev Bob Carter from Bradford who has been one of the 
setters onthe Church Times 
<http://www.churchtimes.co.uk/articles/2012/15-june/features/crossword-no-1167-by-robert-d-carter>
 for over 20 years. Bob sends me some lovely puzzles to edit and we regularly 
exchange postcards. Bringing on other setters through the Church Times has been 
a fascinating exercise.

What makes a successful clue?

For me it has to be grammatically accurate and make some sort of (possibly 
zany) sense.

After that it needs some sort of sparkle, which can come in many different 
ways. "& lit. <http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2008/08/and-literally-so.html>" 
clues are often very nice, but so are those with a totally misleading context. 
Some tease through double meanings in their component parts; some have clever 
wording and very tricky constructions.

There are many ways to a successful clue, but every now and again a setter 
will know when he or she has written one which it would be hard to better.

What are the tools of your trade?

I use Crossword Compiler <http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> 
and a library of reference books. My three dictionaries areChambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
,Collins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007365494>
 and theOxford Dictionary of English 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199571123>
. I look for synonyms in theOxford Thesaurus of English 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199560813>
. Online I sometimes usethe full Oxford English Dictionary <http://oed.com/> 
for useful background reading. The book "tools" sit on a gate-leg table between 
me and the window.

And as Guardian crossword editor Hugh Stephenson points out 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/2010/oct/05/hugh-stephenson-crossword-editors-update>
, anyone with a local library card can accessthe online OED <http://oed.com/>. 
Next question: is setting art or craft?

I'd prefer to call it an intellectual discipline that has to be learned over 
many decades.

Your Guardian profile <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/pasquale> says you're 
a physics graduate: do those who complain about science being underrepresented 
in crosswords have a point?

I think we have much more science these days, but one wouldn't want too much 
really specialist stuff. I get a bit cross when I see bad science in a clue: 
for example, defining amps by electrical power.

But it isn't just science we need. Let's use our puzzles to reflect the 
amazing world we live in - a world of science, religion, arts, culture, 
politics and millions of oddities. By the way, I am saddened when a reference 
to religion brings a Dawkins-style response: there's no excuse for a lack of 
basic Bible knowledge, even in a post-Christian society.

Did writing Chambers Crossword Manual change the way that you set?

Self-influence is a concept I hadn't thought of. I'd be much more interested 
to hear that it had influenced others, I guess.

If you weren't a crossword setter and writer, what would you be?

Relatively impoverished. I'm over 65 and with fairly modest state and 
occupational pensions. I need the money.

How do people respond if and when you tell them you're a crossword setter?

Usually that they've never met one before and that they can only do 
general-knowledge puzzles. Occasionally I meet someone who knows my work and 
once or twice I've introduced myself to someone in a public place solving one 
of my puzzles - that brings a gobsmacked reaction.

What have you done for a living besides writing crosswords?

I spent a few years trying unsuccessfully to be a research scientist. For most 
of my day-job career I was in publishing. I left my last job 10 years ago, as a 
commissioning editor of school textbooks at Oxford University Press.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

Crosswords per se are more diverse than they ever have been, but there are two 
worries: the apparent lack of youngsters (say, the 18-30 bracket) who solve and 
the future of printed newspapers. Maybe we will draw in more folk through 
electronic channels - who knows?

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's a 
Pasquale puzzle?

I have a female Guardian-solving friend in Oxford and she said I was too hard 
last time, so maybe she'll be thinking "I hope this one will be easier."

Anything else you want to say?

Three things quickly:

· To meet me properly you'd need to talk to me and find out about my life 
outside crosswords.

· Thank you for this opportunity to contribute to a very good blog. However, 
there is a danger that, for all their good, blogs may breed cliques who try to 
take ownership of cruciverbalism.

· I would have much much more to say about crosswords. I could write a book on 
it, but come to think of it I've done that already.

We'll have to meet again, then. Many thanks to Pasquale etc for taking part. 
ELEEMOSYNARY, as I'm sure a few of you were wondering, means "concerning 
charity" and was used byGordius last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25457>. And the answer to that 
first clue in the Radio Times? MOONSTRIKE. Don, ever the perfectionist, adds: 
"I should have written 'refusing'."
 