
The news in clues

A week ago, the Independent crossword by Knut (which you may wish to solve 
before reading on 
<http://puzzles.independent.co.uk/games/cryptic-crossword-independent/?puzzleDate=20160118#!201601>
) featured this at 24 across:

24ac In Cincinnati, Bowie returned for tribute (4)
[ hidden backwards in CINCINNATIBOWIE ]

There in the letters CINCINNATIBOWIE was the four-letter OBIT. But surely this 
could not be a tribute puzzle to the man mentioned in the fodder? Not so soon?

It was. 

Up in the top-left corner, we had …

1/9ac Let’s Dance, David’s non-US No 1 single (5,3,6)
[ anagram of DAVIDSNONUSNOI ]

... SOUND AND VISION and the clues and the answers covered Bowie’s personae 
and songs from the art-pop Major Tom, through that starman’s reappearance as a 
new-romantic junkie in the 1980s and beyond. There’s a staggering amount of 
OBIT here and the thematic answers helpfully intersect with other entries for 
the less Bowie-curious: for a death that seemed to catch everyone on the hop, 
this is a masterful achievement from Knut and his editor.

And a week earlier, there was another Bowie-themed puzzle. 

For six years, the excellent Telegraph solvers’ blog Big Dave 
<http://bigdave44.com/> has consoled solvers who wish that the paper published 
a second puzzle on Saturdays, like it does during the week. TheNot The Saturday 
Prize Puzzle 
<http://crypticcrosswords.net/puzzles/not-the-saturday-prize-puzzles/> mixes 
stalwart setters with novices and is consistently fun and provocative. NTSPP 
309, the first by Mitz (and which you may also wish to solve promptly 
<http://crypticcrosswords.net/puzzles/not-the-saturday-prize-puzzles/ntspp-309/>
), was labelled as hiding “a timely surprise”.

Here, too, the clues read like a tracklist of a Bowie greatest hits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/23/david-bowie-announces-first-in-a-series-of-box-sets>
, like this clue …


15ac Extreme evidence about Space Oddity – the one that got away (7)
[ first & last letters of EVIDENCE surrounding anagram of SPACE ]

… for ESCAPEE, but the surprise is an audacious hidden message around the edge 
of the completed grid. The puzzle was indeed timely in that it very briefly 
celebrated Bowie’s 69th birthday and coincided with the release of Blackstar, 
but it very soon became another, inadvertent, OBIT.


Bowie, it’s fair to assume, would have loved all this. He certainly loved 
language, andtold the Associated Press in 2002 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/culturepicturegalleries/12092387/David-Bowie-1947-2016-life-and-career-in-pictures.html?frame=2445723>
:

What I’m most proud of is that I can’t help but notice that I’ve affected the 
vocabulary of pop music. For me, frankly, as an artist, that’s the most 
satisfying thing for the ego.

(A piece of possibly incomplete data-crunching 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/whats-on/whats-on-news/manic-street-preachers-top-lyrical-7418385>
 in 2014 put Bowie as the musician with the second-largest vocabulary in pop – 
1,748 words – behind a prolix Welsh outfit.) And we recently learned that he 
took the Times every day, which inevitably leaves any crossword fan wondering 
if he ever filledthe waiting-around time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jan/18/crossword-blog-would-you-solve-your-workmates-puzzle>
 on buses and planes with the crossword. His lyrics sometimes read like 
crossword clues – “the streams of warm impermanence”, “the serious [or Sirius?] 
moonlight” – in a good way and it’s not fancifulto see that last album as a 
kind of puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/11/was-david-bowie-saying-goodbye-on-blackstar>
 to besolved 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/music/artists/david-bowie-music-tribute/> after his 
death. It’s also worth noting that, now that he is no longer a living person, 
Bowie is now eligible as an entry in the Times’s puzzle.

This brings us to our next challenge. In his splendid liner notes for a 2008 
Mail on Sunday compilation 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1030121/DAVID-BOWIE-I-went-buy-shoes--I-came-Life-On-Mars.html>
, Bowie talked of using “a little-used word for each song” – our phrase is from
Bowie’s reworking 
<https://bowiesongs.wordpress.com/2010/02/05/oh-you-pretty-things/> of such 
sci-fi novels as Arthur C Clarke’s Childhood’s End and Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s 
The Coming Race. From Oh! You Pretty Things: reader, how would you clue HOMO 
SUPERIOR?

Clueing competition

Many thanks for your clues for WELL, WELL, WELL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jan/11/crossword-roundup-do-you-leave-or-let-well-alone#comments>
. The repeated word suggested repeated definitions, done succinctly in 
thebrasselephant’s “Fill hole properly” and with definition in, among others, 
phitonelly’s “I never did fit pool properly” and jonemm’s resigned “I might 
have known – it’s shafted good and proper”.

The audacity award surely goes to ousgg’s attempt at a nonuple in “Liberal 
spring uprising: We will indeed fine and completely shaft the rich” and other 
approaches included harlobarlo’s “Oddly, when LOL tweet loses lustre, at first 
you and I will respond with mock sarcasm”.

The runners-up are steveran’s timely “Flood after flood after flood – I can’t 
believe it!” and machiajelly’s sly “Healthy setters shall spring surprise”; the 
winner is Middlebro’s erudite and knowing “What do we have here, a noun, verb 
or adverb?”

Kudos again to Middlebro; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick 
of the broadsheet cryptics below.


Back to Bowie

Finally, for those who fancy another Bowie-themed puzzle or two: if you can 
find them,the 2013 V&A Bowie exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 coincided with Scorpion’s Independent 8,305 and I am told that Peter Luther’s 
2007 novel Dark Covenant containsone of those fictional crosswords that we’re 
so keen on here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/04/top-10-crosswords-fiction-simpsons>
 with a similar theme.
 