
As the UK closes down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jul/16/olympics-g4s-police-staff?> for the 
Olympics, it's time for a trip abroad to see how they take their crosswords 
there. First stop: America, where cryptics are harder to come by. One source is
the Nation <http://www.thenation.com/>, sometimes called "the flagship of the 
left"; the New York Timesdescribes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/03/arts/03lewis.html?_r=1> "conservative 
Republicans who [hold] their noses" as they buy the magazine for the puzzle.

Nation setter and former codebreaker 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/culture-obituaries/8180268/Frank-Lewis.html>
 Frank W Lewisrecently died 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/156802/puzzlers-puzzler-frank-w-lewis> after 
more than six decades of crosswords. His fans included Kurt Vonnegut and 
Leonard Bernstein and his successors - Joshua Kosman (Trazom) and Henri 
Picciotto (Hot) - have a natty line in smooth and witty clues; I've been 
following their work attheir Word Salad blog 
<http://www.thenation.com/blogs/word-salad>. Let's talk puzzles.

So, Hot: how did the pair of you become the new setters for the Nation?

We met maybe 25 years ago, at a word puzzlers' party, and about 16 years ago 
started our collaboration as cryptic editors for The Enigma, theNational 
Puzzlers' League <> monthly magazine. In that capacity, we have worked with 
many leading US constructors (as we call them over here) and helped to train 
many beginners.

During that time, I was part of a group that met weekly to group-solve FRANK 
LEWIS's puzzles in The Nation. When he retired,Trazom and I discussed the 
possibility of applying for that job 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/168745/following-frank>. Here's a relevant clue:

Our predecessor: candid, stylish at heart, and uncannily wise (5,5)

When The Nation announced a solver-judged competition to replace him 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/160265/we-have-winner>, we entered - and we 
were very excited to actually get the job.

In the UK, with the exception of innovations like the Guardian Quiptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quiptic> and devilish weekend 
puzzles, we have broadly two kinds of puzzle:quick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> and cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic>, both with black 
squares. But it's different in the US, no?

Well, in US-style crosswords, there is a range of difficulty, with the New 
York Times <http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/> setting the pace among the 
high-quality puzzles - the range is from straightforward on Monday to very 
difficult on Saturday.

There is an abundance of such puzzles, sometimes with interesting twists. A 
recent NYT puzzle by Tracy Gray had the theme RIGHT TURN ON RED (a US traffic 
rule). CHEERED ON, for example, was entered with CHEER going down, and then 
making a right turn with RED ON entered across.

Unfortunately, US-style crosswords are not cryptic. The only overlap is the 
occasional cryptic definition, as you know them in the UK.

So where can Americans in search of a cryptic challenge get their fix?

Some rely on British puzzles. I know a number of solvers who solve the London 
Times puzzles <https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/>, and others 
who are addicted to tougher puzzles such asthe Listener 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/> and Azed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed>.

The best American cryptics are probably these:

路 The monthly bar-diagram puzzle by Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon in the 
Saturday Wall Street Journal (example here 
<http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/puzzle20120616.pdf>). The 
difficulty varies, but never reaches the level of the Listener. Their cluing is
flawlessly elegant, and has set the standard for most US setters.

路 The Enigma carries cryptics at many levels of difficulty. We co-edited a 
collection of them,which can be downloaded for free 
<http://www.puzzlers.org/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=puzzles:cryptic:cote>.

路 As for black-square cryptics: there is one every few weeks in the Sunday New 
York Times, and Games Magazine carries them in every issue 
<http://www.gamesmagazine-online.com/>. Alas, those tend to not be very 
interesting to experienced solvers, unlike the black-square puzzles you write 
about on this blog.

路 And of course there is our weekly puzzle <http://www.TheNation.com>, in the 
Nation. This one is only available to subscribers.

With 68 years since the previous change of guard at the Nation, and without a 
pre-existing national scene across the papers, do you feel you're able to 
establish a world of cryptic crosswording as you fancy?

Well, we're trying!

While we're generally square-dealers, we feel that a weekly black-square 
puzzle that will retain its appeal to experienced solvers needs to be a little 
more freewheeling than is traditional in the US, needs to include themed 
puzzles on occasion, and needs to prioritise entertainment over an obsession 
with so-called "rules".

Among our favourite themes was a puzzle where the only vowel in the diagram was
E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/21/crossword-blog-meet-letter-e>
. During the Arab Spring, we had one where all 22 countries of the Arab League 
appeared in the clues -- "because we could", as youmight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/18/crossword-roundup-two-monkeys>
have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/06/crossword-roundup>
put it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/27/crossword-roundup>
.

Which clues have you been proudest of so far?

It's hard to know, as I quickly forget, but here's 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/168062/cryptic-parlor-game> a couple 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/161070/our-new-puzzlers-debut-puzzle-no-3197>:

Jack Fitzgerald Kennedy is whipped (11)

Fibber is the winner of an Idaho beauty pageant? (9)

The answers are FLAGELLATED and MISSTATER. These two were inspired 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/166853/after-words-3230> by the news...

It might come from a pig: kind of spray on individual's face (9)

Questionable money supports Republican presidential candidate (6)

...PEPPERONI and ROMNEY. And here is one 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/167710/breaching-firewall> with a "no and yes" 
structure parallel toa submission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/15891374> to your 
SCREAMO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/08/crossword-roundup-silly-billies>
cluing challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/30/crossword-roundup-emo-fillips?commentpage=all>
, though it appeared a few weeks earlier:

He clears stable? No and yes (8)

That must be HERACLES, by Zeus. Snake-stranglingly good. Many thanks to Hot 
and Trazom, and I hope we'll chat again soon about transatlantic differences. 
Reader, do you ever mix it up with exotic foreign fare?
 