
The solver making the leap from quick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> to cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> is often daunted. 
Confronted with even the simpler of sample clues, he or she can be forgiven for 
assuming that it’s necessary to learn in a trice a bewildering catalogue of 
abbreviations and conventions, like a terrified recruit on their first morning 
atBletchley Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/17/crossword-blog-alan-turing-no-crossword-fiend-imitation-game>
.

Happily, many of the codes which unlock the mysteries of a cryptic clue are 
already known to all of us, from simply walking – or driving – around our world.

“Hot” in a clue typically means an H in an answer, for no better reason than 
the letter we tend to see on the tap which produces the hotter water. Likewise 
“parking” for P.

And, staying in the car for the rest of this guide, there is quite literally a 
world of abbreviations for countries. And they tend to be the ones you see on 
the back of other cars while queuing at a ferry terminal.

In the examples that follow, remember that cryptic clues kindly give you two 
routes to the answer: a more-or-less straightforward definition (indicated in
bold below), and a recipe for the letters in that answer. Plus, of course, you 
get the letters from the other clues as a further nudge.

Some examples

Here’s Redshank in the Financial Times 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20130514175357/http://media.ft.com/cms/5e12d0dc-801e-11e2-96ba-00144feabdc0.pdf>
:

19d How to sum up cheese in France? Put it outside! (2,5) 

Here, “France” might help the solver to choose a cheese, but its cryptic job 
is to indicate the letter on the back of French cars (F). So we take a kind of 
“cheese” (BRIE) and put “in France” (or, rather, IN F) outside it for the 
answer: IN BRIEF (how to sum up).

Next, it’s worth remembering that you don’t always take the first letter of 
the English name for a country. I was baffled and tickled as a boy in the back 
waiting for a Townsend Thoresen to learn that the Spanish used the “wrong” 
letter for their own car stickers. They even used the wrong name for their own 
country: E (España).

Here’s Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26403#16-across>:

16/10ac Driver — and two things he won’t like when touring Spain (5,4) 

For our driver, then, we take two things a driver dreads (being stuck in a JAM 
and being the victim of a SHUNT) and make them “tour” (go around) an E: and by 
the magic of wordplay, JAMES HUNT appears.

And Paul combines two in one clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26781#21-down>:

21d Germany and Thailand have abandoned a theatrical old language (7)

Here we paraphrase “a theatrical” as A DRAMATIC: once that bunch of letters is 
abandoned by D and T, we get theold language ARAMAIC.

It’s not always that simple

It often is. But other ways of abbreviating countries’ names do exist and so 
are fair game for setters. We might, for example, wish thatthe Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/21/icann-internet-us-government>
 had thought of crossword solvers and used the same system as the Geneva 
Convention on Road Traffic when devising how web addresses work, but apparently 
they had other concerns.

And so France can also be FR, as in this clue from the Observer’s 
beginner-friendly Everyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/everyman/3556#9-down> ...

9d Cleaner river in France (6) 

... where Yorkshire’s mighty AIRE goes inside FR for another word for cleaner: 
FAIRER.

And I hope it is not startlingly off-putting to mention in passing that some 
mention of a (European) country may sometimes mean that you need to use more 
than one language to solve: the vocab is all strictly pre-GCSE and is helpfully 
summarised in a previous instalment ofCryptic crosswords for beginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
:Foreign words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/14/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-foreign-words>
.

Over to you

Beginners: any questions? And seasoned solvers: do you have any favourite 
examples to share? My own follows, before a selective list of oval-sticker 
letters which is accurate to the best of my knowledge.

The favourite is this deliciously involved clue by Puck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26593#8-down>:

8d Nice setter, female, has year off in France with ex-PM (not that one who 
lied in court) (7,6)

Brace yourself: here we take how the setter would refer to himself in the city 
of Nice (JE), an abbreviation for “female” (F), then an anagram of “year” 
(EYAR) inside an abbreviation for “France” (FR) and a former prime minister 
(Thatcher) without the letters in the word “that” (CHER): JE + F + FR + EYAR + 
CHER = JEFFREY ARCHER,one who lied in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/jul/20/conservatives.archer10>. Phew.

Here are your codes:

Australia AUS
Austria A
Belgium B
Brazil BR
Cambodia K
Chad TCH
Cuba C
Cyprus CY
France F
Germany D
Greece GR
India IND
Italy I
Japan J
Luxembourg L
Norway N
Portugal P
South Africa ZA
Spain E
Switzerland CH
 