
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> captain Taylor Walker 
says the Crows must get tougher to survive at the business end of AFL seasons.

Walker’s Crows have been beaten semi-finalists in the past two years.

“We need to be a little bit tougher in the contest,” Walker told reporters on 
Monday.

Port Adelaide player Impey accused of fleeing scene of traffic accident
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/port-adelaide-impey-accused-scene-of-traffic-accident>
“There were periods through games that we weren’t at our best so we need to 
maintain it for longer periods of time.

“There’s some things you need to finetune more so than others.

“So we’ll talk about that today and get on the way to getting better and 
trying to achieve what we want next year.”

Adelaide’s entire squad rejoined training on Monday with Walker forecasting a 
competitive pre-season.

“There is opportunities up for grabs and it will be interesting to see who 
will want to take them,” he said.

“Every single player ... you come in as a first-year (player). I don’t put any 
limits on those guys either.

“We’ll educate every single player to play different positions.”

Walker’s forward-line colleagues Josh Jenkins and Tom Lynch are on modified 
programs ahead of Christmas.

But the skipper returned to training a fortnight ago, earlier than expected, 
as he targeted taking Adelaide to that next step next season.

“I just wanted to come back and get five weeks in before Christmas,” Walker 
said.

“I like to keep an eye on the young guys; see how they’re going; see what sort 
of puppy fat they’ve got.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcrows-skipper-calls-tougher-swans-midfield-shakeup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6490d5cdee8ac81645be163edadb5733b15bef12%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crows%20skipper%20calls%20for%20'tougher'%20team%2C%20Swans%20ponder%20midfield%20shakeup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcrows-skipper-calls-tougher-swans-midfield-shakeup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crows%20skipper%20calls%20for%20%27tougher%27%20team%2C%20Swans%20ponder%20midfield%20shakeup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcrows-skipper-calls-tougher-swans-midfield-shakeup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6490d5cdee8ac81645be163edadb5733b15bef12%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Isaac Heeney performs strength drills during a Sydney Swans pre-season 
training session. Photograph: Mark Metcalfe/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, young guns Isaac Heeney and Callum Mills are in line for midfield 
moves as Sydney ponder how to cover the departure of Tom Mitchell to Hawthorn.


Coach John Longmire admits Mitchell, who played every game last season, 
averaging almost 28 touches, was an important player for the Swans, but he is 
confident they can fill the vacancy well.


“We knew we’ve got Heeney coming through and Mills coming through and kids 
like Jordan Foote all pushing for midfield spots and playing through that area 
of the ground,” Longmire said on Monday, the first day of pre-season for most 
of his senior players.


“We’re really confident that we’ve got the players to be able to come in to 
that role and keep evolving our list like we did last year.


‘We had seven debutants last year and I’m sure there will be a number of new 
players this year.”


Brisbane Lions face another setback as Peter Schwab confirms departure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/lions-setback-schwab-confirms-departure>
Heeney and 2016 Rising Star winner Mills both came to the club as midfielders 
and flourished in other roles whilst waiting for a chance to break into 
Sydney’s deep on-ball rotation.


Mills excelled in an unfamiliar role across half back while fellow Swans 
Academy product Heeney played primarily up forward for most of his first two 
seasons.


“Heeney in particular playing a bit more midfield, certainly in the back end 
of the year,” Longmire said.


“Mills was part need, part teaching last year playing at half back and just 
took to it unbelievably well.


“We know with Isaac he can play midfield-forward and we certainly know with 
Millsy he can play midfield-back, so those roles and that flexibility in our 
team we think is going to be really important.”


While all the Swans are running, midfielder Luke Parker (knee), star forward 
Lance Franklin and ruckman Toby Naismith (both shoulder) are yet to join the 
main training group, but are in no danger of missing round one.


Longmire lauded the efforts of midfield star Dan Hannebery who suffered a knee 
injury in the latter stages of the grand final, but won Monday’s club 3km time 
trial.


“He would have not run for a month and obviously that affected his off season, 
but he knows how to prepare and you look at his performance today and he was 
fantastic,” Longmire said.


The Swans coach, who has guided the club to three grand finals and the finals 
in each of his first six years.said the club had moved on after reviewing their 
recent grand final loss to the Western Bulldogs.


“”In the end we probably needed to make sure we attacked it a little bit more 
with the ball,” Longmire said.
 