
Those wary of but curious about cryptic crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> sometimes fear that the 
puzzle, larger thanthe quick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick>, with its longer and 
baffling clues, are only solvable by those of gargantuan erudition. Without a 
solid grounding in Mesopotamian gods and minor Lake poets, they worry, not a 
single clue will yield. Of course, you don’t really need to know much at all; 
you just need to get the knack of seeing how the setter has disguised a little 
recipe for, typically, a bunch of utterly everyday words. In fact, the quick 
crossword is more likely to throw up some proper name you’ve never heard of.

There are, it must be admitted, some areas of life that cryptic setters are 
more fond of than others. When concocting ways of indicating strings of 
letters, the chaps who created and developed this kind of puzzle reached more 
readily in certain directions.


We’ve looked before at abbreviations from the Church of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/may/04/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-revving-it-up>
. Other times, setters worshipped at Lord’s. While you happily don’t need to 
understand how a game of cricket works, sometimes the solver must know the odd 
cricketing abbreviation.


Before we start play, a reminder that cryptic clues typically contain two 
routes to the answer: a definition (look out for words inbold type in the 
examples below) and some wordplay.


And a helpful reminder: here we are going to be looking at clues in isolation. 
A genuine puzzle environment would also give you some letters from other clues, 
making the solve easier again. So, courage!


How does it work?

Some pieces of cricketing lingo announce themselves unambiguously. Here’s Qaos 
with a clue <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26727#25-across> 
for a six-letter word, where the wordplay points you at, well, six different 
letters:

25ac Cricketer’s second ball gets wicket – England’s opener caught in both 
hands (6)

Here we take an abbreviation generally meaning “second” (B), the letter that 
looks like a ball (O). Next comes the cricket: a scorecard abbreviation for 
“wicket” (W). Then we have the “opener” of the word “England” inside the 
abbreviations for each of your hands (L and R).

The definition is “Cricketer”; specifically, a BOWLER. (You can get to know 
Qaos better in this Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/29/crossword-blog-setter-qaos>
.)

And here’s a one across from Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26493#1-across> (Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
):

 1ac Saw spin deliveries bowled (7)

The deliveries are an OVER, and “bowled” indicates the scorecard abbreviation 
B. The rest of the clue has nothing to do with cricket: “spin” is meant here in 
the sense of PR, and those three can be combined to form PR + OVER + B, a saw 
being another word for a PROVERB.


But it’s not always that easy

There are also the terms that you need to think of in a cricketing context to 
decode the wordplay, but that the setter has used such that they appear to mean 
something else. Here Pasquale (Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
)uses the word “runs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26252#24-across> in a way that 
doesn’t suggest cricket ...


24ac Road runs into nightclub, maybe (5)

... but which should be understood as the scorecard’s R inside a seedy 
nightclub (DIVE), with the definition indicating DRIVE.In the same puzzle, this 
“maiden” <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26252#5-across> seems 
to be a person ...

5ac Maiden ensnared by a more desperate stalker? (7)

... but in the wordplay, it’s an M inside A DIRER (“a more desperate”), with 
the answer ADMIRER.

Likewise, words such as “caught” and “century” (both C), “duck” and “over” (O) 
might not reveal their cricketing contexts immediately. And a “side”, remember, 
might be ON.

Over to you

We’ll finish with a couple of my favourites. Here’s a clue faced by Inspector 
Morse inThe Silent World of Nicholas Quinn 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/silent-world-of-nicholas-quinn.html>:

Bradman’s famous duck (6)

Colin Dexter is offering two definitions: either the first name of the 
cricketer Bradman, or the given name of a celebrated animated duck might lead 
you to DONALD, while the apparent meaning of the clue is a miniature match 
report ofDon Bradman’s infamous dismissal at the 
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Oval 
in 1948 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/07/ashes-england-australia-10-best-moments>
. It’s sportingly attributed to Quixote,another nom de guerre of Pasquale above 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
.

And here’s another, from Paul (Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
), setting as Punk in the Independent:


Grossly below the belt, West Indian male seeking English dismissal (hard to 
get out) coming to grips with length finally, findingfamous slip in cricket? 
(3,7,7,3,8,6)

This is an anagram “to get out” of GROSSLYBELOWTHEBELTWESTINDIAN with MAL 
(MALE with the dismissal of E for “English”), and a couple of Hs (“hard” and 
“length finally”), giving usthe legendary 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/osm/story/0,6903,822732,00.html> (in many 
senses) Freudian slip THE BOWLER’S HOLDING, THE BATSMAN’S WILLEY.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0a-FOoM9ms&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0a-FOoM9ms>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0a-FOoM9ms&media=>
Beginners: any questions? And seasoned solvers: what have I missed, and is 
there any favourite cryptic cricketing you’d like to bring into play?
 