
In this series, I hope that newcomers can equip themselves with the tools of 
the solver's trade, while aficionados can enjoy some prime examples of the art 
of setting.

We've looked at hidden answers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/06/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-hidden-answers>
,double definitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/17/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-double-definitions>
 andsoundalikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
; now it's time for initial letters.

If you've been following the series, you may be wondering why we haven't yet 
tackled the staple diet of the setter: the anagram. But the anagram can wait. 
And nervous newcomers should remember that here we're looking at clues in 
isolation; in a genuine puzzle environment, you'd have some letters from other 
clues, considerably lightening the solving load.

How it works

So. We're looking at a device which asks you as solver to take the initial 
letters of a string of words in the clue. Remember, a cryptic clue typically 
gives you two chances to get the answer: adefinition found either at the 
beginning or the end, and somewordplay; sometimes the wordplay is made up 
entirely of this process of decapitating words and gathering together the heads.

Here's an example, from Rufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25293>:

12ac Starts to serve time in Russian prison (4)

The start to "serve" - its first letter - is "S". And so the starts to "serve 
time in Russian" are S, T, I and R for STIR - a synonym for prison and not a 
word in the clue wasted.

Such clues don't always start with "Starts to..." - and where would be the 
challenge in that? But you might find "start" slightly hidden somewhere else in 
the clue, as withOrlando's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25513>...

22d Black and white lamb starts to cry (4)

...where if you take the "starts" of the previous four words, you should be 
having a BAWL.

You should also keep a lookout for variants of "start", as with Brummie's clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25453>...

29d Never offer drunk eggnog starters, bud! (4)

...for NODE and for other words with a similar sense, as with Bunthorne's clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/23570>...

23d Does he lead prayer for openers? Is Mohammed a Muslim? (4)

...for IMAM.

It's not always that simple

As we explore the types of cryptic clues, we often find at this point that the 
device we're getting used to might be used backwards. So it is with initial 
letters and here'sa clue from the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/4028e7312e7d07b1012ff8a563c801ec/print_solution/3>
 in which the hint that this is happening is wittily concealed:

6ac Face protection racket or swindle in village: heads must roll! (5)

So we're taking the first letters of "racket", "or", "swindle", "in" and 
"village" and rolling them back to give us VISOR.

And of course, many clues use more than one device to get you to the answer. 
Here's Philistine <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25534>:

19ac I forgot to mention at the start, so try and pay attention! (4)

Before we get to the initial letters, we have "I forgot to mention", which you 
might indicate by writing "PS" at the end of a message. Then we're asked for 
the starting letters of "so" and "try", S and T. Whack them together and you 
get an expression for "pay attention": PSST.

I know what you're thinking now: "Hey, perhaps those clues which use more than 
one device can work in back-to-front way too! Am I right?"

As Paul proves <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25408>, you are 
right:

26ac Sporting arenas support all temporary staff, initially, in retirement (6)

The definition comes first this time. Then we take a word for "support", AID 
and the first letters of "all", "temporary" and "staff", ATS. Finally we 
"retire" or reverse the lot to give us STADIA.

For the next clue, "macaroni" is an old term for a dandy, by the way, 
especially one who's travelled abroad and eaten poncy foreign food - but we 
don't need to worry about that to see how the "initial letters" device works 
differently here.

So here's another twist: on the basis of what we've seen so far, you'd expect 
"starts to manage estate" to indicate ME. Not inthis Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/4028e7312e7d07b1012f97d5e3cd016f/print_solution/3>
:

17d Old dandy starts to manage estate for example on island (8)

This one should be read as "starts to manage" giving the two letters at the 
start of "manage". We then add CAR (of which an estate is an example), ON 
(obligingly clued by itself) and an abbreviation for island to get MACARONI.

The idea of taking more than one letter in this way is what sometimes passes 
in the crosswording world for an anarachic innovation. Likewise, crossword 
setters of the school they tore down to build the old school might insist that 
each part of a clue be 100% grammatically correct. So while "maiden's head 
would be a kosher way of cluing an M, "Maidenhead" would not.

In a genuine puzzling environment in 2012, however, you might find it 
difficult to avoid setters who are a little more playful in how they ask you to 
find the first letters. In other words, keep a look out for Birkenhead, 
Leatherhead and others of that ilk, even if they irk.

How to spot them

Well, you should of course be alert to any phrases like "heads", "starts", 
"tips" and so on.

If a clue seems very long, it's worth looking to see if you're being asked to 
find initial letters. Sometimes a solver wonders: how on Earth are all these 
words in the clue going to be used to indicate one little one in the answer? It 
may be that many of the words in the clue are each contributing only one letter 
to the solution.

Also, setters and more seasoned solvers might be able to answer: do clues 
using initial letters tend to come more often towards the end of the down clues 
- or is it my imagination?

How to enjoy them

Everyone loves an acrostic - from Lewis Carroll 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=77kcKHmLZXIC&lpg=PP1&pg=PA15#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 to James May, who wasapparently fired from Autocar for including a rude one 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/tv--radio/captain-slow-takes-the-fast-lane/2008/06/18/1213468491019.html>
. So it goes with crosswords.

Since it's not exactly difficult to think of a train of words beginning with 
certain letters, the setter will often up his or her game and offer a phrase 
that gives extra value through wit, charm or appositeness.

For example, here's a clue from Chifonie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25499>...

19d Prophet starts to imagine Saint Augustine is against heathens (6)

...that paints a fittingly pious picture of ISAIAH. And here's one from Viking 
<http://media.ft.com/cms/485bfc62-0cf6-11df-a2dc-00144feabdc0.pdf> that's so 
appropriate, it doesn't need a definition, since the whole clue effectively 
works as one...

12ac Natty, elegant and trim, primarily (4)

...for NEAT. 

Over to you

To the beginners: any other questions? To the addicts: any much-loved examples 
to share? My own favourite isa Telegraph clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=15160>...

17d First of all, did you not ask me if the event is explosive? (8)

...that is quite simply DYNAMITE.
 