
Hello again to cryptic newcomers. Are you ready to have fun? This time, we're 
looking at clues which ask you to find one bunch of letters, then put that 
bunch inside another bunch and finally realise you have the answer. And then 
you write it in the grid.

And a reminder for nervous newcomers before we begin: here we're looking at 
clues in isolation; in a genuine puzzle environment, you'd have some letters 
from other clues to work with, considerably lightening the solving load. In 
other words, everything you see below is easier than it might appear.

How does it work?

A cryptic clue typically gives you two chances to get the answer: a definition 
found either at the beginning or the end (which I'll indicate in bold type in 
the examples below), and some wordplay (look out for the colours).

Unlike the spoonerisms we looked at last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/mar/01/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-spoonerisms>
, which are an occasional crosswording treat, this is a device solvers expect 
to find as often as not in a puzzle.

In clues with containers, the definition gives you, as ever, a straight 
description of the word or phrase. The rest of the clue is wordplay, where you 
have to get playful, as with this from Phi:

9ac Quantity of electricity or power brought into Channel Island (5)

Here, Phi has obligingly put the definition at the start of the clue: a SPARK 
is a quantity of electricity. But we wouldn't get that from the definition 
alone. We confirm it by taking the physicist's abbreviation for power - that 
is, P - and putting it in a Channel Island, in this case SARK. And so the 
definition and the wordplay match and we can write SPARK in the grid.

Some examples

It's also obliging of Phi to use the words "brought into" to hint that we put 
a P into SARK. Sometimes it's fairly obvious that this is what's going on, as 
withthis clue from Chifonie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25602>:

10ac Embryos right to be included in valuable items (5)

It's the same structure: the definition is "embryos"; in the wordplay, we put 
an R inside GEMS for GERMS.

Other times, the hint is less obvious. Try this from Neo 
<http://media.ft.com/cms/637614a2-6ea5-11e1-b1b2-00144feab49a.pdf>:

1ac College writer banks money (6)

"Banks", the dictionaries remind us, can have the sense of "encloses" we've 
been discussing and so here Albert CAMUS encloses a small amount of money to 
give us CAMPUS.

So how to spot them?

On the one hand, it's easy. If you see a phrase like "packing" or "sheltered 
by" or "entering" in a clue, it might well pay to look for a container. Even 
"describe" can mean to go around something, and "this without that" can mean 
thatthis is going around the outside of that.

On the other hand, the English language is not short of vocabulary to describe 
putting one thing inside another. I mean, the lewd phrases alone are enough to 
fill a filthy reference book or three. And then there are the clean ones. 
"Circling", "housing", "wrapping"... it's one thing after - as well as inside - 
another.

And, newcomer, please don't let what I'm about to say put you off. It's part 
of the fun, it honestly is. But many of the phrases most often used to indicate 
a container clue are also frequently used to mean utterly different cryptic 
devices. "About", for example, might mean "encircling", but it can also mean 
"reverse this bit of the clue", or RE, or even justC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/16/crossword-blog-letter-c>
.

Honestly. Fun.

And how to enjoy them

The pleasure with this kind of clue is typically in realising that an 
expression like "run rings around" has been used to run rings around you. In a 
similar vein, here's Orlando:

23ac Girl rings friend and mum in holiday location (3,6)

A great surface reading, very clear and natural, and the answer is LAS PALMAS. 
Staying on the beach, here's Phi again:

11d Nothing turned up in abandoned storeroom in Spanish resort (12)

OK, so this is a down clue, which means that if "nothing" indicates NIL (and 
here it does), "nothingturned up" indicates LIN. Meanwhile, "abandoned 
storeroom" gives us TORREMOOS, an anagram of STOREROOM and our answer is 
TORREMOLINOS. And there's the subtlest indicator of containment you'll ever 
meet in "in".

It's not always that simple

As the TORREMOLINOS clue tells us, it's not always a case of putting one word 
or abbreviation inside the case of another. Either the container or the 
contained phrase might be the result of some cryptic adventure itself, 
requiring you to draw onother posts in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog+series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
.

Take initial letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
. In crosswording, "first of ripe" is likely to mean the first letter of the 
word "ripe" and so inthis Sunday Telegraph clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=14866>...

17a Nice sweets containing first of ripe fruit (8)

...we take a word used in the city of Nice to mean sweethearts, CHÃ‰RIES, and 
insert the "first of ripe" to get the fruit CHERRIES.

Here's a clue from the Daily Telegraph 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=15748> which uses 
the same device to greater effect:

21d Something which snaps say, around top of instep (6)

Here we see a soundalike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
 for the snappy creature the 'GATOR, around the letter I for GAITER.

Over to you

To the beginners: any other questions? To the addicts: any much-loved examples 
to share? And to everyone, let's finish with a favourite, thiscracker from 
Brendan <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25383>:

11ac For whom it's not easy having nothing stored (7)

It's HOARDER. What do you reckon?
 