
It’s been seven months since the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, through its venomous columnist 
Katie Hopkins, launched an attack 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3580768/KATIE-HOPKINS-jobs-come-colour-want-long-s-not-white.html>
 onCreative Access <https://creativeaccess.org.uk/> (CA) – a British diversity 
charity that helps place people from black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) 
backgrounds secure paid internships in the creative industries, such as 
publishing, broadcasting, journalism and public relations.

Sadly, it seems that Hopkins and her followers have won. This week it was 
announced that the charityhas lost £2m in funding 
<http://m.screendaily.com/5112125.article> from the government and is facing 
imminent closure. As someone who recently completed a placement through 
Creative Access at a national newspaper, I am frustrated and angry that 
something that has helped so many disadvantaged people has been sidelined by a 
government that seems intent on ruining any progress made towards diversity in 
the media.

Why is there still so little diversity in the British media? | Nesrine Malik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/diversity-british-media-black-ethnic-minority>
As a rapidly growing petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-diversity-charity-creative-access-from-being-closed>
, “Save diversity charity Creative Access from being closed!”, suggests, I’m 
not alone. CA has placed more than 700 BAME people into industries where 
historically they haven’t been seen or heard. Journalism is94% white 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/24/british-journalism-diversity-white-female-male-survey>
, rising to near 100% when it comes to senior editorial roles, despite14% of 
the population being from an ethnic minority 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/culturalidentity/ethnicity/articles/2011censusanalysisethnicityandreligionofthenonukbornpopulationinenglandandwales/2015-06-18>
 background. Areport last year from the Creative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/assets/userfiles/files/30183-CIF%20Access%20%26%20Diversity%20Booklet_A4_Web%20(1).pdf>
 found that while the number of BAME workers in the creative economy has risen 
to 11%, at least 17.8% of the UK creative industries should be BAME due to the 
media’s concentration in London and the ethnic make-up of the city. Executives 
such as the BBC’s Tony Hall are aware of the problem within their companies and 
have employed CA to help resolve it; often because they don’t have the time, 
money or expertise to do so themselves.

A spokesperson from the Department for Education claims that the funding has 
been diverted to “increasing the proportion of black and ethnic minority 
apprenticeship starts by 20% by 2020”, but I am sceptical about how this will 
have an impact on the current pale, male, stale creative world that so 
desperately needs shaking up. It’s good that a select number of 16- to 
18-year-olds might benefit through apprenticeship schemes, but CA internships 
are open to BAME people of all ages and backgrounds. An ongoing criticism has 
been that it’s not only race that affects people’s ability to succeed in the 
creative world, although other charities, such as theSocial Mobility Foundation 
<http://www.socialmobility.org.uk/> (which serves disadvantaged sixth-formers 
trying to get into university), exist for people of all races from 
working-class backgrounds. But there is an obvious overlap between race and 
class, compounded by institutional racism, which is why CA remains effective.

Charity helping ethnic minority interns loses government funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/14/charity-helping-ethnic-minority-interns-loses-government-funding>
Institutions such as the BBC, Penguin, Twitter, the Baftas and even the Daily 
Mail 
<https://creativeaccess.org.uk/interns/intern-stories/jaber-mohamed-at-the-daily-mail/>
 have had the charity’s interns through their doors. Almost every young, black 
or brown creative I know has crossed paths with CA at some stage, which is 
testament to the very effective work it does. Current interns and alumni have 
inundated me with stories of how CA has helped them secure jobs and given them 
the confidence to pursue their ambitions, even though, due to their race and 
background, they often felt, or knew they were, a step behind peers who have 
the privilege of race, wealth, private schooling and nepotism. Even in CA 
internships, they’ve told me, they have faced racial microaggressions and 
prejudice because of the state of the industry. That can only change if more of 
us are able to enter the field. And it will benefit the industry too. We bring 
unique perspectives, fresh ideas and an awareness of communities and cultures 
that have been off the mainstream radar for too long.

Speaking to Josie Dobrin, who co-founded the charity back in 2012, alongside 
talent agent Michael Foster, she says that funding was almost secured until the 
Brexit vote and Theresa May subsequently becoming prime minister. “We have a 
couple of days before Christmas to make a decision one way or the other [on 
closing the charity],” she says. “I think it would be a real shame for the 
creative industries because we have brought a new pipeline of talent that 
didn’t find it easy to access it in the past. I do think it’s symptomatic of 
the wider priorities of government.”

Alongside the recent decision to block black woman Althea Efunshile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/07/blocking-of-althea-efunshile-from-c4-board-beggars-belief>
 from joining the all-white board of Channel 4, a pattern seems to have 
emerged. “The government talks a good game on gender and racial diversity in 
the boardroom but actions speak louder than words,”said David Lammy MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/mps-write-letter-channel-4-culture-secretary-karen-bradley-board>
, chair of the all-party parliamentary group on race and community on this 
note. “In appointing four white men to the board, the secretary of state has 
failed Channel 4 and the country, and in doing so has hugely undermined all of 
the work being done on diversity across the broadcasting industry.” I would 
argue that this attack on CA should be condemned in equally strong terms.

The saddest thing about this whole mess is that CA should never have been the 
only way into the industry for people such as me. But at the moment it’s all 
we’ve got, so it’s desperately important for the government to reconsider its 
decision – otherwise there will be little way for the next generation of BAME 
talent to break through.
 