
If you’re applying for a role in social work, you need to make a good first 
impression. Being a social worker is hard work, but also extremely worthwhile. 
So, what can you do to make sure your application is a certainty for the short 
list?

If you need some inspiration on what to include in your CV and cover letter, 
check out our handy examples. (Just remember not to copy them as exact 
templates.)

Cover letter example:

Dear Ms Name,

As a fully qualified [child/adult] social worker with [number] years 
experience, I feel I would be well-suited for the role of [job title] at [name 
of council or organisation]. Please find my CV attached.

The nature of my experience includes successfully managing a demanding 
caseload, which includes [elderly people/young children/people who have 
learning disabilities /mental health issues]. I have a [person-centred] 
approach to my work, which involves calmly and practically responding to 
service users to achieve the best outcomes. I am also experienced in 
coordinating care with other agencies, such as primary care practices and 
psychological services.

In addition, I have a particular interest in [...]. This stimulated me to lead 
a community project on [...]. As part of this, I had to liaise with [...] 
meaning that I have developed skills in [...]. I faced some challenges along 
the way, such as [...] and overcame them by [...]. The impact of the project 
overall was measured by/ has been evidenced in [...].

As shown by my experience in [social work/social work placements], I am 
enthusiastic about establishing what is best for the individual and always 
strive to do the best for service users. I am able to successfully manage a 
demanding caseload. I also have the enthusiasm and determination to ensure that 
I make a success of this role.


Thank you for taking the time to consider this application and I look forward 
to hearing from you in future.


Yours sincerely,

Name

CV template:

CV and cover letter tips:

 “The most important thing about your CV and cover letter is that everything 
you include is relevant,” says Craig Davis, head of social work for Sanctuary. 
“Don’t start going off on a tangent, or waffling – every part has to be 
tailored to the role you’re applying for.”

Tom Hawkins, director of Hays Social Care, adds that you should keep your 
cover letter short. “Don’t over-elaborate, and don’t repeat what’s on your CV. 
The key things you need to include are: the reason you’re applying, the reason 
you want to move on from your current employment, and the things that you have 
in your armoury that make you suitable for the job.”


As social work is a vocational profession, it’s also important that you 
evidence enthusiasm for the job. “Don’t be scared to sound passionate about 
what you do – why you do it and why you enjoy it,” he adds.


In your CV it’s also worth including any information that the hiring manager 
might need as a “tick box” exercise in the application process: such as whether 
you have an up-to-date DBS check, or registration with relevant social work 
bodies.


“Be as clear as you can in your writing,” says Hawkins. “So use bullet points 
to describe roles, rather than long and prosaic sentences. Try and start each 
bullet point with a verb, such as ‘created, managed, improved’ – this is a good 
way to focus info on what you did and the difference it made.”


As much as experience is important, it’s not the only thing hiring managers 
are looking for. “Some managers will look at someone who has less experience 
but is more enthusiastic – so be sure to get your passion for the work across 
in your writing,” adds Davis.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 