
Every third CV contains a spelling error, according to a 2015 study by Adzuna 
<https://www.adzuna.co.uk/blog/2015/03/30/adzuna-study-every-third-cv-contains-a-spelling-mistake/>
. But blunders like this could see your application heading straight for the 
bin. Take our quiz to find out if your spelling is good enough to impress an 
employer.
Which of the following is correct?  Liaise  Liase  Liaze  Laise Which of the 
following is spelled incorrectly?  Application  Embarrass  Experience  Seperate 
“I hope my application will be …”  Sucessful  Successful  Succesful  Sucessfull 
Which word is spelt incorrectly in the following sentence? “At the paper 
production company, I have experience of producing all manner of stationary, 
from pencils to paperweights.”  Paperweights  Stationary  Production  Manner 
Which of these words is spelt the American way?  Jewelry  Traveller  Manoeuvre  
Unparallelled How many spelling mistakes are there in this sentence? “Against 
his better jugement, Joe Bloggs applied for a goverment job which was 
financialy sound but ultimately disatisfying and innapropriate for the 
experience listed on his curriculum vitai."  2  8  6  4 Which of these words is 
spelled correctly?  Responsibililty  Responsibility  Responsability  
Responsabillity Fill in the blank with the correctly spelled word. If you’re 
good at talking you probably have … skills?  Comunication  Communnication  
Communication  Comunnication What letter is missing in the misspelled words 
from this sentence? “Millenials find it hard to conect with older people who 
are known for their outspokeness about tyranical dictators.”  C  T  N  I Which 
of these words is spelled incorrectly?  Embarrass  Rhythm  Neccessary  Reference
 You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  