
The future of Britain’s steel industry has been thrown into fresh uncertainty 
after the man in charge of Indian conglomerateTata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Group, which controls the Port 
Talbot steelworks in south Wales, was unexpectedly ousted.

Cyrus Mistry will be replaced as chairman of Tata Sons, the holding company of 
Tata Group, by the man he succeeded as boss in 2012,Ratan Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/mar/28/automotive.mergersandacquisitions>
. This means that control of Tata is back with its founding family. Ratan Tata 
will serve as interim chairman while the conglomerate looks for a permanent 
replacement for Mistry.

The exit of Mistry comes as Tata Steel is deep in negotiations with German 
company ThyssenKrupp aboutmerging their European steel operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/hopes-rise-for-tata-steel-rescue-deal>
.

Tata Steel is also in talks with the UK government about financial support for 
Tata Steel UK, which employs 11,000 people, and a restructuring of its pension 
scheme. Tata Steel has warned that Tata Steel UK will only be included in a 
deal with ThyssenKrupp if talks with the government are constructive.

Mistry has been at the heart of these negotiations. Greg Clark, the business 
secretary, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/20/business-secretary-greg-clark-crisis-talks-tata-steel-bosses-unions>
 and his predecessor Sajid Javid have each flown to Mumbaiseeking assurances 
over the future of Tata Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/teel-crisis-sajid-javid-tata-sanjeev-gupta-port-talbot-cyrus-mistry>
.

The fate of Tata Steel UK has been unclear since the Indian company announced 
in March that it was reviewing its European steel operations. If deals can be 
reached with ThyssenKrupp and the government then the Port Talbot steelworks 
and its other key sites will be saved, but unions have criticised the time it 
has taken for Tata to confirm its plans.

Sources close to Tata said Mistry was leaving because of a “lack of 
performance” across the group, which also ownsJaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jaguar-land-rover>, Tetley Tea and a 
string of other diverse brands.

Analysts and investors in India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> were 
shocked by the move. Tata has become renowned for its long-term outlook and 
stability, with Ratan Tata spending more than two decades as chairman before 
stepping aside for Mistry.

In a brief statement, the Mumbai-based Tata said on Monday that Mistry was 
stepping down after a “decision was taken at a board meeting held here today”.

The 148-year-old company gave no public reason for the surprise departure of 
Mistry after four years in charge. Tata said its committee would aim to find a 
new chairman within four months.


Mistry, 48, joined Tata’s board in 2006 and was Ratan Tata’s choice to succeed 
him when he retired in 2012. Mistry’s father, Pallonji Shapoorji Mistry, owns 
18.5% of Tata, making him the biggest single shareholder of a company whose 
shares are mostly owned by family trusts. His sister Aloo is married to Ratan 
Tata’s half-brother, Noel.

Early reports from India 
<http://www.indiatvnews.com/business/india-tata-sons-removes-cyrus-mistry-as-chairman-names-ratan-tata-as-interim-chief-for-four-months-353672?HPT=1?tw>
 suggested the board was unhappy about Mistry’s push to shed unprofitable 
businesses, includingTata Steel in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/tata-set-to-announce-sale-of-uk-steel-business-port-talbot>
, the disposal of which was announced in March.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ftata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65b19d577aa46c53813ca56117590dbf2537bee3%2F0_171_3493_2096%2F3493.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cyrus%20Mistry's%20departure%20heightens%20uncertainty%20over%20Tata%20Steel%20UK's%20fate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ftata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cyrus%20Mistry%27s%20departure%20heightens%20uncertainty%20over%20Tata%20Steel%20UK%27s%20fate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ftata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65b19d577aa46c53813ca56117590dbf2537bee3%2F0_171_3493_2096%2F3493.jpg>
 Ratan Tata oversaw a period of expansion that included the purchase of Jaguar 
Land Rover during his 21 years as chairman. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters 
Ratan Tata, 78, is the great grandson of Tata’s founder, Jamsetji Tata, and 
chairs the trusts that own two-thirds of the company. Ratan Tata oversaw a 
period of expansion,including the purchase of Jaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/mar/26/automotive.mergersandacquisitions>
 and Corus, which included the remnants of the old British Steel, during 21 
years as chairman.


Tata’s growth, especially in the UK, was a source of pride in India, but it 
has been criticised for lack of dynamism and spreading itself too thinly. A 
recent article inthe Economist said Mistry had failed to reorganise the 
company’s sprawling empire 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business/21707595-indias-most-important-business-group-socially-responsible-financially>
 comprising businesses, from watches to IT consultancy, that barely have 
contact with each other.
 