
Josh Scott scored four goals as Dagenham & Redbridge beat Morecambe 6-0 in the 
first leg of theirLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off semi-final at 
Victoria Road.

Dagenham took just four minutes to open the scoring, through Paul Benson. 
Scott struck four times in 34 minutes, with Benson scoring another.

John Still's side will head to Christie Park on Thursday knowing only a 
remarkable comeback can stop them reaching Wembley.

Sammy McIlroy faces a difficult task to rouse his side for the final game at 
their old stadium.

Danny Green had caused chaos with a couple of long throws before Dagenham took 
a fourth-minute lead. Green's throw was only half-cleared and Abu Ogogo lobbed 
the ball to Jon Nurse at the far post â€“ his header was well saved by Barry 
Roche but the ball ran free for Benson to tap in to an empty net.

Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> came close to an 
instant response. A long ball was chested down by Garry Hunter for the veteran 
Paul Mullin to strike on the half-volley but Tony Roberts made a vital save.

Scott was next to threaten for Dagenham, with a header which looped over the 
crossbar. In the 35th minute, Roche scuffed a goal-kick to the feet of Scott on 
the halfway line. The forward outpaced Jim Bentley and drove home a powerful 
left-footed shot.

McIlroy's side started the second half in a much brighter mood and Mark Duffy 
crossed for Laurence Wilson to shoot wide. But Dagenham scored a third in the 
48th minute. Still had seen two decent penalty shouts turned down in the first 
half but it was third time lucky as Green was tripped. Mark Arber saw his shot 
saved and Scott hit the post with his follow up, before finally scoring from a 
crowded goalmouth.

Scott completed his hat-trick in the 54th minute. Green was again involved, 
swinging over a corner from the right which Scott headed past Roche.

It was 5-0 in the 66th minute after more woeful defending. The Morecambe 
right-back, Andy Parrish, made a mess of a header to allow Benson to lash the 
ball past Roche at his near post.

Scott scored his fourth goal in the 69th minute, running in from the left to 
clip the ball into the far corner.
 