
The number of workers who commute daily for two hours or more has increased by 
a third in five years, a study shows, with stagnant wages and soaring housing 
costs blamed for pushing people further away from their jobs.

Research by the Trades Union Congress estimates that 3.7 million, or about one 
in seven, workers spent at least that time travelling to and from work in 2015 
– an increase of 900,000 people. In 2010 just one in nine workers faced such a 
long commute.

The TUC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> believes the increase is 
down to people being priced out of areas close to their jobs, as well as being 
due to a lack of investment in roads and railways which has increased journey 
times on increasingly dilapidated infrastructure.

How far is too far? The distance workers commute to cities – mapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/jun/08/how-far-distance-workers-commute-uk-cities-mapped>
“Employers cannot turn a blind eye to this problem. More home- and 
flexible-working would allow people to cut their commutes and save money,” said 
Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC. “But if we are to reduce the 
pain of traffic jams and train delays, ministers need to invest more in public 
transport and our roads. Next week’s autumn statement is the perfect 
opportunity to do this.”

The TUC’s analysis is based on unpublished figures from the Office For 
National Statistics’ labour force survey, and covers just workers’ main jobs, 
excluding work done from home.

While men still account for more than three-fifths of those making long 
commutes, more women now are making longer journeys. The TUC’s analysis shows 
35% more women spending two hours-plus on a commute than five years ago, 
compared to 29% of men.

The growth in long commutes to jobs in traditionally female-dominated sectors, 
such as education and health, and social care – up 46% and 26% respectively – 
could explain the narrowing gender gap, the TUC says.

However, the industry with the highest proportion of workers making long 
commutes was finance and insurance, with 29.3% of employees in this sector 
travelling more than two hours a day, followed by 28.9% of mining and quarrying 
workers, and 25.5% of information and communication workers.

Commuters: how much do you know about travelling to work? – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/sep/30/commuters-how-much-do-you-know-about-travelling-to-work-quiz>
Regionally, Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
had the biggest rise in long commuting, followed by the south-east – much of 
which acts as a dormitory for London’s office staff –and the West Midlands.

The research has been prepared and released to mark Work Wise UK’s Commute 
Smart week, an annual campaign to raise awareness of how better working 
practices can mitigate the effect of the winter months on people.

Phil Flaxton, chief executive of Work Wise UK, said: “Long commutes have 
become a part of the UK’s working culture. The excessive time spent commuting 
is one of the main factors contributing to work-life balance problems. Not only 
is the amount of time commuting an issue, the nine to five culture with its 
peak travel times generates congestion on railways, underground and road 
networks, and as a consequence increases stress for commuters.

“Clearly the government, public transport providers and employers must do more 
in order to address the major negative impact on the UK’s economy and lost 
productivity.”
 