
The children in the villages around the Indian city of Nabha in Punjab state 
all know what Horlicks is, although few have tasted it. The malted milk drink, 
manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), is produced at the Horlicks plant in 
Nabha, which sources from around 1,500 dairy farmers in the surrounding area.
Punjab state, India 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/punjab/giv-31075aU45tXD2004r/>
 Punjab state, India 
But after several years of severe drought in a region already heavily reliant 
on groundwater, water reserves are in decline and fodder for cows is becoming 
more expensive. This is making dairy production increasingly difficult in one 
of the highest milk-producing states in the country – itself the world’slargest 
national producer 
<http://www.fao.org/agriculture/dairy-gateway/milk-production/en/#.V-k3cTaU3UY> 
of dairy.

GSK is not the only big business facing drought-related problems in Punjab. 
Danone buys 50,000 – 80,000 litres of milk from 5,000 farmers in 100 villages 
in the state, and Nestlé sources more than 300m litres of milk from 100,000 
farmers in three Indian states, including Punjab.

To ensure a steady supply of milk, these companies have set up long-term 
sustainability projects in Punjab’s villages. But, as water shortagesworsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/india-drought-migrants-head-to-cities-in-desperate-search-for-water>
, can they protect dairy farmers from the potentially devastating effects of 
continuous droughts?

India’s ‘white revolution’ under threat

In 2012, Punjab’s chief minister Parkash Singh Badal called for a “white 
revolution”,encouraging 
<http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/punjab-for-a-white-revolution-/950627/> 
the state’s farmers to take up dairy since, he said, most were too reliant on 
wheat-paddy rotation crops with slim profit margins.

This revolution requires water. One cow consumes approximately 150 litres of 
drinking water a day.Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> is 
also needed to produce fodder for cows.

Fertile lands and good infrastructure in the state such as dams and irrigation 
systems have helped stave off the kind ofacute water shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/apr/21/india-drought-flooding-extreme-weather-economy-protests-state-elections-solar-cop21>
 witnessed in other parts of India over the last few decades. But the severity 
of the latest El Niño weather cycle has led tounprecedented temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/30/el-nino-is-over-but-it-leaves-nearly-100-million-people-short-of-food>
, causing rivers, lakes and dams to dry up in many parts of northern India. In 
Punjab, low rainfall has decreased crop yields and put a huge strain on the 
state’s diminishing groundwater resources.

“In the winter, cows can graze in the fields. But in the summer when there’s 
no rain we have to buy fodder,” says Harpreet Singh, a dairy farmer from the 
village of Issi who supplies milk to Horlicks. “It’s a big problem for us ... 
The cost of fodder keeps increasing but the price of milk stays fixed, so the 
entire business is in decline.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F854857d002db737743e577c8218f6dd76eb4fe35%2F0_44_1280_748%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dairy%20in%20distress%3A%20the%20milk%20revolution%20draining%20Punjab%20dry%20%23India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dairy%20in%20distress%3A%20the%20milk%20revolution%20draining%20Punjab%20dry%20%23India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F854857d002db737743e577c8218f6dd76eb4fe35%2F0_44_1280_748%2F1280.jpg>
 GSK dairy farmer in Punjab. Photograph: GSK Consumer Healthcare 
Harpreet Singh makes approximately 50,000 rupees (£570) profit a month in the 
winter, but says his losses in the summer leave him without savings.

Horlicks’ farmers aren’t the only ones facing this crisis. On its website, 
Nestlésays 
<http://www.nestle.com/csv/case-studies/allcasestudies/water-management-institute-india>
: “Largely due to local over-exploitation by agriculture, industry and domestic 
use, the local water table is dropping by up to a metre a year and could affect 
the supply of milk in our Moga milk district [in Punjab].”

Industry support

To help farmers like Harpreet Singh cut down costs, GSK has set up education 
camps where farmers learn how to make their own silage from surplus grass, 
which can be used as cow feed in the dry season. Even though he’s feeling the 
pressure, Harpreet Singh says this is helping: “It’s a lot of effort, but in 
the summer it means we spend much less on buying fodder.”

GSK also produces a magazine offering dairy farmers advice on topics such as 
water reuse. The initiatives are an effort to keep the dairy business booming: 
“Our hope is that, through working together, we can help local farmers remain 
in business, assuring our supply of milk for Horlicks,” says a company 
spokesperson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0775c923712246edc521d2eeb1280773eed7f46b%2F171_28_861_517%2F861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dairy%20in%20distress%3A%20the%20milk%20revolution%20draining%20Punjab%20dry%20%23India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dairy%20in%20distress%3A%20the%20milk%20revolution%20draining%20Punjab%20dry%20%23India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Findia-punjab-drought-dairy-farming-milk-nestle-glaxosmithkline-danone-horlicks-groundwater-organic-cows-technology-el-nino%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0775c923712246edc521d2eeb1280773eed7f46b%2F171_28_861_517%2F861.jpg>
 GSK dairy farmers with their cows in Punjab. Photograph: GSK Consumer 
Healthcare 
Danone, which makes Activia yoghurt, started sourcing milk from Punjab in 
2012. Last year, the company set up Punjab 2020, an initiative which educates 
farmers in ways to improve soil quality by reducing fertiliser use so it 
retains more water, and maximise milk production in the context of drought. 
About 7,000 farmers have already gone through the company’s Academilk training 
programme and it has invested €570,000 (£508,000) to expand the programmes to 
60 more villages.

As part of Danone’s programme, the company provides communal chilling 
facilities, enabling those with even one or two cows to earn an income without 
having to invest in expensive coolers. “It is a win-win situation as it ensures 
a sustainable livelihood for the farmer while securing the milk supplies for 
Danone,” said a company spokesperson.

The groundwater dilemma

Vibha Dhawan, senior director at the Energy Resources Institute, says that 
while companies are helping provide short-term solutions to prevent the dairy 
industry’s collapse, the urgent problem of groundwater over-extraction still 
needs to be addressed.

Jaskaran Singh, who supplies milk to Nestlé, says that, without rainfall, 
farmers in his village rely on groundwater to irrigate their fields and 
maintain their cows. Groundwater has to be extracted using a diesel-fuelled 
pump. As water levels drop and farmers have to dig deeper, fuel costsincrease 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/084005>. “We’re 
already drilling 10, 20, 30 feet into the ground,” he explains. “Now the water 
is very low. In 30 years, we may have to go much deeper, say 100 feet. That’s 
expensive.”

Farming on the edge: the Indian salt producers coping with 48C heat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/23/climate-change-india-salt-farmers-gujarat-solar-loans>
Cost isn’t the only problem for those relying on groundwater. “As groundwater 
levels go down,” explains Dhawan, “the risk of arsenic or lead poisoning in the 
water increases because heavy metals settle lower down. If farmers keep 
extracting as they have ... the quality of the water, which ultimately goes 
into our milk, will also reduce.”

While the companies have not yet found solutions to this, Nestlé has started 
funding research with the International Water Management Institute to 
understand the causes of groundwater depletion in the area surrounding its 
factory, in the Moga district. The research – which the company runs alongside 
wider farmer support programmes, such as cattle feeding, breeding, and 
veterinary support – includes a six-month pilot project investigating the 
company’s water footprint from milk.

Dhawan believes the Punjab government is partly to blame for the groundwater 
crisis as it subsidises electricity for water extraction. Big companies and the 
government need to start investing in water-wise technology, she says, such as 
sub-soil irrigation, where pipes supply the soil at root level so less water is 
lost through evaporation, or precision agriculture methods, where farms are 
monitored by computer so exact amounts of inputs can be applied.

“These are already technologies that exist, but they need to be made available 
to farmers,” says Dhawan.
 