
California’s attempt to curb emissions of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, 
is facing vocal opposition from a dairy industry that fears government meddling 
in the flatulence of its cows.

The California Air Resources Board <http://www.arb.ca.gov/homepage.htm> (ARB) 
has set a goal of slashing methane emissions by 40% by 2030, from 2013 levels, 
and has targeted the belching and farting – known as “enteric fermentation” – 
of California’s 5.5 million beef and dairy cows, as well as the manure they 
create.

A strategy document 
<http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/shortlived/meetings/04112016/proposedstrategy.pdf> 
produced by the regulator states that improved manure management practices, new 
diets for cattle and “gut microbial interventions” could help cut the amount of 
methane released into the atmosphere. State legislators are currently 
considering a bill to enforce these suggestions.

Methane, primarily emitted from agriculture and the fossil fuel industry, 
doesn’t linger in the atmosphere as long as carbon dioxide. But it is25 times 
more potent <https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/overview-greenhouse-gases#methane>
 as a greenhouse gas over a 100-year period.

California has moved to limit methane after the state’s glowing reputation for 
climate action received a nasty blow by a natural gas leak this year in the 
mountains above Los Angeles that took 112 days to plug andspewed 97,100 metric 
tonnes of methane into the atmosphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/26/los-angeles-aliso-canyon-gas-leak-methane-largest-us-history>
.

But the state’s dairy industry has criticized the crackdown on methane leaking 
from cattle, launching a social media and email campaign that claims the ARB is 
overstepping its remit and raises the specter of exploding cows.

Environmental records shattered as climate change 'plays out before us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/02/environment-climate-change-records-broken-international-report>
“The focus here is to highlight ARB’s efforts at over-regulating the dairy 
industry,”said 
<http://www.kansascity.com/news/nation-world/national/article94738892.html> 
Anja Raudabaugh, chief executive of Western United Dairymen. “By nature’s 
design, (cows) pass lots of gas. Quite frankly, we want them to expel gas so 
they don’t explode.”

The Milk Producers Council has also lambasted the prospect of new regulation, 
with the lobby group’s general manager Rob Vandenheuvelstating 
<http://www.milkproducerscouncil.org/updates/042916.pdf> that the methane rules 
plan “threatens the future of the California dairy industry”.

“This is about fighting against the ridiculously stupid ‘go-it-alone’ strategy 
for implementing business killing regulations aimed at reducing greenhouse 
gases,” Vandenheuvel said.

“When the US talks about going this direction, while countries like China 
refuse, I call that crazy. When a single state likeCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> does it on its own, I call 
that absolutely insane.”

In May, the Obama administration unveiled new rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/obama-methane-emissions-rule-oil-gas-climate-change>
 to cut methane emissions from the oil and gas industry by up to 45% by 2025, 
from 2012 levels. The rules are part of a number of executive actions taken by 
the president this year – including on emissions from aircraft and refrigerants 
– in the face of escalating global temperatures.

The world has just experienced 14 consecutive months of record heat, with 
scientists expressing alarm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/02/environment-climate-change-records-broken-international-report>
 at the pace of temperature increase and resulting impact upon glaciers and sea 
levels.

Neither California nor the federal government, however, has yet adopted an 
idea from Argentina’s government that large backpacksbe strapped onto cows 
<http://www.springwise.com/methane-backpacks-capture-cow-farts-turn-green-fuel/>
 to trap methane and turn it into green energy.
 