
Dame Helen Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> has 
praised what she terms “shameless women” who are redefining beauty, citing 
Pussy Riot and Kim Kardashian as role models who have rejected labels such as 
slut and embraced bigger body shapes.

The Oscar-winning actor said women had been pressured into conforming to 
demure stereotypes throughout the 20th century, but many contemporary 
celebrities took pleasure in breaking taboos.

“When I was growing up, it was thought to be unbelievably sluttish to even 
have a bra strap showing,” Mirren said. “Everything was about women conforming. 
I love shameless women. Shameless and proud!”

Mirren, 70, said she was happy to be finally “relieved of the whole sex-symbol 
tag” but was inspired by women who had not been “controlled by being shamed”.

“I love women who have claimed their own bodies: Madonna, Chrissie Hynde, Joan 
Jett, Bonnie Raitt. I lovePussy Riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot> more than anything in the world.

“They all raise their middle fingers to this epithet of ‘slut’. They wear what 
they want to wear, behave as they want to behave.’”

Mirren said the reality TV star’s famous backside had been positive for young 
women and body confidence.

“I’m not into the Kardashians, it’s a phenomenon I just don’t find 
interesting, but – and this is the big word: B-U-T-T – it’s wonderful that 
you’re allowed to have a butt nowadays,” she told the Sunday Telegraph Magazine.

“Thanks to Madame Kardashian, and before her, J-Lo. We’re also allowed to have 
thighs now, which is great too. It’s very positive.”

Speaking to the paper in Cannes, Mirren said that, despite her stardom, she 
sometimes found the glittering events “terribly intimidating … with all these 
amazing women – glorious creatures – and their clothes and their make-up.

“Sometimes you feel wonderful and – it’s the same whether you’re 13 or 26 or 
86 – sometimes you feel insecure and frightened.”

Mirren’s early character DCI Jane Tennison from TV series Prime Suspect, which 
began in 1991, is about tofeature in an ITV prequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/18/prime-suspect-prequel-sees-return-of-jane-tennison-on-itv>
. She said she was pleased the role was being re-visited, though she will have 
no involvement.

“It’s good for young women to see how the world used to be for women who 
wanted to become police,” she said.

Mirren is the second high-profile British woman to praise Kardashian in recent 
weeks, after former Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman said theKardashian 
women’s message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/28/harriet-harman-kim-kardasian>
 was that “they are kind of going to make their own decisions, make their own 
way in the world”.

“There’s a kind of bravery and a pioneering – oh my God, what am I saying 
here? – a pioneering spirit to them,” Harman said.
 