
There is nothing like a Dame. And Dame Sarah Storey, who has been back in 
action at theRevolution Series <> in Manchester, is a Dame like no other. A 
ferocious competitor on the road and the track, Storey won her 12th, 13th and 
14th Paralympic gold medals in Rio this summer and picked upher second 
nomination for Sports Personality of the Year this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/bbc-sports-personality-year-andy-murray-spoty-who-win-award>
.

Storey, who triumphed on both the road and track in Rio, says the track is the 
“fun option” but that she will do most of her preparation for Tokyo on the 
road. “I see myself as a road cyclist as it’s where the greatest amount of 
competition has been in the past seven seasons since I first started racing UCI 
Women’s pro races,” she says. But events such as Revolution keep her track 
cycling options open.

Sarah Storey wins 14th Paralympic gold in women’s road race in Rio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/sarah-storey-gold-cycling-womens-road-race-rio-2016-paralympics>
Storey’s team, Podium Ambition Pro Cycling 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Podium_Ambition_Pro_Cycling>, will not be racing 
as a UCI-registered team for the 2017 season, citing alack of financial support 
and the fall of the pound 
<https://totalwomenscycling.com/race-news/podium-ambition-pro-cycling-pb-club-la-santa-folds-financial-pressure>
, but she hopes to be back in the UCI peloton come 2018. In the meantime she’ll 
be looking for wild-card entries to key races and preparing for Tokyo in 2020, 
her eighth Paralympic Games and her fifth as a cyclist after she switched from 
a successful career in the pool.

Storey is not slowing down yet but, when she steps back from racing, she would 
like to use her experience to improve women’s cycling and para-cycling further. 
She is already involved with British Cycling’sChoose Cycling campaign 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/campaigning/article/cam20140206-Campaigning---Choose-cycling-0?c=EN>
, along with Chris Boardman, and has set up theBoot Out Breast Cancer Cycling 
Club <http://www.teambootoutbc.cc/> with her husband, Barney. “I set up the 
cycling club with Barney and, while the purpose is to raise the profile of the 
charity as they have no marketing budget, the club has introduced me to 
cyclists of all ages and ambitions so being able to encourage people to be 
active is something I enjoy too. And, if it’s none of the above, I will 
definitely be learning the necessary rules and intricacies of whatever hobbies 
[her daughter] Louisa chooses when she gets going!”

How does Storey find the time and energy to combine being the mother of a 
three-year-old with her training schedule? She says she has a massive amount of 
family support and an “amazing” husband, Barney, the tandem pilot and coach who 
she married in 2007. “We do everything as a team and Louisa is always with us. 
We’ll have to adapt how we work when she’s at school but haven’t ruled out the 
need to homeschool on tour asShelley Rudman 
<http://www.bbc.com/sport/get-inspired/25093179> did.”

Running the cycling team and travelling with Louisa “has been a great 
education already and it’s amazing to watch her grow up with so many great 
experiences.” Storey describes the delicate balance between parenthood and 
elite sport as “an adventure for all of us – it’s certainly given me an even 
happier environment to return to after a tough day in the saddle.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdame-sarah-storey-roadmap-womens-cycling-paralympics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa956d19e7a4da81176bbb98e4d55f79c7d4ce09f%2F0_112_3456_2323%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dame%20Sarah%20Storey's%20roadmap%20for%20women's%20cycling%20and%20para-cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdame-sarah-storey-roadmap-womens-cycling-paralympics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dame%20Sarah%20Storey%27s%20roadmap%20for%20women%27s%20cycling%20and%20para-cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdame-sarah-storey-roadmap-womens-cycling-paralympics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa956d19e7a4da81176bbb98e4d55f79c7d4ce09f%2F0_112_3456_2323%2F3456.jpg>
 Sarah and Louisa Storey pose for the camera in Rio. Photograph: onEdition 
Born without a fully formed left hand 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/sarah-storey-its-a-massive-surprise-there-are-three-paralympians-nominated-for-sports-personality-of-8376217.html>
, Storey is one of an elite group of Paralympic athletes who also competes in 
“able bodied” sport. It puts her in a unique position to identify the 
challenges faced by two groups of athletes who are often sidelined in elite 
competition: women and para-athletes. “Para-cyclists have more barriers on an 
international scale because there are fewer competition opportunities, 
especially on the track, and no prize money or professional registration. 
There’s no doubt para-cycling is many years behind where women’s cycling is. 
The difference is also that male para-cyclists are in the same position, unlike 
women’s cycling where they have less opportunity than their male equivalent.”

Storey points out that the number of para-cyclists in the UK is on the rise ; 
she hopes that competitive opportunities will follow demand. “While the women 
could have 200 women racing on any weekend from April to July, a para-cycling 
event might only attract 30 to 40 across 13 classes, male and female. Women’s 
cycling in the UK needs a race structure revision to accommodate a two-tier 
system, which will ensure new recruits to the sport aren’t faced with racing 
the elite cyclists straight from the off.” Though an entry level National Team 
Series and the elite level National Road Series both exist, Storey says they 
currently cater for the same category of cyclist “and there’s still quite a 
rapid drop-out rate when women get overwhelmed by not being able to start at a 
level they feel comfortable with.”

She feels that, despite the success of the Aviva Women’s Tour and the newly 
minted Tour de Yorkshire, women still need more opportunities to race on closed 
roads in full-on racing conditions. “Lots of UK club teams look for guest 
places in European races to provide the closed-road, race-convoy experience to 
their riders. Ultimately it’s a lot of travelling and its expensive, so if I 
could wave a magic wand it would be to provide those opportunities more often 
in the UK.”

Storey is equally passionate about the need for greater integration for 
para-cycling in the World Cups and World Championships, something that already 
works successfully in para-rowing and para-triathlon. “The biggest challenge is 
in providing this opportunity to the UCI in a format they can’t refuse,” Storey 
says. “So far the barriers presented back to para-cycling are time constraints 
and having too many people accredited for one event. Clearly the integration of 
para-cycling into the worlds or World Cups would see these existing events grow 
by a huge number, but the many benefits of publicity, spectators and the 
reduction of logistical costs to nations and their staffing should allow an 
economical model to be found both in terms of time and finance.

“Integration will be the fastest way to increase media coverage for 
para-cycling. At the moment there isn’t any live coverage of any event outside 
theParalympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>. The South 
African World Cup organisers experimented with a live feed showing pictures of 
the start and turn in their time-trial, but there was no commentary or graphics 
to allow people to adequately follow.”

How would she like to see para-cycling structured in the future? “I’d like to 
see an option for professional registration so that individuals or teams can 
demonstrate to sponsors they are investing in something at the highest level,” 
she says. Storey would also like to see the UCI establish equal prize money at 
world championships “even if that means funding it themselves until they can 
create the interest in para-cycling so it can be self-sufficient – currently 
the UCI struggle to find organisers for Para Track events, even World 
Championships are a struggle.”

The UCI give little or no promotion to para-cycling events, Storey points out, 
and the organisers are expected to do everything themselves. “It would be good 
to see the UCI take more responsibility for the promotion and provision of live 
TV pictures so that the profile of the sport can be raised and organisers get 
into a genuine bidding process rather than the current situation where there’s 
only one option or bidder, if we’re lucky, each year. It’s for this reason the 
integration model would work but the question is whether able-bodied cycling 
can adapt to welcome the para-cycling events into the event.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Storey%3A%20how%20to%20perform%20under%20pressure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Storey%3A%20how%20to%20perform%20under%20pressure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure&media=>
Sarah Storey: how to perform under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/07/dame-sarah-storey-how-to-perform-under-pressure>
Storey’s clear roadmap for para-cycling makes sense and, as an International 
Paralympic Committee member who will shortly travel to her first meeting in 
Germany, she’s uniquely placed to make it happen. UCI President Brian Cookson 
has said he isconfident progress is being made 
<http://www.insidethegames.biz/articles/1044066/uci-president-confident-progress-made-in-para-cycling-after-dame-sarah-storey-criticism>
 in para-cycling in the face of fierce criticism from cycling’s only DBE.

So has Storey achieved everything she wants to in her glittering career? She 
rules out another attempt on the Hour Record, saying she doesn’t have the 
resources or finances, now thatEvelyn Stevens 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/latest-news/evelyn-stevens-smashes-womens-uci-world-hour-record-in-colorado-213639>
 has set the record at altitude. But she does have one final ambition: “The 
3:30 barrier in the 3,000m on the track is still something I am keen to topple, 
plus I would love to win a road stage at a UCI Women’s stage race or win the 
polka dot jersey. I’d also love to ride the team time-trial World Championships 
as it’s the ultimate team event on the road.”

Storey says she has come close to the magic 3:30 all season without success 
“so maybe my Tokyo preparations can see it happen.” And if she had to sum up 
her extraordinary career to date? “In all honesty, I have achieved more than I 
could ever have imagined, so I’m quite relaxed. My biggest motivation is to 
enjoy what I do while trying to find the best version of me on a bike!” It’s a 
modest summary from a very special woman.

• This article is from 100 Tours 100 Tales 
<http://100tours100tales.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Suze Clemitson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/festinagirl>
 