
For two years running, the film that opened the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> went on to major Oscars 
glory. First it wasGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/sep/06/gravity-trailer-video>, 
which maintained momentum right through the five months until it bagged seven 
Academy awards. The following year,Birdman repeated the trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/birdman-wins-big-two-oscars-but-ties-with-grand-budapest-hotel-for-awards-tally>
, taking just two gongs, but one of them best picture.

I love movies where you can sense the director risked biting off more than 
they can chew

In 2015, a blip, as snowy flop Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/sep/18/everest-video-review> 
failed to make it a hat-trick, but this year, the choicest launchpad seems back 
in the good books. La La Land won the spot this year, and reception to Damien 
Chazelle’s follow-up to Whiplash has been nothing short of rapturous. Its world 
premiere drew raves (The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw declared it a “sun-drenched 
musical masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
”). The same occurred at theTelluride film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluride-film-festival-2016> days later, 
where it received its North American debut.

Such buzz has landed La La Land atop awards pundits’ 2017 Oscar predictions, 
with many touting Chazelle as a frontrunner for the best director Oscar (he was 
previously nominated for best adapted screenplay forWhiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review>).

But for the 31-year-old right now, the biggest thrill has been the praise of 
Tom Hanks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomhanks>. In the Colorado ski town 
to plug his performance in Clint Eastwood’s Sully, Hanks has taken it upon 
himself to act as La La Land’s unofficial mascot, professing his admiration for 
the picture when he’s supposed to be touting his own.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
“When you see something that is brand new, that you can’t imagine, and you 
think, ‘Well,thank God this landed,’ because I think a movie like La La Land 
would be anathema to studios,”Hanks said 
<http://deadline.com/2016/09/telluride-film-festival-tom-hanks-praises-la-la-land-sully-q-a-1201813204/>
 during a Q&A for Sully. “Number one, it is a musical and no one knows the 
songs.”

“I’m blushing even thinking about [what Hanks said],” says Chazelle, looking 
like a college student in T-shirt and jeans, sitting in a conference room at 
the Telluride hotel where he’s staying. “I want to kiss him. He’s so generous, 
it’s insane. I’ve worshipped him since forever.”

Chazelle is a self-professed fanboy, not just of Hanks, but of the industry 
that made the actor a household name.La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is a joyous testament to that – a 
colourful and heartrending ode to Tinseltown, and the bygone era of musicals it 
gave birth to.

The story is deceptively simple: Emma Stone plays a struggling actor, whose 
relationship to her jazz pianist boyfriend (Ryan Gosling) becomes strained when 
his career begins to overtake hers. The execution is anything but. For the 
opening pre-credits sequence alone, Chazelle filmed a fastidiously rehearsed 
song and dance set-piece on a closed-off portion of theLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> highway over a weekend.

La La Land is about the city I live in, the music that I grew up playing, 
movies that I grew up watching

“For moments like that, I remember going, ‘Whoa, this is crazy,’” he recalls. 
“I love movies where you can sense that the director risked biting off more 
than they can chew.”

 As Hanks rightly marvelled at, films like La La Land just aren’t made in 
today’s studio system that tends to favour franchise-building over fresh 
concepts. It’s little wonder it took Chazelle six years to see his bold vision 
take shape; he completed the screenplay in back 2010, spurred to make “a 
Hollywood movie – in the old sense of the term – that could still feel personal 
and different. … That space where those two things can overlap has been feeling 
more and more endangered,” Chazelle muses.

“La La Land is about the city I live in, it’s about the music that I grew up 
playing, it’s about movies that I grew up watching,” says Chazelle. “Even the 
big spectacle of the movie feels private to me in that way.”

It also doesn’t mark his first stab at the hard-to-pull-off genre: before 
Whiplash earned him an Oscar nomination for best director, Chazelle helmedGuy 
and Madeline on a Park Bench <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJUzALdI--k>, a 
little-seen micro-budget jazz musical, originally planned as his thesis project 
for Harvard Film School (he briefly left Harvard to focus on finishing the 
film). And while Whiplash doesn’t feature a single show-tune, an incessant drum 
beat courses throughout the tale about a young drummer and his abusive coach.

“I love the idea of thinking of cinema as not that far from music,” says 
Chazelle, who played drums growing up. “A lot of my favourite movie makers, the 
way they move their cameras, or the way they cut justfeel very musical – even 
if the movies have no music in them at all. That, on a taste level, is what I 
respond to a lot. That said, I definitely want to make a movie that’s not about 
music.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdamien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1c52799008877e3599b222c5779c00b888ed13%2F0_0_3072_1991%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Damien%20Chazelle%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'Los%20Angeles%20is%20full%20of%20people%20chasing%20dreams'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdamien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Damien%20Chazelle%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27Los%20Angeles%20is%20full%20of%20people%20chasing%20dreams%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdamien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1c52799008877e3599b222c5779c00b888ed13%2F0_0_3072_1991%2F3072.jpg>
 Emma Stone and Damien Chazelle arrive for the opening ceremony and screening 
of La La Land at the Venice International film festival on 31 August. 
Photograph: Ettore Ferrari/EPA 
You can buy Emma Stone and Ryan Gosling as a 1940s old Hollywood pairing, like 
Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers

 Given its long journey to the screen, La La Land underwent various 
“permutations” over the years, according to Chazelle. Initially, the romance 
was rumoured to star Chazelle’s Whiplash breakoutMiles Teller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/21/miles-teller-i-felt-extremely-misrepresented-war-dogs>
 andEmma Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/08/emma-watson-feminazi-harry-potter-sex-discrimination>
. When Summit Entertainment – impressed by the success of Whiplash – agreed to 
invest in La La Land, Chazelle landed on the proven pairing of Gosling and 
Stone, who demonstrated great chemistry inCrazy, Stupid, Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review> 
and Gangster Squad.

Emma Stone: young people are trapped by their own cynicism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/emma-stone-la-la-land-young-people-cynicism-venice-film>
“They’re short of timeless in the sense that you can buy them as a 1940s sort 
of old movie, old Hollywood pairing – like a Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, or 
a Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy,” says Chazelle of his famous twosome. 
“Yet at the same time, they feel, at least to me, completely contemporary. They 
have a way of grounding everything that they do in a very believable way. Once 
we were able to cast them in the film, it’s like the whole thing sort of woke 
up.”

Like Teller’s character in Whiplash, the artists Gosling and Stone portray are 
big dreamers trying to make it in an industry where constant rejection is the 
norm. Chazelle admits that both films reflect his own experiences as a 
film-maker working his way up the Hollywood ladder.

“I guess you write what you know,” he says, laughing. “There something to be 
said for having even unrealistic dreams. Even if the dreams don’t come true – 
that to me is what’s beautiful about Los Angeles. It’s full of these people who 
have moved there to chase these dreams. A lot of those people are told by 
people around them that they’re crazy, or that they’re living in la la land. I 
wanted to make a movie that saluted them a little bit, and that kind of 
unrealistic state of mind.”

 * La La Land screens at the Toronto film festival on 12 September, and at the 
London film festival <http://www.bfi.org.uk/lff> on 6 October. It opens in US 
cinemas on 16 December and in the UK on 17 January 2017
 