
It was perhaps not a surprise that Meryl Streep took aim at the president 
elect, Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-trump-big-weakness-golden-globes-speech>
 during her speech at the Golden Globes on Sunday night. Her attack on sports 
was a little more unexpected though.

Will Ronda Rousey's downfall kill female UFC? Don't panic just yet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/ronda-rousey-female-mma-ufc-equality>
Streep raised the subject while talking about the rewards diversity has 
brought to Hollywood. “If we kick [foreigners] out, you’ll have nothing to 
watch but football and mixed martial arts – which are not the arts,” said 
Streep, who was honored at the ceremony for “outstanding contributions to the 
world of entertainment”.

On Monday, Dana White, the UFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 
president hit back at Streep. “It’s not going to be everybody’s thing, and the 
last thing I expect is for an uppity 80-year-old lady to be in our demographic 
and love mixed martial arts,” White said of the 67 year-old.

 “Of course [MMA] is an art,” White added. “These fighters, these men and 
women, are so talented. They train their whole lives to be the best in the 
world. To say something stupid like that is like saying, ‘She’s not a talented 
actress,’ which she is. She’s a very talented actress.”

White gave a speech in support of Trump 
<http://www.mmafighting.com/2016/7/19/12232416/dana-white-speaks-in-support-of-donald-trump-at-republican-national>
 at last year’s Republican convention.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1iYkuwT40Ss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1iYkuwT40Ss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1iYkuwT40Ss&media=>
 The UFC president fired back at Meryl Streep’s comments slighting MMA. 
 While Streep may have been alluding to the jock culture and physical 
brutality that surrounds football and MMA, the latter in particular is a 
diverse environment. UFC’s biggest star is Conor McGregor, an Irishman, and it 
is one of the few sports in whichwomen often top the bill ahead of men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/ronda-rousey-female-mma-ufc-equality>
. Its most famous reigning female champion, the Brazilian Amanda Nunes, is an 
out gay woman.

 While Trump responded to Streep’s speech by calling the 19-time Oscar nominee 
an “over-rated” actress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>
, Scott Coker, the head of Bellator MMA, expressed his admiration for Streep 
and invited her to an event.

 “I’m a lifelong fan of your work but also a lifelong martial artist who 
happens to promote mixed martial arts around the world,”Coker wrote in a post 
on Twitter <https://twitter.com/ScottCoker/status/818308374563463168>.

 “The global sport of mixed martial arts celebrates male and female athletes 
from all around the world who work years tirelessly honing their craft and– yes 
– art. They come from every country and every walk of life. We at Bellator 
support them and honor their skill.

 “Please be my guest at the LA Forum on January 21st and you will see that 
mixed martial arts is truly artistic – which will feature fighters from all 
over the world competing at a world class level.”

It was unclear at time of publication whether Streep believes Holly Holm can 
nullify Germaine de Randamie’s kickboxing skills at UFC 208 next month.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&media=>
Meryl Streep attacks Donald Trump in Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
.  