
Daniel Sturridge <https://www.theguardian.com/football/daniel-sturridge> has 
delivered an impassioned defence of his commitment to Liverpool, insisting he 
is content at the club, hurt by accusations he lacks the appetite to play and 
“devastated” when sidelined through injury.

The striker made a rare media appearance on Wednesday to preview Thursday’s 
Europa League last-32 second leg against Augsburg alongside his manager, Jürgen 
Klopp. Sturridge’s appearances on the pitch have also been limited over the 
past 18 months by a series of injuries that have prompted criticism not only of 
his fitness but willingness to play through the pain barrier. Klopp himself has 
previously suggested the 26-year-old needs to learn “what is serious pain or 
what is only pain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/27/jurgen-klopp-daniel-sturridge-serious-pain-liverpool>
”.

Sturridge claimed he did not read any criticism aired on social media, despite 
being active on Twitter and Instagram, and denied recent reports he wanted to 
leave Liverpool at the end of the season. “Of course it’s been a difficult time 
being injured,” he said. “But it’s part of football and I’m now looking forward 
to the future withLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. 
There is not really much to stress or worry about. I have been pretty relaxed 
the whole time and I am happy here.”

Several former Liverpool players have questioned the striker’s commitment 
during the past two seasons, which have been plagued by injury. One rumour 
started on social media was that Sturridge was reluctant to play for religious 
reasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fdaniel-sturridge-happy-liverpool-augsburg-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F868b145caff51dc60459127eb67f662f2a43fda1%2F174_148_3936_2363%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Sturridge%3A%20Liverpool%20absences%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20religion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fdaniel-sturridge-happy-liverpool-augsburg-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Sturridge%3A%20Liverpool%20absences%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20religion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fdaniel-sturridge-happy-liverpool-augsburg-europa-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F868b145caff51dc60459127eb67f662f2a43fda1%2F174_148_3936_2363%2F3936.jpg>
 Sturridge has suffered hip, knee, foot and thigh problems in an injury-plagued 
season. Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Reuters 
The forward, who has made only nine appearances this season, responded: “It’s 
all surprising to be honest. I didn’t know religion had anything to do with 
football. As a child you don’t think of those things.

“To say a player doesn’t want to play is the biggest disrespect ever to any 
footballer and it’s astonishing. It’s very disappointing whoever was saying it. 
It’s football and of course people are entitled to opinions but all I can say 
is I don’t think anyone will understand how much it means to me to play 
football.”

Sturridge has endured hip, knee, foot and thigh problems in recent months and, 
despite insisting he was “blessed by God and I have no stresses”, admitted that 
the frequent injury setbacks had been difficult to take.

He said: “I’m very ambitious, very determined to help Liverpool have some 
success. I am totally focused and of course I want to be on the pitch playing 
in every game and it hurts not being able to play. I would be lying if didn’t 
say it.

“You have to be strong in those situations. I’m not at home chilling, I’m not 
out with friends living life to the full. I’m not happy. I’m sitting in the 
stands or at home devastated at watching my team‑mates play. It hurts hearing 
second- and third‑hand what people say. I’d say a lot of them aren’t saying the 
truth. All I want to do is help this team have success – that’s the most 
important thing, nothing else matters.”

Klopp was taken aback by the forthright views of his leading striker but 
pleased Sturridge had publicly declared his contentment with Liverpool. “It was 
interesting to hear what you asked, I agree with everything he said,” the 
Liverpool manager said.

“It was important to clarify the situation and to hear from Daniel about 
certain things. I’ve heard from him, not second- or third-hand, a lot of times 
about ‘future LFC’. I don’t know another LFC so I think he means Liverpool 
Football Club.

“Everything is fine and you can all stop thinking about this. This is good for 
us. He is a really good player and now he is able to play. That is what we want 
to see all the time.”

Liverpool will again be without Dejan Lovren, Adam Lallana, Martin Skrtel and 
Joe Allen against Augsburg, who have their own injury problems going into 
Thursday’s tie at Anfield. Their leading striker, Raúl Bobadilla, has travelled 
to Merseyside but is a major doubt with a thigh problem sustained duringlast 
Thursday’s goalless first leg in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/augsburg-liverpool-europa-league-match-report-daniel-sturridge>
.

The central midfielder Markus Feulner is absent having fractured a cheekbone 
in Sunday’s 1-0 win at Hannover.

Klopp gave his players two days off after the first leg, in response to a 
hectic fixture schedule, but insisted the Capital One Cup final against 
Manchester City on Sunday would not influence his selection against Markus 
Weinzierl’s team. “To be honest it’s pretty easy, life makes the rules,” he 
said. “If you think about the second step before you make the first step you 
will always fall down.

“We have to be fully concentrated and give everything against Augsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg>. If you think about leaving 
this or this player out, for sure he will be injured in a training session. 
That’s not allowed. We will select just with this game in mind.”

Liverpool v Augsburg, 6pm Thursday 25 February 

Liverpool (4-4-1-1, possible): Mignolet; Clyne, Touré, Sakho, Moreno; Milner, 
Henderson, Can, Coutinho; Firmino; Sturridge.Subs from Ward, Benteke, Caulker, 
Lucas, Origi, Ibe, Randall, Smith, Teixeira, Chirivella.

Augsburg (possible): Hitz; Verhaegh, Janker, Klavan, Stafylidis; Koo, Kohr; 
Esswein, Altintop, Werner; Caiuby.Subs from Bobadilla, Gkelios, Opare, 
Trochowksi, Ji, Max, Thommy, Framberger, Moravek.

Referee C Turpin (Fr).
 