
Danny Houghton has been named the 2016 Man of Steel, becoming the first Hull FC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hull-fc> player to win the British game’s 
most prestigious individual award in its near 40-year history.

The hooker, who has been exceptional for Hull in a season during which they 
have won the Challenge Cup and made the play-off semi-finals, saw off 
competition from his team-mate Gareth Ellis and the Castleford winger Denny 
Solomona to win the award.

Houghton secured the award after a ballot of almost 300 Super League players, 
with the 28-year-old getting almost twice as many first-choice votes as Ellis, 
who finished second.Hull’s Super League season ended in defeat against Wigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/wigan-hull-fc-super-league-match-report>
 last Friday in the play-offs but Houghton is now in the running to be named in 
Wayne Bennett’s England squad for the Four Nations, which will be announced 
next Monday.

For the first time the RFL opted to make the voting process for the award 
public, with details of all 288 voting forms revealed. Houghton voted for the 
Warrington captain, Chris Hill, as his Man of Steel, while Ellis voted for 
Hill’s team-mate, Daryl Clark. The third-placed Solomona, who scored a 
record-breaking 40 tries this season, agreed with the majority of the voting 
field, picking Houghton first and Ellis second.

Warrington’s Declan Patton aims to fulfil lifelong ambition to play in Grand 
Final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/warrington-declan-patton-lifelong-ambition-grand-final-wigan>
Houghton’s win was one half of a double success for the hooker on the night: 
he also retained theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>
 “Hit Man” award after making the most tackles again this season.

Hull’s Lee Radford, was named the Super League Coach of the Year, as voted for 
by his fellow top-flight coaches. The Wakefield winger Tom Johnstone was named 
the Young Player of the Year, beating the Widnes forward Matt Whitley and Wigan 
prop Ryan Sutton to the award by a single vote. Johnstone, who made his 
professional debut only last year, is the club’s top try-scorer in 2016, having 
scored 14 in 22 appearances.

The Hull centre Kirk Yeaman, who retired from rugby league following the 
defeat by Wigan, was one of 12 current or former Super League players honoured 
at the ceremony in Manchester in recognition of their outstanding contributions 
to the game.

Hit Man Danny Houghton (Hull FC), 1289 tackles; Top metre maker Chris Hill 
(Warrington), 3983m;Top try-scorer Denny Solomona (Castleford), 40 tries; Top 
Gun Marc Sneyd (Hull FC), 83% conversion rate; Outstanding contribution Gregory 
Mounis, Iafeta Paleaaesina, Jamie Langley, Kirk Yeaman, Luke Dorn, Luke 
Robinson, Pat Richards, Paul Jackson, Paul Wood, Richard Mathers, Stuart 
Littler, Wayne Godwin;Foundation of the Year Widnes Vikings; Super League Club 
of the Year Hull FC; Super League Young Player of the Year Tom Johnstone 
(Wakefield);Super League Coach of the Year Lee Radford (Hull FC); Man of Steel 
Danny Houghton (Hull FC).
 