
As you were, says chancellor Philip Hammond to the public sector, give or take 
2,500 extra staff for prisons and some wiggle room on efficiency savings, which 
might pay for the reputed 30,000 extra civil servants who will need to be 
drafted into work on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/over-400m-extra-funding-set-aside-for-brexit-process>
.

 Staying “as you were” means the UK government is still on the trajectory 
drawn by George Osborne – to shrink. Public sector spending is 36.3% of GDP now 
and will fall to 33.5% in 2020-21 – assuming the Office for Budget 
Responsibility has got it broadly right on the growth of the economy.

Civil service unable to cope with Brexit, warns former Whitehall chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/civil-service-unable-to-cope-with-brexit-bob-kerslake>
 The language about public service may be softer than under David Cameron but 
the implications for civil and other public servants are as dark as ever: 
numbers will go on declining amid tight control of pay.

 You might take comfort from looking across the Atlantic. Things look bad. 
Egged on by a Republican-controlled Congress, Donald Trumpplans 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/11/21/trump-republicans-plan-to-target-government-workers-benefits-and-job-security/?postshare=4431479767955633&tid=ss_tw>
 to cut the number, pay and pensions of federal employees, abolish the 
education department and decimate the rest (except the military).



 Yet the move would be less alt-right than more of the same – a continuation 
and intensification of what central government staff have faced for the past 
eight years, not just in the US but across the richer nations.

 The latest OECD survey 
<http://www.oecd.org/publications/engaging-public-employees-for-a-high-performing-civil-service-9789264267190-en.htm>
 says civil servants in nearly all its 35 member countries have had their pay 
frozen, their numbers cut and departments downsized as governments responded to 
the financial crash and recession or, as a matter of political principle, had a 
go at shrinking the state.

 In the OECD’s round up, UK civil servants haven’t suffered the worst, but 
they have endured both significant spending cuts and a superfluity of HR 
measures, compared with other countries. The thinktank’s conclusion is that 
austerity has resulted in a loss of trust, commitment and motivation among 
state employees as well as increased stress in the workplace. The cuts threaten 
government effectiveness and have not improved productivity.

 Anticipating the strain Whitehall faces in coping with Brexit, the OECD fears 
austerity “may paralyse public organisations’ abilities to evolve in ways 
required of today’s fast pace of change”.

Over £400m extra funding set aside for Brexit process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/over-400m-extra-funding-set-aside-for-brexit-process>
The Cabinet Office’s chief analyst, Liz McKeown, helped with the OECD report. 
But it’s hard to square the international finding of decreased trust in 
organisation and leadership and lower job satisfaction with the most recent UK 
data. UK cabinet secretary Sir Jeremy Heywood says he is proud of what the 
Cabinet Office’speople survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-service-people-survey-2016-results>
 shows – but “puzzled” would be more appropriate.

 Look, he says, at the response rate, which is relatively high for a repeated 
staff survey. As forengagement – a composite index of what staff think about 
their management, pay, opportunities for learning and development and so on – 
it is quite remarkable that since 2009 the figure has stayed so high (59% this 
year). Even more noteworthy are the high scores (83% and 73% respectively) on 
questions about organisational aims and resources.

 Civil servants do say they are getting a rotten deal on pay and pensions: low 
scores are evident across departments and agencies. Yet that negativity doesn’t 
spill over into other domains of their working life.

 The explanation may be that British civil servants are like the three wise 
monkeys. They appear neither to hear nor see evil in the ministers they serve, 
nor are they prepared to speak ill. Yet many of those ministers – it’s as true 
with Theresa May as with David Cameron – despise “big government” and 
“bureaucracy”, are critical of civil service capacity and would, if they could, 
remove or privatise entire blocks of public administration.

 But HR surveys don’t have a box for what civil servants think of their 
ministers or their values. Maybe they just don’t think. The evidence suggests 
that civil servants cultivate an identity based on department or sub group and 
ignore the “top of the office”.

 In education they ignore Justine Greening; in work and pensions they are 
indifferent to the replacement of Iain Duncan Smith briefly by Stephen Crabb 
and equally indifferent to the arrival of Damian Green. Instead they focus on 
their immediate colleagues and their team.

 It’s odd asymmetry. Ministers get on with ideology, which may include 
diminishing Whitehall and public services. Civil servants ignore them and get 
on with the job of delivering partisan policies, but without losing the values 
of disinterested service of the public.

The OECD observes that austerity has had little effect on the ethos of public 
service: it hasn’t increased corruption or led to “misappropriate” use of 
public resources. Which makes civil servants a kind of human shield for the 
political prophets of austerity.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 