Where was the PDC World Darts Championship held every year before it moved to 
Alexandra Palace in 2008?  Wembley Arena  Circus Tavern The venue in Purfleet, 
Essex, hosted the event from 1994 to 2007.  Riverside Sports Arena  Swan Hall 
No one pulled off a nine-dart finish at this year's PDC World Championship. Who 
threw one in the semi-final last year on his way to winning the tournament?  
Jelle Klaasen  Raymond van Barneveld  Gary Anderson Anderson was awarded 
£300,000 for winning the championship and an extra £15,000 for his nine-dart 
finish. Not a bad week's wages.  Adrian Lewis How many times has Phil ‘The 
Power’ Taylor won the PDC World Darts Championship?  12  14  16  18 What is the 
highest possible checkout to win a game of darts?  160  168  170 Treble 20, 
treble 20, bull  180 How old was Michael van Gerwen when Phil Taylor won his 
first PDC World Darts Championship trophy?  Five Taylor won his first title in 
1995 and his most recent in 2013  Eight  11  14 Which of these is a genuine Sid 
Waddell quote?  'He had it on a plate, he had the sausage, bacon and eggs on it 
as well, but he couldn't take it'  'Braver than a matador in a pink tutu he was'
 'They tell me that all men are equal in God's eyes, this player makes you 
seriously think about those words'  'The atmosphere is so tense, if Elvis 
walked in, with a portion of chips, you could hear the vinegar sizzle on them'
Waddell found texture in vinegar more than once. He also came up with the 
phrase: 'You could hear a blob of vinegar drop on a chip in this hall.' When 
was the first PDC World Darts Championship?  1986  1990  1994 Dennis Priestley 
won the first event, beating Phil Taylor in the final  1998 Phil Taylor won the 
championship in 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005 and 
2006. Who broke his chain of consecutive victories by winning the title in 2003?
 Dennis Priestley  John Part Taylor made it to the final but lost out to the 
Canadian  Gary Anderson  Raymond van Barneveld Which player has the nickname 
‘The Menace’?  Michael van Gerwen  Gary Anderson  Andy Jenkins  Dennis Priestley
The clue is in the name Who used Tony Christie's song Is This the Way to 
Amarillo as his entrance music?  Peter Manley  Vincent van der Voort  Andy Smith
 Steve Hine  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  