
Daryl Gurney reached the quarter-finals of the world championship for the 
first time after overcoming the Welshman Mark Webster in a topsy-turvy 4-3 win 
at Alexandra Palace.

The 30-year-old lost the first set 3-0 in the opening match of an entertaining 
afternoon session before he capitalised on Websterâ€™s trouble hitting the 
doubles to level the match with a tight 3-2 second-set success.

The Northern Irishman, who hit seven maximums, took the next two sets to lead 
3-1 and leave him just one away from a last-eight spot, and had five darts to 
seal victory but Webster hit back to take the next two 3-2 and take it into a 
final set. But Gurney found his composure to come through and win it 3-1, 
setting up a potential match with the world No1,Michael van Gerwen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-van-gerwen>, for a place in the 
semi-finals.

Dave Chisnall held off Jelle Klaasen to earn a 4-2 victory and advance to the 
last eight. He opened up a two-set lead and looked to be coasting against the 
No10 seed before the Dutchman hit back to halve the deficit. The St Helens man 
then won five legs in a row to put him one set away from victory but Klaasen 
responded with checkouts of 99 and 68 before stealing the fifth set with a 
double-top finish.

Chisnall opened the sixth set by missing 22 darts at doubles to hand Klaasen a 
two-leg advantage but stormed back to take the next three and reach his first 
quarter-final.

Michael Smith raced into a two-set lead against the No6 seed James Wade before 
the latter finally got on the board with a 3-1 third set.

A 98 checkout set Smith on his way to a 3-1 advantage and left him just one 
set from the win, but the Aldershot man had other ideas. Level at 1-1 in the 
fifth, Wade checked out 131 before hitting 64 to extend the match to a sixth 
set where he won all three legs to take it to a decider, with Smith struggling 
to make an impact on the scoreboard.

Wade maintained the momentum to win the opening leg of the seventh set before 
breaking the 26-year-old in the second, with double top sealing his seventh 
straight leg and a place in the last eight.
 