
Even when he’s not the story, David Haye makes himself the story. The British 
heavyweight who should be in the spotlight this week is Anthony Joshua,who 
lines up the veteran Eric Molina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eric-molina-anthony-joshua-world-heavyweight-fight>
 for a hat-trick of American bodies to dispatch in defence of his IBF title in 
Manchester on Saturday night.

But Haye grabbed the microphone and the headlines at a press conference to 
announce his non-title fight against Tony Bellew next March when he gave the 
promoter, Eddie Hearn, the benefit of his wisdom in an extended rant that even 
drowned out Bellew.Hearn, happy to have Haye stir the pot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_GtnJCrID_Q>, was equally entertaining in his 
subsequent reply <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rjB80DJ1MBE>.

Anthony Joshua’s IBF title defence is a Christmas present of limited appeal | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/anthony-joshua-face-eric-molina-world-heavyweight-boxing-title>
It takes a lot to wipe the smile off Hearn’s face, although he seemed mildly 
perturbed by Haye’s suggestion that he is an egoist who has to have his name 
first on the promotional banners. The nub of that is, why should Haye care, 
seeing it is a Matchroom promotion and he would not be getting a major payday 
without Hearn’s clout with Sky Sports?

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> folk and their egos …

As for Joshua, he should make short work of Molina, who is marginally better 
than the champion’s previous American challengers,Charles Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 andDominic Breazeale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
, but not by a lot. Much has been made of his strong showing against Deontay 
Wilder in June last year, but the WBC champion still stopped him in 10 rounds. 
Joshua should take half as long.

Saunders and Tibbs

Billy Joe Saunders has problems. The most honest boxer in the business 
described the first defence of his WBO middleweight title, a slender points win 
over the substandard contender Artur Akarov in Scotland on Saturday night, as 
“terrible”.

It was worst than that. Saunders was out of condition, slow, off-target and 
missing his trainer, Jimmy Tibbs. He admitted after his 116-113, 116-112, 
115-113 win over the 30-year-old Russian that he had not sparred “for four or 
five weeks for various reasons”. He would sit down with Tibbs “man to man”, he 
said, and discuss the differences that led to the trainer’s absence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fbcaddfa34fd713db226259e8453b04f9482717%2F0_0_4178_3064%2F4178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Haye%20and%20his%20ego%20steal%20the%20heavyweight%20spotlight%20from%20Anthony%20Joshua%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Haye%20and%20his%20ego%20steal%20the%20heavyweight%20spotlight%20from%20Anthony%20Joshua%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fbcaddfa34fd713db226259e8453b04f9482717%2F0_0_4178_3064%2F4178.jpg>
 Billy Joe Saunders was perhaps fortunate to get the decision over Artur Akavov 
in Glasgow on Saturday. Photograph: Mark Runnacles/Getty Images 
The version of Saunders who huffed and puffed his way around the ring at the 
Lagoon Leisure Centre in Paisley would not last two rounds with Gennady 
Golovkin. Neither would he beat Chris Eubank Jr. In fact, I did not think he 
beat Akarov, a solid but light-hitting challenger, who many experts reckoned 
had won it by a round.

Tibbs is an understanding mentor but nobody’s fool. He and Nigel Benn fell out 
just before the Gerald McClellan fight in 1995. When Kevin Mitchell “went 
missing” during their partnership, Tibbs ended it. Now Saunders has to 
rediscover the focus he showed in taking the title off Andy Lee in his previous 
fight – nearly a year ago – or risk being marginalised in a hot division.

He got away with it on Saturday night but only because of the generosity of 
the Yorkshireman Dave Parris, the American Lynne Carter and the Spaniard José 
Ignacio Martínez Antúnez.

Why won’t Roy Jones lie down?

Nine years ago at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, Enzo Maccarinelli stopped 
Bobby Gunn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dy9VRITQet8> in one round in the 
first defence of his WBO cruiserweight title. Joe Calzaghe headlined for Frank 
Warren against Peter Manfredo. The undercard featured Gary Lockett, Nathan 
Cleverly, Gavin Rees, Dereck Chisora, Amir Khan and Kell Brook. Happy days.

Eight years and 21 fights later, Macarinelli knocked the once-great Roy Jones 
into unconsciousness <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBW-CkMZVdc> in the 
fourth round of a 10-rounder of little consequence in Moscow last December. 
That, we thought, was the last we would see of Jones in a boxing ring. We were 
wrong.

Jones is 48 on 16 January. Gunn, a former bareknuckle fighter with modest 
boxing skills, celebrates his 43rd birthday on Christmas Day.According to 
ESPN’s Dan Rafael 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/boxing/story/_/id/18184656/roy-jones-jr-set-fight-bobby-gunn-12-round-bout-feb-17>
, who is not often wrong in the bare bones of the business, Jones and Gunn will 
fight for an obscure version of the world light-heavyweight title on 
17 February.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990d219544a3df9cdee421253f75585f98a56ba7%2F0_109_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Haye%20and%20his%20ego%20steal%20the%20heavyweight%20spotlight%20from%20Anthony%20Joshua%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Haye%20and%20his%20ego%20steal%20the%20heavyweight%20spotlight%20from%20Anthony%20Joshua%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdavid-haye-ego-heavyweight-spotlight-anthony-joshua%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990d219544a3df9cdee421253f75585f98a56ba7%2F0_109_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
 Enzo Maccarinelli, left, sends a punch into Roy Jones Jr’s head during their 
non-title cruiserweight bout in December 2015. Photograph: Ivan Sekretarev/AP 
“He doesn’t belong in the ring with me,” Jones said. In the decade when the 
American was the undisputed pound-for-pound best in the world, that surely 
would have been the case. Those days reside mostly in the last century.

The promoter David Feldman told Rafael that Jones v Gunn would be on 
pay-per-view. This is boxing as charlatanism. It is a bout that should not be 
sanctioned, let alone sold as PPV.

And what of Macarinelli, who is now 36? Two fights after the Gunn victory, 
David Haye <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> stopped him in 
two rounds at the O2 Arena in Greenwich to take his world cruiserweight title.

Wisely, the likeable Welshman has not fought since Dmitro Kucher stopped him 
in the first round in June – but, although he says he will not fight again, he 
probably could still account for Jones and Gunn on the same night.

If anyone tells you boxing is not the craziest sport in the world, feel free 
to quote any of the above.
 