
The forthcoming tribute shows to David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/18/david-bowie-new-york-tribute-debbie-harry-pixies-mumford-and-sons-bette-midler>
 featuring performances from the Pixies, Blondie, Michael Stipe, J Mascis, the 
Flaming Lips and more will be streamed live for fans unable to attend the New 
York shows.

The first concert will take place at Carnegie Hall on 31 March, with a second 
date at Radio City Music Hall on 1 April. The latter concert will be available 
to watch online, organisers of The Music of David Bowie have confirmed. Those 
watching will be asked for a donation to one ofa selection of arts based 
charities <http://musicofdavidbowie.com/> in return.

David Bowie saw Lorde as 'the future of music'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/david-bowie-lorde-future-of-music>
“Due to unprecedented interest in the David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> memorial concert in Radio City, 
we have teamed up with Skype and Ammado to stream the concert around the world, 
in return for a small donation to our charity partners,” reads a statement on 
the memorial’s official site. “We suggest a minimum donation equivalent to $20, 
or £15.”

Names confirmed for the concert so far are Mumford & Sons, Blondie, Pixies, 
Michael Stipe, J Mascis,Rickie Lee Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rickie-lee-jones>, Esperanza Spalding, Ron 
Pope, Jherek Bischoff, Amanda Palmer and Anna Calvi with Kronos Quartet, Ann 
Wilson Of Heart, The Roots, The Polyphonic Spree, Perry Farrell, Jakob Dylan, 
Holy Holy, as well as the Donny McCaslin Group, who will joined by guests Mark 
Guiliana, Jason Lindner and Bowie producer Tony Visconti.

David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> died on 11 January, 
aged 69. His extraordinary life and career has so far been marked by adivisive 
performance by Lady Gaga 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=Lady+Gaga+bowie+the+guardian>
 at the Grammys anda well-received tribute by Lorde and Bowie’s former band at 
the Brits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/25/david-bowie-brits-tribute-lorde-duncan-jones>
 A memorial is scheduled for 2016’s Glastonbury festival in Somerset.

• This article was amended on 30 March 2016 because an earlier version said 
that Skype was going to live-stream the concert. In fact Skype is a promotion 
partner for the event.

 