
The bar was set low but at the Dorchester hotel on Wednesday David Haye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> and Tony Bellew still 
managed to crassly limbo under it.

A press conference to announce their fight in March fast descended into a 
20-minute slanging match, during which Haye promised to put his opponent in 
hospital and – for good measure – warned him his life was on the line. Then, as 
the pair butted noses during the face-off, a push from Bellew was met with a 
left hook from Haye. As bouncers waded into the chaos, there were numerous 
shouts and threats, with Bellew angrily suggesting the pair settle matters with 
a street fight.

Nicholas Walters stuns boxing by committing the sport’s ultimate sin | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/nicholas-walters-boxings-ultimate-sin-quits-vasyl-lomachenko>
After a desperate few weeks for the sport – with the tragic death of the 
Scottish welterweight Mike Towell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/scottish-boxer-mike-towell-dies-after-bout>
 in October followed by two other fighters,Nick Blackwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/nick-blackwell-no-longer-sedated-after-ill-advised-sparring-session-boxing>
 andEduard Gutknecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/eduard-gutknecht-undergoes-surgery-after-george-groves-fight>
, undergoing brain operations in the past fortnight – this was another 
swingeing blow to boxing’s image. It was not as if they needed to sell the 
fight: Bellew’s promoter, Eddie Hearn, admitted that the demand for pre-sale 
tickets was overwhelming, even with ringside seats costing £2,500.

Afterwards Bellew, the WBC cruiserweight champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/tony-bellew-retains-cruiserweight-stoppage-bj-flores>
, put the blame on Haye for the melee and accused him of dragging the sport 
into disrepute. “Listen, there are fighters in comas right now,” he said. “You 
don’t brag about putting someone in hospital. It’s absolutely horrible. It’s 
the most dangerous sport in the world and we don’t need clowns like him saying 
what he said. It’s disgusting.

“That wasn’t a way of selling the show. I’m a professional sportsman, I’m a 
businessman and I’m not coming here to put the game I love into disrepute like 
that. I threw no punches, I had no intention of throwing any punches. I just 
wanted to get him off my face. That’s all I wanted to do.”

Earlier both fighters had traded insults, with Haye promising to knock out 
Bellew in a round and calling him a “fat, pumped up light-heavyweight”.

“You’ll have some standard of living after this fight,” he added, “but you 
won’t have any teeth to enjoy those lovely meals. You and your whole team are 
getting destroyed.” Then, pointing to Hearn and Bellew’s trainer, Dave 
Coldwell, Haye added: “Both of you two are putting him in such a dangerous 
situation. His life is on the line.”

Bellew retaliated by calling Haye a “nightclub whore” who had wasted the 
millions he had made from boxing. “He’s blown the lot,” he said. “This is the 
only reason he’s fighting me, he thinks he’ll walk through me in a round. He 
could have fought for the heavyweight world title but he chose the money 
because he’s skint.”

Haye was also accused of being “the biggest diva boxing has ever seen”, with 
Bellew pointing to a long list of demands from his opponent in the contract. “I 
don’t know where it’s come from, but I can’t believe how egotistical he is,” he 
said. “I had to be sat in the room when he entered the press conference, that 
was one of the stipulations.”

The former cruiserweight and heavyweight champion of the world increasingly 
has the scent of a heavyweight mega-fight with the IBF champion, Anthony 
Joshua, in his nostrils. “When Sky see the numbers and excitement I bring, they 
will realise they have to make the fight,” said Haye. “It would break all 
records.”

“People laugh about my last two fights being on Dave, and it being a comedy 
channel, but they got 3.5 million viewers so they had the last laugh,” he 
added. “Ticket sales went in a matter of seconds for this fight. People want to 
see this and they want to see me knock someone out.”

What happened on Wednesday will have only boosted pay-per-view sales. The sad 
fact is that these fighters are among the more intelligent and eloquent members 
of their profession. But this was far from their finest hour.
 