
The first plane David Moyes ever boarded as Real Sociedad manager could not 
land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/24/david-moyes-real-sociedad-la-liga-sid-lowe>
 and the lastcould not take off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/david-moyes-real-sociedad>. 
Ultimately, nor could he.Late on Sunday night, he was still in charge at Anoeta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/david-moyes-real-sociedad>, 
still a guest in the suite at the elegant Maria Cristina hotel alongside the 
Urumea river and by the most beautiful of bays, but only because flight U21877 
from Manchester had been cancelled, rescheduled for 6.30am on Monday. And so it 
was that his time as coach of la Real, his Spanish adventure, was extended by a 
day – from 362 to 363.

David Moyes sacked by Real Sociedad after a year in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/09/david-moyes-sacked-real-sociedad>
In San Sebastián the club president, Jokin Aperribay, was waiting for him. He 
has waited for Moyes rather a lot. He waited to sign him, persisting when 
everyone else had given up and the Scot had said no repeatedly; he waited to 
allow him and his players to get it right, resisting when others demanded a 
change, still hoping that together they could find a solution; and now he 
waited to sack him, determined to do this the right way: face to face. David, 
it’s over. Back at Manchester airport, Moyes suspected as much; the meeting had 
been called and the media had too. he heard first hand what he already knew.

Real Sociedad’s trip to Las Palmas on Friday night might have been a turning 
point; instead it was the end. A 2-0 defeat against the team who started the 
weekend second-bottom left la Real level on points with the relegation zone, 
having won just two in 10, and none at home, despite not facing the toughest 
fixture list. The two wins were against the bottom two and if tranquillity came 
with a 4-0 victory over Levante, and with performances that have been better 
than results, unfortunate not to get anything from Celta Vigo and Atlético, 
they still have to play Sevilla, Barcelona, Villarreal and Madrid before 2016. 
A team some think should compete for Europe – although Moyes is not one of them 
– feared a relegation fight instead.

Points were needed, a protective cushion before that run, although there was 
more to this trip than that. Potential replacements had been discreetly sounded 
out a fortnight ago, but sacking him was not the plan and nor was this an 
ultimatum, even if it turned out that way; the intention instead was to use the 
international break to address the flaws, open dialogue and make changeswith 
Moyes. Presidential preference was for him to continue. He had been Aperribay’s 
personal signing, after all. A defeat would not necessarily change that, only 
the conviction that the players had given up would. And at the final whistle 
that conclusion had been reached.

One Las Palmas player privately admitted that they had never won so easily. El 
Diario Vasco described la Real’s performances a “total disaster”, writing: 
“This Real is dead and needs an immediate change before they are irreversibly 
sunk. [Moyes] has used up all his credit. The sooner they realise that his 
continuity is condemned to failure, the closer they will be to the patient 
recovering.”

When players, staff and directors boarded the plane back to the Basque country 
after the game, Moyes was not on board. Instead he flew directly to England, 
where he spent the weekend.

Hold that image; others have. Moyes had been in England celebrating his 
daughter’s birthday and on Sunday night he was due back in San Sebastián only 
for the flight to be cancelled, meaning that the sacking had to wait and so too 
did Eusebio Sacristán, the coach who is set to take over from him.

Moyes has been at Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> almost exactly a year and 
in league terms exactly a season: from week 11 in 2014-15 to week 10 in 
2015-16. It would not be fair to say that nothing has changed, even if looking 
at results, the temptation would be to say exactly that.

Moyes was charged with bringing some intensity to la Real, to make them a 
competitive side and to build for the future, and that was quickly apparent. 
Having taken over with the team in trouble, he took them to comfortable safety, 
12th place and 11 points clear of the relegation zone despite effectively 
letting go once safety was reached and winning just two of the last 11. Some 
better luck and things might look rather different this season, too; there have 
been signs of something, albeit fleeting ones. And yet Moyes took over at 
Anoeta with the team having won just twice in 11 games last season and he 
departs with the team in the same league position this season, having won just 
twice in 10.

So maybe not much has changed, or perhaps just not much has happened. His 
first gamewas a 0-0 draw  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/22/david-moyes-real-sociedad-deportivo-la-coruna>
at Deportivo,the night when the team’s plane was forced to land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/24/david-moyes-real-sociedad-la-liga-sid-lowe>
 at Santiago De Compostela, 70km away; his last was a 2-0 defeat in Las Palmas. 
In between those there has been a 1-0 win over Barcelona, secured by a Jordi 
Alba own goal,and an amazing 4-3 win over Sevilla, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/23/real-sociedad-sevilla-la-liga-david-moyes>
 but not a huge amount else. Highlightsinclude the time he ate crisps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/14/david-moyes-crisps-dismissal-real-sociedad>
, and that lovely touch in the derby, but it is not supposed to be the manager 
who provides the derby’s best moment. Between those flights there have been 38 
league games, a full season: 11 wins, 13 draws and 13 defeats. Never especially 
bad, until last weekend, but rarely especially good; a bit underwhelming, a bit 
normal.

That may well be their real level, rather than the European football they 
believe they should be chasing. This squad is not as good as they think and has 
been weakened every season for three years. There has been a certain 
consistency but none of the consistency held up as a virtue, little real sense 
of momentum: they have never managed two consecutive wins and last season only 
once suffered two consecutive defeats.

Thirty-seven points last season could have been the basis of something, a 
starting point that most were so sufficiently satisfied with that they became 
worried by rumours of Moyes returning to England. This was going to be the 
season, but things have gone wrong. And that’s despite signings – albeit most 
of them not Moyes’s; indeed he was denied the opportunity to do what he is best 
at and identify and buy players, building a team – and despite getting the 
pre-season he didn’t have last year, when he was handed a poorly prepared, 
unfit squad.

If la Real think they will resolve all their problems with a sacking, they are 
wrong; failures have not been his alone, and might yet have been turned round, 
Carlos Vela is their best player and has virtually given up on a system he has 
never been a fan of; the signings Moyes requested were not delivered; injuries 
have come at bad times; and individual mistakes have done them dreadful damage. 
How different it might look if they had killed off Celta, not thrown it away in 
Málaga, or got the draw against Atlético.

But they did expect more. Moyes was, after all, The Former Manchester United 
manager. It is tempting to see that as part of the problem; tempting too to see 
la Real’s determination to get him as part of the problem. Pepe Mel had been 
offered the job when Moyes finally said “yes”; they had given up on him but 
they went back to him immediately. “The president’s message was: ‘we badly want 
you, the players want you, it’s big for us’,” Moyes said at his presentation. 
Right from the start, did that shift the balance of power, the nature of the 
relationship?

Some in San Sebastián believe so. Moyes sought to change things – too many 
things, some said, and things that did not truly matter. His reference point 
was United and la Real are not United. Others thought Moyes aloof, arrogant, 
tough, befitting the former Manchester United manager. Quite apart from the 
fact that they had explicitly brought him in to be tough with players accused 
of cruising, beyond the fact that Moyes spoke with enthusiasm about his 
footballers and plans for the future, they were wrong: a better word would be 
isolated. Far from arrogance, it could in fact be described as timidity.

Moyes arrived alone and although Billy McKinlay later joined him as his 
assistant, he remained largely alone. The rest of his staff were there before 
him and will be there after him. “An island,” one local radio station called 
him this morning. Distance was not always deliberate, but a consequence of 
difficulties communicating. Messages were harder to get across, relationships 
more difficult to build, nuance lost entirely.

“The players have been great and a lot of them are actually taking English 
lessons, so have the staff, so there is something a wee bit weird about that 
... it should almost be the other way round,” Moyes said after the first game. 
He was right, it should be, but it didn’t happen. He did not speak Spanish and 
did not learn, although he tried – at least to begin with. Failed attempts 
could undermine his authority and by extension his desire to try. And so the 
distance grew.

Those players and managers who go abroad and succeed are usually those who 
most embrace their new environment, who fully understand where they are, who 
know exactly what is going on around them; with Moyes that never quite 
happened. “He doesn’t get it” was a phrase too often repeated. His team never 
really took off; he never really landed. The fact that he still lived in the 
hotel almost a year later was held against him; it did not really matter where 
he lived, of course, and every evening he did stroll out and through the old 
town, but that became symbolic of his isolation, of a sense that he might not 
be stopping.

Moyes talked about the little differences and often people agreed with him – 
the Cup format is ridiculous, the kick-off times worse – but it ended up 
seeming like another barrier when it did not really need to. A criticism, even. 
Like he was always moaning, when in fact he was largely enthusiastic. “Look,” 
Moyes had said, “I’m not the guru coming here telling people what to do, 
absolutely not. It’s just an opinion. I knowI have to adapt.” The accusation 
was that he did not, even though he had talked about doing so, even though he 
came because he saw Spain as a learning process, insisting that he had long 
“beaten the drum” for more British managers going abroad.

La Real don’t have a player called Stefano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/13/esteban-granero-david-moyes-real-sociedad-champions-league>
. An easy mistake to mistake – Esteban + Granero + a foreign language + the 
tension of the game = Stefano – and forgiven then, but less so later. Some 
thought he was not sufficiently prepared to try; they could see little 
progress, on or off the pitch. It was odd that they should think he was not 
trying, when he travelled endlessly, from game to game, scouting constantly, 
watching teams.

Key figures in football in San Sebastián could not understand why, despite 
saying he had come to learn, he did not seek out information and understanding; 
why he did not build relationships, beyond the one he had with the president; 
why he was not more open; why, in fact, he was not more cynical, more 
political, why he did not forge alliances or build protection. On one level it 
was laudable; he is a football man, not a manipulator. Yet it may not have 
helped.

Roma win a deserted derby over Lazio as Ultras on both sides make point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/09/roma-deserted-derby-lazio-ultras-make-point>
Others considered him unwilling to leave Britain behind, without considering 
how difficult it is to do so, all the more so for someone who is 52 and has 
spent his entire life in the British football. When Ernesto Valverde joined him 
for a drink after the Basque derby, in a small, grey room under the stand with 
a coffee machine on one table, a handful of sandwiches on another, a little 
fridge filled with beers in the corner and pictures of San Sebastián on the 
walls, he was delighted. That was a British tradition rarely followed in Spain, 
something he missed; it was also virtually a one-off.

La Real wanted Moyes to bring something British with him. “Can we play a 
‘British’ style? I hope so. I want to play fast, the ball moving, energy. But 
if you can’t, you change. I may think differently in six months,” he said. It 
is not clear that he does think any differently. A year later he is set to 
leave; how much of Spain has he taken with him? How much of the British style 
has he left behind? How much did they let him leave? Could his time in Spain be 
summed up right there: the right manager in the wrong place?

The players embraced those ideas to begin with but, naturally, they had doubts 
too. Spanish coaches are more tactically minded than British ones, Spanish 
players too. Moyes was always very positive about his squad, praising their 
professionalism, and some of the work they did was good, but at the start of 
this season the midfielder David Zurutuza claimed “there are lots of things 
missing, not just the final pass … we’re having doubts, we’re lacking an idea”. 
It was not a throwaway line, rather it was an unexpectedly public glimpse of an 
opinion others shared: the players did not so much think that Moyes’s tactical 
work was wrong as that there was not enough of it. This was a different way of 
working, at a different club in a different country and with different players.

It is hard to escape the conclusion that Moyes did not quite grasp some of 
those differences, nor embrace them. “I have to change,” he had said but while 
there was an apparent willingness to do so, he did not really change and no one 
really told him he had to. On Friday night he flew to England and his team flew 
to San Sebastián. Three days later, they were his team no longer.

Talking points
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdavid-moyes-right-manager-wrong-place-real-soceidad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31595ff6db207b2eb3a04aa64f26686777250aa%2F336_113_1617_971%2F1617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Moyes%3A%20the%20right%20manager%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20at%20Real%20Sociedad%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdavid-moyes-right-manager-wrong-place-real-soceidad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Moyes%3A%20the%20right%20manager%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20at%20Real%20Sociedad%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdavid-moyes-right-manager-wrong-place-real-soceidad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31595ff6db207b2eb3a04aa64f26686777250aa%2F336_113_1617_971%2F1617.jpg>
 Real Madrid’s Cristiano Ronaldo looks down after his side were beaten by 
Sevilla. Photograph: Angel Fernandez/AP 
• Sevilla in crisis, hammered by Juventus … four days later they beat 
Barcelona. Sevilla in crisis, hammered by Manchester City …four days later they 
beat Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/real-madrid-first-la-liga-loss-sevilla>
. For about half an hour it looked impossible too. Madrid were 1-0 up and 
comfortable, following Sergio Ramos’s overhead kick, while Sevilla were 
startlingly passive, as if just awaiting their fate. Only it seemed Madrid were 
not that keen on imposing their fate upon them. And then it happened. Ciro 
Immobile got the equaliser, whipping off his shirt to celebrate and getting a 
booking for it, and Ramos went off.He had landed on his bad shoulder when he 
scored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/09/spain-sergio-ramos-juanfran-miss-england-friendly>
. Suddenly, Sevilla were not just in the game, they were on top. As Michael 
Robinson put it on Canal Plus, Immobile escaped a sending off when he missed 
two clear chances. This was a different game now. Madrid crumbled and Sevilla 
grew. By the end, Madrid were pathetic, in the literal sense of the word. 
Sevilla went 2-1 up, then 3-1, rolling over Madrid, tearing them to pieces, and 
although James got one back in the last minute, Madrid had long since given up. 
Theolés were ringing round the Pizjuán and Yevhen Konoplyanka was running rings 
round everyone, turning in the kind of display that was so good it was funny, 
turning people inside out and back to front. As for Madrid, all those doubts 
came racing to the surface. Maybe it was Keylor Navas holding them together 
after all.

• Oh. My. Goodness. Neymar. Suddenly, Barcelona are playing very, very well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/neymar-barcelona-villarreal-match-report>
. Not just Luis Suárez and Neymar, who have pretty much been the second and 
third best players in the world in 2015 and who were leading their team lately 
when the performances were not good, but all of them. And especially Sergio 
Busquets again. They beat Villarreal 3-0, keeping a clean sheet for the fourth 
consecutive game. No Messi, no problem? Not exactly, but far from slipping 
behind Madrid in his absence, they now go into theclásico three points ahead. 
“Theclásico really turns me on,” Piqué said. “I’ve never had an orgasm on a 
football pitch,” Sergio Ramos replied.

• Which was your favourite, then? Iñaki Williams or Neymar? Bloody brilliant 
both of them.

• Rarely has a player felt so ‘right’ and played so well so quickly in a team 
as Raúl García at Athletic.

• Diego Simeone went wild, racing along the touchline, and no wonder. Atlético 
were flat again, lacking in creativity, and heading for a 0-0 draw with 
Sporting Gijón when Antoine Griezmann scored the winner in the 93rd minute. 
Atlético are just one point behind Madrid but things still aren’t quite right. 
And this week Simeone turned his back on the tactical evolution he had been 
trying to bring about. Atlético’s history has always been about 
counter-attacking, he insisted, and anyone who breaks from that gets it wrong.

• Valencia had five shots on target against Celta … and beat them 5-1. How? 
Still not sure. Paco Alcácer and Dai Parejo got two each.

• Javi Guerra again. Lucas Pérez again. Guerra has now scored six or Rayo’s 
last eight league goals, eight of 13 in total. Only Suárez and Neymar have more 
than him. Pérez only has one less than him.

• Is that Eibar in a European place? Bloody hell, it is you know.

• Are Messi and Ronaldo still having that weekly phone call? Kind of looks 
like it, doesn’t it?

Results: Las Palmas 2-0 Real Sociedad, Celta 1-5 Valencia, Levante 1-1 
Deportivo, Eibar 3-1 Getafe, Rayo 2-1 Granada, Málaga 0-1 Betis, Athletic 2-1 
Espanyol, Barcelona 3-0 Villarreal, Atlético 1-0 Sporting, Sevilla 3-2 Real 
Madrid
 