
Klaus Schwab, the World Economic Forum (WEF) founder whose headquarters are 
the chrome and glass of a Bond villain’s lair, introduced this year’s event by 
saying: “The world around us is changing at unprecedented speed.” But it seems 
nothing has changed when it comes to the lack of women atDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>.

Five years ago, when I was the Guardian’s women’s editor, I was sent to report 
on gender diversity at Davos. I dragged my short, not very masculine, body to 
the oddly bleak Swiss village to watch the world’s rich and powerful consort.

Related: Army of staff descends on Davos to serve WEF super-rich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/army-of-staff-descends-on-davos-to-serve-wef-super-rich>

Being neither rich nor powerful, it would be fair to say that I stood out. But 
it would be more accurate to say that I was literally overlooked during my time 
there, as men tend to be taller than 5ft 2.

In 2012, women made up 17% of the delegates. When business and political 
leaders meet in Davos next week, still almost 80% of the 3,000 delegates will 
be men.

Recognising the overwhelming proportion of men among its attendees, the WEF, 
which organises the talkfest each year, introduced a quota system in 2011. This 
meant that the group of megacorps designated “strategic partners”, the 100 
leading global companies, had to bring one woman for every four men. Some chose 
to pay for only four places rather than try to find that elusive beast, a 
powerful woman. Not much has changed.

Anyone used to working in a male-dominated environment – and most governments 
and big companies are – would recognise the atmosphere in Davos. Although most 
of the business is done behind closed doors, men pack the stages and each 
gathering presents a sea of dark suits and a low-toned hubbub. I carried heels 
everywhere as flat snow boots meant a crooked neck, or even worse, being talked 
down to.

There were special programmes of fun-filled events for “wives”, although that 
has changed, I think.
 ‘Dark suits and low-toned hubbub’: inside the conference centre in Davos. 
Photograph: Ruben Sprich/Reuters 
There were brilliant women there, of course, with a series of special events 
and even a slightly gruesomely named Girls’ Lounge, as there will be again next 
week.

WEF has tried to bring about change and 90% of panels this year will include 
at least one woman. Three out of five co-chairs of the 2017 event are women, as 
is the head programme designer, Emma Benameur. As ever, among the younger 
attendees, there is a greater proportion of women. Also, the quotas have 
brought some change, albeit glacial.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> made up just 9% of Davos 
attendees in 2002.

The organisers of Davos, an expensive and bewildering event, blame the fact 
that most global organisations rich enough to send anyone there tend to be led 
by men. The governments of the UK and Germany may be led by women but most 
European parliaments are still overwhelmingly male. Yet one third of the 
delegates come from non governmental organisations such as academia or the 
media. Go figure.

Each year, studies point out that companies perform better when they have at 
least one woman on the board, such as one from accountancy firm Grant Thornton 
in 2015, calledWomen in business: the value of diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/29/companies-with-women-on-the-board-perform-better-report-finds>
. Still no major change.

At the start of 2016, women as a topic ranked among the top three issues at 
Davos, thethird most tweeted, 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/01/25/lack-of-women-still-a-hot-topic-at-davos.html> 
right up there with refugees and climate change. Given where we have got to on 
the other two, perhaps it’s no surprise that so little has changed when it 
comes to the number of women.
 