
In the first big political earthquake of 2017, Northern Ireland’s deputy first 
ministerMartin McGuinness resigned on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
, triggering the potential dissolution of the Stormont government and a fresh 
election.

The resignation, prompted by the ongoing “cash for ash” scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinnesss-resignation-key-questions-northern-ireland>
 concerning a scheme dreamt up while first minister Arlene Foster was 
environment minister, plunges Northern Ireland into further turmoil and 
uncertainty at a time when Brexit has also caused concern about peace in the 
region.

Away from the main stage, the deadlock in Stormont could have far-reaching 
effects for social housing tenants in Northern Ireland. For years, Stormont was 
in deadlock over the implementation of elements of welfare reform, pushed 
through by the coalition government in Westminster and pursued now by the 
Conservatives. While the bedroom tax was rolled out across England, Wales and 
Scotland (before the Scottish National Partyin effect ended the policy north of 
the border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/02/holyrood-power-end-bedroom-tax-scotland>
), with the attendant misery of arbitrarily reduced housing benefit, in 
Northern Ireland there was no agreement between the political parties on how to 
implement welfare cuts.

Related: McGuinness has gone. Stability in Northern Ireland may go with him | 
Malachi O’Doherty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/mcguinness-northern-ireland-cash-for-ash>

Housing Rights, a housing and debt helpline in Northern Ireland, has now 
warned that previously agreed promises that the bedroom tax would not apply 
until 1 April 2020 may not be honoured as they have yet to be passed by the 
Northern Ireland executive. In late 2015, when Stormont was teetering on the 
edge of a budgetary precipice, theFresh Start agreement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/a-fresh-start-for-northern-ireland> was 
signed between the Northern Ireland executive, UK and Irish governments. The 
agreement was designed to bring budgets and finances under control, and 
“mitigations” were put into place, such as the bedroom tax delay and 
regulations on the welfare cap.

As Housing Rights points out, the resignation of McGuinness casts these 
mitigations into uncertainty: there are no firm regulations to mitigate the 
bedroom tax in Northern Ireland. If McGuinness is not replaced within seven 
days, and Sinn Féin has shown no sign of planning to do so, the assembly will 
dissolve and move to an election before managing to pass any regulations 
delaying the bedroom tax, and“the policy will come into full force on 23 
February, affecting around 32,600 households across Northern Ireland.” 
<http://housingrights.org.uk/news/risk-social-sector-size-criteria-not-being-mitigated-northern-ireland>


The bedroom tax is miserable for anyone affected by it and causes huge 
problems for many communities: in post-industrial towns and cities, there 
simply aren’t enough small properties to allow people to downsize, meaning 
people are committed to arrears and reliance on discretionary housing payments 
for the foreseeable future. Bringing in the bedroom tax inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has an added and highly 
dangerous layer of complexity: housing has historically often been seen as a 
sectarian issue.

Related: The fight goes on to free more families from the bedroom tax nightmare
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/11/fight-families-bedroom-tax-supreme-court-housing-benefit-conservative-government>

Speaking to a group of single mothers in Belfast a few years ago, one 
18-year-old who was sleeping on her mother’s sofa explained matter-of-factly 
that if she were Protestant, she believed she’d get a housing association flat 
immediately – all the other mothers nodded in agreement. Housing staff across 
the country work hard to build bridges in communities and are key in moves to
bring down peace walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/12/social-housing-northern-ireland-divided-communities-brexit>
 – the border barriers between Catholic and Protestant neighbourhoods – yet 
housing is still seen as a source of discrimination and unfairness.


The potential risk to peace isn’t negligible, and on top of this, Northern 
Ireland has deeply entrenched levels of poverty: after Malta and Romania,
Northern Ireland has the highest infant mortality rate in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/25/family-support-northern-ireland-infant-death-rates>
. Reasons for infant deaths are myriad, but poor housing is a huge factor, and 
also has a huge impact on mental health in all age groups and causes health and 
learning problems in children.

The bedroom tax is a failing policy, as experience across Britain has shown. 
Bringing it to Northern Ireland at a time of massive political upheaval isn’t 
just cruel, it’s dangerous.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 