
By now you have probably heard the story that has been doing the rounds in the 
past few days about Brian Clough, drunk as a skunk apparently, trying to sign 
Dean Saunders forNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> for what would have 
been a British record transfer fee.

Signing ‘a hooligan’ and a Shankly team talk: how Clough set up Forest for 
title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/11/nottingham-forest-brian-clough-i-believe-in-miracles>
Some belting lines, too, if you like the idea there was a time when the best 
managers in the business refused to dance to the tune of agents. Clough never 
had time for middle men (Peter Shilton tells a wonderful story about taking two 
of his advisers into transfer negotiations and Clough waiting behind his office 
door to trip them up with a squash racket) and was clearly put out to find 
Saunders, then at Derby County, had brought one with him.

“I stand up,” Saunders recalled on TalkSport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/07/dean-saunders-recounts-version-meeting-brian-clough-video>
. “I was a bit nervous – it’s Brian Clough. ‘Young man, nice to see you.’ He 
looks at Kevin, my agent – doesn’t even shake his hand. ‘Son, can I speak to 
you or do I have to speak to him to speak to you?’ I said: ‘You can speak to 
me, Mr Clough.’ He went: ‘Thank you, son, because I don’t really like talking 
about football in front of him – he’s a fat …’”

Let’s start from the beginning, though. This little sketch, we learn, takes 
place at the house of Alan Hill, Clough’s assistant, in June 1991. Saunders 
describes the scene, with “the best garden you have ever seen”, waiting in the 
lounge to discuss a potential £2.9m move. Then, finally, the knock at the door. 
“Green sweatshirt, white shorts, white socks, blotchy cheeks,” Saunders 
recounted. It’s classic Cloughie colour already. “Blotchy cheeks!” one of the 
presenters echoes, with a hoot of laughter.

Everything starts to get a bit weird. “We sit down,” Saunders said, “and he 
walks to the opposite end of the house and sits on the chair with his nose 
about an inch from the wall, looking at the wall. He doesn’t say anything for 
about a minute – just staring at the wall.” Eventually, Clough slides off his 
chair, down to the floor and on to his knees. “I’m thinking: ‘What the … ’” 
Saunders went on. “I can’t believe what’s going on. A British record transfer, 
this is supposed to be …”

Clough, he said, starts crawling on his hands and knees to where his 
prospective new signing is sitting. “At this point” – and Saunders makes this 
next remark in the manner of someone knowingly rolling his eyes – “I started to 
work out hemight be drunk.” (Both presenters laugh.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdean-saunders-recounts-version-meeting-brian-clough-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dean%20Saunders%20gives%20his%20version%20of%20a%20meeting%20with%20Brian%20Clough%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdean-saunders-recounts-version-meeting-brian-clough-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dean%20Saunders%20gives%20his%20version%20of%20a%20meeting%20with%20Brian%20Clough%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdean-saunders-recounts-version-meeting-brian-clough-video&media=>
Dean Saunders gives his version of a meeting with Brian Clough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/07/dean-saunders-recounts-version-meeting-brian-clough-video>
It turns out, perhaps for the benefit of his after-dinner audiences (Saunders 
gets £1,000–£2,000 a pop, according to his online promoters at 
www.comedians.co.uk), Saunders is not just a fine raconteur but a budding 
impressionist.

“He is crawling on the floor,” he says. “He stops, looks at the carpet and 
goes: [Clough impersonation]: ‘Hilly, I like your carpet, son, where did you 
get that from?’

‘Carpetright.’

[Clough impersonation]: ‘How much?’

‘£12.99 a square yard.’

[Clough impersonation]: ‘My Barbara would love that carpet – good choice, 
Hilly, son.’”

Already, you get the idea that this is no ordinary anecdote. Yet we are only 
really warming up. “It goes on ages, this story,” Saunders told us. “It’s 
hilarious.” Clough calls the agent “fatso”. He goes into the garden and, 
according to Saunders, takes one of the flower pots – “the best pot you’ve ever 
seen with flowers spilling out” – and rips out the entire lot to present to his 
prospective new signing. Then, one thing leading to another, Clough starts 
using the flowers as a pretend microphone, persuading Saunders to join him 
singing Chicago by Frank Sinatra.

It is left to Archie Gemmill, according to Saunders, to make Forest’s 
financial offer, hampered by regular Clough interruptions (strange in itself 
when Gemmill is only the first-team coach), and when the player finally gets 
home, head spinning, we get the killer line. Saunders finds his wife inside the 
door, with her finger to her lips, making a shush gesture. “He’s only sat in my 
lounge,” he says, “with the pot from the garden, and his arm around my 
mother-in-law. Honest to God …”

Everyone in football, especially that era, seems to have a Clough story, but 
nothing perhaps quite as bonkers as this one – and I say that as someone who 
has written a couple of books about the man’s work. It is also, I’m pretty 
sure, the first time I can remember anyone telling an anecdote this way when it 
openly references, as a point of humour, the drinking and alcoholism that 
finished Clough – an illness some people (among them, TalkSport regular Ray 
Wilkins, presumably) call it. Sorry to be a dreadful spoilsport – I’m fully 
aware I will be told to get a sense of humour, that it’s banter and LOL – but 
I’ve started to wonder whether Saunders might be a bit of a pillock.

I do have my own drunk-Cloughie story. A year or so after Saunders left Derby 
(he eventually went to Liverpool), I was in my first job, at the Newark 
Advertiser, and Clough was invited to plant a tree to mark the opening of a 
local arts centre.

This time, for the record, he was in a suit, not the green sweatshirt. Blotchy 
cheeks, though. Pissed again. Not exactly Clough in his pomp, with those 
piercing eyes, the immaculately coiffured hair, the healthy skin and all that 
precious, peculiar magic fromthe days winning league titles and European Cups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/10/brian-clough-miracle-nottingham-forest-european-champions-film-jose-mourinho>
.

Brian Clough and the miracle of Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/10/brian-clough-miracle-nottingham-forest-european-champions-film-jose-mourinho>
Anyway, the tree. Most people would pop it in the ground, sprinkle a bit of 
mud on the roots and pat it down with a spade. Not Clough. He was down on his 
knees, flattening the soil with his bare hands, ruining a good suit. Nobody was 
laughing, though, and more fool me, perhaps, for not putting on a Clough accent 
over the years and trying to get some mileage out of it. It’s just there are a 
thousand stories about this man that don’t refer to him being plastered.

He was the guy, remember, who once told a colleague: “Sinatra met me, you 
know,” – and call me a spoilsport, humourless, whatever you will, those are the 
stories that make me laugh. Not ones about his blotchy cheeks or making an oaf 
of himself when he was sliding into alcoholism or maybe already there. Not 
stories I suspect that might have more topspin than a Roger Federer serve.

I’m in the minority, though. It’s clearly fair game to go on the radio and 
tell jokey anecdotes about someone’s drink problem. All the same I hope the 
Clough family – Nigel, Simon and Elizabeth, and their own children – weren’t 
tuning in. I know what some of the players from Clough’sEuropean Cup-winning 
teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/nottingham-forest-european-cup-hall-fame-brian-clough>
 think about it and I put in a call to Hill this week.

“It’s a good after-dinner speech but unfortunately most of it isn’t true,” he 
told me. “Brian wasn’t drunk, he wasn’t crawling on his hands and knees, he 
didn’t sit facing a wall, he didn’t mention the carpet once and there was no 
flowerpot … it just feels like he [Saunders] has put this story through a very 
imaginative scriptwriter and this is what they’ve come up with.”

All rather awkward, I’m sure you will agree. “Brian liked a drink and we all 
know he had a situation towards the end but he wasn’t drunk that day at all,” 
Hill continued. “He didn’t do the things that have been said and I’ve no idea 
why he [Saunders] would say them.

“Brian arrived with Archie Gemmill. ‘Hello, Mr Clough,’ Saunders said. ‘Son, 
call me Brian,’ he replied. It was all perfectly normal. He didn’t really want 
to speak to an agent, that’s correct, and we were told it was going to be 
difficult because Saunders had already agreed a deal with Everton. ‘It won’t be 
difficult,’ Brian told him, ‘we’ll just offer you more money than they have.’ 
Then off he went up the garden to smell the lavender.

“When he’d gone, Saunders told me Everton had offered him £8,000. ‘A month?’ I 
asked. ‘No, a week.’ Crikey. I told Brian and his reaction was: ‘Bloody hell, 
that’s more than me, our Nigel and Pearcey get together.’ First of all, though, 
he wanted me to do something. ‘Smell this flower,’ he said, ‘it’s beautiful.’

“After half an hour Saunders said he would talk it through with his wife and 
went home. Then at 9pm he rang to say Liverpool had matched our offer and he 
would rather go there because his father used to play for them. So that’s it. 
Brian wasn’t drunk, and it’s not fair. There are all sorts of differentBrian 
Clough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brian-clough> stories – I tell 
some myself, but not derogatory ones, not ones like this.”

Still, the damage is done. That eight‑minute clip – “the funniest thing that’s 
ever happened to me in football”, Saunders concludes – has gone viral. It is an 
internet sensation and the Liverpool Echo’s headline on Monday was: “How a 
drunken Brian Clough tried to persuade Dean Saunders to turn down Howard 
Kendall.” Even the Birmingham Evening Mail was running it. “The following 
anecdote has nothing to do with our clubs on this patch,” the newspaper 
explained. “However, it is quite possibly one of the best football stories we 
have heard in the past quarter of a century.” Or, depending who you believe, 
one of the more ludicrous.

Clough had taken his side to the FA Cup final that year, one of six Wembley 
visits in four seasons. He obviously rated Saunders – who has been informed 
that his story is disputed and chosen not to comment – but, for the most part, 
he did not need to break transfer records to improve his team. The year before, 
Clough found Roy Keane playing for Cobh Ramblers and signed him for £47,000.

As far as I’m aware, Keane has never told a story, or embellished one, about 
Clough, with his drink-ravaged face, in that difficult period, 1991 to 1993, 
when the deterioration set in. Maybe it’s true, as Keane once said, the game is 
full of bluffers.
 