
Three months before he was due to be reunited with his wife and daughter in 
the Philippines, Joey Tocnang’s punishing work schedule finally took its toll. 
In April 2014 the 27-year-old trainee at a casting company in centralJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> died of heart failure at his firm’s 
dormitory.

This week labour standards authorities ruled that Tocnang’s death was directly 
related to the long hours of overtime he was forced to perform, a reflection of 
outdated attitudes towards work that Japan’s government has warned puts 20% of 
the entire workforce at risk of death from overwork, orkaroshi. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2007/jan/13/careers.work>

Japan: one fifth of employees at risk of death from overwork – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/japan-one-fifth-of-employees-at-risk-of-death-from-overwork-report>
In its first white paper on karoshi earlier this month, the government said 
one in five workers was at risk of death from overwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/japan-one-fifth-of-employees-at-risk-of-death-from-overwork-report>
.

Hundreds of deaths related to overwork – from strokes, heart attacks and 
suicide – are reported every year inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, along with a host of serious health 
problems – symptoms, critics say, of the demands placed on workers who 
routinely work long hours and take short holidays.

The white paper on karoshi found that despite attempts by some firms to 
establish a better work-life balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/japan-long-hours-work-culture-overwork-paid-holiday-law>
, Japanese workers still spend much longer hours in the office than those in 
other countries.

According to the paper, 22.7% of companies polled between December 2015 and 
January 2016 said some of their employees logged more than 80 hours of overtime 
each month – the official threshold at which the prospect of death from work 
becomes serious.

The report added that approximately 21.3% of Japanese employees work 49 or 
more hours each week on average, well above the 16.4% reported in the US, 12.5 
% in Britain and 10.4% in France.

Claims for compensation for karoshi rose to a record high of 1,456 in the year 
to the end of March last year, according to labour ministry data, particularly 
in industries, such as health care and welfare, that are experiencing labour 
shortages.


But Hiroshi Kawahito, secretary general of the National Defence Counsel for 
Victims of karoshi, said the government’s reluctance to recognise karoshi 
deaths means the actual number could be 10 times higher.

“The government hosts a lot of symposiums and makes posters about the problem, 
but this is propaganda,” Kawahito said earlier this year. “The real problem is 
reducing working hours, and the government is not doing enough.”

The health risks associated with long working hours were highlighted earlier 
this month after a labour standards inspection office in Tokyo said Matsuri 
Takahashi, a 24-year-old employee of the advertising giant Dentsu, had been 
driven to commit suicide due to stress brought on by long working hours.

Weeks before she killed herself last December, Takahashi shared her growing 
sense of despair on social media. “I want to die”, she said in one post. 
Another read: “I’m physically and mentally shattered.”

Her mother, Yukimi, said that Matsuri’s death proved that some companies put 
business performance before the welfare of their employees. “My daughter was 
telling her friends and colleagues she would get only 10 hours of sleep in a 
single week and the only thing she felt was just a desire to sleep … why did 
she have to die?” she told the TBS TV network.

Takahashi, who had joined Dentsu in April last year, regularly worked more 
than 100 hours of overtime a month, including at weekends, in the firm’s 
internet advertising division.

The health ministry reported 93 cases of suicides or attempted suicides 
directly linked to work pressure in the year to this March. But the national 
police agency and cabinet office say that work was partly responsible for 2,159 
suicides in 2015.

Tocnang was working between 78.5 hours to 122.5 hours of overtime a month, 
according to the Gifu labour standards inspection office.

His work involved cutting steel and preparing casts for molten metal, and he 
sent most of his meagre salary to his wife, Remy, and their five-year-old 
daughter, Gwyneth. The day before he died, Tocnang told a colleague that he 
planned to go shopping the next day to buy a gift for his daughter.

He was one of 210,000 people who belong to Japan’s foreign trainee programme. 
Introduced in 1993 and expanded under the current prime minister, Shinzo Abe, 
the programme has long been criticised by unions for allowing firms to hire 
workers on low pay and with few employment rights.

The two recent karoshi cases prompted calls for the government to do more to 
relieve pressure on employees.


Noting that Japan has “the worst standards for long working hours among 
advanced nations”, the conservative Yomiuri Shimbun said that a 2014 law 
designed to prevent karoshi had not changed the prevailing work culture of 
devotion and self-sacrifice, even at the expense of employees’ health.

“Workplaces that force employees to work excessively long hours do not, in the 
end, increase their productivity,” the newspaper said.

In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 