
Penrith appear to have uncovered a superstar after debutant Te Maire Martin 
kicked them to an upset 23-22NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> win 
over competition favourites Brisbane. After being a late inclusion for his 
first game, the former Junior Kiwis maestro scored to level the game 11 minutes 
from time before kicking the winning field goal to seal a dream debut game in 
first grade.

The Broncos looked to be storming to victory after opening up a 22-6 lead late 
in the first half at Pepper Stadium, however the home team piled on 17 
unanswered points to score their first win of the year. Martin will now prove 
difficult to displace from the No.6 position after guiding his side to an 
unlikely victory.

Coach Anthony Griffin will have a difficult decision to make when hooker James 
Segeyaro returns from a broken arm in a month. He must decide whether to shift 
regular pivot Peter Wallace, who has played No9 for the last two weeks, back 
into the halves or leave him out.

The Broncos had the Panthers rocked early as they raced out to a healthy lead 
on the back of some Anthony Milford magic. After scoring the first try of the 
game after 90 seconds, Milford set up Darius Boyd 11 minutes later before 
stepping through the line to get his double.

The Panthers looked on the ropes but after scoring both sides of the halftime 
siren, they turned the game on its head. Panthers livewire back-rower Bryce 
Cartwright had a mixed game, coming up with key errors but proved the architect 
of his side’s second half fightback. He scored 30 seconds from halftime to lift 
his team and when he drifted across field late in the second half, he created 
room for Martin to score and level up the scores.

Jamie Soward missed the conversion as well as a penalty attempt which would 
have sent his side ahead however Martin iced the game three minutes from time 
to seal a memorable win. Broncos centre Jack Reed was taken from the field late 
in the game with a head knock and appeared to suffer a concussion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fnrl-round-3-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cdceb54f4a5e7af75f5b5f53f650bc423ba544%2F0_0_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debutant%20Martin%20fires%20Panthers%20to%20upset%20win%2C%20Knights%20show%20spirited%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fnrl-round-3-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debutant%20Martin%20fires%20Panthers%20to%20upset%20win%2C%20Knights%20show%20spirited%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fnrl-round-3-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cdceb54f4a5e7af75f5b5f53f650bc423ba544%2F0_0_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
 Sione Mata’utia is tackled by Sam Williams (left) and Josh Papalli during the 
round 3 NRL match between the Newcastle Knights and the Canberra Raiders. 
Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
Earlier on, Newcastle came back from 16-0 down to score a dramatic 24-24 NRL 
draw against Canberra at Hunter Stadium. In the first draw since 2013, the 
Knights and Raiders exchanged seven field goal attempts and Canberra missed a 
penalty goal in golden-point extra-time.

Newcastle found themselves down 16-0 after 28 minutes, but were leading 24-18 
by the 72nd minute. The unbeaten Raiders levelled with four minutes remaining 
after Brenko Lee scored off an overhead pass from Jordan Rapana and Jarrod 
Croker kicked the pressure conversion 10 metres in from touch.

The Knights looked headed for another heavy defeat when they trailed 12-0 in 
the 13th minute. Josh Papali dived on a short kick from Williams for the opener 
in the 10th minute before Sia Soliola strolled over after a short ball from 
second-rower Elliott Whitehead. It was Whitehead again who laid on the crucial 
pass as the Raiders made it 16-0 through Rapana.

The Knights, though, had tries disallowed either side of the Raiders’ third 
try. Hodkinson’s put-down off his own kick in the 21st minute was ruled out 
because Robbie Rochow was offside, then Dane Gagai crossed out wide in the 36th 
minute but was called an obstruction.

Newcastle finally had joy in the 39th minute when 18-year-old Cory Denniss 
scored on debut in the corner. Hodkinson’s conversion after the half-time siren 
made it 16-6, then prop Sam Mataora scored under the posts in the 63rd minute 
to make it 18-12.

Newcastle centre Pat Mata’utia stepped off his left foot to find space and 
score in the 67th minute and Hodkinson converted to bring the game level at 
18-18. Denniss scrambled over in the corner in the 71st minute and Hodkinson 
converted for a 24-18 lead before the Raiders sent the game to golden point.

In Saturday’s final game, Gold Coast Titans forward Ryan James came off the 
bench to inspire the Titans’ upset 30-18 NRL win over Wests Tigers. Titans 
coach Neil Henry hailed James as the catalyst of his side’s fifth straight home 
win, sparking a remarkable turnaround after the visitors jumped to a 10-0 lead 
in just 15 minutes.

And Henry believed New South Wales Origin coach Laurie Daley would have also 
approved. James was called up to train as part of an extended NSW squad in an 
Origin camp last May. Henry believed the towering forward may have another 
taste this year. “Every year his name get tossed up,” he said. “If he keeps 
improving and his form is good, Laurie will certainly look at him. I know 
Laurie does rate him.”

James amassed 156m off the bench and scored in the 53rd minute as the Titans 
defied humid conditions to pile on the points after trailing 10-6 at halftime. 
At one stage the Gold Coast ran in four tries in 17 minutes as the hosts turned 
a 10-0 deficit into a 30-10 lead.

“Ryan James was really good off the bench, he really lifted the tempo,” Henry 
said. “Vaha (Pulu) had a lot of energy too. We were tanking a bit defensively 
but when those two came on we had spark in our defence. Our bench did a really 
good job in changing momentum for us.”

At first, nothing seemed to be able to stop the Wests Tigers juggernaut. They 
had scored 150 points in their last four games, averaging at least 30 a match. 
And they looked on track again after centre Kevin Naiqama bagged a double in 
the opening 15 minutes. But Naiqama had to wait until the 77th minute for his 
third as the Titans turned the screws in front of 9,975 fans.

Wests Tigers could have earned the overnight competition lead by winning their 
400th game since becoming a joint-venture. But Gold Coast rallied to ensure the 
visitors had nothing to celebrate. The Titans did their best to keep James 
Tedesco in check although the NSW fullback hopeful still managed 156m and two 
try assists.

No stranger to a rollercoaster game this season, Wests Tigers captain Aaron 
Woods admitted this time they couldn’t halt the Titans’ second half momentum 
swing. “We didn’t handle it too well,” he said. “We were trying to throw it out 
of our bums too early.” Wests Tigers backrower Chris Lawrence was placed on 
report for a 26th minute dangerous tackle on James.
 