
While Southern England basked in windless sunshine Worthing had its warmest 
December week-end for forty years, and the weather was described at Eastbourne 
as “almost a summer’s day” – patchy fog along the East Anglian coastline and in 
Scotland reminded Britain yesterday that the season is approaching midwinter.
South coast resorts reported more than five hours of sunshine. Hundreds at 
Eastbourne enjoyed a midday temperature of 72deg., recorded by the thermometer 
on the pier, by strolling along the promenade. Few wore over-coats, and the 
Entertainments Manager, Mr George Hill, said: “None of my staff can remember so 
many deck-chairs out on the parade in December.”

Worthing hotels were well filled with visitors and the Marine Parade and car 
park were packed with cars throughout the week-end. People sunbathed on the 
beach and several went into the placid water on which the sun shone as in 
midsummer. Householders in Worthing are still mowing their lawns, flowers are 
in profuse blossom, and some gardeners are picking good strawberries and 
raspberries.
Most of the rest of Britain had mild weather, although in most places the sky 
was overcast and there was a little drizzle in some areas.


Today’s weather - Dull or Misty
An anticyclone is centered over the Baltic, and a ridge of high pressure 
extends W. across the British Isles. It will be dull in most districts, with 
much mist and fog, and there will be some dense fog in places during the 
morning, especially in S. England and the Midlands. Fog will persist also over 
high ground in many places, and there will be much thick fog on the E. Coast. 
There will be some drizzle at times, more especially in Scotland. Bright 
intervals will probably occur, however, here and there in S. England and the 
Midlands, and some sheltered places elsewhere, more particularly during the 
afternoon. It will be generally mild.

 