
Deddie Davies, who has died of ovarian cancer aged 78, will be remembered as 
Nell, wife of the station porter Mr Perks, in The Railway Children, the director
Lionel Jeffries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/19/lionel-jeffries-obituary>’s 
lovingly made 1970 film adaptation of Edith Nesbit’s Edwardian novel.

The character brings the three children – played by Jenny Agutter, Sally 
Thomsett and Gary Warren – into Perks’s home life, away from the railway 
station where they have their adventures. “It’s a birthday such as Perks never 
had, not even when he were a boy,” she tells them on seeing the gifts they have 
collected from villagers. When Perks (Bernard Cribbins) insists he will not 
accept charity, Mrs Perks looks on fretfully as they persuade him that the 
presents were donated with kindness and respect.

Usually to be seen with a wide smile, the 5ft 1in, bird-like actor 
subsequently brought her skills as a character player to the supporting casts 
of sitcoms over five decades – with timid, tearful and prim parts in sharp 
contrast to her own focused personality, which was augmented by a wicked sense 
of humour.
 Deddie Davies with Dora Bryan, left, in Both Ends Meet, 1972. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
She was born Gillian Davies in Bridgend, Glamorgan, to Dolly (nee 
Shufflebotham), who ran her family’s business distributing and retailing china 
and giftware, and Llewelyn, a bank cashier. She had a half-sister, Norah, the 
daughter of her father’s first wife, who died of polio.

Davies’s passion for acting was demonstrated in plays at Howells school, 
Llandaff. She trained at Rada and, because another actor was called Gillian 
Davies, changed her name to Deddie – the nickname she had acquired because of 
her dedication to acting.

Rep seasons followed in Exeter, Richmond upon Thames and Manchester. In 
Colchester, she acted alongside Paddy Ward, whom she married in 1966. He was 
seen with her in several television productions and two films, driving the cart 
taking the Waterbury family to their new home in The Railway Children and as a 
bus driver in The Amazing Mr Blunden (1972 ), in which she played the servant 
Meakin. In the West End, they were on stage together in Toad of Toad Hall (Duke 
of York’s theatre, 1970).

Davies’s television career began with parts in period dramas – Millie in The 
Forsyte Saga (1967) and Lady Crawley in Vanity Fair (1967) – but casting 
directors saw her talent for comedy when she played the town tittle-tattle 
Madame Fouache in Clochemerle (1972), Ray Galton and Alan Simpson’s nine-part 
adaptation of a 1934 French satirical novel.
 Deddie Davies, left, with cast members of the Railway Children in 2014. 
Bernard Cribbins, centre, played Mr Perks, Gary Warren was Peter and Jenny 
Agutter Roberta. Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
A string of comedy roles followed, starting in two workplace sitcoms – as Flo, 
one ofDora Bryan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/23/dora-bryan>’s 
fellow factory employees at Cannon’s Family Sausages, in Both Ends Meet (1972) 
and Mabel, in Fenner Fashions’ dressmaking workshop, in the 1977-78 remake of 
The Rag Trade.

Then came Sister Mary in Father Charlie (1982); the music teacher Miss Coombes 
in AJ Wentworth, BA (1982); the doctor’s surgery receptionist Miss Parfitt in 
the last two series (1985-86) of That’s My Boy; Mrs Little, trying to convince 
her daughter (Brenda Blethyn) that her fiance (Simon Callow) was not the man 
for her, in Chance in a Million (1984-86); and Miss Bamber, one of the 
advertising agency staff, in My Husband and I (1987-88). In the 1990s she was 
Sister Sheila in the final three runs (1992-94) of Waiting for God and Auntie 
Dot in the pilot Outside Chance (1993) and Time After Time (1994-95).

Davies showed her versatility when she switched to soaps and took five parts 
in The Bill (1991-2007) and four in Doctors (2004-11). Her roles in costume 
dramas included Nancy in The Mayor of Casterbridge (1978), Mrs Cluppins in The 
Pickwick Papers (1985) and Aunt Caroline in The Canterville Ghost (1986). She 
was also a favourite in children’s programmes, playing Mad Meg in The Black 
Arrow (1974-75), Mrs Wigson in The Phoenix and the Carpet (1977), Miss Fairman 
in Just William (1977) and Agnes Bell in Bernard’s Watch (2001).

Film roles were rare, but her last was in Pride (2014) as a bingo lover in a 
SouthWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> miners’ welfare hall where 
lesbian and gay activists bring money raised for them during the 1984-85 
strike. “Listen, love,” she tells one. “I don’t care if you’re Arthur Scargill. 
Don’t talk during the bingo.”

Davies was also back in the valleys of her childhood to play the donkey owner 
Marj Brennig in Ruth Jones and David Peet’s comedy-drama Stella (2012-16), set 
in the fictional Pontyberry.

Off screen, she brought the same passion she had for acting to her charity 
work campaigning for elderly people. In 2007, as one of the Zimmers – billed as 
“the world’s oldest rock band” – she helped to highlight their isolation by 
recording the Who songMy Generation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zqfFrCUrEbY>, which became a Top 30 hit.

A year later, Davies – a trustee of Compassion in Care – investigated the 
quality of life in care homes for BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. She spent five 
days in a home, in the role of the reporterJon Manel 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_7451000/7451028.stm>’s aunt, and 
kept an audio-diary of her experiences in cold rooms, with residents sitting in 
a TV lounge between their very basic meals, left alone for long periods, and, 
in the case of the bedridden, without company or conversation. “I do think [the 
residents’] quality of life could be better with just a little bit more 
effort,” she said.“It wouldn’t take much more money but it just needs a greater 
vision of what it’s like to be completely helpless.”

Davies and her husband remained ardent theatregoers. He died in 2011.

• Deddie Davies (Gillian Nancy Davies), actor, born 2 March 1938; died 21 
December 2016
 