
Dele Alli intends to keep the “aggressive streak” he believes is required to 
become a great player.

The 19-year-old midfielder could have easily been sent off in Tottenham’s 1-1 
Europa League first-leg draw in Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/fiorentina-tottenham-europa-league-last-32-match-report>
 after seemingly kicking out at an opponent.

Alli was booked for what appeared to be booting Nenad Tomovic after he fouled 
theFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> defender on the 
touchline.

It is not the first time the England international has courted controversy 
after the Crystal Palace manager, Alan Pardew, accused him of stamping on Yohan 
Cabaye in aPremier League game in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/crystal-palace-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
.

Emmanuel Adebayor – a stubborn foe but loyal to those who stand by him
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/19/xx> 
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
said Alli still has “a lot to learn about elite football” but the former MK 
Dons player believes he must keep the fiery side to his game.

“My personality is that I like to express myself and that is not something I 
will look to change,” he said. “Do you need an aggressive streak to thrive? You 
could say that. A lot of the great players have that mentality. I want to be 
the best I can and if that’s what I need to do it, that’s what I do.”

Tomovic reacted angrily to the incident and his mood was not helped when he 
conceded a controversial penalty shortly afterwards having been adjudged to 
have tripped the marauding Ben Davies.

Nacer Chadli stroked home the spot-kick, with the usual penalty taker Harry 
Kane watching on from the substitutes’ bench as one of six changes made by 
Pochettino fromthe weekend win over Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/manchester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
.

Tottenham could not hang on and conceded a second-half equaliser from Federico 
Bernardeschi’s deflected effort and the tie remains wide open for the return 
leg at White Hart Lane on Thursday.

It could be Alli’s apparent petulance which is the lasting memory of the game, 
with the player insisting he ironed things out with Tomovic.

“It was not deliberate,” Alli said. “I would never do that. Football always 
gets a bit heated but we shook hands and that’s fine. I told him what happened, 
he said it was OK and we moved on. I explained it to him and we leave it behind 
now. Coming from League One, a lot of tackles go in and that is where I’ve 
learned my trade.”

Pochettino pointed to that upbringing as one of the reasons Alli has that 
aggressive side to his game but the manager plans on talking to one of his best 
players of the season about it.

“We need to look at the video to try to teach him,” he said. “He is a young 
player and he has a lot to learn about elite football. It his first season in 
the Premier League at Tottenham. He came from League One, he needs to learn a 
lot, still learn. But I didn’t see [the incident]. Some people say yes, say no, 
so I don’t know.”
 