
Oxford gave us “post-truth”; Merriam-Webster’s is set to be “fascism”; in 
Australia, the word of 2016 is “democracy sausage”.

The barbecued snag, bought at a polling booth sausage sizzle on election day, 
beat out “smashed avo” and “census fail” to define the year, following a 
mammoth eight-week election campaign.

When I hear the words 'smashed avocado', I reach for my Adler 110 | First Dog 
on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/when-i-hear-the-words-smashed-avocado-i-reach-for-my-adler-110>
On any day but election day, the barbecued sausage served in a single slice of 
bread is known by different terms across Australia, including “sausage in 
bread” in Victoria.


On 2 July, however, #democracysausage trended on social media.

Several websites were set up to map where voters could cast their votes and 
enjoy an election-day snag.

A shot of the Labor leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/bill-shortens-election-day-sausage-gaffe-a-snag-for-labor-as-social-media-roasts-technique>
, Bill Shorten, demonstrating his bite-from-the-middle technique (“Tastes like 
democracy”, he said) was one of the defining images from the ballot box.

The word – rather, words – were chosen by the Australian National Dictionary 
Centre, based at the Australian National University in Canberra.

Amanda Laugesen, the director of the centre, said “democracy sausage” had 
first been recorded in 2012 but had risen to prominence in 2016.

“There certainly seem to be plenty of terms – sausage sizzle itself is an 
Australianism, snag is an Australianism.

“We seem to be quite fond of our sausages here in Australia.”

Suggestions for word of the year are informed by research by the centre’s 
editorial staff, as well as suggestions from the public; the shortlist is then 
put to a vote of a team of editors.

“Census fail”, recognising the spectacular failure of the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics’ website on census night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/australias-2016-census-website-shutdown-to-cost-30m>
, and “smashed avo”, a popular cafe breakfast that the demographer, Bernard 
Salt, said young people were prioritising over home ownership were on the 
shortlist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fhow-smashed-avocado-divided-the-generations-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20smashed%20avocado%20divided%20the%20generations%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fhow-smashed-avocado-divided-the-generations-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20smashed%20avocado%20divided%20the%20generations%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fhow-smashed-avocado-divided-the-generations-video-explainer&media=>
How smashed avocado divided the generations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/19/how-smashed-avocado-divided-the-generations-video-explainer>
Another contender was “shoey”, defined as “the act of drinking an alcoholic 
beverage out of a shoe, especially to celebrate a sporting victory”, as 
demonstrated by Australian Formula One racing driver Daniel Ricciardo andthe 
men dubbed the “budgie nine” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/nine-australians-detained-for-stripping-to-underwear-arrive-at-malaysian-court>
 celebrating his win in the Malaysian Grand Prix.


Turbulence overseas was also reflected in the shortlist with “deplorables”, as 
used by the Democratic presidential candidate, Hillary Clinton, to describe 
people considered extremely conservative or reactionary.

“Ausexit” – the potential cutting of ties with the British monarchy, or the 
departure of Australia from the United Nations – was born after June’s Brexit 
vote in the UK.

Laugesen said Brexit was “inescapable”, but the centre put greater weight on 
Australian English.

It publishes the Australian National Dictionary of words and phrases unique to 
Australia in partnership with Oxford University Press. Its first comprehensive 
updatesince 1988 was published this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/23/do-a-bradbury-and-bogan-among-6000-new-entries-in-australian-national-dictionary>
, with the addition of “bogan”, “bush baptist”, “straight to the pool room”, 
and many other pearls.

Census 2016: the political game has changed and Coalition failed its first 
test | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/census-2016-the-political-game-has-changed-and-coalition-failed-its-first-test>
Oxford Dictionaries declared “post-truth” its international 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
 word of the year for 2016 in November.

Merriam-Webster, meanwhile, urged readers to look up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/01/stop-fascism-becoming-word-of-the-year-urges-us-dictionary>
 other words than “fascism” to stop it becoming its word of the year, which is 
determined by popularity in online search. 2015’smost looked-up word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/16/socialism-most-looked-up-word-2015-merriam-webster-bernie-sanders>
 was “socialism”.

Macquarie Dictionary’s word of 2016 will be announced in early 2017. Last 
year’s was “captain’s call”: the decision made by a political or business 
leader without consultation with colleagues.
 