
My friend Dennis Massey, who has died of cancer aged 67, worked for vulnerable 
and disadvantaged people throughout his life.

He was the first son of Harry Massey, a British soldier who courted a young 
German woman, Astrid Lange, while serving in Hamburg in 1945. They married and 
set up home in Chester, where Dennis was taunted at school because his mother 
was German.

After reading history and American studies at Keele University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/keeleuniversity>, Dennis went to work at 
Stansted airport with refugees expelled from east Africa. Here he met a fellow 
volunteer, Mary Limbird. She was about to start a two-year teaching stint on 
the Gilbert Islands, half way between Papua New Guinea and Hawaii, and he was 
about to do an MA in social work. However, they kept in touch and married when 
she returned in 1976, and went on to have two children.

Although a fine mentor, counsellor and mediator, Dennis was too free-spirited 
to fit easily into the employment structure of local authority social work. 
Instead he became the main carer for the children, while devoting any free time 
and energy to good causes. Foremost among these wasTools for Self Reliance 
<http://www.tfsr.org/> (TFSR), a charity that refurbishes hand tools and sends 
them to Africa, and for 13 years he involved himself enthusiastically in the 
branch at theCamphill Milton Keynes Community 
<http://www.camphill.org.uk/~miltonkeynes>.

In 2002 the family moved to Castle Cary, in Somerset; soon afterwards their 
son, Jonathan, was killed in a climbing accident at the age of 20.

The following year Dennis launched a new branch of TFSR; he went on to teach 
adult education drawing and woodwork classes, and to give physical and 
emotional support atWindsor Hill Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/02/a-place-of-refuge-an-experiment-in-communal-living-the-story-of-windsor-hill-wood-tobias-jones-revie>
, a community for people recovering from addictions. His aim was always to 
offer help â€“ whether it was by practical assistance, advice or reassurance, the 
loan of tools or books, a chat or a shared joke.

He is survived by Mary, their daughter, Kate, and granddaughters, Lucy and 
Hannah.
 