
A Deportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> supporter has died 
after he was injured when dozens of rival fans clashed near the stadium before 
the club’s La Liga match at Atlético Madrid on Sunday.

The 43-year-old fan, who was not identified by name, had to be fished out of 
the freezing Manzanares river near Atlético’s Vicente Calderón stadium and 
suffered cardiac arrest, hypothermia and head injuries, emergency services said.

Hospital sources later said he had died shortly after 2pm local time after 
failing to respond to efforts to revive him. Eleven other people were treated 
for mostly minor injuries, including one female police officer with a fractured 
hand.

Twenty people were taken into custody and a total of 100 troublemakers had 
been identified, police said on their Twitter feed. Unconfirmed reports state 
that over 200 people were involved in the violent fight that took place at 9am 
local time when the buses taking supporters to the stadium parked in the area.

Atlético and Spain’s professional football league (LFP) condemned the 
troublemakers and the LFP said it had wanted to suspend the game.

Spanish media reported they had been unable to do so as it had not been 
possible to contact the Spanish football federation in time.

“I want to say that this has nothing to do with football,” Atlético president 
Enrique Cerezo said in an interview with Spanish television after champions 
Atlético won the match 2-0.

“These are radical groups who meet up and these are the consequences,” Cerezo 
added. “I repeat that neither Atlético nor Deportivo have anything to do with 
these incidents, they are organised by radical groups who have their histories 
and their accounts to settle.”

Deportivo president Tino Fernández said clubs needed to do more to make sure 
such incidents were not allowed to happen.

“It’s tragic news,” he told Spanish TV. “I want to express our vehement 
opposition to violence.”
 