
Comfortably seated in the fertility clinic with Vivaldi playing softly in the 
background, you and your partner are brought coffee and a folder. Inside the 
folder is an embryo menu. Each embryo has a description, something like this:

Embryo 78 – male
• No serious early onset diseases, but a carrier for phenylketonuria (a 
metabolic malfunction that can cause behavioural and mental disorders. Carriers 
just have one copy of the gene, so don’t get the condition themselves).
• Higher than average risk of type 2 diabetes and colon cancer.
• Lower than average risk of asthma and autism.
• Dark eyes, light brown hair, male pattern baldness.
• 40% chance of coming in the top half in SAT tests.

There are 200 of these embryos to choose from, all made by in vitro 
fertilisation (IVF) from you and your partner’s eggs and sperm. So, over to 
you. Which will you choose?

Doctors edge closer to creating babies with DNA from three people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/08/doctors-edge-closer-to-creating-babies-with-dna-from-three-people>
If there’s any kind of future for “designer babies”, it might look something 
like this. It’s a long way from the image conjured up when artificial 
conception, and perhaps even artificial gestation, were first mooted as a 
serious scientific possibility. Inspired by predictions about the future of 
reproductive technology by the biologists JBS Haldane and Julian Huxley in the 
1920s, Huxley’s brother Aldous wrote a satirical novel about it.

That book was, of course, Brave New World, published in 1932. Set in the year 
2540, it describes a society whose population is grown in vats in an impersonal 
central hatchery, graded into five tiers of different intelligence by chemical 
treatment of the embryos. There are no parents as such – families are 
considered obscene. Instead, the gestating fetuses and babies are tended by 
workers in white overalls, “their hands gloved with a pale corpse‑coloured 
rubber”, under white, dead lights.

Brave New World has become the inevitable reference point for all media 
discussion of new advances in reproductive technology. Whether it’sNewsweek 
reporting in 1978 on thebirth of Louise Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/jun/02/guardian190-test-tube-baby-1978>
, the first “test-tube baby” (the inaccurate phrase speaks volumes) as a “cry 
round the brave new world”, or theNew York Times announcing “The brave new 
world of three-parent IVF 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/29/magazine/the-brave-new-world-of-three-parent-ivf.html?_r=0>
” in 2014, the message is that we are heading towards Huxley’s hatchery with 
its racks of tailor-made babies in their “numbered test tubes”.

The spectre of a harsh, impersonal and authoritarian dystopia always looms in 
these discussions of reproductive control and selection. Novelist Kazuo 
Ishiguro, whose 2005 novel,Never Let Me Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/feb/26/bookerprize2005.bookerprize>, 
described children produced and reared as organ donors, last month warned that 
thanks to advances in gene editing, “we’re coming close to the point where we 
can, objectively in some sense,create people who are superior to others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/02/kazuo-ishiguro-were-coming-close-to-the-point-where-we-can-create-people-who-are-superior-to-others>
”.

But the prospect of genetic portraits of IVF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> embryos paints a rather different 
picture. If it happens at all, the aim will be not to engineer societies but to 
attract consumers. Should we allow that? Even if we do, would a list of dozens 
or even hundreds of embryos with diverse yet sketchy genetic endowments be of 
any use to anyone?

I don’t think we are going to see superman or a split in the species any time 
soon, because we just don't know enough
Henry Greely, bioethicist 
The shadow of Frankenstein’s monster haunted the fraught discussion of IVF in 
the 1970s and 80s, and the misleading term “three-parent baby” to refer to 
embryos made by the technique of mitochondrial transfer – moving healthy 
versions of the energy-generating cell compartments called mitochondria from a 
donor cell to an egg with faulty, potentially fatal versions – insinuates that 
there must be something “unnatural” about the procedure.

Every new advance puts a fresh spark of life into Huxley’s monstrous vision. 
Ishiguro’s dire forecast was spurred by the gene-editing method called
Crispr-Cas9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/10/crispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease>
, developed in 2012, which uses natural enzymes to target and snip genes with 
pinpoint accuracy. Thanks to Crispr-Cas9, it seems likely that gene therapies – 
eliminating mutant genes that cause some severe, mostly very rare diseases – 
might finally bear fruit, if they can be shown to be safe for human use. 
Clinical trials are now under way.

But modified babies? Crispr-Cas9 has already been used to genetically modify 
(nonviable) human embryos in China, to see if it is possible in principle – the 
results were mixed. And Kathy Niakan of the Francis Crick Institute in the UK 
has been granted a licence by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority 
(HFEA) to use Crispr-Cas9 on embryos a few days old to find out more about 
problems in these early stages of development that can lead to miscarriage and 
other reproductive problems.

Most countries have not yet legislated on genetic modification in human 
reproduction, but of those that have, all have banned it. The idea of using 
Crispr-Cas9 for human reproduction is largely rejected in principle by the 
medical research community. A team of scientists warned inNature less than two 
years ago that genetic manipulation of the germ line (sperm and egg cells) by 
methods like Crispr-Cas9, even if focused initially on improving health, “could 
start us down a path towards non-therapeutic genetic enhancement 
<http://www.nature.com/news/don-t-edit-the-human-germ-line-1.17111>”.

Besides, there seems to be little need for gene editing in reproduction. It 
would be a difficult, expensive and uncertain way to achieve what can mostly be 
achieved already in other ways, particularly by just selecting an embryo that 
has or lacks the gene in question. “Almost everything you can accomplish by 
gene editing, you can accomplish by embryo selection,” says bioethicist Henry 
Greely of Stanford University in California.

Because of unknown health risks and widespread public distrust of gene 
editing, bioethicist Ronald Green of Dartmouth College in New Hampshire says he 
does not foresee widespread use of Crispr-Cas9 in the next two decades, even 
for the prevention of genetic disease, let alone for designer babies. However, 
Green does see gene editing appearing on the menu eventually, and perhaps not 
just for medical therapies. “It is unavoidably in our future,” he says, “and I 
believe that it will become one of the central foci of our social debates later 
in this century and in the century beyond.” He warns that this might be 
accompanied by “serious errors and health problems as unknown genetic side 
effects in ‘edited’ children and populations begin to manifest themselves”.

For now, though, if there’s going to be anything even vaguely resembling the 
popular designer-baby fantasy, Greely says it will come from embryo selection, 
not genetic manipulation.Embryos <https://www.theguardian.com/science/embryos> 
produced by IVF will be genetically screened – parts or all of their DNA will 
be read to deduce which gene variants they carry – and the prospective parents 
will be able to choose which embryos to implant in the hope of achieving a 
pregnancy. Greely foresees that new methods of harvesting or producing human 
eggs, along with advances in preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) of IVF 
embryos, will make selection much more viable and appealing, and thus more 
common, in 20 years’ time.

PGD is already used by couples who know that they carry genes for specific 
inherited diseases so that they can identify embryos that do not have those 
genes. The testing, generally on three- to five-day-old embryos, is conducted 
in around 5% of IVF cycles in the US. In the UK it is performed under licence 
from the HFEA, which permits screening for around 250 diseases including 
thalassemia, early-onset Alzheimer’s and cystic fibrosis.

As a way of “designing” your baby, PGD is currently unattractive. “Egg 
harvesting is unpleasant and risky and doesn’t give you that many eggs,” says 
Greely, and the success rate for implanted embryos is still typically about one 
in three. But that will change, he says, thanks to developments that will make 
human eggs much more abundant and conveniently available, coupled to the 
possibility of screening their genomes quickly and cheaply.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb5d9fdd92733bf69b602ffcd3bcc01e0859d599%2F0_84_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb5d9fdd92733bf69b602ffcd3bcc01e0859d599%2F0_84_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
 Carey Mulligan, Keira Knightley and Andrew Garfield in the 2010 film 
adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro’s Never Let Me Go, in which clones are produced to 
provide spare organs for their originals. Photograph: 20th Century 
Fox/Everett/Rex 
Advances in methods for reading the genetic code recorded in our chromosomes 
are going to make it a routine possibility for every one of us – certainly, 
every newborn child – to have our genes sequenced. “In the next 10 years or so, 
the chances are that many people in rich countries will have large chunks of 
their genetic information in their electronic medical records,” says Greely.

But using genetic data to predict what kind of person an embryo would become 
is far more complicated than is often implied. Seeking to justify 
unquestionably important research on the genetic basis of human health, 
researchers haven’t done much to dispel simplistic ideas about how genes make 
us. Talk of “IQ genes”, “gay genes” and “musical genes” has led to a widespread 
perception that there is a straightforward one-to-one relationship between our 
genes and our traits. In general, it’s anything but.

There are thousands of mostly rare and nasty genetic diseases that can be 
pinpointed to a specific gene mutation. Most more common diseases or medical 
predispositions – for example, diabetes, heart disease or certain types of 
cancer – are linked to several or even many genes, can’t be predicted with any 
certainty, and depend also on environmental factors such as diet.

When it comes to more complex things like personality and intelligence, we 
know very little. Even if they are strongly inheritable – it’s estimated that 
up to 80% of intelligence, as measured by IQ, is inherited – we don’t know much 
at all about which genes are involved, and not for want of looking.

At best, Greely says, PGD might tell a prospective parent things like “there’s 
a 60% chance of this child getting in the top half at school, or a 13% chance 
of being in the top 10%”. That’s not much use.

We might do better for “cosmetic” traits such as hair or eye colour. Even 
these “turn out to be more complicated than a lot of people thought,” Greely 
says, but as the number of people whose genomes have been sequenced increases, 
the predictive ability will improve substantially.

Ewan Birney, director of the European Bioinformatics Institute near Cambridge, 
points out that, even if other countries don’t choose to constrain and regulate 
PGD in the way the HFEA does in the UK, it will be very far from a crystal ball.

Nearly anything you can measure for humans, he says, can be studied through 
genetics, and analysing the statistics for huge numbers of people often reveals 
some genetic component. But that information “is not very predictive on an 
individual basis,” says Birney. “I’ve had my genome sequenced on the cheap, and 
it doesn’t tell me very much. We’ve got to get away from the idea that your DNA 
is your destiny.”

If the genetic basis of attributes like intelligence and musicality is too 
thinly spread and unclear to make selection practical, then tweaking by genetic 
manipulation certainly seems off the menu too. “I don’t think we are going to 
see superman or a split in the species any time soon,” says Greely, “because we 
just don’t know enough and are unlikely to for a long time – or maybe for ever.”

If this is all “designer babies” could mean even in principle – freedom from 
some specific but rare diseases, knowledge of rather trivial aspects of 
appearance, but only vague, probabilistic information about more general traits 
like health, attractiveness and intelligence – will people go for it in large 
enough numbers to sustain an industry?

Greely suspects, even if it is used at first only to avoid serious genetic 
diseases, we need to start thinking hard about the options we might be faced 
with. “Choices will be made,” he says, “and if informed people do not 
participate in making those choices, ignorant people will make them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7896458cf277badfa0e40e73b9965047f755698b%2F556_114_3269_1962%2F3269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7896458cf277badfa0e40e73b9965047f755698b%2F556_114_3269_1962%2F3269.jpg>
 The Crispr/Cas9 system uses a molecular structure to edit genomes. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Green thinks that technological advances could make “design” increasingly 
versatile. In the next 40-50 years, he says, “we’ll start seeing the use of 
gene editing and reproductive technologies for enhancement: blond hair and blue 
eyes, improved athletic abilities, enhanced reading skills or numeracy, and so 
on.”

He’s less optimistic about the consequences, saying that we will then see 
social tensions “as the well-to-do exploit technologies that make them even 
better off”, increasing the relatively worsened health status of the world’s 
poor. As Greely points out, a perfectly feasible 10-20% improvement in health 
via PGD, added to the comparable advantage that wealth already brings, could 
lead to a widening of the health gap between rich and poor, both within a 
society and between nations.

Others doubt that there will be any great demand for embryo selection, 
especially if genetic forecasts remain sketchy about the most desirable traits. 
“Where there is a serious problem, such as a deadly condition, or an existing 
obstacle, such as infertility, I would not be surprised to see people take 
advantage of technologies such as embryo selection,” says law professor and 
bioethicist R Alta Charo of the University of Wisconsin. “But we already have 
evidence that people do not flock to technologies when they can conceive 
without assistance.”

The poor take-up of sperm banks offering “superior” sperm, she says, already 
shows that. For most women, “the emotional significance of reproduction 
outweighs any notion of ‘optimisation’”. Charo feels that “our ability to love 
one another with all our imperfections and foibles outweighs any notion of 
‘improving’ our children through genetics”.

All the same, societies are going to face tough choices about how to regulate 
an industry that offers PGD with an ever-widening scope. “Technologies are very 
amoral,” says Birney. “Societies have to decide how to use them” – and 
different societies will make different choices.

One of the easiest things to screen for is sex. Gender-specific abortion is 
formally forbidden in most countries, although it still happens in places such 
as China and India where there has been a strong cultural preference for boys. 
But prohibiting selection by gender is another matter. How could it even be 
implemented and policed? By creating some kind of quota system?

And what would selection against genetic disabilities do to those people who 
have them? “They have a lot to be worried about here,” says Greely. “In terms 
of whether society thinks I should have been born, but also in terms of how 
much medical research there is into diseases, how well understood it is for 
practitioners and how much social support there is.”

Once selection beyond avoidance of genetic disease becomes an option – and it 
does seem likely – the ethical and legal aspects are a minefield. When is it 
proper for governments to coerce people into, or prohibit them from, particular 
choices, such as not selecting for a disability? How can one balance individual 
freedoms and social consequences?

“The most important consideration for me,” says Charo, “is to be clear about 
the distinct roles of personal morality, by which individuals decide whether to 
seek out technological assistance, versus the role of government, which can 
prohibit, regulate or promote technology.”

She adds: “Too often we discuss these technologies as if personal morality or 
particular religious views are a sufficient basis for governmental action. But 
one must ground government action in a stronger set of concerns about promoting 
the wellbeing of all individuals while permitting the widest range of personal 
liberty of conscience and choice.”

“For better or worse, human beings will not forgo the opportunity to take 
their evolution into their own hands,” says Green. “Will that make our lives 
happier and better? I’m far from sure.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b4f62d9e078cb795312c32684d319214ed9ac68%2F738_499_3352_2011%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20babies%3A%20an%20ethical%20horror%20waiting%20to%20happen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fdesigner-babies-ethical-horror-waiting-to-happen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b4f62d9e078cb795312c32684d319214ed9ac68%2F738_499_3352_2011%2F3352.jpg>
 A scientist at work during an IVF process. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
Easy pickings: the future of designer babies

The simplest and surest way to “design” a baby is not to construct its genome 
by pick’n’mix gene editing but to produce a huge number of embryos and read 
their genomes to find the one that most closely matches your desires.

Two technological advances are needed for this to happen, says bioethicist 
Henry Greely of Stanford University in California. The production of embryos 
for IVF must become easier, more abundant and less unpleasant. And gene 
sequencing must be fast and cheap enough to reveal the traits an embryo will 
have. Put them together and you have “Easy PGD” (preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis): a cheap and painless way of generating large numbers of human 
embryos and then screening their entire genomes for desired characteristics.

“To get much broader use of PGD, you need a better way to get eggs,” Greely 
says. “The more eggs you can get, the more attractive PGD becomes.” One 
possibility is a one-off medical intervention that extracts a slice of a 
woman’s ovary and freezes it for future ripening and harvesting of eggs. It 
sounds drastic, but would not be much worse than current egg-extraction and 
embryo-implantation methods. And it could give access to thousands of eggs for 
future use.

An even more dramatic approach would be to grow eggs from stem cells – the 
cells from which all other tissue types can be derived. Some stem cells are 
present in umbilical blood, which could be harvested at a person’s birth and 
frozen for later use to grow organs – or eggs.

Even mature cells that have advanced beyond the stem-cell stage and become 
specific tissue types can be returned to a stem-cell-like state by treating 
them with biological molecules called growth factors. Last October, a team in 
Japan reported that they had made mouse eggs this way from skin cells, and 
fertilised them to create apparently healthy and fertile mouse pups.

Thanks to technological advances, the cost of human whole-genome sequencing 
has plummeted. In 2009 it cost around $50,000; today it is most like $1,500, 
which is why several private companies can now offer this service. In a few 
decades it could cost just a few dollars per genome. Then it becomes feasible 
to think of PGD for hundreds of embryos at a time.

“The science for safe and effective Easy PGD is likely to exist some time in 
the next 20 to 40 years,” says Greely. He thinks it will then become common for 
children to be conceived through IVF using selected genomes. He forecasts that 
this will lead to “the coming obsolescence of sex” for procreation.
 