
The future of the UK as a union is under threat because of piecemeal 
devolution to Scotland, Wales andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, a group of peers has said.

The House of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> constitution 
committee called on ministers to “focus more on the union” and urged a review 
of the Barnett formula, which calculates the spending allocations for the 
different nations of the UK.

It predicted full fiscal autonomy for the constituent nations would “break the 
union apart” and called for any new independence referendum to be set out in 
primary legislation made by Westminster. “Any future devolution must not be at 
the expense of the stability, coherence and viability of the union,” the peers 
said.

The Scottish National party dismissed the report as irrelevant, saying it was 
“crystal clear that the Barnett formula will remain”.


David Cameron has ruled out changing the funding arrangements, despite 
complaints from some Conservative MPs that theallocation is weighted against 
people living in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/23/holyrood-westminster-odds-devolution-funding-swinney-scottish-parliament>
.

The committee is chaired by Ian Lang, a former secretary of state for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, who held out against devolution 
under John Major before losing his seat in the 1997 election. He subsequently 
warned that devolution was threatening the union.

“Since 1999, devolution has been largely demand-led and piecemeal,” Lord Lang 
said. “The committee saw no evidence of strategic thinking about its cumulative 
impact on the union as a whole.

“The government does not seem to recognise the pressures being placed on the 
UK by the ad hoc, reactive manner in which devolution has taken place, and 
continues to take place. It’s now time to focus more on the union.”

The committee report says: “We believe that the four nations of England, 
Northern Ireland, Scotland andWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> are 
stronger united than apart. The union has brought stability, peace and 
prosperity to the United Kingdom. Yet today, the union is under threat.”

Pete Wishart, an SNP MP and shadow leader of the House of Commons, said: “This 
report indicates a spectacular failure of the committee to grasp devolution, 
and its recommendations would break the vow and promises made to the people of 
Scotland during the [independence] referendum campaign.

“This House of Lords report is irrelevant and adds nothing to the debate. The 
decisions about the future of the government of Scotland should rightly be made 
by the people who live and work here.

“Decisions about Scotland’s future should not be left to a group of cronies 
and politicians who have been rejected by the electorate and have no democratic 
accountability whatsoever.

“Peers live in a privileged, ermine-clad bubble with absolutely no 
accountability whatsoever and they might do better to debate their own 
abolition instead of hours wasted on how they think democracy will work better 
for the rest of us.”
 