
Ding Junhui reached his first World Championship final in record-setting style 
as he saw off Alan McManus at the Crucible. China’s snooker flag-bearer fired 
his seventh century of the semi-final, a classy 123, and completed a 17-11 
victory over the Scottish veteran.

Before Ding’s masterclass, the record in Sheffield stood at six centuries in a 
match, achieved by Mark Selby and Ronnie O’Sullivan, but he has rewritten that 
corner of the history books and also becomes Asia’s first World Championship 
finalist, a landmark moment for the sport. His earlier tons in the match were 
100, 131, 100, 128, 138 and 113, and in a startling run of scoring he also 
fired breaks of 84, 62, 90, 97, 80 and 60.

Marco Fu tips match back in his favour against Mark Selby at Crucible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/marco-fu-mark-selby-snooker-world-championship>
Ding’s time has finally come. Snooker’s biggest match beckons. The 29-year-old 
has been tipped to dominate snooker since his teenage years. He won the UK 
Championship at the age of 18 and in 2013-14 matched Stephen Hendry’s record of 
five ranking titles in a season, becoming world No1 in December 2014. A drastic 
dip in fortunes led to him sliding outside the top 16, meaning he had to go 
through qualifying. But sweeping through three preliminaries bolstered his 
confidence for an assault on the event in which he has previously 
underachieved, providing what has proven to be the ideal preparation

Mark Selby summoned all his battling qualities to win a record marathon frame 
and draw level in his back-breaking semi-final against Marco Fu. They finished 
a session that overran locked together at 12-12, with Selby well short of the 
form that won him the title in 2014 and Fu striving to take advantage.

The final frame of the session lasted a draining one hour, 16 minutes and 11 
seconds, the longest in Crucible history, surpassing the record of one hour and 
15 minutes that Stephen Maguire and Mark King set in their 2009 second-round 
match. They spent 22 minutes on the yellow alone, before Selby took charge and, 
to his relief, squared the match. The final frame score was 73-43 in the 
Leicester man’s favour.
 