
Disability advocates have put further pressure on the government to suspend 
its automated debt recovery system, whileCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/welfare-in-australia> continues to 
refer distressed and suicidal individuals to Lifeline.

Disabled People’s Organisations Australia, a collection of disability support 
and advocacy groups, has called on the government to immediately halt the 
recovery process, which has relied on a crude and automated data-matching 
process to beginchasing 169,000 debts from welfare recipients since July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/heartless-core-autistic-man-chased-centrelink-debt-collectors>
.

Co-chief executive officer Matthew Bowden said he feared the system was having 
a particularly unfair impact on those with a disability.

“Many people with disability rely on social security payments to make ends 
meet. For those that work in casual or contract work, this new system appears 
to be particularly problematic,” Bowden said.

This is what happened when Centrelink called to review my false debt 
accusation | Michael Griffin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/this-is-what-happened-when-centrelink-called-to-review-my-false-debt-accusation>
“The majority of people with disability being reviewed will have been entitled 
to social security payments and have done nothing wrong. People with [a] 
disability may need more time and support to understand the information and 
respond, may need the information in different, accessible formats and should 
have increased advocacy available to engage with theCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> system and manage such 
a stressful situation.”

The group called for the government to immediately suspend the system. It adds 
to a growing number of groups calling for the system’s suspension, including 
the Australian Council of Social Service, Autism Awareness Australia, the 
Community and Public Sector Union, Labor, the Greens, independent Andrew 
Wilkie, and senator Nick Xenophon.

In a further sign of the system’s impact on individuals, Centrelink is 
referring some Twitter users to Lifeline. The tweets, clearly made by concerned 
staff, show the level of damage the system is causing.

Former Greens leader Christine Milne drew attention to the tweets on Thursday, 
writing: “What sort of government terrifies its poorest people then tells them 
to ring Lifeline? Centrelink debacle must stop. PM should intervene now,” she 
wrote on Twitter.

Wilkie on Wednesday said his office had fielded complaints from four people 
who were suicidal since first raising problems with the system in early 
December. He said one of the more than 100 complaints he had received involved 
a woman being erroneously told she owed $69,000, more money than she had ever 
received. When she queried the debt, it was reduced to $3,000, without 
explanation.

“This is a systemic problem, the harm it is causing is very broad,” Wilkie 
said. “I’ve had people who have approached me who have been frightened, 
absolutely scared, people who are paying this money because they are so 
frightened by this very official letter.


“I’ve had four people now approach me in my office who I would describe as 
presenting as suicidal and in all those cases we’ve taken what action we 
thought was appropriate.”

Centrelink’s debt recovery risks would have been known at senior levels – 
ex-official
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/05/centrelinks-debt-recovery-risks-would-have-been-known-at-senior-levels-ex-official>
Wilkie referred the matter to the commonwealth ombudsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/ombudsman-asked-to-investigate-if-centrelink-wrongly-pursuing-welfare-debts>
 four days before Christmas. He said the ombudsman’s office had now responded 
and was gathering information.

The automated compliance system works by matching an individual’s reported 
income to Centrelink with information held by other agencies, such as the 
Australian taxation office. Where a discrepancy is detected, a letter is 
automatically sent asking them to prove they were entitled to their benefits, 
sometimes up to six years old.

The matching process is marred by significant flaws, including its tendency to 
simply average out a person’s yearly income over Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly 
reporting periods. If the discrepancy cannot be explained within 21 days, a 
debt is automatically raised.

If it is not disputed or paid, Centrelink refers the case to one of three 
private debt collectors, collectively on contract for about $15m. Many people 
are not receiving the letters or are simply paying the debts without question.

• Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; 
Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467. Beyond Blue also provides information 
and support on 1300 22 4636
 