
Disney have denied they are negotiating with Carrie Fisher’s estate for the 
rights to use the actor’s digital image in futureStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> film, according to industry sources.

The BBC’s Newsnight programme 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/report-disney-is-negotiating-with-carrie-fishers-estat-1791138577>
 had reported that, “with what might be regarded as unseemly haste, Star Wars 
studio Disney had opened with the actor’s estate over her continued appearance 
in the franchise.”

But in a statement the Walt Disney Company said: “Disney is not in 
conversations with the estate ofCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> at this time and any 
reports to the contrary are false.”

Fisher’s likeness as the young Princess Leia in the original 1977 Star Wars 
was digitally rendered and appeared in the final frames of prequel Rogue One – 
along with Peter Cushing’s. As filming occurred prior to Fisher’s death, her 
permission was presumably obtained. However,reports have emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/star-wars-braintrust-to-plot-life-in-leia-less-universe-after-carrie-fishers-death>
 of discussions between the makers of Episodes VIII and IX, as Leia had been 
expected to play a significant part in both films. Apart from the technical 
challenge,a number of ethical considerations emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/rogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing>
 in the wake of Cushing’s “resurrection” in Rogue One, 22 years after his death.

Disney's dilemma: digitally resurrect Carrie Fisher or write her out of Star 
Wars?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/06/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-episodes-viii-ix-disney>
The BBC’s use of the words “continuing appearance” suggested the film-makers 
were considering using Fisher’s digital image in future films, although there 
are also other ancillary uses, such as video games. Fisher had reportedly 
completed filming on Episode VIII, directed by Rian Johnson, so any significant 
digital resurrection would be reserved for Episode IX, which has Jurassic 
World’s Colin Trevorrow on board as director.
 