
Hatem Ben Arfa was not at Marseille 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/marseille> last season when coach Eric 
Gerets threw a half-time wobbly at Karim Ziani during the team'sFrench Cup 
defeat at the hands of non-league Carquefou 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FmdWysbKH04>. If he had been, he may have 
thought twice before refusing to warm up following his demotion to the subs' 
bench forL'OM's 4-2 home defeat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1UnCsJfTrE> by 
Paris St Germain <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/parisstgermain> on Sunday 
night. Gerets — who last season had reportedly picked up Ziani by his shirt and 
thrown him across the changing-room, shrugging off the incident by saying "no 
one ended up with a broken nose" — was not impressed by Ben Arfa's behaviour. 
"No player has ever done that to me in all my [16] years as a coach and he will 
get what's coming to him," was his response after the game.

Coming from a man who, according to former players, used to hang up those he 
felt had under-performed on coat-pegs and kick in changing-room doors after a 
defeat, Gerets showed remarkable restraint. After all, he was speaking after
Marseille <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/marseille>'s first league loss of 
the season, their first at home to PSG for five years and the first time they 
have ever allowed their biggest rivals to score four at the Vélodrome. And as
Lyon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/lyon> had drawn 0-0 with Auxerre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/auxerre> on Saturday, L'OM also blew their 
chance to top the table.

Gerets has since made up with Ben Arfa. "I'm happy with the way I controlled 
myself during our chat, as at other times it could have been something that 
ended with injuries to both sides," he said, while Ben Arfa interrupted his 
coach's Monday press conferenceto publicly apologise 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2008/20081027_145817_ben-arfa-s-est-excuse_Dev.html>
. "I'm a competitor and I admit what I did was wrong, and I have said sorry to 
the coach." This is the same Ben Arfa who caused dressing-room unrest at Lyon, 
had a bust-up with team-mate Modeste M'bami during L'OM's warm-up before the 
European match against Liverpool, and who, when asked to play on the left in a 
League Cup defeat to Sochaux, told Mathieu Valbuena to move to the left so he 
could play in the middle. He recently toldFrance Football, "I don't care what 
people think of me." When William Gallas reportedly revealed that a young 
player had told him to "fuck off and worry about your own game" after he had 
offered some advice during a France international training session, Ben Arfa 
was rumoured to be the culprit.

The row overshadowed one of the best results of Paul Le Guen's career as PSG 
coach, and will now surely end Didier Deschamps's ambitions of replacing him 
anytime soon. After Jérôme Rothen's autobiographybrought one type of headline 
to PSG 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2008/oct/01/ligue1football.parisstgermain>
, this week it was the turn offormer president Alain Cayzac 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/alain-cayzac-raconte-les-coulisses-du-psg-21-10-2008-283352.php>
, who revealed inImpossible Passion 
<http://www.amazon.fr/Passion-impossible-Alain-Cayzac/dp/2354170378> that Yoann 
Gourcuff'sproposed move to PSG last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2008/oct/21/ligue1-football-frenchfootball-europeanfootball-france-lyon-bordeaux-toulouse-acmilan>
 was blocked because his father Christiandid not want Le Guen coaching the 
youngster 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20081021_083114_pourquoi-gourcuff-a-refuse-paris_Dev.html>
. The pair, both Bretons, apparently fell out when the elder Gourcuff replaced 
Le Guen at Rennes in 2001.

This week, Le Guen made two big decisions, one impacting on the other. First 
he selected a reserve side for Thursday's Uefa Cup loss to Schalke, for which 
he was widely criticised. Then, with a newly refreshed first team at his 
disposal, he picked an attacking 4-3-3 formation at Marseille in which Claude 
Makéléle was the only defensive midfielder. Péguy Luyindula, who scored one and 
set up another, once again looked like the player who won three titles at Lyon 
while Mateja Kezman, the striker foisted on Le Guen by perma-tanned owner
Charles Villeneuve <http://www.efelant.net/planete/charles_villeneuve.jpg>, 
stayed on the bench.

But the star of the show was Guillaume Hoarau, who opened the scoring with 
PSG's fifth consecutive headed goal (despite closing his eyes as he made 
contact) before having the good grace not to claim a touch when Rothen's 
free-kick went in through a bundle of players. His second strike allowed him to 
join Karim Benzema at the top of France's scoring charts. "You can understand 
why Raymond Domenech is now beginning to think of Hoarau," wroteL'Equipe, who 
rated him nine out of 10 and compared him to Peter Crouch. "There's something 
good happening in this team, and we have to make sure we hang on to it," said 
Hoarau, "but I would prefer you not to talk too much about me."

PSG are now just two points behind second-placed Marseille and will leapfrog 
Toulouse if they beat them on Wednesday night. But there are still some 
concerns: goalkeeper Mikaël Landreau was at fault for both Marseille goals, the 
Schalke defeat showed up the lack of depth in the squad while another 
Villeneuve signing, Ludovic Giuly, is still struggling for fitness. The owner's 
obsession with big-name players has now extended to Ronaldo, who hasconfirmed 
he's in talks with PSG 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20080919_002535_ronaldo-son-retour-le-psg_Dev.html>
 recruitment director Alain Roche. Considering Le Guen deemed Kezman too 
high-profile, you can imagine his response to that. Newcastle'sCharles N'Zogbia 
is also a target 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2008/20081027_092517_n-zogbia-interesse-le-psg_Dev.html>
.

PSG were the only side in the top six to win at the weekend, as Lyon showed 
signs of fatigue following their midweek 5-3 Champions League win over Steaua 
Bucharest. They escaped fromAuxerre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre> with a goalless draw, but were 
lucky as Dennis Oliech hit the post, and they could also have had goalkeeper 
Remy Vercoutre sent off. "I think it's a decent result for us, considering we 
were all a bit knackered," said Ederson.

Bordeaux somehow failed to capitalise, drawing 2-2 at Nice 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4D22qZY5hiU> despite being 2-0 up with six 
minutes left. At that point, Eric Mouloungui pulled one back from a clearly 
offside position. "If the linesman could not see that goal was offside, then we 
have a serious situation here," said Bordeaux's coach, Laurent Blanc. Worse was 
to come, as referee Tony Chapron awarded a 96th-minute penalty after the ball 
struck the top of Pierre Ducasse's arm. Loïc Rémy made no mistake from the spot 
to leave Bordeaux defender Marc Planus fuming: "It's a scandal."

Nice coach Frédéric Antonetti accepted Chapron had messed up but, considering 
his team were on the receiving end of some shockers in week five,when Lyon came 
back from 2-0 down to beat Nice 3-2 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x6qvdd_resume-lyon-nice-3-2_sport>, he 
remained unrepentant. "I propose that we give Bordeaux the two points that they 
were deprived of," he said, "on the condition that Nice are given all the 
points that we've had robbed from us due to bad refereeing this season." Given 
that the linesman who missed the offside was in fact a lineswoman, Corinne 
Lagrange, the subsequent debate in France means it might be a while before 
Sabine Bonnin, the female referee who made her Ligue 2 debut in Angers' win 
over Tours at the weekend (coming on at half-time to replace her injured 
brother-in-law) moves up to the top flight.

Grenoble continued their excellent start to the season with a 2-0 win at St 
Etienne <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-9uCDS5hr_0>. Caen's hero as they came 
from two goals down to draw 2-2 at Lille 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EXP9e-HX8OM> was once again Steve Savidan, 
France's favourite former dustman, who last week revealed he still takes out 
the bins at home. "I was ashamed when I was 20 and wore a bright yellow jacket 
and big work boots, but one thing I learnt from those days was solidarity. We 
all looked out for each other," he toldFabulous Sport 
<http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/archive/2008/10/17/fabulous-sport-steve-savidan-vous-repond.html>
. His former club Valenciennes are now 19th afterlosing 2-1 to Le Havre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZK722UZOM0>, their fifth straight defeat. They 
are winless away in 15 months and, with no Savidanho to bail them out at home, 
look in big trouble.

Bordeaux could join Lyon at the top if they beat Le Havre on Tuesday, before a 
full round of action on Wednesday night. "It's a shame we don't have longer to 
enjoy this win overMarseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>, 
what with all the games this week," admitted Hoarau, but he should look on the 
bright side. Last weekend's games were the ones set aside for strike action. 
Perhaps someone forgot to tell Ben Arfa it was called off.

Results: Auxerre 0-0 Lyon, Rennes 2-2 Le Mans, Nice 2-2 Bordeaux, Lille 2-2 
Caen, Lorient 3-0 Nantes, Le Havre 2-1 Valenciennes, Toulouse 0-0 Monaco, 
Saint-Etienne 0-2 Grenoble, Nancy 1-1 Sochaux, Marseille 2-4 PSG

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 