
It’s a big, blockbusting week on the DVD shelves, but the best new film 
heading to your living rooms is one you probably haven’t had the option of 
seeing in cinemas. Among the most exciting titles yet to receive the 
direct-to-Netflix treatment, writer-directorHouda Benyamina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/divines-director-houda-benyamina-its-better-to-make-a-film-than-a-bomb>
’s first solo film,Divines <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80115031>, is a 
sharp, swaggering siren call to young women of colour in a France that seems 
increasingly weighted against them. As Marine Le Pen’s loathsome brand of 
bigotry gainsnational traction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/marine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france>
, this story of Dounia, a hard-up teenage Muslim from the outer Paris estates 
determined to secure herself a taste of the good life – by hook or, 
dangerously, by crook – plays as an exhilaratingly amoral, empathetic minority 
report.

In inviting audiences to hear rather than judge an angrily under-represented 
demographic,Divines has understandably prompted comparisons with Céline 
Sciamma’s more pristineGirlhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/girlhood-furious-7-dvd-guy-lodge>
, but Benyamina’s feminist remix of the thug life genre has a strident voice 
all its own. It positively bristles with the restless fury and rough-and-tumble 
wit of its adolescent leads. In its finest moments – boldest among them a 
freewheeling segue into urban fantasy in which Dounia (sensationally played by 
Oulaya Amamra, the director’s younger sister) and her best friend steer an 
imagined, ghetto-fabulous Ferrari – the film cheekily corrects the macho 
posturing ofScarface and its ilk. Benyamina, who deservedly won the Camera d’Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2016/may/22/cannes-2016-palme-dor-winners-live>
 for debut features at Cannes this year, looks ready to beat a boy-dominated 
industry at its own game. It deserved big-screen exposure, but you can hardly 
blame Netflix for pouncing.

Over on the supersize side of things, I’d like to say I felt similarly 
invigorated by the female takeover ofGhostbusters (Sony, 12), not least as a 
decisive up yours to the swarm of social media misogynistswhose attacks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/ghostbusters-trashing-internet-tantrum-change-troll-reviewing>
on Paul Feig’s remake made headlines this summer. Well, the middle finger can 
stand. It turns out the female ensemble, with their collective sparkplug 
chemistry, is the best reason this otherwise slightly damp candyfloss has for 
being. Feig proved his knack for lively, personality-led farce inThe Heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/24/the-heat-worlds-end-guy-lodge-dvds>
andSpy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/08/spy-song-of-sea-self-less-dvd-revew>
, but the rhythm’s just off here. The human dynamics feel plastic, the jokes 
not quite loose enough, as if stiffened by the pressure of nostalgia. The 
genial riffing of the four expert leads, particularly the sweetly spacy Kate 
McKinnon, seems to happen in spite of the script, rather than in tune with it. 
There must be a better original vehicle for their, and Feig’s, supreme 
silliness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca34c58e54415e80b3536e5e8b38b9c79ce3198b%2F0_0_4240_2832%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Divines%3B%20Ghostbusters%3B%20The%20BFG%3B%20Star%20Trek%3A%20Beyond%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Divines%3B%20Ghostbusters%3B%20The%20BFG%3B%20Star%20Trek%3A%20Beyond%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca34c58e54415e80b3536e5e8b38b9c79ce3198b%2F0_0_4240_2832%2F4240.jpg>
 The ‘collective sparkplug chemistry’ of Melissa McCarthy, Kate McKinnon, 
Kristen Wiig and Leslie Jones is wasted on Ghostbusters. Photograph: AP 
Still, I’ll admit that any one of the better pratfalls in Ghostbusters raised 
a broader smile from me than the chilly entirety ofThe BFG (eOne, PG), in which 
Steven Spielberg’s signature earnestness and Roald Dahl’s black-edged drollery 
blend about as harmoniously as Nesquik and tequila. Dahl is routinely tricky to 
nail on screen, though many a better tailored film-maker might have struggled 
with his fanciful 1982 tale of loneliness, dream-weaving and infighting among 
giants, the most delightful virtues of which are discursive and language-based. 
Spielberg, propulsive storyteller that he is, struggles to keep the episodic 
whimsy of the film’s first half afloat; even his reliable world-building gifts 
falter here, hampered by coldly synthetic, textureless CGI. I yearned for the 
characterful angularity of Quentin Blake’s universe.

Sadly, then, the week’s most satisfactory Hollywood nostalgia exercise is its 
most risk-averse. There’s little to say about Justin Lin’s cheerfully pulpyStar 
Trek: Beyond (Universal, 12) other than its handsome functionality as 
fan-service fare. On balance, its throwback approach probably gets more right 
than 2013’s pompous, muddledStar Trek Into Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-trek-into-darkness>, but I might already 
recall more details from the latter. Similarly short on surprises, but 
efficiently meeting its on-the-tin promises, Ron Howard’s documentaryThe 
Beatles: Eight Days a Week – The Touring Years(Studiocanal, 12) unearths no 
fresh insights or information on the by now thoroughly demystified phenomenon 
of Beatlemania. Still, it’s brightly, cleanly assembled and packed with 
well-presented concert footage, the documentary equivalent of an oft-played but 
digitally remastered album.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe681697de275a67b917fdbb9f29922530d14f63a%2F0_500_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Divines%3B%20Ghostbusters%3B%20The%20BFG%3B%20Star%20Trek%3A%20Beyond%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Divines%3B%20Ghostbusters%3B%20The%20BFG%3B%20Star%20Trek%3A%20Beyond%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdivines-ghostbusters-bfg-star-trek-beyond-beatles-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe681697de275a67b917fdbb9f29922530d14f63a%2F0_500_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘Astonishing, sometimes thrillingly demented’: Abel Gance’s 1927 film, 
Napoleon. Photograph: Courtesy BFI 
Speaking of digital remastering, few classic rereleases this year can stand up 
to the restoration of Abel Gance’s astonishing, sometimes thrillingly demented 
1927 silent epicNapoleon (BFI, PG), which roars and rages and rivets for more 
than five hours and somehow covers a mere fraction of the diminutive general’s 
made-for-cinema life. That hardly matters, however, by the time Gance pulls out 
all the stops for a berserk, beautiful, genuinely climactic finale, here 
presented in its full, long unavailable widescreen glory, across three 
co-ordinated panels with vivid interludes of colour tinting. It’s a spectacle 
at once years ahead of its time and with no direct aesthetic equal. I recently 
saw it luxuriously extended across the stage of the Royal Festival Hall, but a 
gleaming Blu-ray miniaturisation will still suffice.
 