
Much like the felines from which she draws inspiration, it would be fair to 
say that Catwoman tends to split opinion. For every memory of Michelle 
Pfeiffer’s purring PVC-clad kitty, or Anne Hathaway’s slinky, stylish 
real-world cat burglar, there are those who recall Halle Berry’scheesy, 
basketball-playing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rNlmRId2FVQ>, milk-supping 
Patience Phillips iteration, which still stands as one of the most painful 
renderings of a classic comic-book icon in Hollywood history. Worse still, the 
execrable 2004 effort is almost entirely responsible forthe view among studio 
executives that female-led superhero movies are bad for business 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2015/05/marvel-ceo-doesnt-believe-in-female-superheroes-203801/>
 – which in turn is the reason Patty Jenkins’ upcoming Wonder Woman will be the 
first film of its kind to hit multiplexes in more than a decade.

You might wonder then, why Sienna Miller is willing to risk her resurgent 
career on portraying Catwoman in the new DC Extended Universe (DCEU), 
especially given the critical hammering handed out to early effortsBatman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/25/review-batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice>
 andSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/08/suicide-squad-hollywood-creativity-blockbuster-films>
. For, according toa tweet over the weekend 
<https://twitter.com/ErikDavis/status/799784112152342528> from Erik Davis, 
managing editor of US ticketing site Fandango, the British actor is so keen to 
pull on the fake leathers that she’s willing to write her own part for Ben 
Affleck’s upcoming solo movie The Batman.
ErikDavis (@ErikDavis) 
Sienna Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sienna-miller> told me tonight 
that she wants to play Catwoman in Affleck's Batman movie. "She's not in the 
script but I wanna write her in!"
 <https://twitter.com/ErikDavis/status/799784112152342528> November 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ErikDavis/status/799784112152342528> 
Davis’s tweet also suggests Affleck has no intention of including Selina Kyle, 
the original, classic Catwoman, in his movie. But that doesn’t mean she won’t 
turn up further down the line, and most likely in a rather different form to 
the one in which we last saw her on the big screen, in Hathaway’s elegant 
portrayal in Christopher Nolan’sThe Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight-rises>.

For if there’s one thing we do know about the DCEU, it’s that, for better or 
for worse, this is a universe in which superpowers and the supernatural are 
firmly back on the table following the more realistic rendering of Gotham and 
its inhabitants in Nolan’s films. Any film series that can find room for 
villains spawned from zombie General Zod and Lex Luthor’s DNA (Dawn of 
Justice’s Doomsday), and an ancient, apparently immortal witch (Cara 
Delevingne’s Enchantress inSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>) is hardly going to balk at a 
little feline reincarnation. Expect to see a Catwoman whose alter ego is once 
again spawned when she is murdered by her boss: it’s the version filmgoers know 
best, and has that frisson of freakiness that has so far been the DCEU’s one 
defining characteristic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6pJbjbRnAA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6pJbjbRnAA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6pJbjbRnAA&media=>
Is Miller the right woman for the job? Well, why not? She’s back in the 
limelight following a celebrated turn in American Sniper and has a role in 
Affleck’s forthcoming thrillerLive By Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/09/live-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video>
. If the 44-year-old actor-director does bring back Batman’s on-off lover, 
he’ll probably want to cast somebody in at least their mid-30s (Miller is 34), 
as picking anyone younger would be creepy.

The British actor should perhaps be wary, however. Catwoman almost killed 
Berry’s career, only two years after she won an Oscar for her performance in 
Monster’s Ball. Margot Robbie and Amy Adams haven’t suffered from taking 
underwritten roles as Harley Quinn and Lois Lane in Dawn of Justice and Suicide 
Squad, but Delevingne is surely kicking herself for ever agreeing to play 
gyrating villain Enchantress in the latter.

Could Margot Robbie's all-female superhero movie be DC's trump card?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/margot-robbie-harley-quinn-suicide-squad-dc-marvel-comic-book-films>
Moreover, the DCEU’s position on Gotham’s female superheroes is unclear. Will 
it ultimately adopt the empowering perspective that typifiedcomic-book writer 
Gail Simone’s pioneering run on Batgirl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/13/batgirl-dc-comics-series-reboot>
, or slip into the tired, sexist tropes of the likes of Frank Miller –whose 
defining act on the seminal 1987 graphic novel Batman: Year One was to 
reimagine Kyle as a prostitute 
<http://www.cbr.com/the-abandoned-an-forsaked-catwoman-was-a-prostitute/>? 
Affleck, judging by his recent output, is unlikely to continue the policy of 
objectification that led to so many complaints about Quinn’s treatment in 
Suicide Squad, and there hasbeen talk of a Robbie-led all-female superhero movie
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/margot-robbie-harley-quinn-female-dc-comics-book-movie>
 featuring Quinn, Batgirl, Birds of Prey, Poison Ivy, Katana and Bumblebee. But 
the jury remains out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGYDDBV-Cego&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGYDDBV-Cego>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGYDDBV-Cego&media=>
The best versions of Catwoman over the years have always been sexy but 
empowered. Bob Kane, Batman’s creator, said he modelled Kyle’s costume on a cat 
because he wanted the character to be “cool, detached, and unreliable … as hard 
to understand as women are”. But as sexist as such a reading seems in 2016, it 
is this wily duplicity that makes Catwoman so intriguing. She is very much her 
own kitty cat, with her own compulsions and desires. ToBatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman>, Kyle’s unwillingness to toe the 
line may seem like a mark of deceit, but to Selina herself it is simply 
sensible self-interest.

As such, Catwoman would surely make a welcome addition to the DCEU. Let us 
hope she gets her ninth life on the big screen sooner rather than later.
 