
A spot of gardening, going travelling – who hasn’t daydreamed about early 
retirement? So damn the latest study in theJournal of Epidemiology and 
Community Health 
<http://jech.bmj.com/content/early/2016/03/21/jech-2015-207097.short?g=w_jech_ahead_tab>
 that shows an early retirement can mean less time to enjoy it.

You might assume the effect was caused by sicker people retiring earlier and 
dying prematurely, but this study really tries to take that into account. The 
researchers analysed data from 2,956 people who were part of theHealthy 
Retirement Study 
<https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/growing-older-america-health-and-retirement-study/preface>
 funded by the National Institute on Aging <https://www.nia.nih.gov/> in 
America. People were divided into unhealthy and healthy retirees based on 
whether they said sickness influenced their decision to stop work: about 
two-thirds were healthy and a third unhealthy. During the 18 years of the 
study, 12% of the healthy and 25.6% of the unhealthy group died. After taking 
into account factors such as the healthy group’s better education and finances, 
they found that healthy retirees who worked a year longer (over the age of 65) 
had an 11% lower ‘all-cause mortality risk”. Even the unhealthy group reduced 
their likelihood of dying by 9% if they delayed retirement.

The solution


This seems counterintuitive. If anything should kill you, surely it’s dragging 
yourself into work until your late 60s. There is at least one study showing 
that people are happier, even if they’re not healthier, after retiring, 
especially if it was their own decision, but the evidence overall is not 
clearcut.An Israeli study of 2,374 people 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=1316644&fileId=S0144686X07006216>
 found that those who retired earlier had the same lifespan as those who did 
not.A German study from 2009, Time to Retire – Time to Die? 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.484.1149&rep=rep1&type=pdf>
, is one of the few to find that healthier people who retire before the age of 
61 may live longer than those who continue to work. But this study, like some 
others, may not fully account for differences in occupation – heavy manual jobs 
may take more of a toll than managerial ones.

A Swedish study found that women in non-manual jobs who retired had a higher 
risk of dying from heart disease whenever they left work, compared with those 
who stayed in jobs. Buta Swedish study of army officers 
<http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/observatories/eurwork/articles/working-conditions-law-and-regulation/sweden-early-retirement-has-positive-health-effects>
 found early retirement reduced the likelihood of dying by the age of 70 by 26%.

Many people will continue working from financial necessity. But if you can 
afford to stop working earlier and you’re healthy, you shouldn’t postpone 
retirement out of fear it could kill you. Chenkai Wu, lead author of the latest 
paper, says that it may be what work represents to people that prolongs life – 
not employment itself. “Keeping active and getting involved in voluntary work 
definitely brings retirees a lot of benefits that would have been brought about 
by keeping on working.”
 