
The debate around fairer pay for women feels more prominent and urgent than 
ever. Yet, despite this momentum, new estimates suggest the gender pay gap 
won’t be closed anytime soon. A new report from the World Economic Forum 
estimates thatit will take up to 170 years for the world’s women to earn wages 
that are equitable to men’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/gender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality>
.

While that’s the global picture, things aren’t much better at home in the US. 
According to the Institute for Women’s Policy Research, in 2015,female 
full-time employees earned about $0.79 for every dollar made by full-time male 
employees <http://www.iwpr.org/initiatives/pay-equity-and-discrimination>. For 
minorities, the data is even more disparaging: African American women earn 
$0.64, Native American women earn $0.59 and Latinas earn $0.54.

Now, with pressure from legislators, investors and the public sector rising, 
more states and companies are proactively taking strides to decrease the 
disparity and address these damning numbers. In August,Massachusetts passed an 
equal pay law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/massachusetts-equal-pay-law-women-salary-history>
, making it illegal for employees to ask potential hires about their salary 
histories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/massachusetts-equal-pay-law-women-salary-history>
.California also tightened up its equal pay act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/06/california-governor-fair-pay-act-gender-wage-gap>
 this year, calling for companies to look beyond job titles and ensure that men 
and women who do the same types of work are paid the same wage.

Earlier this year, Obama issued an executive order that will require companies 
with more than 100 people to report their employee salaries to the government, 
broken down by gender and race. And in June, the White House announced itsEqual 
Pay Pledge, calling on American companies to commit to paying the same salaries 
to women and men 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/webform/white-house-equal-pay-pledge>. More than 50 
major companies signed the pledge, including Apple, GM, Target and Unilever.

This is an encouraging first step. But what are businesses doing in practice 
to address inequalities in pay? Here, we take a look at the pay practices of 
four big employers to explore what could – and should – be done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa59d591dc278ea9e4ed1c9f0f89322515b7f2d%2F0_52_965_579%2F965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa59d591dc278ea9e4ed1c9f0f89322515b7f2d%2F0_52_965_579%2F965.jpg>
 Patagonia store. Photograph: Patagonia 
Patagonia

California-based Patagonia, an outdoor clothing retailer known for its 
activism as much as its windbreakers and fleece jackets, signed the White House 
pledge in August. But they’ve long had a tradition of catering to female 
employees, says Dean Carter, vice president of human resources and shared 
services. Currently, the company, which has a female CEO, Rose Marcario, has 
more women than men on staff – 866 v 862, respectively.

Carter attributes the company’s ability to retain female employees to its 
culture and generous benefits: 12 weeks of fully paid family medical leave 
applicable to both men and women, with no limitations on the number of times it 
can be used; 16 weeks fully paid maternity leave; and 12 weeks fully paid 
paternity leave. Patagonia also offers free on-site childcare to all staff 
members, both at their Ventura headquarters and their distribution warehouse in 
Reno.

“It’s true, there are financial costs to offering on-site child care, but the 
benefits – financial and otherwise – pay for themselves every year,” Marcario 
says. “As a CEO, it’s not even a question in my mind. Business leaders [and 
their chief financial officers] should take note.”

The company’s child care program began in 1983. Three decades later, the 
company says it actually recoups 91% of the program costs through tax benefits, 
employee retention and employee engagement. Patagonia also says its 
family-friendly policies have helped improve productivity and have resulted in 
more women in management positions, and it’s proud of the fact that a full 100% 
of new mothers return to work after taking maternity leave.

Arjuna Capital

While Patagonia has been proactive about gender parity, some companies have 
been harder to turn around, according to Natasha Lamb, director of equity 
research and shareholder engagement at Arjuna Capital.

Arjuna, a Massachusetts-based wealth management company that champions social 
responsibility, and it invests in some of the biggest tech companies in the US, 
including eBay, Expedia, GoDaddy, Facebook, Alphabet, Intel, Adobe, Microsoft 
and Amazon. Last year, Lamb decided to take a bold public stance on the gender 
wage gap by filing shareholder resolutions at each of these companies, 
requesting that they publicly share data on the differences in pay between men 
and women.

The companies’ responses were mixed. For example, Intel, Apple and Microsoft 
agreed to share their data, revealing that male and female employees are paid 
the same or nearly the same wages. Google and Adobe haven’t complied, nor has 
Facebook, though it has said that male and female employees are paid equitably.

This was not Lamb’s first time pushing tech giants to consider equal pay for 
women. In 2014, she filed a first shareholder resolution to eBay requesting 
data on gender and pay; only 8% of shareholders voted for it. “I really 
expected that eBay would be more proactive and receptive and work with us. But 
that didn’t happen,” Lamb says.

“It was the first year a gender pay gap proposal was ever filed and ever went 
to a vote. As an emerging investor issue, it did not garner the support of the 
proxy advisory firms, which recommend how investors should cast their votes. 
Plus, at that point no other companies had taken any action. The Gap was the 
only company to claim it had no gender pay gap.”

By 2016, Lamb had filed proposals at nine big tech companies, and many of them 
were beginning to disclose their pay gaps and commit to closing them. “So by 
the spring of 2016, [investors] viewed the gender pay gap as a competitive 
issue critical for attracting and retaining top talent. Peers were taking 
action on equal pay.”

As a result, in 2016 the vote went up, with 51% of votes cast in favor of 
disclosing pay disparities at the company. Ebay finally released the gender and 
pay data in October, revealing that women earn nearly the same salaries as men 
in equivalent roles 
<https://www.ebayinc.com/stories/news/ebays-gender-pay-equity-study-finds-pay-parity-between-women-and-men/>
 – they get 99.8% of what men earn, to be exact. While Lamb says few companies 
report complete compensation, which would include salary, bonuses, and stock 
grants, Ebay said that its data includes those additions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6b3d010008bec107758d18c41be379ffc2a3ad0%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6b3d010008bec107758d18c41be379ffc2a3ad0%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A carnival float sponsored by Salesforce. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Salesforce

The tech giant, which signed the White House pledge, underwent a massive audit 
in 2015, looking at salaries for its 17,000 employees and whether there were 
differences based on gender and job function. Salesforce found that 6% of its 
workers needed a salary adjustment, andspent nearly $3m to “eliminate 
statistically significant differences in pay 
<https://www.salesforce.com/blog/2016/03/equality-at-salesforce-equal-pay.html>
”, which affected both men and women.

Going beyond just wage equity, Salesforce has added schools with more diverse 
student populations to its roster of places to recruit new employees. The 
companyhas also launched a new leadership training program for employees 
<https://www.salesforce.com/blog/2016/03/equality-at-salesforce-equal-pay.html> 
that it says has boosted the number of women who were promoted by 33% in the 
last year. As far as benefits, Salesforce has increased employee parental leave 
for both women and men to 12 weeks off at 80% salary, and allows them to return 
gradually by working reduced hours for the first four weeks at full pay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f35c85786b1a0560ab52b0620f53ffa81bac4d%2F0_311_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Patagonia%20have%20the%20answer%20for%20narrowing%20the%20gender%20wage%20gap%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fus-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f35c85786b1a0560ab52b0620f53ffa81bac4d%2F0_311_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Expedia analytics team workers Mike Brown, left, Saurin Pandya and Prashanti 
Tata chat in an alcove set up for employees, in Bellevue, Wash. Photograph: 
Elaine Thompson/AP 
Expedia

Washington-based travel site Expedia says it strives to address diversity in 
the workplace beyond just looking at wage parity. The company says that it pays 
men and women equally for equivalent roles, including bonuses and stock-based 
compensation. And, 51% of Expedia’s employees in the US are women.

However, the harder task is getting women into management roles. Currently, 
only 33% of Expedia’s manager level and senior or executive leadership 
positions are held by women.

“While we compare well with many of our technology peers, we have a long way 
to go in bringing more female representation into leadership roles,” says Dara 
Khosrowshahi, president and CEO of Expedia. “We need to attract, hire, engage 
and promote talent of all kinds all around the world, and we believe that by 
enriching the diversity of workforce across all dimensions, including gender, 
we achieve the most enriched outcomes.”

As far as benefits, Expedia offers 12 weeks of paid parental leave for both 
women and men. However, Nikki Krishnamurthy, executive vice president, says 
that it’s hard for the company to determine what causes women to leave the 
company after having children. Expedia has studied retention rates across 
gender, finding similar rates among male and female employees. Most women, 
Krishnamurthy says, return after the leave, adding: “But that isn’t to say that 
after a year or two that they don’t make an alternative career choice.”
 