
The total value of all the unpaid work done by the UK population, mostly by 
women – from cooking meals and cleaning the house to childcare, DIY and 
gardening – has been officially valued at £1tn a year by the country’s top 
statisticians.

The Office for National Statistics (ONS), which published the figures 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-value-of-your-unpaid-work/>, found that women put 
in more than double the proportion of unpaid work when it comes to cooking, 
childcare and housework but men can claim bragging rights when it comes to 
ferrying family members and others around.

Gender pay gap is a worldwide issue | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/gender-pay-gap-is-a-worldwide-issue>
To coincide with the new data, the ONS has launched an “unpaid work calculator”
 <http://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-value-of-your-unpaid-work/> that will allow 
people to work out the value of all the unpaid work they do, which may help to 
settle once and for all some of those arguments about who does the lion’s share 
of the chores, and who is getting off lightly.


The calculator uses 2016 data on earnings to estimate how much an individual 
could earn for doing these tasks – if they could only find someone to pay them.


Women aren't just 'better' at housework but men might be better at avoiding it 
| Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/22/women-better-at-housework-men-better-at-avoiding-it>
The department said its figures showed that unpaid work had a total value of 
£1.01tn in 2014, which was equivalent to approximately 56% of the UK’s gross 
domestic product (GDP).


The ONS said women carry out an overall average of 60% more unpaid work than 
men. On average, men do 16 hours a week of cooking, childcare, adult care, and 
housework, which includes laundry and cleaning. But for women the figure is 26 
hours.


“The only area where men put in more unpaid work hours than women is in the 
provision of transport - this includes driving themselves and others around, as 
well as commuting to work,” said a spokesman.


Women do more unpaid work than men in every age group, from the 25-and-under 
age category to the 56-and-over category.


The average man would earn £166.63 more per week if his unpaid work was 
remunerated, whereas the average woman would earn £259.63.


“So not only do women do an average of 60% more unpaid work in terms of hours, 
they also tend to do the work that has a higher value,” said the ONS.


Paid housework? No one'll clean up from that idea | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/08/paying-for-housework-domestic-women-men>
According to the calculator, one hour of housework (which also includes DIY 
and gardening) a week is “worth” £8.58 per week or £446 a year. One hour of 
childcare a week is valued at £15.28 a week or £795 a year. For cooking meals, 
it’s £7.63 or £397, while for transport – such as driving children to their 
clubs and commuting to work – it’s £11.24 or £584.


Overall, 36- to 45-year-olds carried out the most unpaid work, putting in 27.4 
mean hours per week of unpaid work, followed by 26- to 35-year-olds.


The figures also revealed that people on lower incomes tended to carry out on 
average more unpaid work than other income brackets, with some exceptions, such 
as transport.

 