
Dominic Breazeale has impressed everyone with his confidence and demeanour 
since his arrival in London. The problem for the unfailingly polite andunbeaten 
American heavyweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/anthony-joshua-defend-ibf-heavyweight-title-dominic-breazeale>
 with a wafer-thin CV is that the impression he will leave on the canvas at the 
O2 Arena in Greenwich on Saturday night is likely to be that of another 
senses-wrecked opponent at the feet of Anthony Joshua.

It might take longer for the IBF world champion to dispose of the 6ft 7in 
Californian than the three minutes, 32 secondshis hugely disappointing 
compatriot Charles Martin lasted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 at the same venue in April. “I’m only a quarter of the way there,” Joshua said 
that night. “I ain’t gonna get too carried away because there’s still a lot of 
work to be done. It only went two rounds, so I’ve got to go back to the 
changing room and do some pads.”

That starkly described Martin’s towering ineptitude when he brought his IBF 
belt over from Carson, California. But he was not even the best 30-year-old 
heavyweight in his state. Breazeale – who lives 25 miles from Martin in 
Glendale and is four months younger – could make it exciting if he lands early; 
he is better than his southpaw compatriot but not by much.

Anthony Joshua: 16 fights to glory – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/apr/08/anthony-joshua-15-fights-15-kos-in-pictures>
His performance in the most recent of his 17 fights suggests the late starter 
with an American football background does not have the boxing pedigree to 
create the openings against a champion who is growing in stature with each 
crushing victory.

The best opponent Breazeale has faced, Amir Mansour, was in the peculiar 
position of outboxing him for each of the five rounds it lasted, putting him 
down heavily in the third yet losing when leading 50-44 on all three cards in 
their January contest in Los Angeles. Mansour, who was 43 years old and more 
than two stones lighter than Breazeale, reluctantly quit on his stool, unable 
to breathe because of a heavy cold and having bitten his tongue in round two, 
gifting his outclassed opponent the insignificant WBC Continental Americas belt.

That, really, should be the extent of the challenger’s achievements in this 
business because, despite his natural strength and power, he has rudimentary 
skills, boxing chin up and square on – very much like the amateur he was when 
he lost widely in the first round of the 2012 Olympics in London, where Joshua 
won gold and launched a career that could yet scale the heights.

Breazeale’s record is littered with anonymous opponents, including Fred Kassi, 
a 36-year-old from Cameroon who went seven ugly rounds with Hughie Fury in 
April before losing on a technicality because the callow British heavyweight 
was cut accidentally, and was leading on points.

Apart from the 32-year-old Cuban Yasmany Consuegra, whose chin let him down 
inside three rounds, the rest of his dancing partners were old, mediocre, 
lacking in ambition or all three. But that is the state of the division and it 
is Joshua’s good fortune to be ruling a part of it because he will move on 
fairly quickly from this engagement to much bigger things.

It should be another stepping-stone fight for Joshua, winner of all his 16 
professional bouts by early-to-mid-rounds stoppage. There are far bigger fish 
to fry in the heavyweight division than fringe American contenders such as 
Martin and Breazeale – as his promoter, Eddie Hearn, and Hearn’s father, Barry, 
have said this week.

According to Hearn Sr, Joshua can be the dominant heavyweight for the next 
decade. Eddie has either Tyson Fury or Wladimir Klitschko in view, with David 
Haye a possible contender next year, and a fight against Deontay Wilder, the 
formidable but eminently beatable owner of the WBC title, is a pay-per-view 
blockbuster waiting to be made. Hearn Jr said this week: “We do have a huge 
amount of revenue here to protect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/04/anthony-joshua-boxing-signs-multi-fight-deal-showtime-united-states>
.” He certainly does – and Mr Breazeale is unlikely to be an intruder to detain 
the Joshua Train for long.

Hearn has another recently acquired asset to exploit in Chris Eubank Jr, who 
has an undercard obligation against Tom Doran to fulfil but who, more 
importantly, is within a signed contract for what could be the fight of the 
year: againstGennady Golovkin, the best middleweight in the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/gennady-golovkin-stops-david-lemieux-in-eighth-to-unify-middleweight-titles>
.

“There have been lots of conversations with Tom Loeffler [the champion’s 
promoter], contracts drafted and terms virtually agreed,” Hearn told Sky 
Sports. “He shouldn’t overlook Tom Doran but I had a good chat with him 
yesterday and it’s a big opportunity for him. There are a few things to tie up 
but, if everyone really wants the fight, it’s there for him to sign.”

The best fight of Saturday night – as every fan knows – is that between George 
Groves and Martin Murray at super-middleweight.

This might be a last chance for Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/george-groves-boxing-world-title-fights>
 – whose three defeats have come in world title fights – to redraw his 
credentials.

Murray, who has failed four times in world title challenges – a creditable 
draw with Felix Sturm, a dubious away points loss to Sergio Martínez,a brave 
tilt at Golovkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/feb/22/wba-middleweight-title-fight-gennady-golovkin-v-martin-murray-in-pictures>
 anda split-decision defeat by Arthur Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/martin-murray-world-title-boxing>
, when he was docked a point for holding – is marginally better placed to kick 
on from here. I suspect he will.
 