
I reject Uber completely: not primarily because it pays drivers too little – 
which may now change temporarily in the UK (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
, 29 October), until Uber fires them all – but because of its injustice to 
passengers themselves. One basic injustice is that Uber requires riders to run 
a proprietary app. A proprietary program is controlled by a company and gives 
the company power over whoever runs it. This is wrong in itself, and often 
tempts the company to design the program to snoop on users or otherwise 
mistreat them (seehttp://gnu.org/proprietary/ <http://www.gnu.org/proprietary/>
).

The other basic injustice of Uber is that it makes customers identify 
themselves – and records where they go. If Uber or similar services replace 
today’s taxis, we will all suffer a loss of freedom. The data Uber collects is 
easily available to the state (see
http://gnu.org/philosophy/surveillance-vs-democracy.html 
<http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/surveillance-vs-democracy.html>).

If we don’t want a society of total surveillance, in which democracy becomes 
impossible, we must be wise enough not to give up an essential liberty for a 
little temporary convenience.
Dr Richard Stallman
President, Free Software Foundation

• Your correspondent (Why Uber deserves to be hailed not hated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/31/why-uber-deserves-to-be-hailed-not-hated>
, Letters, 1 November) should perhaps move from the metropolis to the wilds of 
Essex. We have two local taxi companies, both of whom send a cab minutes after 
a phone call and send text messages to let me know its progress and arrival. 
They usually arrive earlier than promised and I have never had a no-show.

The drivers she speaks to seem to think that working more hours and driving 
more miles for a lower per-mile rate is a good thing!

I don’t know her circumstances but would be interested to know whether, like 
most of my acquaintances who support and useUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, she herself is in permanent, 
well-paid employment with maternity, holiday and sickness rights and possibly 
private medical insurance too.
Charles Moore
Wickford, Essex 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 