 Frank Lloyd Wright, who was supposed to know about these things, once said: 
"Less is only more where more is no good." But the property developer, casino 
owner and possible presidential candidate Donald Trump sticks closer to the 
words of Philip Johnson, the sometime glass-box architect: "Towers are for 
power." Or, to put it another way, more is always better - as long as it's got 
Trump's name on it.
The Donald, as he is known, already has more towers than the average medieval 
monarch. His latest gift to the city, the world's tallest residential apartment 
building - now a fledgling 36ft - will reach 900ft above Manhattan by next 
summer.

The Trump World Tower is going up on First Avenue, way over on the East Side 
and opposite the United Nations, the tunnel that separates the two disgorging a 
permanent traffic jam. Lloyd Wright also said of New York: "It is a great 
monument to the power of money and greed." This observation is probably more to 
the taste of Trump's many gilded enemies.

Alberto Vilar, who is bankrolling the campaign against Trump, says: "My sense 
of proportion, my sense of aesthetics, my sense of landscape for New York just 
said this was wrong." As an investment manager who operates a $5bn hi-tech fund 
and who has given $30m to the Metropolitan Opera, Vilar's sense of proportion 
and aesthetics is clearly exquisite.

"Who the hell is Trump to go around changing the landscape of New York?" he 
asks. (Mind you, this would be the least of it were the Donald to succumb to 
the blandishments of Minnesota governor and Reform Party kingmaker Jesse 
Ventura, and run for the White House.)

Vilar has put up $100,000 to fight Trump. "Whatever it costs I am willing to 
fund it. I want to be able to say that I had a sense of civic outrage and I 
contributed," he announces.

There is also the small matter of Trump's dark-glass pillar blocking the view 
of the Empire State Building from the sitting room of Vilar's 30-room 
apartment. But this is a small matter and Vilar says it's not what bothers him. 
"To me it is a question of aesthetic outrage."

The price of apartments in the Trump outrage will range from $400,000 to $9m, 
and many are said to be sold already. Soon, depending on what the winter 
brings, the tower will be growing by two or three floors a week.

And that will block out Walter Cronkite's view of the Chrysler building - 
which is many people's favourite - from his home in the United Nations Plaza. 
Cronkite, the much-loved 82-year-old former CBS News anchor, says: "This 
protest is supported by a whole lot more less-than-wealthy folks who are 
sharply offended by the unnecessary grossness of this project."

He sent a letter to president Kim Dae Jung of South Korea, asking him to press 
the Daewoo Corporation, main lender for the $360m building, to make sure it 
went no higher than the UN tower. The letter cut no ice - and certainly did not 
cut the size of the building.

UN secretary general Kofi Annan has also complained about the vulgarity on the 
other side of First Avenue. As it happens, the shabby decency of his place 
stops short at floor 39, as against the 72 floors of the Donald's mega lith 
(although because of the generous ceiling heights, the completed building will 
look more like 90).

The East Side elite of Turtle Bay are losing the battle with brutalism because 
Trump acted to secure the necessary rights while his detractors were tending 
their aesthetic sensibilities. Trump is expected to survive one more official 
hearing - and then his opponents, who include the former chairman of Diners 
Club, an oil billionaire, publisher SI Newhouse's wife and a former bank 
chairman, will be off to court.

"Rich people don't like losing their view, that is purely and simply what all 
this is about," says the Donald.

Harry Burstein, a former photographer who lives around the corner from the 
site, is not impressed by the quality of the anti-Trump forces. "They're 
crazy," said the 77-year-old, who often drops by to see how the building is 
coming on.

"They don't know what they're talking about. Where were they when that other 
building [he indicates a 55-floor tower on 48th] was going up in the 80s? I'd 
rather look out my window and see the Trump Tower than the United Nations 
that's been there 50 years and never did a thing for the United States.

"It's an exciting thing for me to watch," he continues. "And if someone can 
afford it, why not? A lot of billionaires are going to be sorry they didn't buy 
here."

Though Burstein says that, unlike some of his friends, he never made big 
money, he admits to being rather pleased with the state-of-the-art audio system 
which he claims put him back $250,000.

The man in the street does not have such equipment. Specifically, Robbie 
Moore, whose job on the Trump World Tower site means he is more accustomed to 
making noise than listening to it. He deals with the vehicles that come and go, 
making sure that when the Donald visits his vision he is not greeted head-on by 
a truck thundering in the opposite direction.

"I don't know what it's like to have money and live like this," says Moore. 
"But that's New York City. Nothing is guaranteed. Everyone knows that things 
can change at any time. You have someone like Donald around, he's going to do 
something. God bless him. People want to live in this environment? God bless 
them.

"That's what America is all about. You make it? Great. You don't make it? 
Tough."

The jury's out (spending its thank-you cheques)

Car parking tycoon Abe Hirschfeld has been asked if he might desist from 
paying jurors. Asked, you will note, rather than ordered, because there is 
nothing illegal about the practice. Hirschfeld gave 11 jurors $2,500 a piece 
after a mistrial was declared when he was facing tax-evasion charges. For some 
reason Manhattan supreme court judge Carol Berkman seems to think that the 
prospect of similar gifts might in some way interfere with the jury's judgment 
when Hirschfeld is up in court this week accused of hiring someone to kill his 
business partner. The gentleman in question died anyway of natural causes in 
the summer.

London may have the Dome and the ferris wheel on the Thames, if they can get 
it up, but these are hardly in the same class as Manhattan's new millennium 
marker. Con Edison, the electricity company, has just introduced to Times 
Square a 314lb cast-iron piece titled Global Energy, otherwise known as the 
millennium manhole cover. It is distinguished from merely functional appliances 
by a lattice of curved lines. By the year's end 150 of these will be in place, 
scattered among the 250,000 of the common-or-garden variety.

Anyone who spends more than 75 minutes commuting to work in Manhattan should 
find a new job or a new home, according to Dr Joyce Walsleben, a 
psychobiologist at New York University. Yes, it's that dangerous. Her research 
shows that people with a long ride to work sleep almost three hours a week less 
than those with a short trip; they are nearly twice as likely to suffer from 
hypertension; and, criminally, below 3% of Long Island Rail Road passengers 
have sought professional help.
 