
It’s turning out to be an awful week for Donald Trump. The Republican nominee 
for president is worth some $800m less this year than he was last year, 
according tothe Forbes 400 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferwang/2016/09/28/the-definitive-look-at-donald-trumps-wealth-new/#32c6bf277e2d>
, an annual ranking of the world’s wealthiest people.

Trump’s net worth fell from $4.5bn to $3.7bn between the 2015 and 2016 
ranking. He is now tied for 156th place in the magazine’s annual wealth 
competition with fellow real estate developers Jerry Speyer and Igor Olenicoff, 
FedEx founder Frederick Smith, and Steven Spielberg, who saw his own net worth 
rise by about $100m. Trump is down 35 places from 2015.

His fall came as the rich got even richer. The country’s 400 richest were 
worth $2.4tn this year and had an average net worth of $6bn, both record highs. 
For the23rd straight year 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kerryadolan/2016/10/04/inside-the-2016-forbes-400-facts-and-figures-about-americas-richest-people/#64c189b39730>
, the wealthiest person on the list was Microsoft founder Bill Gates. Gates 
gained $5bn in the last year – his net worth has increased from $76bn to $81bn.

Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, too, gained ground: an additional $20bn makes him the 
second-richest person on Earth, up from the fourth-richest last year. 
Entrepreneur Warren Buffett’s ranking dropped second to third, though his net 
worth went up from $62 to $65.5bn.Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> also had a good 2015: 
the Facebook CEO made $15.2bn between this list and the last, placing him in 
fourth place and knocking Oracle CEO Larry Ellison down to No 5. Former New 
York mayor Michael Bloomberg’s $6.4bn increase to $45bn put him up at sixth 
place from eighth last year. Republican financiers the Koch brothers are tied 
for No 7: their personal fortunes grew by only $1bn this year. Meanwhile, 
Pierre Omidyar, founder of the Intercept, was up $100m to $8.1bn, rising three 
places from #57 to #54.

Notable absences from the list included Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of the 
biotech startup Theranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/08/theranos-elizabeth-holmes-banned-medical-lab>
, which is being investigated for fraud. Forbesrevised Holmes’s net worth to 
zero 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewherper/2016/06/01/from-4-5-billion-to-nothing-forbes-revises-estimated-net-worth-of-theranos-founder-elizabeth-holmes/#67b4d6392f29>
 from $4.5bn after investigations into Theranos’s proprietary technologies 
suggested the company had falsely claimed a number of scientific breakthroughs.

Holmes isn’t the only one with money troubles this year: among Trump’s woes 
are uncertainties in the New York City real estate market, where demand for 
retail and office space has become less urgent, according to the magazine.

Trump’s net worth has been a subject of much debate over the course of his 
presidential campaign, as his steadfast refusal to release his tax returns has 
kept most details of his financial dealings out of the public eye. The New York 
Times revealed last week thatTrump had declared a $916m loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-income-tax-returns-published>
 on his 1995 state tax returns; the partial returns provided to the Times by an 
anonymous source are the largest single disclosure of Trump’s financial 
dealings.


Fortune’s research into Trump’s wealth has the advantage of 35 years of 
research on the man – the first time Forbes published an estimate of Trump’s 
wealth was on its first-ever Forbes 400 in 1982, when he was worth a mere 
$100m. Nowadays, young Trump wouldn’t even make the list – the poorest person 
on the 400 is car dealership magnate Gail Miller, with $1.7bn. Even adjusted 
for inflation, Trump’s $100m in 1982 is “only” $249m.
 