
Donald Glover will play Lando Calrissian in the Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> spinoff about the young Han Solo, 
Lucasfilm announced on Friday.

In a statement 
<http://www.starwars.com/news/donald-glover-cast-as-young-lando-calrissian-in-upcoming-han-solo-star-wars-stand-alone-film>
, the studio said the film would show Calrissian long before he became the 
baron of a floating city in the clouds, and then the patsy of Darth Vader and a 
general in the Rebel Alliance.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – five reasons we're still slightly worried
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-five-reasons-were-still-slightly-worried>
“This new film depicts Lando in his formative years as a scoundrel on the rise 
in the galaxy’s underworld,” Lucasfilm said.

Glover joins Alden Ehrenreich, playing Solo, as the only named cast members of 
the still untitled film, which will be directed by Phil Lord and Christopher 
Miller.

“We’re so lucky to have an artist as talented as Donald join us,” said Lord 
and Miller, who are best known for directing The Lego Movie and the two recent 
21 Jump Street films. “These are big shoes to fill, and an even bigger cape, 
and this one fits him perfectly, which will save us money on alterations. Also, 
we’d like to publicly apologize to Donald for ruining Comic-Con for him 
forever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fstar-wars-donald-glover-lando-calrissian-young-han-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc166dbd2923e21a51d4c57dc2aa121fd283fa7c4%2F0_562_3624_2172%2F3624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Glover%20to%20play%20Lando%20Calrissian%20in%20spinoff%20about%20young%20Han%20Solo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fstar-wars-donald-glover-lando-calrissian-young-han-solo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Glover%20to%20play%20Lando%20Calrissian%20in%20spinoff%20about%20young%20Han%20Solo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fstar-wars-donald-glover-lando-calrissian-young-han-solo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc166dbd2923e21a51d4c57dc2aa121fd283fa7c4%2F0_562_3624_2172%2F3624.jpg>
 Alden Ehrenreich will play the young Han Solo in the film directed by Phil 
Lord and Christopher Miller. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
Billy Dee Williams played Calrissian in the Empire Strikes Back, in which he 
and Solo hint at a history of crime capers, and Return of the Jedi, in which 
Calrissian, penitent but still wearing a blue cape, flies the Millennium Falcon 
into the second Death Star.

The new film is scheduled for release in 2018, a year after Episode VIII and 
two years after this winter’s release of Rogue One, the first live-action Star 
Wars film to tell the stories of characters not named Skywalker.

Glover, 33, most recently has won critical acclaim for creating, writing and 
starring in the FX series Atlanta, which charts the sometimes surreal stories 
of two cousins in the city’s underground rap world. He also starred in four 
seasons of the comedy Community, wrote for the award-winning NBC show 30 Rock, 
and was nominated for two Grammys under his pseudonym, the Childish Gambino.
 