
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> at one time 
believed he would be dead before 40, believes he “knocked the shit” out of Cher 
during an infamous Twitter spat and once invented a fictional business 
executive to issue statements on behalf of his real estate empire.

These are just a few of the revelations contained in a new biography, to be 
published on Wednesday, that shed light on the billionaire Republican 
presidential frontrunner.

Journalist Michael D’Antonio was initially granted access to Trump over a 
series of interviews for his book Never Enough. Several interviews in, Trump 
rescinded that access, after learning D’Antonio had interviewed an old foe, but 
the book still contains several new details on the 69-year-old who leads the 
pack of GOP presidential aspirants.

D’Antonio reveals, for example, that Trump, who inherited his father’s 
successful housing business 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=AiFeQZhakXQC&pg=PA23&hl=en#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 in 1971, fired two workers in the 1980s at the behest of the late TV host 
Johnny Carson. Perhaps less surprising are the disclosures that Trump believes 
he has “innate ability”, and that most people “aren’t worthy” of his respect.

According to the author, Trump told business associate Ned Eichler in the 
1970s that he “expected to die before age forty”.

Trump had pursued Eichler in a bid to acquire the Penn Central Midtown train 
yard, in Hell’s Kitchen, west Manhattan. Eichler, who had a wealth of property 
experience, was in charge of brokering a deal for the yards, and a young Donald 
Trump was keen to build on the site.


“Eichler was impressed by the younger man’s energy,” D’Antonio writes, “even 
though he sometimes spoke in fatalistic terms. He recalled that Trump explained 
his impatience by saying he expected to die before age forty.”

The woman who stunned Trump into silence – and threw the race wide open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/19/arly-iorina-donald-trump-republican-candidate-race-election-2016>
Trump also reportedly told Eichler that he would “never marry”. Both 
predictions proved inaccurate: the 69-year-old has been married three times.

The book also claims that in 1980 Trump manufactured a fake vice-president of 
his real estate conglomerate, whom he called John Baron. The fictional 
executive would repeatedly issue statements on behalf of the company, D’Antonio 
says. According to the book, Baron was the name Trump “and at least one of his 
employees hid behind when they didn’t want their identities attached to a 
statement”.

Baron, or whoever at Trump’s company was allegedly fabricating his quotes, 
commented on a range issues on behalf of the company. He spoke on behalf of the 
company when Trump reportedly purchased the 21 Club, and also commented on the 
removal and disposal of artwork from the Bonwit Teller building, which was 
replaced by Trump Tower in 1983, before apparently being retired in the 1990s.

Around the time of Baron’s “employment” several celebrities were investing in 
Trump’s eponymous tower, including Michael Jackson, Steven Spielberg, and 
former Tonight Show host Johnny Carson. D’Antonio tells of how Carson called 
Trump one day to complain that “two fucking men who were working in the 
building” had stolen an expensive coat from his apartment.

Trump tracked down the men, who denied the theft. He told Carson that the men, 
who were from Queens, would be unlikely to wear such a coat – it was made of 
rare South American vicuna wool – and would be “run out of their neighborhoods 
if they ever did”. Carson was still dissatisfied, and Trump fired the men. 
“Months later,” D’Antonio writes, “Carson would discover the coat in the back 
of a closet.”

Since announcing his presidential bid in June, Trump has surged ahead of his 
Republican rivals in the polls. His popularity has remained unaffected by his 
depiction of Mexican immigrants as rapists and drug dealers andhis criticism 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/carly-fiorina-takes-donald-trump-task-face-faux-pas>
 ofCarly Fiorina’s appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/17/carly-fiorina-republican-debate-donald-trump-sexism-foreign-policy-women>
.

His standing as the frontrunner in the pack has continued despite an apparent 
suggestion 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/08/politics/donald-trump-cnn-megyn-kelly-comment/> 
that Fox News host Megyn Kellywas menstruating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/06/donald-trump-misogyny-republican-debate-megyn-kelly>
 during the first Republican debate and, more recently, his indulgence of an 
anti-Muslim audience memberwho asked him a question at a rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/18/trump-fails-to-correct-questioner-who-calls-obama-muslim-and-not-even-american>
.

Trump’s vivid description of his Twitter spat with Cher comes from a 
conversation with D’Antonio about his social media presence.

The former Apprentice host had been criticised by the singer on Twitter for 
his repeated demands that Obama release his birth certificate. Specifically, 
Cher called him a “flaming asshole” and a “racist cretin”.

“Cher said some nasty shit,” Trump recalled of the 2012 incident. “So I took 
on Cher. I knocked the shit out of her and she never said a thing about me 
after that.”

Trump’s recollection – as relayed via the book – contrasts with the fact Cher 
hascontinued to say lots and lots of things 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/olgalexell/15-times-cher-gave-donald-trump-something-to-cry-a-1eadi>
 about him over the past three years.

At times Trump comes in the book across as more sensitive than he would 
probably care to admit. He admits that on Twitter “you’ll say things that you 
can regret”, although he qualifies that by lamenting that people are “always 
knocking the shit out of my hair”.

The Trump juggernaut took out Scott Walker. But he may live to run again | Jeb 
Lund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/22/scott-walker-donald-trump-run-again>
D’Antonio also interviewed Trump’s eldest children, Donald Jr, Ivanka, and 
Eric (Trump has two other children from his second and third marriages).

Eric describes his father as “a supergenius in a very, very practical way”, 
and compares him to Winston Churchill. Donald Jr, the eldest of the Trump 
brood, appears to have inherited his father’s self-belief. “I’d like to believe 
generally I’m predisposed to better than average,” he told the author.

Ivanka shows more self-awareness, merely reflecting that Donald Trump Sr is 
“going to say exactly what he is thinking”. That said, Trump (or his campaign) 
did not immediately respond for a request to comment.
 