
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has selected 
the retired marine general James Mattis to serve as his first Pentagon chief, 
the first of his national-security appointments that will reassure the 
establishment defense circles Trump scorned on the campaign trail.

Trump made the announcement at an Ohio rally on the first day for his “thank 
you tour”.

 “I don’t want to tell you to this, I refuse to tell you, don’t let it outside 
of this room. I will not tell you that one of our great great generals, don’t 
let it outside, we are going to appoint Mad Dog Mattis as our secretary of 
defense and we’re not announcing it until Monday so don’t tell it to anybody.”

Mattis, has deep wells of support on Capitol Hill and in the military. Unlike 
Trump’s other announced nominees, Mattis is unlikely to receive a contentious 
confirmation hearing for the defense secretary job, even though he will need a 
special waiver from Congress because he has not been out of uniform for the 
requisite seven years.

The nomination comes after Mattis met with Trump at the businessman’s golf 
club in Bedminster, New Jersey, last month.

The retired general declined to talk to the media at the time, but Trump 
praised him. “All I can say is he is the real deal. The real deal,” he said.

The appointment of Mattis, which had been first reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trump-has-chosen-retired-marine-gen-james-mattis-for-secretary-of-defense/2016/12/01/6c6b3b74-aff9-11e6-be1c-8cec35b1ad25_story.html?hpid=hp_rhp-top-table-main_mattis-4pm%3Ahomepage%2Fstory&utm_term=.d5ac8ba8b8ae>
 by the Washington Post on Thursday afternoon, was initially denied by Trump’s 
transition team. In a tweet written three hours before Trump took the stage in 
Cincinnati, senior communications adviser Jason Millerinsisted 
<https://twitter.com/JasonMillerinDC/status/804440140496171008>, “No decision 
has been made yet with regard to Secretary of Defense. #TrumpTransition.”

Mattis’s appointment comes with much establishment hope attached. Many in 
Republican national security circles who opposed Trump have faith that the 
forceful Mattis can moderate Trump and bureaucratically neutralize Mike Flynn, 
the president-elect’s pick for national security adviser. But Mattis has enough 
points of policy agreement with Trump to make his integration with the Trump 
hardliners as strong a possibility.

“Jim Mattis has a deep respect and affection for the men and women who put 
their lives on the line for our country, and the allies who help us. He’ll be a 
terrific secretary of defense,” said Kori Schake, a former defense adviser to 
John McCain, a prominent “never Trump” conservative, andMattis’s co-editor 
<http://www.hooverpress.org/Warriors-and-Citizens-P627.aspx> on a recent book.

Unusually, days before the announcement, McCain released a statement that all 
but openly campaigned for Mattis’s appointment, calling the retired general 
“impressive” and an “extraordinary leader”. As the chairman of the Senate armed 
services committee, McCain’s endorsement will be critical to Mattis’ 
confirmation.

Establishment hopes that Mattis could rein in Trump appeared to be bearing 
fruit even before his appointment. Trump told the New York Times Mattis had made
a forceful case against torture 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=b-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 in a private conversation, apparently telling Trump: “I’ve always found, give 
me a pack of cigarettes and a couple of beers and I do better with that than I 
do with torture.” Trump said he was “was very impressed by that answer”, 
although it had not totally changed his mind.

“Mad Dog” Mattis’s highly quotable blend of wit and bluntness has earned him 
esteem within the military – and even a hashtag,#Mattisisms 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2010/07/16-most-hair-raising-general-mattis-quotes/340553/>
. In uniform, he relishedattacking the sacred cows 
<https://www.wired.com/2010/07/tech-skeptic-is-petraeus-new-boss/> of the 
Pentagon, the broader military and the marines specifically. Yet Mattis’s mouth 
has gotten him in trouble, as has a hawkishness on Iran that alienated many in 
Barack Obama’s White House.

A now-famous quote has Mattis, then the senior marine in the volatile Iraqi 
province of Anbar, informing a local interlocutor: “I come in peace. I didn’t 
bring artillery. But I’m pleading with you, with tears in my eyes: if you fuck 
with me, I’ll kill you all.”

A speech he gave in 2005 mused that it was “fun to shoot some people” in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, a statement called callous by Marla Ruzicka, the head of a 
civilian-advocacy group that worked with the military in Iraq. Mattis was 
defended by marine leadership but instructed towatch his tone 
<http://www.foxnews.com/story/2005/02/04/marine-general-comments-stir-outrage.html>
.

Those who know Mattis say his bluster is intentionally over-the-top and 
leavens his intellectual streak. Despite being a marine, he co-authored the 
army’s counterinsurgency field manual with David Petraeus, which cautioned 
restraint and discrimination in lethal force. His allies say he took Ruzicka’s 
criticisms to heart, particularly after she was killed in Iraq by a suicide 
bomber.

Mike Rogers, a former Republican congressman who was the national security 
advisor on the initial Trump transition team, portrayed Mattis as a 
scholar-general. “He might have a TV in his house, but I’m not convinced of it. 
His library is about 10,000 books and he’s read every one of them, and those 
are just the ones he kept.

“The guy ... understands the big picture. He’s an internationalist and he 
understands engagement. He also understands the judicious use of military 
power. He’s not looking for a fight but he’ll always finish the fight,” he said.

“He’s a visionary, and yet he’s molded out of the same grit as [legendary 
world war two marine] Chesty Puller,” the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, Martin Dempsey, once reflected about Mattis.

Obama elevated Mattis to the leadership of US Central Command, but the fit 
proved to be a bad one. Mattis, Obama’s Middle East aides said, displayed an 
eagerness to confront Iran far out of sync with an administration focused on 
diplomacy with Tehran. In 2012 congressional testimony, Mattis suggested the 
Syrian civil war provided the US with an opportunity to deal “the biggest 
strategic setback for Iran in 25 years 
<https://www.wired.com/2012/03/mattis-syria/>” through deposing Iranian ally, 
Syrian president Bashar al-Assad. Obama fired Mattis the following year.

As a civilian, Mattis has become a critic of Obama’s.


In January 2015 congressional testimony, Mattis advocated a “refreshed 
national strategy” that reversed what he saw as Obama’s “reactive crouch”. More 
recently, he has said the US posture in the Middle East suffers from “strategic 
atrophy 
<https://news.wsu.edu/2016/08/24/former-top-military-advisor-strategic-atrophy-plagues-u-s/>
”. But while he has sought a resolution of the Syrian civil war, Mattis in 2013 
warned against Americanizing what would be a “very, very serious war 
<http://warontherocks.com/2013/07/realtalk-mattis-at-the-aspen-security-forum/>
”. He has advocated placing regional Muslim-majority countries in a leading 
role, a posture that has yet to materialize in any coherent manner after six 
years of conflict.

Similarly, Mattis’s emphasis on partnerships with Muslim-majority nations in 
the Middle East places him at odds with the Trump camp’s willingness to 
denounce Islam as synonymous with terrorism. Mattis has instead said terrorists 
hide behind “false religious garb”. Mattisfavors arming Syrian rebels 
<https://www.wired.com/2012/03/mattis-syria> fighting Assad, something Trump 
has signaled he considers adistraction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/us-military-airstrikes-mistake-syria-assad-deir-ez-zor>
 from fighting Isis and which places Mattisat odds 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trumps-cia-pick-is-seen-as-both-a-fierce-partisan-and-serious-student-of-national-security-issues/2016/11/18/5b089f0e-ad9a-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html?utm_term=.03a01081eed4>
 with CIA director-nominee Mike Pompeo.

While Trump has signaled a warmth to Vladimir Putin, Mattis has criticized 
“the unfortunate and dangerous mode the Russian leadership has slipped into”, 
warning Nato allies against accommodating “Russian violations of international 
law”.

Yet Mattis is firmly in line with the emerging Trump administration’s 
confrontational posture with Iran. He has said Iran is “a special case that 
must be dealt with as a threat to regional stability”, a position shared by 
Flynn and Pompeo.

The retired marine general apparently wasn’t Trump’s first choice. In an 
interview with NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/20/502769948/ret-army-gen-jack-keane-says-he-declined-offer-to-be-defense-secretary>
 last month, retired four-star general Jack Keane said he had turned down the 
position. Keane, an architect of the surge in Iraq who is close to McCain, said 
he instead recommended both Mattis and his army protege, Petraeus, whom Trump 
is considering for secretary of state.

Additional reporting by Julian Borger
 