
When Paul Moffat took the reins as chief executive at a new trust running 
long-failing children’s services in Doncaster, he was under no illusions about 
the crisis he and his 500 staff faced.

A series of reports had criticised woefully inadequate services which left 
youngsters at risk of harm and neglect, while a culture of failure and 
disillusionment gripped the organisation as management regimes came and went.


Staff had been “demonised, morale was at rock bottom” and there was huge 
turnover of frontline workers, offering little continuity to vulnerable 
children who were left with a “sense of chaos” in provision, he says.


Two years later and “significant progress” in services has been identified in 
the latest monitoring visit by Ofsted. It describes leadership across the trust 
as “highly visible and accessible” and staff “very positive about working in 
Doncaster” following improvements in support and working environments.


Meanwhile a peer review by the Local Government Association points to its 
“strong leadership”. Staff are encouraged “to contribute ideas and solutions to 
what appears to be developing as a learning organisation” and, in conversations 
with young people, it finds a more stable workforce is building “trust in the 
trust” – with a direct impact on children’s lives.


It adds: “There is recognition that staff were poorly supported in the past 
and that good and effective leadership was lacking. The clear message we picked 
up is that the trust both require and support staff to get to good, thereby 
removing what was perceived by some as a ‘blame culture’.”


Moffat describes the pace of change as “phenomenal” at the trust – the first 
set up in England to deliver social care including child protection, fostering, 
adoption, children’s homes, and services to youngsters with disabilities, 
currently supporting 5,600 children.


Among key changes, he says the senior management team is highly visible, 
rather than remote as before, and regularly meets frontline staff, who are also 
represented on the trust’s board. Staff summits are held and other 
communications are much improved.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-improving-paul-moffat-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7261c889214901cc54f0c18205b7454e33e25cf5%2F0_27_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doncaster%20children%E2%80%99s%20services%20trust%20is%20improving%20%E2%80%93%20and%20staff%20are%20keen%20to%20reach%20outstanding%20rating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-improving-paul-moffat-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doncaster%20children%E2%80%99s%20services%20trust%20is%20improving%20%E2%80%93%20and%20staff%20are%20keen%20to%20reach%20outstanding%20rating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fdoncaster-childrens-services-trust-improving-paul-moffat-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7261c889214901cc54f0c18205b7454e33e25cf5%2F0_27_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A Local Government Association peer review found a more stable workforce is 
building ‘trust in the trust’ – with a direct impact on children’s lives. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
He says as part of moves to evaluate the organisation’s strengths and 
weaknesses, managers undertook activities with frontline staff to assess their 
training needs, giving them confidence that “we were going to do something 
proactive and weren’t going to have a mass clear-out”.


There has been significant investment in training, including a practice 
improvement programme for social workers, and work to develop leadership, to 
make sure “we have the right skills and the right staff in the right services”.


Moffat says staff have bought into the changes, describing how fostering and 
adoption services were rated good by Ofsted last year. “Staff were delighted 
but I thought what was telling is they asked what do we have to do to get to 
outstanding – they were pushing themselves to get to that next level,” he says.


Staff across the organisation are expected to take on leadership roles as part 
of their work. “I talk in meetings with staff about working beyond their 
authority. It’s more difficult to say to somebody who you are not the boss of 
‘Can you help with this?’ and using skills of negotiation and persuasion.”


He says it is important too for senior leaders to show they are human, 
recognise their own vulnerabilities and learn from mistakes, and, he 
emphasises, be wholly committed to improving the lives of children.


Moffat says there are still senior figures in the field who are critical of 
the concept of trusts but, with more likely to be created, he wants to share 
Doncaster’s experiences.


“I think we need to have a grown-up conversation about how trusts and local 
authorities can develop new models which improve lives and outcomes for 
children and families but not that one size fits all,” he says. “There are some 
excellent local authorities but I can see there being some excellent trusts as 
well.”


He says further work is needed to improve consistency in the way families are 
assisted, in supervision and support for frontline staff, and at better early 
intervention, but believes targets set for the trust to be rated good by Ofsted 
in 12 months and excellent by 2019 are achievable.


He adds: “I won’t be satisfied until we know with the resources allocated to 
the trust, we are doing the best job we can and the feedback from our service 
users is saying you are doing a very good job – at that point I know we will 
have delivered what we wanted to do.”


He continues: “We recently interviewed for a head of service and received 45 
applications, whereas 15 months earlier we were lucky to get two. What is clear 
is that people are becoming familiar with the work of the trust but also its 
aspirations. The reputation of Doncaster is improving and people want to be 
part of the new leadership arrangements and part of the solution.”


Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by Doncaster 
children’s services trust

 