
The defending champions, Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>, crushed Hamburg SV 5-0 in 
the Bundesliga’s season opener on Friday after a scintillating performance that 
set an early marker in their hunt for an unprecedented fourth straight title.

Any club in need of a goalkeeper should look to Germany and the Bundesliga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2015/jul/31/goalkeeper-germany-bundesliga-manuel-neuer-ter-stegen>
The German international Thomas Müller scored twice in four minutes midway 
through the second half. Mehdi Benatia and Robert Lewandowski also netted and 
the newcomer Douglas Costa, who also set up a goal, grabbed the fifth in the 
87th minute.

Bayern, odds-on favourites to retain their league crown, were never threatened 
by the visitors, who needed a relegation play-off to stay up last season and
started the new campaign with a shock German Cup first-round defeat by the 
fourth-tier side Carl Zeiss Jena last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/14/bundesliga-bayern-munich-hamburg-preview>
.

Despite having Mario Götze on the bench amid widespread media speculation 
about his future at the club, Franck Ribéry still injured and Bastian 
Schweinsteiger having left for Manchester United, the Bavarians turned on the 
style.

Costa terrorised the Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> 
defence down the left wing with his speed while the Chile international Arturo 
Vidal, who joined from Juventus in the close season, coolly orchestrated the 
attacks from midfield.

Hamburg, who had conceded a staggering 31 goals in their five previous visits 
to the Allianz Arena, were forced to defend from the start.

The Poland striker Lewandowski twice went close before the central defender 
Benatia headed in a Xabi Alonso free-kick in the 27th minute.

Lewandowski made it 2-0 in the 53rd when Matthias Ostrzolek’s header rolled 
into his path and Müller headed the third goal after a surging Costa run and a 
superb left-footed cross.

Müller added his second goal of the evening in the 73rd minute, rounding the 
goalkeeper René Adler after good work from Lewandowski. Costa then capped a 
memorableBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
debut with a goal when he drilled the ball in from the edge of the box three 
minutes from time.
 