


Non-league football awaits Luton Town after they finally succumbed to the 
30-point deduction imposed on them at the start of the season. A 0-0 draw at 
home toChesterfield was not enough to stave off relegation from League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> because Grimsby Town 
defeatedNotts County 2-0, leaving Luton 13 points from safety with only four 
games remaining.

Eight days after guiding the Bedfordshire club to Johnstone's Paint Trophy 
glory in front of 40,000 of their fans at Wembley, Mick Harford must now steel 
his squad for life in the Blue Square Premier. The Luton players and manager 
learned their fate only on returning to the dressing room and Harford said they 
took it in their stride.

"I found out at five to five," the manager said. "I looked at the clock in the 
dressing room and said to the players 'Remember this time. Five to five on 13 
April. This is the rebirth ofLuton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> Football Club.'" Harford 
exonerated his players of any blame in a season in which they have won only 13 
games out of 42, saying: "It is the past incumbents of this football club who 
are to blame. The penalty points were a massive burden and we just couldn't 
overcome it.

"The benchmark is Doncaster Rovers. They went down but they came back and 
they're now in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with a new ground. That's 
what we'll be aiming to do."

Harford, in his fifth stint with the club as player or manager, pledged his 
future to the Kenilworth Road club and their new owners: "I want to try and 
bring back the good times. Luton Town football club has been good for me. The 
new directors – the 2020 consortium – have been good for me and we owe them for 
it." Relegation ends an 89-year stay in the League for Luton, who were in the 
top flight as recently as 1992.

Forty-seven places above doomed Luton, Leicester City all but confirmed an 
immediate return to the Championship with a 1-0 win overLeeds United. The 
season's biggest crowd at the Walkers Stadium, 25,507, was sent into raptures 
in second-half stoppage time whenSteve Howard soared highest to meet Max-Alain 
Gradel's corner with a bullet of a header 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/13/leicester-city-leeds-united-steve-howard>
.

Leicester would have secured promotion if MK Dons had failed to beat Bristol 
Roverslater in the afternoon but Roberto Di Matteo's side held on for a 2-1 
victory thanks to goals either side of half-time from Ali Gerba and Luke 
Chadwick. Leeds remain in the play-off places, along withTranmere Rovers, their 
visitors on Saturday.

Leicester's manager, Nigel Pearson, was correct not to celebrate promotion 
prematurely before theMK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> 
result was known but admitted his side look set to return to the Championship. 
"The situation that we are currently in is great but there are three games left 
and there are points to play for," he said. "It would be nice to finish the 
season with some momentum to take into next season."
 