
If you need a carrot to tempt you to work, there’s a trolley of healthy 
snacks. Every desk is within seven metres of a window and a flick of your phone 
modifies temperature and lighting.

With as many as one in every 17 people 
<http://www.duurzameinzetbaarheid.nl/155726/151112_Factsheet_WerkstressV2.pdf?v=0>
 suffering from burnout in the Netherlands, a figure that rises to one in six 
for workers aged 25 to 35, a series of “healing offices” aim to demonstrate how 
to boost staff health and happiness.

The Edge, a tower in the Zuidas business district of Amsterdam, has just won an
Urban Land Institute 
<http://uli.org/awards/edge-2016-global-awards-excellence-finalist/> Global 
Award for Excellence for its green approach, on top oftrophies 
<http://www.plparchitecture.com/the-edge.html> and a 98.36% sustainability 
score from British environmental agencyBREEAM. 
<http://www.breeam.com/index.jsp?id=804>

Inside The Edge, lifts take you up to a precipitous view of the large entrance 
hall – a design that allows natural light to flood into glass-walled offices. 
Each office lights up when you step inside, and you can adjust brightness and 
temperature using an app on your mobile phone, which charges wirelessly when 
you put it on a desk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa92bd25d245dff1514fae35987b61ea82a1cb8a%2F0_233_4745_2847%2F4745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dutch%20companies%20pioneer%20'healing%20office'%20to%20cut%20staff%20sick%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dutch%20companies%20pioneer%20%27healing%20office%27%20to%20cut%20staff%20sick%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa92bd25d245dff1514fae35987b61ea82a1cb8a%2F0_233_4745_2847%2F4745.jpg>
 The Edge office space in Amsterdam was given a 98.36% sustainability score 
from British environmental agencyBREEAM. 
<http://www.breeam.com/index.jsp?id=804> 
The space <http://ovgrealestate.com/project-development/the-edge> has more 
than 15 smart systems and 20,000 sensors to optimise lighting, cleaning and 
heating. The result is a building that, according to BREEAM, uses 70% less 
electricity than similar offices – and apparently a happier, healthier 
workforce too.

“It’s a kind of laboratory,” says Cees van der Spek, global corporate 
relations director of developer OVG Real Estate, based in The Edge. “The main 
things that make people unwell in offices are lack of daylight, the climate 
system not working and noise. Improving productivity is the holy grail in 
offices and, if illness goes down, it’s automatic.”

Office envy: are these the world's most sustainable workplaces? – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/nov/26/worlds-most-sustainable-offices-treadmill-desks-apps-solar-lighting-gallery>
The consultancy firm Deloitte is The Edge’s largest tenant. Before moving 
there, the consultancy had seven offices around Amsterdam. “Everyone stepped 
into the elevator, went into their own room and didn’t see anyone all day,” 
says Harry Vlaardingerbroek, a senior manager at Deloitte. Deloitte has now 
consolidated its Amsterdam offices in the Edge. “Now no one has their own desk 
and we have open floors so you can work with colleagues with better comfort and 
climate,” Vlaardingerbroek says.

The Deloitte PR department is at pains to emphasise it does not “track each 
person personally”. It says that while health – and company growth – are about 
more than working environment, the level of staff absenteeism has decreased.

Coping with stress at work

While Dutch workers are no more stressed than neighbouring countries, there’s 
more incentive to act. Employersmust 
<https://www.blenheim.nl/employment-law-netherlands/illness-employment> pay 
long-term sick employees 70% of their pay fortwo 
<https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/ziekteverzuim-van-het-werk/vraag-en-antwoord/hoeveel-loon-krijg-ik-doorbetaald-als-ik-ziek-ben>
 years, topped up to the minimum wage by the firm at first, then the government 
in the second year.


Everyone has private medical insurance, and health funds end up taking the 
strain. The costs of absence and productivity loss are €2.2bn (£2.6bn) each 
year in theNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, 
according to insurer Zilveren Kruis. “The main work-related causes are 
workload, autonomy and social relations. It appears work facilities like 
offices can have an impact on stress levels, both positive and negative,” the 
company said in a statement.

Amsterdam-based design studio D/DOCK designed the The Edge’s interior to test 
its “healing office” concept. It has identified10 indicators 
<http://www.ddock.com/en/innovation/healing-offices/> – including indoor 
climate, daylight, physical activity, healthy food, diversity and nature – that 
it believes, if improved, could reduce sick leave by up to 30%, increase 
productivity by up to 20% and result in longer life expectancy for employees.

D/DOCK is also designing a new office space for Macaw, the IT company once 
named the best employer in the Netherlands, which it hopes will increase 
productivity.

Leaving the office with energy

However, not everyone is convinced by the idea that new office design really 
fixes work stress problems. Instead, they argue, policies such as flexible 
hours, job security and support in dealing with a job’s emotional demands might 
be more relevant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F971c5877da0f37fa670dcc6a626ab106566c7ecb%2F88_601_4924_2955%2F4924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dutch%20companies%20pioneer%20'healing%20office'%20to%20cut%20staff%20sick%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dutch%20companies%20pioneer%20%27healing%20office%27%20to%20cut%20staff%20sick%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fdutch-healing-office-staff-sick-days-stress-amsterdam-the-edge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F971c5877da0f37fa670dcc6a626ab106566c7ecb%2F88_601_4924_2955%2F4924.jpg>
 The office interior of The Edge, designed by D/DOCK. Photograph: Alan 
Jensen/The Edge 
Improving the physical environment is a relatively easy fix for workplace 
health but does not have the most impact, says Wilmar Schaufeli, a psychology 
professor from Utrecht University. “I believe job characteristics are more 
important than the environment,” he says.

“Certainly, physical environment plays some kind of role, and some people are 
probably more vulnerable than others. But when it comes to job stress, work 
overload, lack of autonomy, social or supervisory support tend to be more 
important.”


Colin Powell, project manager for the World Green Building Council’s Better 
Places for People campaign, says its recentreport 
<http://www.worldgbc.org/files/1114/7735/3801/WGBC_BtBC_Oct2016_Digital_Low.pdf>
 on the business case for green building suggests an office that is “more 
conducive to work” can improve productivity. But, he admits, “it’s hard to 
pinpoint if that is the dominant factor, or equal to better training”.

Ronald van Es, Macaw’s chief financial officer, says an office cannot fix all 
the demands on his employees, but he is looking forward to seeing what it can 
do when they move in next June. “We believe we cannot reduce pressure at work 
as customers have more demands, people at Macaw are very ambitious, and a lot 
are young parents,” he says. “But I believe employees will leave the office 
with more energy than they came in with.”

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 