
AFL club presidents Eddie McGuire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-mcguire> and James Brayshaw are 
expected on Monday to address “clearly inappropriate” comments they made about 
the journalist, Caroline Wilson, after being contacted by the league’s chief 
executive, Gillon McLachlan.

The controversial remarks were made on radio station Triple M nearly a week 
ago, but were only brought to a wider audience this weekend whenthe recording 
was shared and picked up on social media 
<https://twitter.com/erinrileyau/status/744309832178499585?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

In a statement late on Sunday, the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
said it had only become aware of the discussion between the pair and other 
pundits – in which disparaging remarks about Wilson were made – earlier in the 
day.

Eight teams to make up inaugural women's AFL competition in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/eight-teams-to-make-up-inaugural-womens-afl-competition-in-2017>
In the segment, which featured on the station’s The Rub show – before McGuire 
was to take part in a charity event in which he was to slide into an icy pool 
of water – theCollingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> 
president is heard to propose a different format to the fundraiser.


“In fact I reckon we should start the campaign for a one-person slide next 
year. Caroline Wilson. And I’ll put in 10 grand straight away – make it 20 and 
if she stays under, 50,” McGuire said.

“Straight in,” North Melbourne chairman Brayshaw answers, before the former 
players-turned-pundits, Danny Frawley and Wayne Carey, indicate they are “in” 
too.


“I’ll actually jump in and make sure she doesn’t,” Frawley adds. “I’ll hold 
her under, Ed.”

Wilson is the chief football writer for the Age 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/by/Caroline-Wilson> and has been named the AFL 
Players Association’s football writer of the year and won the AFL Media 
Association’s awards for most outstanding football writer and most outstanding 
feature writer several times during her career.


McGuire goes on to suggest the group could charge $10,000 for “everyone to 
stand around and bomb her”.

Damian Barrett, a journalist, is the only one of the group apparently reticent 
to back the idea, saying “I’m on Caro’s side these days”.


McGuire responds to Barrett with: “She’ll burn you like everyone else, mate. 
She’s like the black widow. She just sucks you in and gets you and you start 
talking to her and then bang! She gets you.

“It’d be magnificent. I think we should do that next year. It’s all good for 
footy,” McGuire concludes.

Frawley, appearing on Fox Sports’ Bounce program on Sunday evening, issued a 
brief apology.

“On Monday on radio I made a couple of insensitive, inappropriate remarks 
about Caroline Wilson. Clearly it was a poor attempt at humour [for] which I 
sincerely apologise,” Frawley said.

“Let’s leave it at that. Unfortunately, as I said, it was a poor attempt at 
humour and it didn’t go down that way.”

The AFL statement said the league “had expressed the strong view to both club 
presidents and All Australian selector Danny Frawley ... that although seeking 
to be light-hearted, the language and tenor of the wording could be seen to be 
supporting violent attitudes or actions against women, and was therefore 
clearly not appropriate.”

The segment played out to much laughter from the group, and sparked outrage on 
social media.
Miki Perkins (@perkinsmiki) 
In which Eddie McGuire and the usual suspects slag off Caroline Wilson and 
joke about VAW. Disgusting.https://t.co/l44D27keLa <https://t.co/l44D27keLa>
 <https://twitter.com/perkinsmiki/status/744278150188720128> June 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/perkinsmiki/status/744278150188720128> Ben Smith 
(@BenSmith94) 
Pretty concerning how many men think Eddie McGuire's comments were ok and the 
resulting outrage is just OTT political correctness.
 <https://twitter.com/BenSmith94/status/744358285621366785> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BenSmith94/status/744358285621366785> Anna Spargo-Ryan 
(@annaspargoryan) 
So good the way these idiots think “criticising” is comparable to “wanting 
dead”.https://t.co/6OacU4m7bi <https://t.co/6OacU4m7bi>
 <https://twitter.com/annaspargoryan/status/744355708234141697> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/annaspargoryan/status/744355708234141697> Luke 
(@outofyourmix) 
I'd like to know if Collingwood's sponsors, namely @CGUInsurance 
<https://twitter.com/CGUInsurance>, @holden_aus <https://twitter.com/holden_aus>
,@emirates <https://twitter.com/emirates> and @LaTrobeFin 
<https://twitter.com/LaTrobeFin> support Eddie/Collingwood's stance.
 <https://twitter.com/outofyourmix/status/744156997910593537> June 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/outofyourmix/status/744156997910593537> 
The incident came in the same week that the AFL launched its involvement in 
White Ribbon Week, Australia’s campaign to prevent men’s violence against women.

On Wednesday last week, the AFL announced its backing of a new women’s 
competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/eight-teams-to-make-up-inaugural-womens-afl-competition-in-2017>
, starting next year. McGuire’s Collingwood were one of the eight successful 
applicants.
 