
Edgar Davids will stay at Barnet and lead them into next season's Blue Square 
Bet Premier campaign. The 40-year-old former Champions League winner, who has 
been with the Bees since October,took over the reins in December following Mark 
Robson's exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/28/edgar-davids-mark-robson-barnet>
, but he was unable to guide them to League Two safety asthey lost their 
Football League status following a final-day defeat at Northampton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/28/barnet-aldershot-conference-wimbledon>
.

Speculation was rife about the former Juventus, Milan and Barcelona 
midfielder's future, but the Dutchman has confirmed he will stay and attempt to 
lead them back to the Football League.A club statement said 
<http://www.barnetfc.com/news/article/edgar-davids-stays-at-barnet-830296.aspx>
: "There has been a lot of speculation regarding Edgar's future following the 
club's relegation from League Two but the head coach is keen to help the Bees 
return to the Football League."

"Edgar took sole charge of the team in December 2012 and despite a 
disappointing end to the season the Dutchman boasted an impressive record which 
he hopes to continue in the Conference Premier. He is also extremely proud at 
being able to lead the club into an exciting new era at The Hive."

The club's chairman, Tony Kleanthous, is delighted to keep a man of Davids's 
calibre at the London club. "I am thrilled that Edgar has decided to remain 
with the club," Kleanthous said. "The way last season ended was disappointing 
for everyone involved but there is no doubt in my mind that Edgar is the right 
man to take us forward.

"He has started a football revolution here and we hope we can maintain the 
attractive style of play we developed under him in the Football League. It is a 
measure of the man that he wants to stay to finish the job he started. Once a 
Bee always a Bee!"
 