
The former Holland midfielder Edgar Davids has become the joint head-coach of 
League TwoBarnet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> and will also 
play for the club.

The 39-year-old, who retired from football two years ago following a short 
spell with Crystal Palace, will share the management role with Mark Robson, who 
has been head coach at Underhill since the start of the season.

"Dutch legend, former Barcelona, Juventus, Ajax & Milan midfielder Edgar 
Davids joins Barnet & becomes joint Head Coach with Mark Robson," read a tweet 
on Thursday night from the club's official Twitter feed.

Robson added on the club's website: "I am delighted to welcome Edgar to our 
club. His experience as a player throughout his illustrious career will be a 
massive benefit to all our players and I look forward to forming a strong 
partnership with him."

On his own Twitter site, Davids wrote: "Happy to say I will join my local 
football club Barnet fc as a player/coach."

Barnet are currently bottom of League Two having failed to win any matches in 
any competition this season and thus it is not a surprise that they have made a 
change to their management structure.

Tony Kleanthous, Barnet's chairman, said: "I am absolutely delighted to 
welcome Edgar as part of our exciting set up at Barnet FC. We have world class 
training facilities that are now attracting world class players and I feel, 
despite recent results, that these are exciting times ahead for our club."

Eyebrows will be raised, however, at the appointment of Davids, who has no 
previous coaching experience having, since retirement, only worked in a 
boardroom capacity at Ajax, the club where the Dutchman made his name and won 
the Champions League in 1995.

Davids, who has also played for Internazionale and Tottenham, could be in the 
Underhill dugout for Saturday's visit of Plymouth and on the pitch over the 
next few weeks.
 