
Open defecation in India: forcing people to stop is not the solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/18/open-defecation-india-solution-world-toilet-day>
1 | Think beyond waste

Innovation can play a massive role in increasing consumer demand for 
sanitation systems, but we believe it can go beyond the toilet itself. We are 
nearing a tipping point between advances in health and technology, and the 
toilet is an invaluable tool in this. Health sensors, fertilisers, biogas – 
unlocking these business models can change the face of sanitation and the way 
we think about “doing our business”. I think we’re about to see what has 
happened with telephones over the last two decades happen with toilets.
Alexandra Knezovich, programme manager,Toilet Board Coalition 
<http://www.toiletboard.org/>, @swissmrsk <https://twitter.com/swissmrsk>

2 | Induce change through competition 

The Sanitation Challenge <http://www.sanitationchallenge4ghana.org/> is a 
competition for local authorities in Ghana. It was launched in November 2015 
and we are in the second stage of the programme. The competition is leading to 
a shift in the priorities of the government, making sanitation more visible and 
important. Local authorities are excited about having the opportunity to decide 
what they think is needed in their area. An innovation prize that can be 
broadly defined as “a financial incentive that induces change through 
competition” is bringing changes at political level, as well as incentivising 
local authorities to identify new service delivery methods.Veronica Di Bella, 
senior consultant,IMC Worldwide <http://www.imcworldwide.com/>

3 | Go mobile 

Mobile phones have made paying for services easier, with lower transaction 
costs. Small payment amounts make pay-per-use more affordable for low-income 
populations as well. It is only one small piece in the puzzle, but it has 
opened up many opportunities.Christian Zurbrugg, senior researcher, Swiss 
Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology <http://www.eawag.ch/>

4 | Make toilets a hyper-local marketplace 

We also create the toilet blocks to be a hyper-local marketplace – users can 
recharge their mobile phones

Private entrepreneurs have to be encouraged to use unique business models 
which make toilet services an experience to remember, and a routine that 
attracts people to use them. For example, access to our toilets is free and 
they have all the basic facilities – sufficient lighting, ventilation, wash 
basins, soap dispensers – and we use stainless steel so the blocks are shiny. 
We also create the toilet blocks to be a hyper-local marketplace – users can 
recharge their mobile phones. Just think of the incentives that would be 
created if people had access to a free Wi-Fi hotspot at a public toilet.Mayank 
Midha, managing partner,GARV Toilets <http://www.garvtoilets.com/>, @mayankmidha
 <https://twitter.com/mayankmidha>

5 | Involve communities

It is critical that people accept the water and sanitation solutions that are 
installed. Even in Europe, there is great resistance to the idea of using 
faecal sludge on agricultural land. Involving communities in the design and 
choice of technology is key to ensuring that the result is what users want. One 
great example is from Paraguay, where communities helped to select the 
technology and the design of the facilities to ensure they met their values. 
This is a long process and requires investment in the construction and 
participatory processes, but considering the current low sustainability rates 
of many Wash [water, sanitation and hygiene] investments, it will pay off in 
the long term.Moa Cortobius, programme officer and gender specialist, Stockholm 
International Water Institute <http://www.siwi.org/>

How do you solve a problem like a broken water pump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/22/how-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump>
6 | Create standards for innovation

If we want to promote sanitation as a sustainable utility service, it is 
important to come up with more standards for technologies and services. The
International Organization for Standardization 
<http://www.iso.org/iso/home.html> is developing a new standard for non-sewer 
sanitation systems that kill pathogens. The standard provides guidelines for 
the industry to develop new technologies, and can help countries shape their 
policies and promote the best systems.Doulaye Kone, deputy director – water, 
sanitation and hygiene,Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/>

7 | Keep your audience in mind

Innovation can be done in different ways but it should be focused on the key 
audience for the right reasons and for the right end value-add. This might be 
around working on aid effectiveness, scaling action in supply chains, focusing 
on marginalised communities, hygiene behaviour, water stewardship, capacity 
building or working with the private sector – a whole number of things. It can 
take longer but buy-in is greater in the end.Isabelle Herszenhorn, innovation 
and strategic engagement lead,WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/>, @izzy_hersz 
<https://twitter.com/izzy_hersz>

Celebrating toilets from Madagascar to Ghana - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/nov/18/celebrating-toilets-from-madagascar-to-ghana-in-pictures-world-toilet-day>
8 | Accept and share failures 

We need to have a cultural attitude that supports innovation. This also means 
that we have to accept failures when new techniques don’t live up to 
expectations and share these lessons. This should not be an excuse for 
ill-considered experimentation, however, as the stakes are high.Brian Reed, 
Water, Engineering and Development Centre 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjKqoGcy7nQAhUSySYKHdTQCDoQFggaMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwedc.lboro.ac.uk%2F&usg=AFQjCNFGpVS1ZKJZnfffycBEtWbUYyGrVQ&sig2=SVIBvTp66b2CLzQCoVjenw&bvm=bv.139250283,d.d24>

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/10/live-qa-what-is-the-future-of-innovation-for-water-and-sanitation>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 