
From hero to zero – literally. That’s the journey 32-year-old Elizabeth Holmes 
has takenin only a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/01/forbes-downgrades-net-worth-former-richest-woman-zero-elizabeth-holmes>
, courtesy of Forbes and its annual lists of the US’s richest citizens.

Every summer the magazine offers up rankings of the rich for our perusal, 
sliced and diced for our voyeuristic delectation. There’s the Big List (the 
richest 400 Americans, in aggregate), and the wealthiest self-made Americans 
(winnowing out all those who inherited their loot, like Walmart’s Walton 
family). Then there is an array of subsidiary lists, from the richest 
entertainers to the most affluent women (who get their own list because there’s 
a gender gap among the 0.1% and the 1%, just as there is everywhere else).

Forbes list 'fat cats' have more money than all regular cat owners in America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/02/forbes-list-fat-cats-have-more-money-than-all-regular-cat-owners-in-america>
In general, the same set of billionaires jostle to hold their positions from 
one year to the next. Rarely are we treated to the kind of fall from grace that 
we’ve witnessed with Holmes, founder of Theranos, a blood-testing startup that 
tookSilicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>, and 
some sections of the financial press, by storm.

Forbes’ previous estimates pegged Holmes’s net worth at a cool $4.5bn based on 
her holdings in her (still privately held) business, a tech “unicorn” with a 
valuation headed for the stratosphere.Theranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/theranos> promised to “disrupt” (the 
word alone guarantees a billion) the business of healthcare testing, making it 
faster and simpler for everyone, including patients, and cheaper for the 
industry.

Alas and alack. Last fall, when investors valued the company at $9bn, the Wall 
Street Journal disclosed that, according to insiders, Theranos was using its 
proprietary “pinprick” technology – the company’s key selling point and the 
reason for that unicorn valuation – foronly a fraction of the tests it conducted
 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-has-struggled-with-blood-tests-1444881901>
.

By now, of course, Holmes has far more important things to worry about than 
her status (or lack of same) on the Forbes rich list. Federal prosecutors have
kicked off a criminal investigation 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-is-subject-of-criminal-probe-by-u-s-1461019055>
 into whether Theranos misled investors about the technology and its 
operations. Nonetheless, Forbes has cut its estimate of Holmes’s net worth to 
zero. Although the company may still be worth $800m, her stake ranks junior to 
the equity provided by other backers, so the magazine figures that her 
company’s fall from grace has left her with nothing. A mighty fall, indeed, 
after topping last year’s debut list of America’s richest self-made women, 
beating out the likes of Oprah.

The rest of us, however, might want to take this as a chance to ponder the 
value of rich lists – and the inherent problems involved in compiling them.

That’s particularly true, given that so many billionaires actually want to fly 
beneath the radar, whether out of a desire to keep the details of their wealth 
private or out of concern for their family’s security. Some just don’t want to 
be taxed on it. The UK Sunday Times just released its latest rich list, 
including the estimated net worth of 120 British billionaires. The first to hit 
newsstands since thePanama Papers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>disclosed the myriad 
ways some of the world’s wealthiest dodged disclosing just how wealthy they 
are, those estimates only include the listed assets, not offshore trusts that 
papers and magazines can’t possibly track, in the absence of more such 
disclosures.

For Brazillionaires 
<http://www.amazon.com/Brazillionaires-Wealth-Decadence-American-Country/dp/0812996763>
, an upcoming book by Bloomberg reporter Alex Cuadros (to be published next 
month by Spiegel & Grau) about his quest to identify all of Brazil’s 
billionaires while reflecting on the growth in the ranks of the ultra-rich in a 
country with significant inequality, Cuadros met João Marinho, one of three 
brothers who jointly run parts of the Globo media empire. Each of them, he 
estimates, is worth about as much as Rupert Murdoch ($12.7bn according to 
Forbes). Cuadros showed Marinho a copy of Bloomberg’s own global rich list, and 
asked for his opinion. “We don’t like to be on it,” Marinho told him, adding 
that the family doesn’t want to be known for how much money it has. “We want to 
be known for what we do.”

The fact remains that the rest of world doesn’t agree with him, or the other 
secretive types. Sure, we want to know what they do. But we believe that 
knowing how much they make isn’t just voyeurism. Money talks, and if we don’t 
know who owns that money, it gets a lot more difficult to figure out who’s 
setting agendas, or precisely how much firepower they have at their disposal. 
There’s a difference between knowing that the Koch brothers are billionaires, 
and being aware that they have approximately$43.9bn each at their disposal 
<http://www.forbes.com/billionaires/>, in terms of net worth.

But if it’s important to try to figure out not just who controls our economy, 
but how many billions they actually are worth (whether it’s made up of stakes 
in public or private companies, real estate, inherited wealth held in trusts, 
or other assets), doing so can be tricky, as the Theranos mess shows all too 
clearly.

If a group of intoxicated venture capitalists choose to describe a company as 
somehow being “worth” $9bn,because a group of equally intoxicated investors had 
invested $400m 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/hiltzik/la-fo-hiltzik-forbes-theranos-20160601-snap-story.html>
, who is to say they are wrong. Nobody. We just don’t know what a private 
company is worth, and in the absence of any kind of test (such as an IPO), 
extrapolations like that are at best interesting guidelines. They’ve got no 
real merit unless and until another round of investors confirm that value, over 
and over, by continuing to purchase at that price. The wider that group of 
investors, too, the more robust the valuation.

Almost certainly, there are more unicorn founders on various rich lists whose 
net worth numbers aren’t quite what the architects of those lists present them 
to be. Home-sharing and ride-sharing have turned the founders of both Airbnb 
and Uber into billionaires by Forbes’s calculations;they made their debut 
<https://skift.com/2015/03/02/uber-and-airbnb-founders-make-forbes-billionaires-list/>
 on the Forbes 400 list last year.

Neither Uber nor Airbnb is publicly traded, and neither has the kind of hard 
assets that would have made the net worth of the typical robber baron of 
yesteryear easy to value: railroads, oil wells, mines, real estate. 
Nonetheless, Forbes now pegs the net worth of Blair Chesky of Airbnb at $3.3bn; 
Uber’s CEO, Travis Kalanick, Forbes says, has seen his net worth soar to $6bn, 
despite the company’sbusiness difficulties 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2016/05/uber-lyft-austin/481863/> 
and in part because of Saudi Arabia’s recent$3.5bn investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/01/uber-investment-saudi-arabia-royal-government-tech>
 in the company, which sustained the company’s valuation at $62.5bn.

If some billionaires try to duck the scrutiny of the rich lists, it’s in the 
interest of others – including CEOs of unicorn companies – to see their rank 
and their “number” sustained or increased year over year.

A tiny handful of individuals get so caught up in this that their very 
identity or ego seems to be at stake. The most famous example may be the 
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who has squabbled continually 
with Forbes over the latter’s refusal to value him at his own estimation. “They 
don’t really know my assets very well 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/donald-trump-hits-back-at-forbes-for-listing-him-at-lower-net-worth/>
,” he retorted, miffed.

Saudi Arabia’s Prince Al-Waleed bin-Talal went even further, suing Forbes in 
2013 for – wait for it – defamation. The magazine’s crime? It said the Saudi 
princewas worth a mere $20bn 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-saudi-billionaire-idUSBRE9560Q020130607>
, $9.6bn less than he believed the correct number to be. (The lawsuit was 
settled “on mutually agreeable terms” in 2015.) Now that is rich.
 