
“If my children were ever taken off me, I wouldn’t survive the day,” was my 
sister’s emotive, yet understandable, comment when we were discussing the 
impact losing your children could have on your mental health. It made me think 
of a woman I had worked with, Emily.

Emily had her son taken off her after she had attempted to kill herself. The 
boy, Jacob, was pre-school, and the decision by social services was made in her 
best interests. Emily had been in an abusive relationship and was struggling to 
cope. She had serious mental health problems as well as a history of childhood 
abuse, so coping was not something she was good at. She had always refused to 
engage with mental health services for fear that it would result in Jacob being 
taken away. The tragedy is that engaging with services was probably the only 
thing that would have kept their family together.

After further attempts to take her own life, Emily was detained under the 
MentalHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Act and admitted to 
the mental health ward where I worked. At this point, Jacob had been taken away 
by social services. Emily was told Jacob would be adopted; she could have phone 
contact until then and one final visit to say goodbye.

Sam is a convicted paedophile … and a teenage girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/08/convicted-paedophile-teenage-girl-child-abuse-psychiatrist>
Initially she could not accept this and just wanted to die. It was one of the 
hardest cases I have experienced. She was right – what did she have to live for 
now she had lost Jacob? How could she continue feeling this pain and despair 
for life? As a team – nurses, doctors, occupational therapists and 
psychologists – we worked tirelessly with her to instil some sense of a future. 
Jacob was going to grow up loved, in a safe and secure environment unlike 
anything Emily had ever experienced. Her son had a positive future and she 
could take some comfort in that.

We focused on preparing Emily for her last contact with her son. She made her 
own plans about what she wanted for the two of them, and we supported her to 
achieve it. Emily was brave and made sure she could hold it together until 
Jacob had left, and then her world came crashing down.

Part of the preparation included talking to Emily about her suicidal thoughts 
and talking to her about what we could do to minimise the risk. We kept her 
safe while she grieved the loss of her son. We then worked with her to create 
the positive future she wanted for herself. This started with her keeping 
herself safe on the ward, one day at a time. We then looked at a longer term 
placement where she could get the intensive psychotherapy she needed to manage 
her mental health issues, heal from the hurt of the past and come to terms with 
losing Jacob.

Every day mental health nurses help people like Emily, who feel they have 
nothing to live for. Every day mental health nurses save lives. According to a
report 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 by the Mental Health Taskforce Strategy (2016) more than 14,000 people who 
have killed themselves between 2003 and 2013 had been in contact with mental 
health services; this is only just over a quarter of all suicides in that time. 
The same report acknowledges that suicide rates for mental health inpatients 
are declining, but sadly it is only the people we don’t manage to save that 
make the headlines. I am glad that we were able to help Emily and she hasn’t 
become another statistic.

Names and some details have been changed

 * Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/welisten?gclid=CL6A_b-l68sCFYZuGwodhR4HuQ> can be 
contacted on 116 123. In the US, theNational Suicide Prevention Hotline 
<http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/gethelp.aspx> is 1-800-273-8255. In 
Australia, the crisis support serviceLifeline <https://www.lifeline.org.au/> is 
on 13 11 14.

If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

 * This article was amended on 3 November 2016 to correct an editing error 
that implied Jacob was a girl. This has now been corrected.  