
The Danish Girl star Alicia Vikander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander> and The Amazing Spider-Man’s 
Emma Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> have both been lined 
up to play a young Agatha Christie in biopics being developed at rival 
Hollywood studios.

According to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/whodunit-sony-paramount-jockey-develop-905077>
, Vikander has been approached by Sony to play the celebrated crime author in 
her formative years as a “proto-feminist” unhappy with traditional 
wife-and-mother expectations. Stone, on the other hand, has been pencilled in 
for Paramount’s take on Christie’s “missing” 11 days in 1926 – a subject 
already covered in Michael Apted’s 1979 film Agatha, which starred Vanessa 
Redgrave and Dustin Hoffman.

The resurgence of interest in Christie follows a flurry of interest from 
film-makers in getting film versions of the writer’s work off the ground. A 
forthcoming adaptation of her 1934 yarn Murder on the Orient Express hasKenneth 
Branagh in the director’s chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/kenneth-branagh-boards-on-the-orient-express-remake>
 andAngelina Jolie in the cast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/10/angelina-jolie-murder-on-the-orient-express-kenneth-branagh>
, is due to start shooting this summer and will be released in 2017. A version 
of the 1939 mystery And Then There Were None was successfully aired on BBC1 at 
Christmas, and leading British film compnay Working Title aremoving ahead with 
a feature film adaptation 
<http://deadline.com/2015/09/and-then-there-were-none-movie-agatha-christie-morten-tyldum-fox-1201549866/>
 to be directed by The Imitation Game’s Morten Tyldum. However, a Julian 
Fellowes-scripted adaptation of Crooked House appears to have stalled, afteran 
announcement in 2012 
<http://deadline.com/2012/07/sony-pictures-worldwide-acquisitions-buys-into-agatha-christies-crooked-house-297940/>
 that Possession director Neil LaBute was on board.

The current activity around Christie’s work is ascribed to Acorn Media’s 
purchase of a 64% stake in the Christie estate in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/29/acorn-media-bys-stake-agatha-christie>
 from entertainment company Chorion, who themselves had bought the rights to 
Christie’s work in 1998. Chorion had overseen the reworking of the Miss Marple 
stories for TV – a series which began in 2004 – but Acorn, who were the DVD 
distributors for Marple, are thought to have ambitions in the feature film 
arena. The last set of major big-screen adaptations arrived in the mid-1970s, 
with a cameo-studded cast coming together on Murder on the Orient Express in 
1974 and Death on the Nile in 1978.

Any film adaptation of the writer’s work will also have to secure the approval 
of Christie’s descendants, who are thought to hold a 36% stake in the company 
that holds licensing rights.
 