
La La Land star Emma Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> said 
she hoped her new movie would steer young people away from “cynicism” and 
“making fun of things” and instead encourage them to “work hard and achieve 
their dreams”.


La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
Stone was speaking at the world premiere of La La Land at the Venice film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, where it has 
been handed the prestigious opening gala slot. Directed by Whiplash’s Damien 
Chazelle, and featuring Stone as an aspiring actor opposite Ryan Gosling’s 
jazz-obsessed musician, La La Land is a self-aware homage to the traditional 
Hollywood musical, and something of a love letter to Los Angeles itself.

Stone, however, commented on the romantic idealism of the characters she and 
Gosling played, citingConan O’Brien’s celebrated goodbye speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e35SVmdx9nY> on The Tonight Show, in which he 
pleaded with viewers to reject cynicism. Drawing a round of applause from the 
assembled press, she added: “The characters might be cynical about what they 
are going through, but the movie itself is in no way cynical; it’s about 
dreaming and hoping and working to achieve something. I think young people have 
fallen into cynicism, and making fun of things, and pointing out the flaws in 
everything. This movie is what I hope young people will do: work hard and 
achieve their dreams instead of being cynical.”


Chazelle, who made his name as a director by winning the US grand jury drama 
and audience prizes withWhiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review> at the 2014 
Sundance film festival, revealed that he had been “nursing fantasies” of making 
La La Land for many years, and had completed the script for it prior to 
Whiplash’s premiere. He also said the film had been conceived out of a 
long-term love for Hollywood movie musicals.

“There’s something about musicals that get at something only movies can do: 
movies as a dreamland, movies as the language of our dreams, movies as 
expressing a world where we break into song, the emotions that violate the 
rules of reality. There’s something really beautiful and simple about that.”

Stone also said she had been a fan of musicals since childhood, and could 
empathise with the bruising series of failed auditions her character undergoes. 
“I moved to LA when I was 15 to try to be an actor and have a few humiliating 
audition stories; but it never got to the point for me that was quite as 
devastating as for [my character] Mia.”

Stone was also grilled about her absent co-star, Gosling, with whom she 
previously acted inCrazy Stupid Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review> 
and Gangster Squad. She gave little away, other than saying that they took 
ballroom dancing lessons together: “Once you’ve learned to ballroom dance with 
somebody, you’ve learned all you need to know … He is very good at leading.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
Watch the La La Land trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
La La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>, which has drawn 
positive reviews, including a five-star assessment by the Guardian’s Peter 
Bradshaw, goes to some lengths to evoke the atmosphere of modern Los Angeles, 
despite its deliberately artificial settings. Chazelle said: “There’s something 
about the loneliness of LA, when you first move there and don’t know many 
people. The city doesn’t give itself up easily. All the cliches are there: the 
traffic, the terrible parties, the celebrity culture, the shallowness; but then 
the challenge is to see what’s beautiful under the surface.

“There is something very poetic about LA. It’s a city built by people with 
unrealistic dreams, and who put it all on the line for them.”

• The Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> continues until 10 
September.
 