
The Empty Bottle <http://emptybottle.com/> opened in 1992 in a self-described 
“cat-ridden hole-in-the-wall bar” in Chicago’s Wicker Park neighborhood. A few 
months later, the venue moved two blocks up the street to the location it has 
remained in for 23 years hosting bands such as the White Stripes, Flaming Lips, 
Interpol, OK Go, Girl Talk, the Strokes and many more. It was also ground zero 
for Chicago’s music scene in the 90s with bands such as Tortoise, the Sea and 
Cake, Trans Am, Red Red Meat and Jesus Lizard gracing the club’s stage.

On Friday, Chicago independent publisher Curbside Splendor 
<http://www.curbsidesplendor.com/books/the-empty-bottle-book-twenty-plus-years-of-piss-sht-broken-urinals-pre-order>
 will release a book,The Empty Bottle Chicago: 21+ Years of 
Music/Friendly/Dancing 
<http://www.curbsidesplendor.com/books/the-empty-bottle-book-twenty-plus-years-of-piss-sht-broken-urinals-pre-order>
, documenting the history of the club that helped a generation of Chicago’s 
indie scene make a name for themselves in the 1990s and then kept on going for 
the next generation.

The Empty Bottle’s owner, Bruce Finkelman, grew up in Columbia, Missouri, and 
arrived in Chicago with a dream and very few dollars. “I think we opened up the 
first Bottle for like $934,” he says. The club was in the perfect location as 
the rent was cheap and the fans and the musicians who played the shows all 
lived nearby, pushed into the then run-down neighborhood of Wicker Park by the 
unseen hand of gentrification. (Real estate brokers may now call the 
neighborhood Ukrainian Village, but back then it was Wicker Park.) “A lot of us 
ended up there in the early 90s and it was a rough neighborhood, but it changes 
so fast it’s crazy,” says Dan Bitney of Chicago bandTortoise. 
<https://youtu.be/7ArKJ5k1Vnc> “Back then, it was really kind of the wild, wild 
west out there,” Finkelman adds. “I remember the second day we were open my 
manager had got held up by knifepoint.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85d046b69ba6d8691889f8bc524564d2193fac8%2F0_0_3091_2048%2F3091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20'hole-in-the-wall'%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago's%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20%27hole-in-the-wall%27%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago%27s%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85d046b69ba6d8691889f8bc524564d2193fac8%2F0_0_3091_2048%2F3091.jpg>
 Garage rockers Thee Headcoats play the venue in 1997. Photograph: C Anderson 
The club was finally able to throw open its doors thanks to the scrappy 
attitude and hard work of the owners and the community. “I don’t think we ever 
could have done it without the amazing amount of support from the people that 
were living in that area,” says Finkelman. “They chipped in with painting, they 
chipped in the programming, they wanted to be part of the operations.”

The club opened in their permanent location the night before Halloween 1993 
and was christened with a show headlined by Ohio rockersScrawl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5obLgqid6J8>. “I remember we played a 
Halloween show and I dressed up like Carrie, covered in blood,” says singer 
Marcy Mays. “I had a pretty good costume! I just don’t remember anything else 
about the show.”

Before the Bottle opened Chicago’s scene was spread around the city, as locals 
hopped between bars such as Dreamers, Lounge Ax, the Metro, and the Rainbo 
Club. “TheRainbo Club 
<http://www.chibarproject.com/Reviews/RainboClub/RainboClub.html> was the 
epicenter, even though it wasn’t a venue. Liz Phair would be in there and the 
Urge Overkill guys and Jesus Lizard would show up,” Bitney says. “The Bottle 
was really more the venue.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90bbcdd6413abe8c11d163563c7f4d7e6e79b3f4%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20'hole-in-the-wall'%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago's%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20%27hole-in-the-wall%27%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago%27s%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90bbcdd6413abe8c11d163563c7f4d7e6e79b3f4%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
 An early show by Vampire Weekend. Photograph: Clayton Hauck 
“When the Empty Bottle opened, it was this incredible moment because we didn’t 
have to haul ourselves all the way to the north side to go to the iconic Lounge 
Ax,” says Kathryn Frazier, who launched her music publicity companyBiz3 
<http://biz3.net/> out of what she describes as “a closet” in the club. “Bruce 
kept it cheap enough that you would just go there to drink every night, and you 
would happen to catch all these cool bands. It created a big community and a 
culture grew out of that place, because we were just there every night.”

“When they first opened, it wasn’t the club that everyone went to,” says Sam 
Prekop ofthe Sea and Cake <http://www.theseaandcake.com/>. “There was a bit of 
animosity when they were first opened, but later it became like a hometown 
club, probably mainly due to its location. It was where most people lived.” Now 
when you ask Prekop how long he has been playing at the Bottle, he laughs: “How 
long have they been open?”

Besides the cheap drinks, the club quickly developed a reputation for putting 
on memorable shows. “They booked the best stuff, and unlike a lot of bars, it 
was like that every night,” Frazier says. As the 1990s rolled on and labels 
such asTouch and Go <http://www.touchandgorecords.com/>, Bloodshot 
<https://www.bloodshotrecords.com/>, Thrill Jockey 
<http://www.thrilljockey.com/index> and Drag City <http://www.dragcity.com/> 
helped make Chicago bands staples of the college charts (“People think Chicago 
is like this magical place, where there’s something in the water,” says 
Bitney), the Bottle became the home to the burgeoning scene. “I remember the 
final night of a tour with Sea and Cake and Tortoise and it felt like a proper 
homecoming at the Bottle,” Prekop says. “It was really good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44bfda696e2319f4723676ddb1e456f554821af7%2F0_0_2048_3091%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20'hole-in-the-wall'%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago's%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20%27hole-in-the-wall%27%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago%27s%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44bfda696e2319f4723676ddb1e456f554821af7%2F0_0_2048_3091%2F2048.jpg>
 The Go have liftoff. Photograph: C Anderson 
The venue wasn’t just for local acts. “There were so many bands that would 
come over from across the pond that would play their first show there, and then 
move on to stardom, but they would still stop back in there,” Finkelman 
recalls. As its foothold in the city became secure, the owners started to 
invest in the club, even improving its notoriously awful plumbing.

“For a while it smelled terrible, but they remedied that,” Prekop says. “In 
the past you had to pick your spot carefully in the room and it would sound 
really great, but they’ve fixed that now, too. Now, it feels lived in and 
comfortable.”

“It had everything that a great bar should have – it wasn’t very expensive to 
drink there, they had a couple of video games, and there were always cool 
people hanging out, hipsters and locals,” recalls Steve Drozd, whose band the 
Flaming Lips would drive up from Oklahoma to play. “It was a great place. You 
could stumble in andTrans Am <http://www.thrilljockey.com/products/volume-x> 
would be playing.”

The club also was willing to take risks, booking bands and genres that were 
new for the indie rock world. “For a while they were booking a lot of 
experimental stuff. These very exotic European improvisers. It was always 
exciting,” Prekop says. They would book freeform jazz, avant pop, and post 
punk, and helped bring drum’n’bass to the US. “Back in ’94 when Tortoise 
really, really blew up, they were always flying to London, and they were the 
first people I knew that discovered jungle, which went on to be drum’n’bass. 
And they would bring it back to Chicago,” Frazier says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf00e92e15153d12621147354c8ffd662878c97%2F0_0_2568_1712%2F2568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20'hole-in-the-wall'%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago's%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20%27hole-in-the-wall%27%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago%27s%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf00e92e15153d12621147354c8ffd662878c97%2F0_0_2568_1712%2F2568.jpg>
 Winks get horizontal in 2004. Photograph: C Anderson 
Members of Tortoise set up a weekly night at the Bottle called Deadly Dragon 
Sound System <http://www.deadlydragonsound.com/>that became legendary. “The 
place would be packed with reggae and drum’n’bass music,” Bitney says. “I have 
great memories of going there and dancing and watching bands getting super 
sweaty.”

“Indie rock kids back then didn’t go dancing,” Frazier says. “I feel like 
those guys, through their Sunday night at the Empty Bottle, really merged those 
worlds for the first time that I saw and they got a lot of attention because of 
that. There were cool things like that that Bruce would let people do.”

In addition to his diverse lineup, Finkelman and his crew managed to create a 
club that bands liked to play and fans liked to visit, because the club was all 
about the music, not just the profits. One night the Flaming Lips were booked 
and Finkelman kept the room under capacity. “Bruce did this beautiful thing 
which was he didn’t oversell the room, he undersold it,” Frazier recalls. “I 
looked around at the room and asked him if a bunch of people didn’t show up. He 
was like, ‘nah, I didn’t want the room to be gross, you know, I wanted this to 
be a special night.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43bb6b30597d4a490b4ec71fc46700c382aed8c%2F0_0_4800_7041%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20'hole-in-the-wall'%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago's%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empty%20Bottle%3A%20the%20%27hole-in-the-wall%27%20that%20shook%20up%20Chicago%27s%20indie%20music%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fempty-bottle-club-chicago-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43bb6b30597d4a490b4ec71fc46700c382aed8c%2F0_0_4800_7041%2F4800.jpg>
 Quintron set the venue on fire … literally. Photograph: Rob Karlic 
It worked, too. “That show we played in 1994, that stands out as one of our 
favorite shows of all time,” adds Drozd, who felt as though Chicagan fans were 
early adopters of the Flaming Lips. “I played piano on this old crappy upright 
that they had there, and we played all these songs we don’t normally play. It 
was a really magical night.”

Of course that wasn’t the only memorable show. There were noteworthy sets by 
the White Stripes, Guided by Voices, Elliott Smith, and newer acts like Vampire 
Weekend and Alt J. “I remember Jay Reatard playing there, and trying to steal 
the disco ball because I had charged him for it last time he had tried to rip 
it down, and we had bolted it up there so high that he just couldn’t get it 
down,” remembers Finkelman.

While the club has evolved, some things remain the same. Tortoise still packs 
the house, but on weekends Bitney now takes his daughter to the club, which 
hosts kid-friendly matinee shows. “The neighborhood has changed,” he says. “But 
there’s something about the Bottle. It was just consistent and that’s why it 
lasted so long. Everywhere else is gone now.”

Finkelman, who has gone on to open other Chicago venues like Thalia Hall 
<http://thaliahallchicago.com/#!/>, and Longman and Eagle 
<http://www.longmanandeagle.com/>, knows how lucky he is to have made it in the 
fragile music business ecosystem. “I continually think I’m the luckiest person 
on the earth to be able to kind of walk through this life that I get to live in 
the different places that we have,” he says. “It’s really been quite a 
wonderful, wonderful life.”

 * The Empty Bottle Chicago: 21+ Years of Music / Friendly / Dancing is 
available for pre-orderhere 
<http://www.curbsidesplendor.com/books/the-empty-bottle-book-twenty-plus-years-of-piss-sht-broken-urinals-pre-order>
.
 