
Nine bottlenose dolphins, four common dolphins and one dolphin that was so 
decomposed that it could not be identified were caught in shark nets across 51 
New South Wales beaches, accordingto the latest report on NSW’s controversial 
shark-meshing program. 
<http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/693028/2015-16-SMP-Annual-Performance-Report.pdf>

The report showed 748 marine animals became entangled in the nets in 2015-16.


Of those, 86% were threatened, protected or species not intended to be 
targeted by the shark net program. Thirteen threatened green turtles were 
caught and only two survived, while four loggerhead and two leatherback sea 
turtles were also trapped.

Related: Australian surfers stay out of the sea as great whites torment town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/22/great-white-sharks-ballina-new-south-wales-surf-resort>

Almost 150 non-target sharks were caught in the nets, a jump from 50 the year 
prior. The nets trapped 112 smooth hammerheads in 2015-16, which are not 
supposed to be targeted. All but two died.

Nineteen of the threatened greynurse sharks were caught, five of which died, 
as were nine Australian angelsharks, two thresher sharks, two Port Jackson 
sharks, and one great hammerhead shark.

Those species were not meant to be targeted by the nets, and about half of 
them died.

Humane Society International described the report’s findings as disturbing. 
Head of campaigns Nicola Beynon urged the NSW government to remove the nets, 
and instead use “non-lethal bather protection strategies”.

“Five harmless grey nurse sharks were killed and this is a critically 
endangered species with a likely population of only 1,000 individuals,” Beynon 
said.

“This is a shocking blow to the population, something which cannot continue if 
we want to see this species survive in the long-term,” she said.

Greenpeace said there was no evidence that shark nets were effective in 
preventing attacks.

Campaigner Alix Foster said evidence-based solutions, like electromagnetic 
barriers and spotting programs, should be favoured over nets.

“There is no conclusive evidence that nets are effective at preventing 
human-shark encounters and these alarming new government figures show that 
dolphins, turtles, rays, endangered shark species and other wildlife are being 
unnecessarily killed by the nets,” Foster said.

“The [NSW department of primary industries] itself found that about 40% of 
sharks trapped in NSW nets are found on the beach side,” she said.


The 748 animals caught in 2015-16 was a significant jump from 189 the year 
prior, and was driven by a dramatic increase in the number of stingrays trapped 
by the nets. The report also found eight shark nets had been vandalised in 
2015-16.

A net at Bondi was slashed on 7 September, while a net at Dee Why was cut 
along the float line a week later. The net at Bronte was damaged by an anchor 
on 12 October, and the Curl Curl net was vandalised in late November.

Others were damaged by storms or accidentally became tangled by other vessels. 

The NSW primary industries minister, Niall Blair, condemned deliberate acts of 
vandalism,telling News Corp 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/sharks-in-sydney-idiot-ecowarriors-putting-lives-at-risk-by-sabotaging-next/news-story/a8e6bf7e57f1dac2b522208708bc6424>
 Australia: “Deliberate acts of malicious damage are not just dangerously 
foolish, they can attract sentences of up to five years jail under the Crimes 
Act.”

Related: Shark attack: drum lines set along NSW beach after 65-year-old bitten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/shark-attack-65-year-old-new-south-wales-north-coast-colin-rowland>

Shark sightings were down on the two years prior. In 2015-16, 117 sharks were 
spotted in NSW, mostly in Sydney, down on the 139 in 2014-15, and 124 in 
2013-14.


Authorities investigated 11 shark attacks in 2015-16, six involving white 
sharks. Five of the shark attacks led to serious injury.

Threatened or protected species entangled in NSW shark nets in 2015-16: 


 * 31 white sharks (21 dead; 10 released alive)

 * 19 greynurse sharks (5 dead; 14 released alive)

 * 1 great hammerhead shark (dead)

 * 13 green turtles (11 dead, 2 released alive)

 * 5 hawksbill turtles (all dead)

 * 4 loggerhead turtles (2 dead; 2 released alive)

 * 2 leatherback sea turtles (1 dead; 1 released alive)

 * 4 common dolphins (all dead)

 * 9 bottlenose dolphins (all dead)

 * 1 unidentified dolphin (dead & decomposed)

 * 1 shearwater seabird (dead – retained and pending formal identification)

Non-target species caught in the nets:


 * 425 rays (97 dead, 328 released alive)

 * 112 smooth hammerheads (110 dead, 2 released alive);

 * 9 Australian angelshark (4 dead; 5 released alive);

 * 2 thresher sharks (both dead);

 * 2 Port Jackson sharks (released alive)

 * 6 finfish (5 dead; 1 released alive);
 