
It's early morning at a ghostly disused RAF base, and I have just been 
transported back to the 1960s. A woman struts past me in a green mini-dress, 
hair backcombed into a beehive. A vintage blue and cream bus sits in a car 
park. A man in a serge suit and a beige mackintosh sits on a folding chair, 
smoking a cigarette. Through all this strolls a tall, loose-limbed young man 
with piercing blue eyes and a strangely familiar expression.

The expression – avuncular yet determined, confused yet confident – is 
familiar because it's the default expression ofInspector Morse 
<http://www.itv.com/morse/>, the opera-loving solver of shire-based crimes. But 
Morse has not come back from the dead: the loose-limbed young man is actorShaun 
Evans 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/news/a333095/inspector-morse-prequel-endeavour-casts-shaun-evans-first-look.html>
, seen recently in Martina Cole's The Take, who is playing a young version of 
the gruff,Jaguar-Mark-2-driving <http://www.morsejaguar.co.uk/news.html> sleuth 
immortalised by the late John Thaw. This site, on the outer reaches of west 
London, is the set of Endeavour, a one-off film for ITV that takes its title 
from the inspector's first name, once the source of great mystery and finally 
revealed in 1997, at the end of the episodeDeath Is Now My Neighbour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SIeTSIrznqg> (Morse had joked that his first 
name was actually Inspector).

Set in 1965, Endeavour was written by Russell Lewis 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0507714/>, who also penned the Morse spin-off 
Lewis. It is intended to mark the 25th anniversary of the first ever episode of 
Morse, The Dead of Jericho, scripted by a certainAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/mar/18/filmnews.theatrenews>. Endeavour 
stars 31-year-old Evans as Morse's younger self, an Oxford university dropout 
who has joined the police and is now investigating the murder of a 15-year-old 
girl found naked in an Oxford wood. Although Morse is the star of the show, 
using his crossword-solving powers to crack the case, he is, in effect, the 
sidekick for once, since the investigation is led by DI Fred Thursday, played 
by a taciturn Roger Allam.

TV prequels are an uneasy business: for every Smallville 
<http://www.kryptonsite.com/> (the excellent US series tracing the life of 
Clark Kent before he became Superman), there are 10The Young Indiana Jones 
Chronicles <http://www.theraider.net/films/young_indy/index.php> (George 
Lucas's clunky 1990s series). And with ITV already devoting a good portion of 
airtime to Lewis, the inevitable question about Endeavour is whether this could 
be Morse overkill. Diehard fans of the original have certainly been bristling 
at the prospect of another actor taking on a role that Thaw made his own. "A 
tetchy young copper is not going to credibly have the same scope – or life 
experience – that Morse senior had," sniffed one on the website Digital Spy. 
"Morse worked to a large degree thanks to the portrayal by John Thaw," said 
another. "Whoever replaces him is on to a loser."

If Evans is worried about any of this, he isn't showing it. I sit with the 
Liverpool-born actor in his tiny trailer and ask him how it feels to step into 
the great man's brogues. "I don't feel a responsibility to be faithful to what 
has come before," he says briskly. "I didn't watch Morse growing up. If the 
ghost of John Thaw was here looking over my shoulder, I hope he'd be 
supportive."

The man who was smoking in the serge suit turns out to be Paul Plausin, who 
has appeared as a spare detective in countless episodes of Morse and Lewis. "I 
do miss John," he says. "He had an incredible memory – whatever you'd told him 
the last time you worked together, he'd remember exactly. And he was a 
chain-smoker, so whenever he was shooting a scene, there'd be an ashtray 
nearby. That suited me down to the ground."

A languid inspector calls

The company behind Endeavour is Mammoth Screen, which also makes Lewis. Over 
lunch in another (larger) trailer, fitted out with reclaimed bus seats, Michele 
Buck, the company's joint managing director, tells me that Endeavour was partly 
inspired by a short story featuring the young Morse thatColin Dexter 
<http://www.fantasticfiction.co.uk/d/colin-dexter/>, creator of the inspector, 
wrote for the Daily Mail at Christmas time in 2008. "Colin has very much been a 
part of this," she says. He even, apparently, had casting approval. "We had a 
very tense day," says Buck. "We took photos of various actors along and we were 
thinking, 'Please think it should be Shaun.' And Colin looked at him and said, 
'He's perfect – there's something sensitive about his face.' People think of 
Thaw as gruff, you see, but he was so sensitive."

Why all this reverence? Well, Morse still has quite a pedigree. This was, 
after all, the programme that some mighty British screenwriters and directors 
cut their teeth on: as well as Minghella,John Madden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/may/08/1> and Danny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2011/jan/07/danny-boyle-127-hours> are 
credited with a number of episodes. The phenomenally popular series would 
continue for 13 years, encompassing 33 shows. Back in those dark days before 
cable reruns and watch-again websites, the ad breaks in every Sunday-night 
episode caused a power surge as the nation clicked on its kettles. In 2000, 
more than 18 million people watched the final three shows, which culminated in 
Morse's death from a heart attack. It struck him down – where else? – in the 
picturesque quad of an Oxford college. Later, grey and weak in a hospital bed, 
Morse, affable to the last, uttered his dying words: "Thank Lewis for me."

With each episode two hours in length, the shows had a languid feel that 
challenged preconceptions about TV detective drama: Morse could be reflective 
where others were fast-talking and even faster-paced. This is the legacy that 
Buck hopes Endeavour can live up to. "The original Morse had a huge impact on 
television," she says. "People said, 'The audience won't stay with it,' but 
they did. It was a breathtaking piece of scheduling. Hopefully," she adds with 
a bright smile, "with the grammar of Morse and the style of today, people will 
feel the same about Endeavour."

Dexter is not on set, so I call him to ask how he feels about seeing the 
character he swore he would never revive back on screen. He chuckles. "Oh, I 
have no worries about it at all," he says. "I really ought to have said more 
about Morse's past in the books. Until I wrote that short story, I didn't 
really have much of an idea about what he had been like as a young man. Shaun 
seems like an admirable actor. I think [Endeavour] will be good, though you 
never quite know."

Named by a Quaker

Endeavour is full of clues about the man Morse would become: we see him 
listening to opera, admiring a familiar-looking red Jaguar Mark 2, taking a 
rather keen interest in attractive women; even talking about his parents (they 
named him after HMS Endeavour, by the way, his mother being a Quaker and 
following its tradition of picking virtuous qualities for names). For 
inspiration, Russell Lewis reread all of Dexter's novels. "I wanted to create a 
continuity between the world of the television show and the world of the 
books," he says. "I worked my way back from the guy we know to the guy he would 
have been." He included a small part as a journalist for Thaw's daughterAbigail 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0857173/>, also an actor. "If you had the option," 
he says, "why wouldn't you?"

For Buck, who sees Morse as "an old-fashioned thinker with old-fashioned 
values", the 1960s setting puts some important distance between Endeavour and 
the original. "There's something comforting about a 1960s murder," she says, 
"about seeing him solve crimes in a time when things were much more black and 
white."

But this definitely isn't the nostalgic, soft-focus 1960s portrayed by the 
likes of Heartbeat: Endeavour's director, Colm McCarthy, has directed episodes 
of The Tudors and Spooks, while editor Masahiro Hirakubo worked on 
Trainspotting and The Beach. I couldn't tell too much from my morning on the 
set, which saw the derelict barracks standing in for Cowley police station, but 
the final edit, when I see it, is a different beast entirely. It has the 
same dark hues, stirring operatic soundtrack and unsettling camera angles that 
we came to expect of the original, and the script zips along like a Jaguar – 
although a much sportier model, perhaps, than a Mark 2.

• Endeavour is on ITV1 on Monday night at 9pm.
 