
Black engineering graduates are less likely to find jobs than white students 
with lower second or third class degrees, according to a report that reveals 
stark inequalities within the profession.

The review <http://www.raeng.org.uk/policy/diversity-in-engineering>, by the 
Royal Academy of Engineering (RAEng), found that being black or minority ethnic 
was a bigger obstacle to employment than any other factor considered, including 
degree classification, attending a less prestigious university or gender.

Bola Fatimilehin, the academy’s head of diversity, said an old boys’ network 
approach to recruitment and unconscious biases were contributing to the 
challenges faced by non-white students.

“There is a certain amount of stereotyping of who can be an engineer and what 
talent looks like,” she said. “A lot of people fall into the mode of thinking 
that there aren’t a lot of black engineers because [black people] are not 
interested in it.”

30 years ago I struggled as a black engineer. It seems little has changed | 
Helen Powell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/ethnicity-engineering-black-minority-ethnic>
The analysis found that 71% of white engineering graduates were in full-time 
jobs within six months of leaving university, compared with just 52% of Asian 
students and 46% of black students.


When gender, age, class of degree and type of institution were taken into 
account, black and Asian graduates were more than twice as likely to be 
unemployed as their white counterparts.

The figures highlight an apparent paradox in which government and industry 
leaders have consistently pointed to a national shortage of engineers, while a 
high proportion of black and ethnic minority graduates are failing to find 
jobs. Indeed, the science minister, Jo Johnson, noted “the chronic shortages of 
engineers that have long held our economy back” ina comment article 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/dyson-university-is-a-wake-up-call-for-higher-education-gjgnz5gls>
 last month.

The shortage of engineers is often cited as an incentive to attract more women 
into the profession – just 12-15% of engineering undergraduates are female.

“That’s true, but what about the missed opportunity with all these graduates 
from ethnic minority backgrounds?” said Fatimilehin. “It feels like a low 
hanging fruit.”

Gender has dominated the diversity agenda in engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/engineering-apprenticeships-courses-women-engineers-education-degrees>
 for the past decade, but the report found that it only has a minor influence 
on immediate employment prospects for graduates. Women were slightly less 
likely to enter engineering occupations after university, but more likely to 
pursue further study.


The focus on “getting girls into engineering” has led to the lack of progress 
on racial diversity being overlooked, according to Fatimilehin.

“People come back to gender because it feels safer,” she said, adding that 
male engineers tended to get behind the idea that women face additional 
barriers because most would have a wife, daughter or female friend. “They’re 
less likely to have a friend who is black,” she said.

The RAEng report puts forward several possible explanations for the findings, 
which were based annual destination surveys of around 250,000 students by the 
Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA).Engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/engineering> firms often recruit from 
Russell Group universities, which on average have lower proportions of ethnic 
minority students. However, even when institution type is taken into account 
there is a gulf between the employment prospects of white students and black 
and Asian ones.

Engineers, unless we wave our arms a bit we'll never inspire the next 
generation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2015/jun/18/engineers-unless-we-wave-our-arms-a-bit-well-never-inspire-the-next-generation>
“This suggests statistically that ethnicity itself is correlated with an 
unemployment outcome, and is a stronger effect than any of the other factors 
studied,” the report concluded.

According to Fatimilehin, unconscious bias, preconceptions about who will “fit 
in” with company culture and people “recruiting in their own image” also play a 
role.

“The chief execs say ‘there’s nobody out there’,” she said. “There are people 
out there. As a society we need to get better at looking for people, rather 
than just accepting that a certain type of black person doesn’t exist.”

Anita Bernie, director of spacecraft platforms at Surrey Satellite Technology 
Ltd (SSTL), said she was “amazed” by the gulf in career prospects between white 
and ethnic minority students. Bernie, who is black, said that SSTL has a 
diverse mix of ethnicities and that most of her current team are female.

“When I go to other companies, the mix in terms of gender and ethnicity is 
very different,” she said.

Bernie agreed that employer recruitment bias is likely to be a problem. “It’s 
partly human nature that you tend to want to recruit people like you,” she 
said. “It’s really easy to see a young white lad come in and think ‘I used to 
be like that’. I do think that exists in other companies.”

Rebecca Hilsenrath, chief executive of the Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> and Human Rights Commission 
said: “It is shocking that black and minority ethnic people with degrees are 
still not getting the same job opportunities as others. This suggests we have a 
long way to go to create the equal society the prime minister talked about on 
the steps of Downing Street.”

An EHRC report 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/our-work/news/widespread-inequality-risks-increasing-race-tensions-warns-ehrc>
 published earlier this year found that the life prospects for young black and 
minority ethnic people have got much worse over the past five years and are at 
their most challenging for generations. On average, black, Asian and ethnic 
minority workers with degrees are two-and-a-half times more likely to be 
unemployed than white workers with degrees, the report found.

Belinda Phipps, CEO of the Science Council, welcomed the RAEng review, saying 
it was important to highlight inequalities in the profession. “From the moment 
a baby is born its life is shaped by the enforcement of stereotypes: girl 
children are taught they must be clean and quiet; those of certain ethnic 
origin are expected not to succeed,” she said.
 