
Wayne Bennett has confirmed he will make changes to his side for their must‑win
Four Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> match against 
Scotland on Saturday as he casts an eye ahead to the final group game against 
Australia in London next weekend.

Bennett said he still has to finalise his side for the final group game 
against the Kangaroos but has a fair idea of who he will select. He will use 
the game in Coventry on Saturday as an opportunity to play those who have yet 
to appear for the national side this autumn.

England keep spirits up but defeat makes route to final a steep climb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/england-rugby-league-four-nations-sam-burgess>
Sam Burgess is expected to be fit despite picking up a knock in training but 
the vice-captain, James Graham, will miss out because of a knee injury. George 
Williams and Liam Farrell are the two players most likely to come in, but 
Bennett warned he will not rotate too much following thenarrow defeat against 
New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-new-zealand-four-nations-match-report>
 on Saturday.

“I’m not going to make too many changes but I want to make sure I give 
everyone in the squad a game and I’ll make sure I do that this weekend,” he 
said. “Stevie Ward is the one exception from the group who won’t play and there 
are some guys that haven’t played since France and probably won’t play again 
now.

“I saw George play in the finals for Wigan a few weeks ago and he’s a quality 
player. He’ll definitely play this weekend, but it’s a bit hard for some guys 
who haven’t played since France – but you can’t do anything about it.”

England know that only victory in their final two group games gives them a 
realistic chance of making the Anfield final this month, making the match 
against Australia next weekend in London a semi‑final in effect.

“I’m fairly close to knowing the team that will play against Australia,” 
Bennett said. “There’s two or three spots up for grabs on Saturday but I think 
we all have a fair idea of what the side will be in London next weekend 
already.”

Bennett believes that confidence is still high in his group after their 
opening‑round defeat to New Zealand. “They’ve had enough losses in their life 
to handle [that] one,” he said. “We can’t change it, there’s disappointment but 
we move onto this weekend.”
 