
The first beavers to live in the wild in England for 300 years are to be 
allowed to continue to swim free in a Devon river as long as it can be proven 
they are free of disease and of Eurasian origin.

Initially the government announced plans to trap the beavers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/30/first-england-beavers-in-centuries-captured>
, which are roaming wild in the River Otter, and confine them to a zoo or 
wildlife park, arguing they were an invasive species and could be carrying a 
disease.

But environmental campaigners – and many people who live and work along the 
river 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/16/battle-stop-capture-englands-first-wild-beavers>
 – launched a passionate campaign arguing the beavers were defined as 
non-native only because man hunted them to extinction.

Natural England’s board decided on Wednesday to grant a licence to Devon 
Wildlife Trust 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/natural-england-approves-trial-release-of-beavers>
 (DWT) to allow the “managed release” of the beavers back into the Otter once 
they had been captured and proved to be of Eurasian origin free of the
Echinococcus multilocularis parasite. The trust will be allowed to study the 
beavers and their impact on the environment over five years.

Rewilding Britain: bringing wolves, bears and beavers back to the land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/19/-sp-rewilding-large-species-britain-wolves-bears>
The trial could lead to the re-introduction of the creature across England.

In a statement Natural England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/natural-england> said: “Devon Wildlife 
Trust’s licence application has been thoroughly assessed against the 
internationally recognised guidelines published by the International Union for 
the Conservation of Nature.

“The licence is subject to a range of conditions, including confirmation that 
the beavers are of Eurasian origin and are free of theEchinococcus 
multilocularis parasite.

“Under the terms of the licence, by September at the latest, Devon Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust must develop a 
management strategy to deal quickly with any undesirable impacts which the 
beavers may have on the River Otter during the trial period, as well as a 
monitoring programme to study their impacts.”

Andrew Sells, Natural England’s chairman commented: “Reintroduction of a 
species is a complicated and emotive subject and we have considered this 
application very carefully. Responses to our written consultation and public 
meetings have been generally positive and we are now satisfied with Devon 
Wildlife Trust’s plans for managing and monitoring the project, which will 
allow important evidence to be gathered during the trial on any impacts which 
the beavers may have.

“Future decisions by Natural England on the release of beavers will, in large 
part, be informed by results of this trial. The unauthorised release of beavers 
remains illegal and Natural England does not expect to grant any other licences 
for beaver release during this trial period.”

Harry Barton, chief executive of DWT, said: “This is an historic moment. The 
beavers of the River Otter are the first breeding population in the English 
countryside for hundreds of years.

“We believe they can play a positive role in the landscapes of the 21st 
century through their ability to restore our rivers to their former glories. We 
know from our own research and research done in Europe that beavers are 
excellent aquatic-engineers improving the flood and drought resilience of our 
countryside and increasing the water quality of our rivers. They are incredibly 
industrious animals and their hard work has benefits for people and wildlife.”

There have been sightings of beavers on the Otter for the last decade. But 
last year their existence was provenwhen local retired environmental scientist 
Tom Buckley took a video of the creatures last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
.

The town of Ottery St Mary enjoyed something of a tourist boom as beaver 
spotters headed to Devon to try to spot the creatures and many naturalists 
argued that the beavers were good news for biodiversity and could ease flooding 
problems because their dams slow the rate water moves down rivers, such as the 
Otter.

But the government, then under intense fire from enthusiasts because of the 
badger cull up in nearby Somerset and Gloucestershire, risked further ireby 
insisting the beavers had to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/30/first-england-beavers-in-centuries-captured>
.

Friends of the Earth launched legal proceedings 
<http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/press_releases/friends-earth-begins-legal-challenge-devon-beaver-capture_24102014>
 claiming that because Britain was part of the beavers’ natural range before 
they were hunted to extinction, they are protected under European law. 
Petitions were signed,public meetings held 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/16/battle-stop-capture-englands-first-wild-beavers>
.

The DWT came up with a practical solution 
<http://www.devonwildlifetrust.org/devons-wild-beavers/>, applying for a 
licence to release the beavers back into the wild after they had been captured 
and tested and then monitor them over five years.

The origin of the Devon beavers is unknown but is thought to be the result of 
an escape or an unsanctioned release.

According to the DWT there is evidence of beaver activity on the River Otter 
from Honiton to Budleigh Salterton, a distance of around 13 miles. DWT assumes 
there are at least nine beavers on the river, including one confirmed breeding 
group.

DWT has drawn up plans for the “River Otter Beaver Trial” – a five year 
monitoring project. This project will oversee the population, range and health 
of the beavers - and the effect they have on the local landscape and people. It 
will focus on the beavers’ impacts on wildlife, vegetation, water flow, water 
quality, communities and infrastructure.

In 2009 Natural England published a report 
<http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/45003> that had extolled 
the benefits of releasing beavers back into the wild. The report said beavers 
could improve fish stocks and their dams could help prevent flooding by slowing 
down the flow of water from high ground.

The next step will be to trap the beavers and test them before they can be 
re-released. This will be carried out by the Animal Plant Health Agency (APHA) 
under a separate licence that was granted towards the end of 2014.
 