
Here we go again. The Equal Pay Act was introduced 46 years ago and yet from 
Thursday this week the UK’s female workforce will effectively be working for 
free until 31 December, due to the scale of the gender pay gap.

This year’s “equal pay day”, which highlights the difference between men’s and 
women’s salaries, is only one day later than it was last year 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/equal-pay-day-2/>. This 
reflects the glacial pace of change in reducing the gulf between the genders in 
earnings.

Average pay for full-time female employees is still 9.4% lower than for 
full-time male employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/26/weekly-uk-earnings-rose-2015-biggest-increase-since-financial-crash>
, according tothe latest official figures 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-gender-pay-gap-what-is-it-and-what-affects-it/>. 
That gap is only slightly better than the 9.6% recorded in 2015 but at least an 
improvement on 17.4% back in 1997.

Women continue to be penalised with lower pay and fewer promotions when they 
return to work after taking time away to care for children and because they 
tend to work in jobs with lower salaries, such as caring and administration. 
There is also a penalty for working part-time where pay, on average, is less 
per hour than in full-time work. And a far higher proportion of women work 
part-time – 41%, compared with only 12% of men.

What’s more, when compared with other countries’ records on gender equality, 
the UK has slipped down the global rankings.It was the ninth most gender-equal 
country in 2006 but by this year had slipped to 20th place 
<https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-gender-gap-report-2016/>, according 
to tables compiled by the World Economic Forum.

At this pace, it will take decades to close the gender pay gap. On one 
estimate,equal pay will finally be achieved 99 years after the 1970 Equal Pay 
Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/24/gender-pay-gap-wont-close-until-2069-says-deloitte>
 was enacted.

That’s bad news for a government that has vowed to close the gap within a 
generation.

To be fair, ministers have made some encouraging noises and even some 
meaningful changes. They include flexible parental leave and the national 
living wage, of which two-thirds of recipients are women.

The government is also increasing the amount of free childcare on offer to 
working parents and – in a bid to put pressure on employers – from April next 
yearall those with more than 250 staff will have to publish their gender pay gap
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/12/gender-pay-gap-reporting-big-firms-start-2018>
. There are also moves to get more women on boards.

Even so, rather than celebrating the latest marginal improvement in the pay 
gap, as ministers did when the figures came out, it is time to come up with 
more radical moves to stamp out workplace discrimination, support women’s 
careers and get more young women into higher-paying sectors.

At the moment, girls and boys are let down by inadequate careers advice, and 
when they get into the workplace they are let down again by a chronic 
under-investment in training that traps far too many people in low-paying, 
low-skilled jobs.

In placing employers under more scrutiny, the new rules in April should be 
helpful. But it is not enough to name and shame the worst offenders. Workers 
need more means to challenge those inequalities. Companies must be made to 
explain themselves.

The government could start by scrapping the tribunal fees that stand in the 
way of many women getting justice from employers who have discriminated against 
them.

In most cases, the pay gaps that come to light under the new disclosure rules 
next year will be down to the usual factors of more men than women being in the 
top jobs, as opposed to outright discrimination and men earning more than women 
for the same work. But if we accept those differences in seniority, we might as 
well give up on hopes of closing the pay gap. Instead, offending firms should 
be made to re-assess how they train and promote people, how they hire new staff 
and what kind of flexibility they offer.

Theresa May called for gender equality when she set out her pledge for a 
“Britain that works for everyone” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
. If she meant it, she must get tough on Britain’s stubbornly wide pay gap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fequal-pay-gender-gap-britain-women-earnings-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffa2e90c8c4b0b9f252e26e6161e5722bd6ccaae%2F0_133_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Equal%20pay%20is%20still%20far-off%20for%20Britain%2C%20where%20the%20gender%20gap%20narrows%20at%20a%20glacial%20pace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fequal-pay-gender-gap-britain-women-earnings-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Equal%20pay%20is%20still%20far-off%20for%20Britain%2C%20where%20the%20gender%20gap%20narrows%20at%20a%20glacial%20pace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fequal-pay-gender-gap-britain-women-earnings-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffa2e90c8c4b0b9f252e26e6161e5722bd6ccaae%2F0_133_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Philip Green: trying to make a deal on his own terms. Photograph: Mike 
Marsland/WireImage 
Green hardly the one to rule on BHS pension

Five months ago, this newspaper wrote that the BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> scandal was not about the failure of 
capitalism but the failure of people to recognise their basic moral duties.

Last week, as the Pensions Regulator started formal legal proceedings against 
Sir Philip Green and Dominic Chappell, the former owners of BHS, that statement 
is as pertinent as ever.

There has been much debate about how much Green has offered the regulator to 
support the BHS pension scheme, which has a deficit of £571m.

But really this does not matter. The Pensions Regulator is the organisation 
best placed to rule on how to financially support an ailing pension scheme – 
the key is in the name. Yet, Green cannot bring himself to meet the watchdog’s 
demands and is proposing a complex deal that would involve the BHS pensions 
becoming part of a new pension scheme that is not secured by a sponsoring 
company.

The billionaire promised to “sort” the problems facing the BHS pension scheme, 
but we are still waiting for a settlement. It is now clear Green wants to 
“sort” it on his terms, but as the size of the BHS deficit shows, he is not the 
ideal person to be dictating the terms of a pension rescue.

The Pensions Regulator and its boss, Lesley Titcomb, are fighting for their 
future after the criticism they have received because of the BHS scandal. This, 
and the febrile political atmosphere around Green, add an extra dimension to 
their work. But at least their remit is focused on getting the best deal for 
BHS pensioners, who will ultimately have to pick up the bill if it enters the 
Pension Protection Fund, funded by a levy on other schemes.

That is why the regulator is right to press ahead with formal action against 
Green, even if it could take years to resolve. In the meantime, hopefully Green 
will face up to his responsibilities to the 11,000 BHS workers who lost their 
jobs and agree to the regulator’s demands. It should not be forgotten that 
while they have lost their jobs and some retirement benefits, Green has only 
lost his reputation.

M&S faces bitter conflict on store closures

Get ready for a brutal battle between Marks & Spencer, MPs and trade unions. 
The high street retailer clashed with politicians and union leaders when it 
tried to make changes to pay and pensions, but wait and see what happens when 
it announces next week that is closing dozens of shops and downsizing its 
clothing offer in others.

M&S may no longer produce the lucrative profits it did in its heyday in the 
late 1990s, but its shops are still the bastion of high streets across the 
country. Each of its shops can employ more than 100 people, and they offer 
towns a reliable collection of high-quality food and clothing.

So, when M&S proposes shutting a shop it is a big deal. The company tried to 
close nine last year, affecting 430 workers, sparking petitions and rows in 
places including Aldershot in Hampshire.

Steve Rowe, the M&S chief executive, is right to take action – the company has 
way more shops and retail space than its rivals. But M&S is a British 
institution, and he won’t find this an easy task.
 