
Despite the Equal Pay Act, women in Britain today still earn less than men. 
The current gender pay gap means that from Thursday 10 November, women in 
full-time jobs will in effect work for free until 31 December.

This year’s “equal pay day”, which highlights the difference between men’s and 
women’s salaries, is only one day later than it was last year 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/equal-pay-day-2/>, 
reflecting the glacial pace of change in reducing the earnings gulf between the 
genders. Thecurrent pay gap 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/equal-pay-day-2/>  
<http://%20current%20overall%20gap%20for%20full%20time%20workers%20is%2013.9%25./>
between men and women in the UK is 13.9%

Equal pay is still far-off for Britain, where the gender gap narrows at a 
glacial pace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/equal-pay-gender-gap-britain-women-earnings-men>
Equal pay is a totemic issue for gender equality. When the Dagenham Ford 
machinists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/06/dagenham-sewing-machinists-strike>
 began their fight in 1968, the women did not realise they had set the UK on a 
course for equal pay legislation.

A European Court of Justice judgment in 1982 led to the UK amending the 1970 
Equal Pay Act to incorporate equal value into UK law. As a result, women were 
not only entitled to equal pay for equal work, but also to equal pay when their 
role could reasonably be judged to be of equal value to that occupied by a man 
in the same organisation.

Landmark case

In 1993 the European Court of Justice heard a case brought by Dr Enderby, a 
speech therapist (a role almost exclusively occupied by women), who was paid 
40% less than senior hospital pharmacists and clinical psychologists (roles 
predominately filled by men). In that landmark case, the European court ruled 
that there was aprima facie case of sex discrimination and it was for the 
employer to show an objective justification for the difference in pay. Dr 
Enderby won her case because the employer couldn’t meet that test.

 In our highly gender segregated labour market the concept of equal value goes 
to the heart of the fight for gender equality. While 80% of care workers are 
women, 90% of the science, technology, engineering and manufacturing sector 
workforces are male. The question is why jobs traditionally done by women have 
lower pay than those mostly carried out by men. OneUS study 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/article1682296.ece> found that as 
women moved into male-dominated sectors, pay in those sectors fell. So perhaps 
it is women we undervalue, rather than the jobs they do.

Why do jobs traditionally done by women have lower pay than those mostly 
carried out by men?

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> dominate low-paid 
sectors: caring, cleaning, cashiering, clerical work and catering. But why 
should a refuse collector, say, be paid more than a care worker? When you start 
to unpick the justifications for pay differences they begin to look weak.

The Enderby case led to a series of legal challenges, mainly in the public 
sector, and in local government in particular, where women successfully brought 
equal value claims. The difficult issue with many of these cases was that 
collective bargaining bumped up against the individual woman’s right to equal 
pay.

Trade unions are and have been at the forefront of the fight for equal pay, 
including, for instance, the currentUnison 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/press-release/2016/10/women-drag-last-equal-pay-claim-council-to-court-says-unison/>
 fight for its members inReading council 
<http://www.publicfinance.co.uk/news/2016/10/reading-council-faces-equal-pay-challenge>
. However, in these particular equal value cases the truth is that lawyers have 
fought for and secured a better deal for individual women than their trade 
unions achieved.

 These cases led to the women fighting for their right to equal pay being told 
that they were going to bankrupt their local councils. The bill has indeed been 
huge: Birmingham council alone facestotal costs of £1.2bn 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-birmingham-34069437> to settle its case 
with female staff.

 But women are not to blame for pursuing something to which they are entitled 
in law. The fact is that some employers have dragged their feet in settling 
these claims and women have waited for many years – some have literally died 
waiting. Reading has now won the dubious title of the last local authority in 
England and Wales to settle an equal pay claim, keeping women waiting for seven 
years.

Civil service women see gender pay gap grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/06/civil-service-women-in-growing-gender-pay-gap>
This is not only a public sector issue. The £100m legal battle between 
supermarket chain Asda and its shopfloor staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/asda-equal-pay-shopfloor-staff-women>
 shows that the private sector also faces equal value claims.

New gender pay gap reporting requirements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/12/gender-pay-gap-reporting-big-firms-start-2018>
, due to start in 2018, will require large employers to report on their gender 
pay gaps. As employers review their pay systems most will find that women are 
concentrated in lower-paid roles.

As we look ahead to a UK outside the EU and possibly the single market, we 
cannot take for granted that equal pay for work of equal value will remain part 
of our equalities framework. So the theme of this year’s equal pay day on 10  
November will be that women’s work is of #Equalvalue. Nothing less will do.




Sam Smethers is chief executive of the Fawcett Society.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 