
The former world darts champion Eric Bristow has apologised for a number of 
offensive tweets he sent out in relation to the football sexual abuse scandal.

 Bristow, 59, was sacked by Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/eric-bristow-loses-sky-sports-role-twitter-sex-abuse-story-comments>
, where he had been a regular contributor to darts coverage since the early 
1990s, after writing on social media: “Might be a looney but if some football 
coach was touching me when I was a kid as I got older I would have went back 
and sorted that poof out.”

Another tweet read: “Dart players tough guys footballers wimps”.

In a heated interview with Piers Morgan on ITV’s Good Morning Britain 
<http://www.itv.com/goodmorningbritain> on Wednesday, Bristow defended his 
tweets, saying he was trying to encourage children to report abuse immediately. 
“I want youngsters now to go out and complain straight away. There’s no point 
complaining 30 years later,” he said.

But he was confronted by Marilyn Hawes, a mother of three sexually abused 
children and founder of the Enough Abuse charity, who called him a bully. “I 
find you the most deeply offensive man that’s breathed oxygen and quite 
frankly, if I had a set of darts, I would stick them where the sun don’t 
shine,” she said.

“I sat with people last night that you have harmed immeasurably and if you 
think that what you have said is clever, let me take you through what a bully 
is. You are a bully.”

Bristow then accepted that he had caused offence. “It was worded wrong. I 
apologise, it was a miswording. They are not wimps,” he said.
GMB Daily (@GMBDaily) 
Bristow Defends Tweets, Eric Bristow speaks to @susannareid100 
<https://twitter.com/susannareid100> and @piersmorgan 
<https://twitter.com/piersmorgan>, #GMB 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GMB?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/ZQdOYVOnIj 
<https://t.co/ZQdOYVOnIj>
 <https://twitter.com/GMBDaily/status/803880929907404800> November 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GMBDaily/status/803880929907404800> 
The posts from the five-times world champion, who was awarded an MBE in 1989, 
drew fierce criticism earlier this week. One tweet, which stated “bet the rugby 
boys are ok”, prompted a reply from Brian Moore, the former England rugby 
player who himself was abused as a child. “I’m not even going to address the 
many reasons these tweets are wrong. I’ll just say ignorance is no excuse for 
this idiocy,” he wrote.

Newcastle United football club also dropped Bristow from an upcoming event. 
Steve Walters, a former Crewe Alexandra player who has reported abuse, tweeted:
Steve Walters (@steven_walters4) 
Disgusted with Eric Bristows remarks tonight #stoneagementality 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/stoneagementality?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/steven_walters4/status/803348847300845568> November 28, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/steven_walters4/status/803348847300845568> 
 More than 20 former footballers have come forward alleging they were victims 
of child abuse as junior players, the chief executive of the Professional 
Footballers’ Association, Gordon Taylor, has said. Numerous police forces are 
also investigating the allegations.
 