
The former darts world champion Eric Bristow has been sacked by Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> after he tweeted comments about 
the football sexual abuse story on Monday.

Bristow, 59, had been a regular contributor to the channel’s darts coverage 
since the early 90s but Sky announced on Tuesday morning that he would no 
longer be used by it. “He was a contributor to our darts coverage in the past 
but we will not be using him in the future,” a spokesperson commented.
Eric Bristow MBE (@ericbristow) 
Might be a looney but if some football coach was touching me when i was a kid 
as i got older i would have went back and sorted that poof out
 <https://twitter.com/ericbristow/status/803330575352393728> November 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ericbristow/status/803330575352393728> 
Bristow had caused outrage overnight following a number of tweets, starting 
with one which stated 
<https://twitter.com/ericbristow/status/803330575352393728>: “Might be a looney 
but if some football coach was touching me when i was a kid as i got older i 
would have went back and sorted that poof out.”

The five-time world champion, who was awarded an MBE in 1989, continued with a 
series of posts which drew fierce criticism.

More than 20 former footballers have come forward alleging they were victims 
of child abuse as junior players, the Professional Footballers’ Association 
chief executive, Gordon Taylor, has said. Numerous police forces are also 
investigating the allegations.

Another of Bristow’s tweets stated “bet the rugby boys are ok” – prompting a 
reply from Brian Moore, the former England hooker who himself was abused as a 
child. “I’m not even going to address the many reasons these tweets are wrong. 
I’ll just say ignorance is no excuse for this idiocy,” he wrote.
 