
Essendon’s $9.8m loss has laid bare the financial toll of their AFL 
supplements debacle. A few hours afterthe AFL officially stripped Jobe Watson 
of his 2012 Brownlow medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/afl-2012-brownlow-medal-awarded-to-trent-cotchin-and-sam-mitchell>
, the Bombers had even worse news for their long-suffering fans.

They confirmed the huge financial hit, which has put them just over $9m into 
debt.Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> said most of the 
loss relates directly or indirectly to January’s Court of Arbitration of Sport 
verdict against 34 current and past players, including Watson.

Resigned acceptance over Brownlow medal masks AFL’s policy failings | Craig 
Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/resigned-acceptance-over-brownlow-medal-masks-afls-policy-failings>
CAS ruled against the players over doping charges related to the club’s 
disastrous 2012 supplements regime. The doping bans severely weakened Essendon’s
AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> side and they finished last.

Essendon chief executive Xavier Campbell said they had a unique set of 
challenges this season. “While we’ve been stringent in our financial 
operations, a number of one-off costs severely impacted the financial result,” 
he added.

“Shortly after the CAS decision, the board and administration implemented 
serious measures to respond to these challenges, including a range of cost 
cutting measures and identifying greater efficiencies across the business.

“With the abnormal costs to our business now largely behind us, we are 
confident that our underlying business model, debt reduction plan and strategic 
priorities, will return Essendon to a position of strength in the coming years.”

Essendon said the net additional cost of player compensation claims and legal 
fees was $4.5m. Additionally, they had to fork out $1.5m for short-term player 
contracts so they could field an AFL team.

They also lost $3.1m in reduced gate takings and other revenue. Essendon took 
another hit of $806,000 as they wrote off assets at their old Windy Hill ground.

“We expect debt levels to peak during 2017 and our strong cash flows from 
normal operations will then allow us to begin paying down the debt,” Campbell 
added.

“Despite these issues, we have taken a number of important steps to ensure a 
positive future for our club both on and off the field and I am confident we 
can now transition into a new era with a strong sense of optimism and purpose.”

Essendon will welcome back most of their banned players next season, including 
Watson. They will hold their annual general meeting on 19 December.
 