
And then, in a fog of champagne-fuelled anticipation, it was suddenly 2017. 
We’ve perhaps been idealising it a little: “I can’t wait for this year to be 
over,” people would say in response to every nightmare 2016 threw up, as if a 
mere change of digit would make all the difference. Still, if you fancy getting 
the new year off to a gentler start, you could do worse thanEthel & Ernest 
(Universal, PG), Roger Mainwood’s delicate, melancholic and adoringly realised 
animated adaptation ofRaymond Briggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/24/raymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest>
’s autobiographical graphic novel.

Detailing the half-century-spanning relationship between Briggs’s 
salt-of-the-earth parents, from first date to last goodbye, Mainwood has 
fashioned a film in which every dramatic conflict lands like a goose down 
pillow. It’s a very English, composed celebration of unconditional familial 
love and risks tipping into an overly romantic exercise in 20th-century 
nostalgia. Then again, as Ethel and Ernest, voiced by Brenda Blethyn andJim 
Broadbent <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent>, repeatedly spar 
over their opposing politics, the film also plays as a wry blueprint of the 
Brexit voter’s rose-tinted England.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51e654f49db74eba26ca7cfcf6e539120def5220%2F0_166_4987_2993%2F4987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethel%20%26%20Ernest%3B%20Little%20Men%3B%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%3B%20London%20Town%3B%20The%20Man%20Between%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethel%20%26%20Ernest%3B%20Little%20Men%3B%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%3B%20London%20Town%3B%20The%20Man%20Between%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51e654f49db74eba26ca7cfcf6e539120def5220%2F0_166_4987_2993%2F4987.jpg>
 Michael Barbieri and Theo Taplitz in Ira Sachs’s Little Men: ‘immaculately 
observed’. Photograph: Altitude Film 
Alternatively, if you’re in the mood for quiet tenderness with a shade less 
cuteness, head over to Netflix, where Ira Sachs’s gorgeous teenage friendship 
studyLittle Men has skipped DVD to land on the streaming service, just in time 
to soothe some New Year’s Day hangovers. Exquisitely observed and immaculately 
cast, the film has an innate, unforced understanding of male adolescent 
breakability and bravado, embodied in the chalk-and-cheese pairing of withdrawn 
Jake (Theo Taplitz) and bolshy Tony (Michael Barbieri), who forge a deep bond 
as their parents fight a cross-class battle over Brooklyn property inheritance.

The unhappy practicalities of the adults’ world is presented in stark contrast 
to the boys’ purer, sweeter search for their own identities. Sachs hints oh so 
subtly at the crises they might eventually face, without preserving their 
innocence in amber. Though the adult players are uniformly terrific, notably 
Chilean actress Paulina Garcia as Tony’s hard-up seamstress mum, it’s Taplitz’s 
aching vulnerability and Barbieri’s eccentric swagger that stick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0644faba0a073e7b55f4f9355512562348efb6ea%2F0_37_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethel%20%26%20Ernest%3B%20Little%20Men%3B%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%3B%20London%20Town%3B%20The%20Man%20Between%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethel%20%26%20Ernest%3B%20Little%20Men%3B%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%3B%20London%20Town%3B%20The%20Man%20Between%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fethel-ernest-raymond-briggs-little-men-paul-schrader%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0644faba0a073e7b55f4f9355512562348efb6ea%2F0_37_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
 ‘Stomach-churning brio’: Nicolas Cage and Willem Dafoe in Dog Eat Dog. 
Photograph: Allstar/Signature Entertainment 
As nasty and nihilistic as Sachs’s film is generous and humane, Paul Schrader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/paul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview>
’sDog Eat Dog (Signature, 18) at least finds the veteran chronicler of 
society’s seamier underside – an awfully long way from the insights ofTaxi 
Driver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/taxi-driver> – attacking lurid genre 
terrain with stomach-churning brio. You can’t accuse the film’s neon-nightmare 
atmospherics of being half-hearted. The film’s hunger to shock, coming straight 
out of the gate with a grisly, drugged-up double murder, is so all-consuming 
that its sleazily tangled yarn, involving Nicolas Cage and a bug-eyed Willem 
Dafoe ineptly kidnapping an infant, seems an afterthought. PerhapsLondon Town 
(High Fliers, 15) could borrow some of its surplus bad attitude: Derrick 
Borte’s peculiar musical semi-biopic welds a would-be gritty portrait ofthe 
Clash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/clash> to a sentimental coming-of-age 
narrative to awkward effect.

The rerelease of the week is a cracker. As taut and terse today as it must 
have seemed in 1953, Carol Reed’s chiaroscuro espionage thrillerThe Man Between 
(Studiocanal, U) tends to get filed away inThe Third Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-third-man>’s shadow, but deserves its own 
platform. Anchored by a typically suave, opaqueJames Mason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/apr/13/1>, this morally complex tale of 
a former Nazi caught up, along with prim, innocent Claire Bloom, in a 
border-blurring Soviet-German abduction plot startles even today with the 
tougher twists of its melodrama.
 