
At 1.30pm on Thursday, a long queue snaked along the pavement outside 
Newcastle’s O2 Academy, a concert venue in the heart of the city. Many of those 
waiting were wearing England football shirts and all were in excitable mood.

The immediate issue of national importance that preoccupied the gathering 
crowd was how long it would take to get into the hall chosen by hundreds of 
Geordies as the place to watch England play Wales in Euro 2016. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>

So when asked about how they would vote in this Thursday’s EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, and whether they would do 
so, they were initially thrown. “Woooaaahh,” a young man shouted as he turned 
to his friends. All then joined in a louder, soaring cry and burst into 
laughter before, one after another, declaring themselves for Brexit. The 
loudest, a young man who claimed he was called Paul but who his mates insisted 
was Mike, said Nigel Farage was a “good bloke” who spoke sense.

Paul/Mike said he had listened to the arguments on both sides, thought “a lot 
of lies have been said”, and had decided for himself. “I have an eye on the 
pros and cons. We have the best engineers in this country. The Japanese will 
still want to buy from us whether we are in or out won’t they? I’m voting for 
out.”

EU referendum splits Britain down the middle as battle resumes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-britain-voting-campaign-jo-cox>
Further back in the queue, another group of friends, a quieter bunch, met the 
referendum inquiry with a pensive calm. They were for remain, to a man. David 
Brocklehurst, a housebuilder, was in no doubt that it would be best for him and 
his country. “I am for staying in. There will be a shock to the economy if we 
leave. Our jobs would be at stake. There would be less houses built.” One of 
his mates said he was worried about political uncertainty compounding the 
economic damage. “It may be exaggerated, what they say about a shock. But it 
worries me. There will be a negative effect.”

Newcastle  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle>is a solidly red city: 
its MPs are all Labour and the city council is Labour-run. If votes in the 
referendum were to follow party loyalties, Newcastle would be overwhelmingly 
for Remain, and if this were reflected in other Labour strongholds, David 
Cameron would be home and dry.

Instead, after months of bruising campaigning on the biggest issue to have 
been put to the British people in a generation, it is a city divided, in a 
country split down the middle.Today’s Opinium/Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/polls> poll shows that with three days to 
go, it’s a dead heat:

■ 44% of UK voters are for Brexit and 44% for remain, with 10% undecided;

■ 64% of Labour voters want to stay but 27% are still for leave;

■ 50% of Conservatives back remain and 43% leave.

Last week, in a final effort to shift more Labour voters to Remain, Cameron 
gave centre stage to senior Labour figures, who fanned out across the country 
to make the case for staying in. There was even a joint appearance byGeorge 
Osborne and his Labour predecessor as chancellor, Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/george-osborne-alistair-darling-unite-against-vote-leave>
, at a Hitachi plant in Kent to try to show Labour people that remain was not 
just a Tory cause but their cause, too. Gordon Brown toured the north. Former 
home secretary Alan Johnson was in Newcastle on Thursday. But was it working?

Rupert Murdoch’s newspapers in two minds over EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/18/rupert-murdoch-newspapers-eu-referendum-sun-times>
For every remain supporter in Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle>, there seemed to be another for 
leave. Jim Henderson, a retired watermark engineer, said he would take his lead 
from his grandchildren. And what did his grandchildren think? “They are all for 
out,” he said with a broad smile. Immigration was a huge issue for him and his 
family. The north-east has one of the lowest ratios of immigrants of any part 
of the country – just 2%, according to the Labour MEP for the area, Paul 
Brannen – but it will still be decisive for many.

Ciara McCrory, a 19-year-old healthcare adviser, said she had been following 
the debate closely. “My dad is a taxi driver. He says there would be more work 
if it weren’t for immigration and all the Polish people. So I will vote to 
leave.” But walking down the road behind her, Ian Farrimond and his wife, 
Lindsay, who are missionaries, said there was no question that the country 
would be stronger inside the EU. “I just have a strong gut feeling we are safer 
and better off in. But I don’t have any confidence about the result. It really 
terrifies me,” said Lindsay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7415cc7d148f018f05d793ecf4191043f1034bb3%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20voters%20unconvinced%20by%20scare%20tactics%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20just%20want%20to%20do%20what%E2%80%99s%20right%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%20voters%20unconvinced%20by%20scare%20tactics%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20just%20want%20to%20do%20what%E2%80%99s%20right%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7415cc7d148f018f05d793ecf4191043f1034bb3%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Remain campaigner Alan Johnson, the former Labour home secretary, has been 
touring the country and visited Newcastle last week. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty Images 
Others were simply unsure which way to go. David Phillips, a farmer from near 
Hexham, said he was undecided but leaning towards remain. “I am not sure yet, 
but I think probably we have to play along with this [the EU]. The working 
class has made up its mind to vote to leave, but I think we may be better 
staying in. I just want to do what is best for the country.”

The only view that was pretty much universally held by people on the streets 
was that both campaigns had lacked credibility and had been peddling scare 
stories which had left them cold, dismissive of politicians’ rallying cries and 
determined to decide for themselves. The phrase “scare stories” was on 
everyone’s lips.

Our Opinium survey bears this out. For all the sound and fury of both 
campaigns on this most far-reaching of issues, political leaders of both sides 
are not seen as credible by the people they have tried to convince or scare, 
whether it is remain on the damage to the economy or leave on the threat of 
more waves of immigration. Cameron is seen as “convincing” by just 24% and “not 
convincing” by 63%, while the score for Corbyn is little, if any, better – 20% 
saying he has been convincing against 58% who say the reverse. Boris Johnson, 
heading the leave camp, scores best, with 38% saying he has been convincing, 
while 48% say he has been unconvincing.

Criticism of the campaigns’ failure to serve a genuinely interested electorate 
is not confined to voters. Many leading politicians now accept that something 
has gone badly wrong. In an interview with theObserver, former Tory chancellor 
Kenneth Clarke said the whole referendum campaign had been a “bizarre political 
experience”. The Remain camp’s efforts to “dramatise the erudite reports of the 
Treasury and Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/brexit-would-cause-diy-recession-says-george-osborne>
” had not worked, he said. On the leave side, “too many of the respectable 
politicians” had made “rather guilty echoes” of the bigotry andprejudice of 
Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
. Political leaders had voiced views they did not appear to believe in, and 
people could see through them.

“I won’t name the leading figures, but there are people in the leave campaign 
who would never have dreamt of raising anti-immigrant arguments because they 
are not anti-immigrant in their politics,” Clarke said. “But I am afraid they 
have been tempted to make anti-immigrant noises once they realised that their 
cause might win on that ticket.” The result of all this, Clarke has concluded, 
is that a great swell of the population felt confused and angry at having to 
make this decision in a referendum that should never have been called. “Ever 
since the referendum started, I thought it a complete gamble,” Clarke said. 
“And I remain completely unsure which way it is going to go.” It was all now in 
the “lap of the gods”.

“The political opinion of the sensible, intelligent electorate is more 
confused and more angry on this occasion than is usually the case in a general 
election,” Clarke added. “People have not been impressed by the campaigning. 
They do feel they don’t know enough about it. And they are slightly uncertain 
as to which way to vote. One thing I am encouraged by is that a growing number 
of people think that they should vote.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f876f311134f0ab9f5096e3c82905d10ffe4def%2F0_378_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20voters%20unconvinced%20by%20scare%20tactics%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20just%20want%20to%20do%20what%E2%80%99s%20right%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%20voters%20unconvinced%20by%20scare%20tactics%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20just%20want%20to%20do%20what%E2%80%99s%20right%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Feu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f876f311134f0ab9f5096e3c82905d10ffe4def%2F0_378_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kenneth Clarke: ‘Ever since the referendum started, I thought it a complete 
gamble.’ Photograph: Felix Clay for the Observer 
Some 80% of the polling conducted by Opinium was carried out before the 
dreadful news of the murder of the Labour MP for Batley and Spen, Jo Cox, began 
to dominate the news bulletins from Thursday evening onwards. Both sides 
suspended campaigning out of respect and because it seemed so utterly 
inappropriate to continue. When it resumes in earnest on Tuesday – after 
parliament has been recalled on Monday for a day of tributes – the remain and 
leave camps say the remaining 48 hours will be far more sober than before.

No one knows how, or whether, the death of Cox – who was strongly in favour of 
remaining in the EU and had praised the way in which immigration had enriched 
the country – will affect the result. Privately the remain camp believe it will 
make it harder for their opponents to campaign aggressively on immigration and 
the need to turn our backs on the EU. When the suspect charged with Cox’s 
murder, Thomas Mair, was asked to give his name in court on Saturday he said 
“death to traitors, freedom for Britain”. The opposing theory, voiced by people 
on both sides of the argument, is that muted campaigning in the vital last few 
days will make it more difficult for remain to turn things back in their 
favour, after a string of other polls have showed leads for Brexit.

The first results from 382 local authority areas will be announced early on 
Friday. Sunderland is expected to be the earliest; soon after will come the 
result from Newcastle. Nick Forbes, the Labour leader of Newcastle city 
council, was campaigning outside the railway station on Thursday afternoon. He 
said that fears about immigration had shifted things in favour of leave in the 
previous days. The Brexit vote was stronger in surrounding rural areas and 
small towns than in the city itself. The result in the city has to be clearly 
for remain for his side to win nationwide. “My guess is that if there is not a 
60% remain vote in Newcastle, we are in serious trouble,” he said.

With so many voters still undecided, and so little time left for both 
campaigns to make decisive arguments, the atmosphere, not just in Newcastle, 
but across the country will be tense indeed in the early hours of Friday.
 