
Sevilla’s quest for a third successive Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> title remains on 
course after they beatAthletic Bilbao on penalties at the end of a game in 
which all the considerable drama came after half-time, with Kevin Gameiro 
scoring his side’s only goal before also converting the decisive spot-kick.

Liverpool 4-3 Borussia Dortmund: five Europa League talking points | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-talking-points>
Aritz Aduriz opened the scoring in the 57th minute, after a goalkeeping error 
from David Soria, only for Gameiro to turn in Grzegorz Krychowiak’s low cross 
within seconds. Raúl García put the visitors ahead for a second time, and 
brought the teams level on aggregate, when he headed in Beñat Etxebarria’s 
cross with 10 minutes to play, and though Coke had a shot cleared off the line 
in extra time neither side could prevent the tie going to penalties.

In the shootout Soria atoned for his earlier mistake by saving from 
Etxebarria, and Gameiro, limping after a late injury and ignoring fighting that 
broke out among the rival players during it, sent the decisive penalty in off 
the underside of the bar to sendSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> through.

Only Real Madrid, between 1984 and 1986, and Sevilla themselves between 2005 
and 2007 have won theUefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> Cup or 
the Europa League twice in succession, and Sevilla are attempting to become the 
first to hold the trophy for three successive years.

In addition to Liverpool they will be joined in the semi-finals by Shakhtar 
Donetskand Villarreal, both of whom followed narrow first-leg wins with more 
emphatic successes in the return. Shakhtar beatBraga 4-0, with Darijo Srna 
scoring one and creating two, to complete a 6-1 aggregate victory, while
Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> stormed to a 4-0 
half-time lead – and a 6-1 aggregate advantage – againstSparta Prague, who 
scored two consolation goals in the second half.
 