
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is in bad shape to 
repel a terrorist threat that has moved from its Middle East doorstep into its 
living room. Political divisions, public disenchantment, economic weakness, 
lack of leadership and acute international instability are combining to make 
this a uniquely vulnerable moment for the western democracies.

For Europe’s sake, Angela Merkel must hold the centre ground | Timothy Garton 
Ash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-angela-merkel-germany-terror-liberal-europe>
The nature of the threat – ubiquitous, hidden, improvised and randomly 
targeting civilians – is all but impossible to defend against. When a “lone 
wolf” attacks, as in the Bastille Day truck killings in Nice last July, the 
problem is magnified. It is still unclear whether the driver of the Berlin 
lorry was acting alone or what his motive was.

The Berlin assault could have happened anywhere. It almost did. Police foiled 
an attack on a Christmas market in Ludwigshafen, in south-westGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, by a 12-year-old German-Iraqi boy. 
Last month, French authorities arrested five people believed to be plotting 
attacks on a Christmas market on the Champs-Élysées.

Even Angela Merkel is not immune to the political backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/angela-merkel-open-door-migrants-berlin-christmas-market-attack-refugee>
 when terrorists strike. Dissent within her ruling coalition over her open-door 
immigration policy and the fury of Germany’s racist, xenophobic fringe parties 
are dragging her to the political right. This dynamic, if it continues, could 
place her autumn re-election prospects in doubt.

Far greater uncertainty attends the outcome of next spring’s presidential 
elections in France, where Marine Le Pen, the Front National leader, was 
already expected to fare well. Observers suggest new terrorist attacks inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, where anti-Muslim feelings run 
high, could decisively tip the contest in favour of the FN.

Similarly reactive distortions are also on the cards in the Netherlands, where 
voters will choose a new government in March. Geert Wilders, an Islamophobic 
extremist, is currently leading the polls.

Understanding terrorist tactics is not rocket science. Islamic State and its 
Europe-based sympathisers are fully aware of the potential of well-timed 
outrages to cause political upheavals, by exploiting people’s fears and the 
apparent inability of political establishments to protect them. Consequent and 
rising hate crime victimising Muslims (and other religious and ethnic 
minorities) is grist to the terrorist mill.

Amid the bloody carnage, Angela Merkel is a beacon of sanity | Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-terror-angela-merkel>
On the other hand, predictions that electorates can be panicked by violent 
extremism into supporting political extremism probably underestimate the 
democratic solidarity often exhibited in the wake of terrorist atrocities.

The defiant reaction of Parisians to 2015’s Charlie Hebdo and Bataclan attacks 
are cases in point. Liberal democracy is often at its strongest when most badly 
wounded.

Merkel apart, Europe is rendered more vulnerable by its perceived lack of 
strong, dependable leaders. In France, François Hollande is the least 
well-regarded president on record. Italy’s reformist prime minister has 
resigned. Spain seems incapable of agreeing on who should lead it. In Britain, 
Theresa May became prime minister without a vote.

This deficit of political legitimacy extends to the EU, where Jean-Claude 
Juncker, the confrontational commission president, is discredited. The last 
European elections saw record low turnouts. And Brexit has thrown the EU into 
turmoil at the very moment when it should be fixing eurozone finances, dealing 
with the migration problem – and shoring up terrorist defences.

Meanwhile Isis, under pressure in Syria and Iraq, is openly attempting to take 
its fight to the “enemy” in Europe’s heartlands. And Europe cannot expect much 
help from an inwardly focused Donald Trump. It is uncertain whether Europe can 
cope.
 