
Manchester United, Liverpool and Tottenham’s prospects of making an impression 
on the Europa League appear to have been enhanced byMonday’s draw in Nyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/14/manchester-united-midtjylland-tottenham-fiorentina-liverpool-augsburg-europa-league-draw>
.

United, who were eliminated from the Champions League at the group stage 
following their defeat against Wolfsburg, face the Danish championsMidtjylland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/midtjylland> while Liverpool’s reward for 
coming through their group is a meeting with Augsburg.

Tottenham seem to have the trickiest draw, although Mauricio Pochettino will 
have revenge in mind when Spurs face a repeat of last season’s meeting at this 
stage withFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>.

Here is what the English clubs can expect from their last-32 matches.

Midtjylland

Known for their reliance on analytics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/how-fc-midtjylland-analytical-route-champions-league-brentford-matthew-benham>
 and having the Brentford owner, Matthew Benham, as the majority shareholder, 
the club based on the Jutland peninsula shocked Danish football by winning 
their first domestic championship last season and are in a decent position to 
retain their title at the halfway stage. Eliminated from the Champions League 
by Apoel Nicosia in the third qualifying round, Jess Thorup’s side battled past 
Southampton to reach the group stages of the Europa League before finishing as 
runners-up behind Napoli courtesy of a 3-1 away win over last season’s 
quarter-finalists Club Brugge.

Pione Sisto has been courted by several of Europe’s big clubs but has 
struggled for form at times, having only scored twice in the league. But after 
gaining the point they needed to qualify against Brugge last week in their 
final match before the winter break, the meeting with Louis van Gaal’s side on 
17 February is their next fixture. You can bet they will be ready for it.

League position: 3rd

Star player: Pione Sisto

Augsburg

If last season was a fairytale for Augsburg then this season was fast turning 
into a nightmare for the little club from southern Bavaria. Having achieved the 
club’s best-ever Bundesliga finish last term by ending up fifth, coach Markus 
Weinzierl managed to hang on to the majority of his players in the summer after
selling the Ghana defender Baba Rahman to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/10/chelsea-agree-fee-augsburg-baba-rahman>
 for a fee that could reach up to £20m.

They recruited wisely in the form of the Germany international Piotr 
Trochowski and the South Korean forward Ja-Cheol Koo but a disastrous start to 
the season saw them pick up just five points from the opening 11 Bundesliga 
fixtures to languish in the relegation zone. But just as normal service 
appeared to have been resumed, soAugsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> began to find their mojo again. 
Three wins and a draw against Wolfsburg in their last four matches have lifted 
the club out of the bottom three and took them through as runners-up behind 
Athletic Bilbao, although having only lost one of eight meetings with them 
during his time at Borussia Dortmund, Jürgen Klopp will not be losing any sleep.

League position: 13th

Star player: Ja-Cheol Koo

Fiorentina

Tottenham’s defeat to the Italians at this stage of the competition last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/tottenham-fiorentina-europa-league-match-report>
 was largely down to two moments: Roberto Soldado’s inexplicable decision to 
pass instead of shoot when he was through on goal and Mohamed Salah’s brilliant 
one-two with Mario Gómez that sealed a 2-0 win. Given neither Soldado, who 
scored Villarreal’s winner against Real Madrid on Sunday, or Salah, who snubbed 
Fiorentina to join Roma in the summer, will be present for the rematch, 
Mauricio Pochettino will no doubt fancy his chances.

But even with a more potent-looking strike force at his disposal these days, 
the Spurs manager will be wary of taking anything for granted. Fiorentina 
remain second in Serie A despite losing to Juventus on Sunday and are Italy’s 
top scorers with 31 goals from their 16 matches. Under Paulo Sousa, they play 
an attacking formation designed to get the best out of the former Blackburn 
striker Nikola Kalinic (nine goals from 15 games) and the Senegal international 
Khouma Babacar. Once again, this could come down to the finest of margins.

League position: 2nd

Star player: Nikola Kalinic

How Midtjylland took the analytical route towards the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/how-fc-midtjylland-analytical-route-champions-league-brentford-matthew-benham> 