
In-form Napoli continued their 100% record in Group D, Manolo Gabbiadini 
(two), José María Callejón and Gonzalo Higuaín scoring in a 4-1 success over FC
Midtjylland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/midtjylland>.

Group E leaders Rapid Vienna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rapidvienna>
 and Group F pace-setters Braga have also won all three of their matches after 
both edged five-goal thrillers.

The Austrians came out on top of Viktoria Plzen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/viktoria-plzen>, while Alan grabbed an 
89th-minute winner for Braga against Marseille.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer celebrates first match back at Molde with Celtic win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/molde-celtic-europa-league-match-report>
Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> nestle second 
behind Rapid, Cedric Bakambu’s brace setting up a 4-0 defeat of Dinamo Minsk.

Fenerbahce got their first victory, Fernandao scoring in the 89th minute 
againstAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax>.

Lacina Traoré’s goal was enough for Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> to edge past FK Qarabag and 
leapfrog Tottenham at the Group J summit.

Lazio took a three-point lead in Group G after defying an early red card to 
beatRosenborg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosenborg> 3-1 at Stadio 
Olimpico.

Mauricio was dismissed after only six minutes but Alessandro Matri, Felipe and 
Antonio Candreva netted for the Serie A side in a match in which penalties were 
missed at both ends.

Dnipro had been level on points with Lazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> but lost 1-0 at home to St 
Etienne, with Romain Hamouma on target.

Schalke remain atop Group K after a 2-2 draw with second-placed Sparta Prague, 
while APOEL Nicosia beat Asteras Tripolis 2-1.

Sporting were the evening’s big scorers in Group H, despatching the Albanian 
side Skenderbeu 5-1, with all six goals coming after Hamdi Salihi’s first-half 
sending off.

Top two Lokomotiv Moscow <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lokomotivmoscow>
 and Besiktas shared a draw, with goals from Maicon and Mario Gómez.

There were two unexpected away wins in Group I.

Lech Poznan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lech-poznan> celebrated a 
2-1 success at Fiorentina, Dawid Kownacki and Maciej Gajos negating Giuseppe 
Rossi’s late consolation, with Portugal’s Os Belenenses surprising Basel by the 
same scoreline.

In Group L Augsburg got off the mark in style, Piotr Trochowski’s goal enough 
to defeatAZ Alkmaar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar> at home.

Athletic Bilbao ended Partizan Belgrade’s 100% record as Raúl García and Benat 
Etxebarria secured a 2-0 win for the visitors.

Legia Warsaw <https://www.theguardian.com/football/legiawarsaw> against Club 
Brugge and Liberec versus Groningen both ended 1-1.

FC Sion took a four-point lead at the top of Group B after Liverpool and Rubin 
Kazanplayed out their 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/liverpool-rubin-kazan-europa-league-match-report>
, having won 1-0 at 10-man Bordeaux.

Jürgen Klopp’s former charges Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> sit three points to the 
good on top of Group C, Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang securing a 3-1 win with a 
hat-trick, while PAOK and Krasnodar went goalless.
 