
Juanfran's late equaliser saved Atlético Madrid from another dispiriting 
defeat as they claimed a 1-1 draw atRennes in Group I of the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>.

Beaten 5-0 by Barcelona at the weekend, Atleti were on course to fall again 
when Victor Montano put the Ligue 1 side ahead in the 56th minute. But Juanfran 
struck with three minutes to play to salvage a point and ensure the 2010 Uefa 
Cup winners stay top of the group.

Udinese are alongside them on four points, as they left it even later to claim 
a 1-1 draw atCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/29/celtic-udinese-europa-league>.

Ryan Donk's 90th-minute header gave Club Brugge a 2-1 victory at Braga. The 
Portuguese side were dominant in the first half and took the lead eight minutes 
after the interval through Helder Barbosa, but Joseph Akpala levelled after 71 
minutes before Donk's late contribution decided it.

In the other Group H game, Birmingham City came from behind to win 2-1 at 
Maribor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/29/nk-maribor-birmingham-city-europa-league>
.

Schalke's Christian Fuchs scored a goal in each half to give the German side a 
3-1 win overMaccabi Haifa. Fuchs scored in the seventh minute and again in the 
65th after Idan Vered had equalised, before José Jurado added a third forSchalke
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> with 10 minutes to play.

Also in Group J, AEK Larnaca picked up their first point with a 1-1 draw 
againstSteaua Bucharest. AEK took a 59th-minute lead through Miljan Mrdakovic 
before Steaua equalised through Mihai Costea, and the Cypriot side could not 
make the most of their man advantage following the 82nd-minute dismissal of the 
visiting defender Pablo Brandán.

Mathias Suárez and Dieudonne Mbokani scored as Anderlecht maintained their 
winning start to the campaign, emerging from a battering atLokomotiv Moscow 
with a 2-0 win in Group L.

In the other match in that group, Mario Haas was the injury-time match-winner 
forSturm Graz as they found two late goals to win 2-1 against an AEK Athens 
side who had survived all but nine second-half minutes with 10 men. The Greek 
side had taken control with Joachim Standfest's own-goal in the 51st minute, 
but Traianos Dellas was dismissed three minutes later and late goals from 
Thomas Burgstaller and Haas turned the match around.

Marc Janko's double helped FC Twente heap more misery upon the outclassed 
Polish sideWisla Krakow as Co Adriaanse's men eased to a 4-1 victory in 
Enschede. Wisla took a shock ninth-minute lead through David Biton, but Janko's 
double and goals for Luuk de Jong and Willem Janssen easedTwente 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fctwente> home.

Andrew Johnson scored twice to give Fulham a 2-0 win at Odense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/29/odense-fulham-europa-league> 
in Group K's other game.

Austria Vienna inflicted more misery on their hosts Malmo to get their own 
Group G campaign off and running with a 2-1 win. The Swedish side had been 
hammered 4-1 byAZ Alkmaar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar> on 
matchday one and slipped once more courtesy of first-half goals from Nacer 
Barazite and Alexander Grünwald.

The substitute Agon Mehmeti pulled one back for Malmo and Vienna had Emir 
Dilaver dismissed late on.

The Brazilian forward Taison earned Metalist Kharkiv a 1-1 draw at AZ Alkmaar, 
who had taken the lead through Jozy Altidore.

A goal 10 minutes from time by Giorgos Fotakis earned Paok Salonika a 2-2 draw 
atRubin Kazan in Group A. The Greek side had taken the lead midway through the 
first half through Stefanos Athanasiadis, but second-half goals from Nelson 
Haedo Valdez and Vladimir Dyadyun appeared to have put the Russian team on 
course for victory before Fotakis's late intervention.

In the evening's later matches Tottenham Hotspur scored three goals in five 
minutes as they came from behind to beatShamrock Rovers 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/29/europa-league-tottenham-hotspur-shamrock-rovers>
 and go top of Group A.

Sporting Lisbon held on to beat Lazio 2-1 and maintain their perfect start in 
Group D. Ricky van Wolfswinkel and Miroslav Klose traded first-half goals 
before Emiliano Insúa put the hosts back in front on the stroke of half-time 
with a powerful 35-yard drive. Insúa was later sent off.

Admir Mehmedi salvaged a 2-2 draw for 10-man Zurich at Vaslui. Alexandre 
Alphonse gave Zurich the lead, but the Zurich defender Raphael Koch was sent 
off for a foul on Wesley, who converted the resulting penalty in the 62nd 
minute. Mike Temwanjera then put Vaslui in front in the 77th minutebefore 
Mehmedi headed the equaliser two minutes later.

First-half goals from Igor Gabilondo and Markel Susaeta gave Athletic Bilbao a 
2-0 win over big-spendingParis St Germain, who had Mohamed Sissoko sent off in 
the 53rd minute.

Leonardo, Eulogio Zarate and Dusan Svento scored in the second half to give 
Salzburg a 3-0 win over Slovan Bratislava.

Goals from Peter Crouch and Jon Walters gave Stoke City a 2-1 win over Besiktas
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/29/stoke-city-besiktas-europa-league>
, who had led through Roberto Hilbert's goal.

Dor Micha struck in the 44th minute to maintain Maccabi Tel Aviv's long 
unbeaten record in continental competition with a 1-1 draw againstDynamo Kiev, 
who opened the scoring through Ideye Brown.

Goals from Luis Seijas, Felipe and Antonio Kanu brought Standard Liège a 3-0 
win overFC Copenhagen, while Hannover won 2-1 at Vorskla with first-half goals 
from Mohamed Abdellaoui and Christian Pander, despite Oleksiy Kurilov's reply.

Goals from Danijel Ljuboja, Marcin Komorowski from a penalty and Miroslav 
Radovic one minute from the end gaveLegia Warsaw a 3-2 win over Hapoel Tel Aviv
, for whom Toto Tamuz and Maaran Lala scored.

Wilfred Bouma, Ola Toivonen and Tim Matavz earned PSV Eindhoven a 3-1 win over 
Rapid Bucharest, who had opened the scoring through Dan Alexa.
 