
Hull’s formal coronation as the UK’s City of Culture for 2017 takes place on 
Sunday as the hangovers wear off. On this evidence Robert Snodgrass’s left foot 
should be among the primary exhibits.

For the threadbare hopes of its football club’s top-flight future appear to 
hang on the Scotland international’s use of it. Snodgrass has now converted or 
created exactly half of Hull’s 16Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> goals, and for 20 minutes 
his sixth of the season, an exquisite free-kick, threatened to atone for his 
compatriot David Marshall’s first-half howler.

Hull City 2-2 Everton: Premier League –as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/30/hull-city-v-everton-premier-league-live>
That it did not and that Hull sit one point off the bottom rather than three 
is down to another recurring theme: an inability to turn good performances into 
wins. Having handed Ronald Koeman’s team one equaliser on the stroke of 
half-time, via Marshall’s sliced punch into his own net, they conceded a second 
to the recalled Ross Barkley’s late header.

Hull, refusing to be deflated by the final 20 minutes of their defeat on the 
same turf by Manchester City on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/hull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, started adventurously and took a sixth-minute lead through their second-top 
scorer, the central defender Michael Dawson. Like Snodgrass’s it was a quality 
finish.

Neither did Mike Phelan’s team lack spirit. “We are off the bottom of the 
league,” Phelan enthused. “At times this season things haven’t gone our way but 
the players are all putting a real shift in. They are listening, learning and 
have everything to look forward to, which is progress up this league. We have a 
real battle on our hands in the second half of the season but I think we’re up 
for it.”

Phelan spoke in the build-up to this contest of the need to reinforce his 
squad with players “courageous” enough for the fight ahead. Yet it is the 
grossest of understatements to say that Hull is an even harder sell now than 
when he did his last recruitment pitch in August on the back of wins from both 
their opening fixtures.

Nor have his set of summer transfer window purchases proved a raging success. 
Ryan Mason, the club’s£12.5m record signing from Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/hull-city-sign-ryan-mason-from-tottenham-for-club-record-fee>
, went missing in a relegation duel at Middlesbrough in the first week of 
December and has not been spotted in a starting XI since; neither has Markus 
Henriksen, whose permanent £3.5m move from AZ Alkmaar is to be ratified next 
week; Dieumerci Mbokani has been praised for his hold-up play but is yet to 
score in 10 appearances since returning to the English top flight.

Two former Manchester United trainees Will Keane and Mike Weir have proved 
peripheral. The Scotland goalkeeper Marshall, a moderate success, has shipped 
an average of 2.42 goals a game, and showed himself prone to panicking under 
pressure soon after Dawson’s finish from a flicked-on Snodgrass corner had put 
Hull ahead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fhull-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70745467dbbc4439be61898be52b722769634a8e%2F0_0_2976_1785%2F2976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everton%E2%80%99s%20Ross%20Barkley%20denies%20Hull%20rare%20win%20after%20Robert%20Snodgrass%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fhull-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everton%E2%80%99s%20Ross%20Barkley%20denies%20Hull%20rare%20win%20after%20Robert%20Snodgrass%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fhull-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70745467dbbc4439be61898be52b722769634a8e%2F0_0_2976_1785%2F2976.jpg>
 David Marshall punches the ball back into his own net for one of the most 
bizarre own goals of the season. Photograph: Greig Cowie/BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
The sucker punch, quite literally, came in first-half injury time, when Kevin 
Mirallas swung over a corner and Marshall was cramped by the presence of his 
own striker Mbokani in his attempt to fist away. The ball skewed backwards for 
one of the more bizarre Premier League goals of the season. “Everything is 
fizzing around your head – what you want to say to the players, you know 
exactly what you want to do and, when that happens with 10 seconds to go, it 
changes your whole thinking,” said Phelan, of his half-time team talk plans.

Jürgen Klopp finally gets a chance to face Pep Guardiola on level playing 
field | Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
Marshall’s next touch three minutes into the resumption went the same way. 
Crucially this time, however, his fingertips proved the difference between 
Romelu Lukaku’s deflected drive hitting the crossbar and flying beneath it.

Then, after Snodgrass found his range by striking the bar in the 55th-minute 
via a classical up-and-down free-kick – Leighton Baines’s header against the 
base of a post just shy of the quarter-hour was the first of the attempts 
against the frame of the goal – he put Hull back in front. One of Harry 
Maguire’s Beckenbauer-esque marches from deep was crudely halted by Baines, and 
Snodgrass got the trajectory just right, arcing the ball perfectly into the top 
corner despite Robles’ attempts to claw it away.

Koeman cited the Yorkshire club’s potency from dead-ball situations – “we knew 
they’d scored eight out of 14 goals like that,” he said afterwards but conceded 
that nullifying Snodgrass’ quality was another matter. The same could be said 
of Hull’s attempts to muzzle Barkley, a player previously dropped as a “wake-up 
call” by Koeman. Appearing to have been energised by that, and perhaps by the 
fact Gareth Southgate was among the crowd, he emerged to head in Baines’ dink.

“I hope it gives Ross a boost,” Koeman said. “I think he was the player that 
we expect in his position. We spoke about him being more dangerous in front of 
goal, to have better offensive movement and he was really important in the 
final part of attacking.”
 