
Ronald Koeman has confirmed Everton have been in touch with Charlton Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> over a £10m move for 
the 19-year-old forward Ademola Lookman.

Leicester’s gloom darkens after Romelu Lukaku seals win for Everton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/leicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
The Merseyside club’s director of football, Steve Walsh, identified the 
England under-20 player as a target some weeks ago, and Everton are expected to 
move quickly once the transfer window opens in January. Lookman scored his 
seventh goal of the season away at MK Dons on Boxing Day and has also been 
interesting Crystal Palace, butEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> now appear to be at the front of 
the queue for his services.

“There is interest for the boy, yes,” Koeman said on Wednesday. “Of course we 
are working on some deals for January. We have certain interest in some players 
but we have to keep that inside the club. Some of the names you read in the 
papers are correct, though most of the time the speculation is bullshit. We 
would like to use the transfer window to make the team stronger.”

Apart from Lookman, who would not be loaned back to Charlton but may not be 
immediately ready to step up into the Premier League, Everton are believed to 
be interested in Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay,both finding games 
difficult to come by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-injury>
 under José Mourinho at Old Trafford. Koeman is an admirer of the former having 
worked with him at Southampton, and is thought to consider Depay an ideal 
replacement for Yannick Bolasie, the winger signed in summer who has been 
sidelined for the rest of the seasonwith a knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/everton-yannick-bolasie-surgery-knee>
.

Everton travel to Hull on Friday without Maarten Stekelenburg and James 
McCarthy, though buoyed by theirvictory at Leicester on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/leicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
, a first win on the road since the start of September. That was the occasion 
Koeman withdrew Ross Barkley to improve his side’s effectiveness in what was 
seen as a get-tough approach that worked, though the player was back on the 
bench at Leicester and his manager is increasingly wary every time the subject 
crops up.

“It is better not to always talk about Ross,” he said. “We had other subs on 
the bench at Leicester and maybe I am not so good as an actor. I think in the 
past I have been too honest with my thought about players, so I won’t do that 
again. I need to protect myself a little bit.”

Koeman reverted to his favoured three at the back system against Leicester and 
may keep the formation against Hull. “Most of the time I prefer three 
centre-backs against teams that play 4-4-2, because it means it’s not one 
against one behind,” he explained. “You look for the best way to deal with your 
opponents’ strengths. It isn’t being afraid, just being prepared.”

Young players such as Mason Holgate and Tom Davies may again be called upon as 
Koeman tries to cope with so many games in such short a period.

“We are better off than some, because we get a day extra rest before playing 
again on January 2,” he said. “But it is a tough period, you can’t do it with 
11 players.”

Hull are bottom of the table with only three wins all season but Koeman 
intends to take nothing for granted. “The most dangerous thing you can do in 
football is to expect to win a game, especially when the Premier League is so 
unpredictable,” he said. “I don’t look at the position in the table because I 
watched Hull play against Man City and after 70 minutes it was still scoreless. 
Hull lost against West Ham but they were the best team and hit the post a few 
times. It will be a tough game and we will need to be at our best.”
 