
Andy King, one of Everton’s most popular and charismatic players of the 1970s, 
has died of a heart attack at the age of 58.

The Luton-born midfielder scored 67 goals in 248 appearances for Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> during two spells with a club 
where his passion and knack of scoring important goals made him a firm 
favourite with the fans. He also suffered a heart attack in 2009.

King, signed for £35,000 in 1976 by Billy Bingham after only 33 games for 
Luton Town, was immediately embraced by the Goodison Park faithful at what was 
a difficult period for the club. The midfielder’s stock rose higher after he 
scoreda stunning winning goal against Liverpool in 1978 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dcL3wNZHVM8> to give Everton their first 
victory in a Merseyside derby for seven years.

He joined QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> in 1980 having lost 
his way under the manager Gordon Lee but returned to Goodison two years later 
in a swap deal with West Bromwich Albion for the forward Peter Eastoe arranged 
by the new Everton manager Howard Kendall. A serious knee injury hindered his 
second spell at Goodison and he moved to the Dutch side Cambuur Leeuwarden just 
as Everton’s successful period of the mid-1980s commenced.

King, who had played twice for England Under-21s, later had playing spells 
with Wolverhampton Wanderers and Luton among others before managing Mansfield 
Town and Swindon Town, where he had two spells in charge. He also coached at 
Sunderland alongside his former Everton team-mate Peter Reid and has been 
working as chief scout forMK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>.

King took over as caretaker manager of Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> following Aidy Boothroyd’s 
departure in late 2013 but returned to scouting with MK Dons two months later.

A statement on the Dons’ club website, said: “Milton Keynes Dons Football Club 
are devastated to learn that chief scout Andy King has suddenly passed away at 
the age of 58.

“He passed away suddenly after a heart attack at his home on Wednesday. King, 
who joined the Dons’ backroom staff in 2014, was a hugely respected figure 
throughout football and a magnificent individual and friend to many at MK Dons 
– he will be missed greatly.

“The thoughts of everyone at MK Dons are with Andy’s wife Barbara, his family 
and his friends at this extremely sad and difficult time.”
 