
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
have accepted a £22m bid from Everton for Morgan Schneiderlin, which could rise 
to £24m with add-ons.

Ronald Koeman’s opening offer of £19m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-ademola-lookman-morgan-schneiderlin-ronald-koeman>
 for the France midfielder was rejected last week, and West Bromwich Albion 
also saw a similar offer turned down with United keen to recoup the £24m fee 
they paid Southampton for Schneiderlin in July 2015.

Negotiations have continued in recent days, with Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> now hoping to complete the 
signing in the next 48 hours after agreeing a fee on Tuesday. United manager 
José Mourinho confirmed after last night’s EFL victory over Hull that the 
executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, had informed him Schneiderlin is on his 
way.
Transfer window 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/fb-messenger-bot/embed.html>
“Before the match Mr Woodward told me ‘almost there’, so I have ‘almost 
there’,” Mourinho said. “So I’m sad, I’m happy. I’m sad because I like him and 
he could be an option for us in a long season.

“I’m happy because this is what he wants – he wants to play every game, to be 
an important player in the team. So if this is what he wants, I am happy for a 
very good professional, somebody I can only say good things about.”

Koeman, who has also agreed to allow Oumar Niasse to join Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/hull-oumar-niasse-everton-loan>
 on loan until the end of the season, insisted after Everton’s defeat by 
Leicester City in the FA Cup on Saturday that he is not interested in backup 
options as he seeks to strengthen his squad with the player he managed at 
Southampton for one season. Schneiderlin, 27, has played just 11 minutes for 
United in the Premier League this season having been frozen out by Mourinho.

He could yet be joined at Goodison Park by Memphis Depay, with the Holland 
winger seen as one of Koeman’s primary targets, although the French side Lyon 
are also interested. Atalanta have also rejected a £15m bid from Everton for 
Franck Kessié, with the Italian side determined to hold on to the 20-year-old 
Ivorian midfielder until the end of the season despite continued interest from 
Chelsea.
 