
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> have secured a 
multimillion-pound naming rights deal with a company founded by the Russian 
billionaire and Arsenal shareholder Alisher Usmanov.

Everton’s Ronald Koeman planning new bid for Morgan Schneiderlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-ademola-lookman-morgan-schneiderlin-ronald-koeman>
USM Holdings, the holding company for Usmanov’s wide-ranging business 
interests, has become the Premier League club’s first training-ground partner 
in a five-year deal. The partnership will see Everton’s Finch Farm training 
complex renamed USM Finch Farm and includes marketing rights plus match-day 
advertising at Goodison Park. It also represents a commercial link between 
Arsenal’s second-largest shareholder and the club where his business partner,
Farhad Moshiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/everton-farhad-moshiri-majority-investor>
, is the major shareholder.

Moshiri bought a 49.9% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/28/everton-majority-shareholder-farhad-moshiri-increase-stake-bill-kenwright>
 in Everton for £87.5m last February just days after selling his Arsenal 
shareholding to Usmanov, giving the latter a 30% interest in the north London 
club through Red and White Holdings Limited. Moshiri is also chairman of the 
board of directors of USM Holdings, where the British-Iranian billionaire is 
one of the main shareholders along with the company founder, Usmanov and 
Vladimir Skoch. Its assets include Metalloinvest, the largest mining company in 
Russia, and MegaFon, one of that country’s main telecommunications operators.

The business links and friendship between Usmanov and Moshiri fuelled 
speculation last year that the Uzbek-born billionaire planned to sell his 
shareholding at Arsenal, where Stan Kroenke retains majority control with 
67.05%, and reinvest in Everton. That prompted a spokesperson for Red and White 
Holdings to state that Usmanov “does not intend to sell his stake in Arsenal 
Holdings Plc. Mr Usmanov continues to be committed to Arsenal and considers his 
stake in the club as a long-term investment for his family and future 
generations. Red and White Holdings Limited owns 30.04% of Arsenal Holdings 
Plc.”

Moshiri has paid off Everton debts with an £80m interest-free loan since 
investing in the club and is pressing on with plans for a new stadium, with a 
site atBramley Moore dock the preferred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/everton-new-ground-docks-agm> 
but more expensive option. Addressing an Everton AGM for the first time on 
Wednesday, he admitted Usmanov was the primary reason for his initial 
investment in English football. “The reason I got into Arsenal was because my 
business partner is a crazy fan of Arsenal and we do most things together,” he 
said. “I had looked at a number of clubs [to become a major shareholder] having 
been at Arsenal for a long time as a minor shareholder.”

Everton have not announced the value of the USM partnership but their chief 
executive, Robert Elstone, told the AGM the club had signed two “high-value” 
commercial deals in recent weeks – naming rights for the training ground plus a 
shirt sponsorship deal – worth a total of £75m over the next five years.
 