
I met up with Steve Webb this week, the highly regarded pensions minister in 
the coalition government for five years until he lost his seat in the election. 
He can be a lot more candid now he’s out of office (particularly in what he 
says about George Osborne). What, I asked, is the biggest single issue facing 
pension savers in Britain today? Is it the fact we may all be forced to work 
until 70 before collecting a pension? Is it the way women born in the mid-1950s 
are shafted when it comes to the state pension? Is it the gaping hole inthe BHS 
pension fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/25/bhs-pension-regulator-sir-philip-green-analysis>
?

It’s none of these, he said. The biggest issue is something that is not being 
talked about anywhere, yet it will affect 10 million people – not today’s 
pensioners, but those at work, on middling or low incomes. The good news is 
that the vast majority have been, or are about to be, automatically enrolled 
into a pension scheme, many for the very first time. The bad news? They will be 
seriously disappointed if they think the pension will pay out anywhere near 
enough when they come to retire.

So far, auto-enrolment has worked well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/auto-enrolment-pensions>. More than 5.5 
million people have joined, with a further five million due to follow by early 
2018. “Nudge” theory has worked, with hardly anyone choosing to opt out. Maybe 
that is because the ramp-up in contributions has not yet taken place. For now, 
workers pay in just 0.8% of salary, but that will rise to 2.4% in April 2018, 
then 4% in April 2019.

But it’s not the 4% that vexes Webb. It’s the fact that the 4%, plus 3% from 
the employer and 1% in tax relief, adds up to a total contribution of only 8% 
of salary. And that’s a woefully low level of payments.

There are some general rules of thumb for working out how much of your salary 
should be going into a pension. A good one is to take your age and halve it. So 
if you start saving for a pension at age 30, you need to put away 15% of 
salary. If you put it off until 40, you need to put in 20%.

So 8% a year is, at best, only half the amount you should be saving.

The trouble is, how do 10 million poorly paid workers possibly find the money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/20/20-million-lose-out-pension-reform>
 to double or even triple their contributions? Webb thinks rejigging 
auto-enrolment rates won’t work, as pushing the 4% employee contribution rate 
to, say, 10% would simply provoke mass opt-outs.Making companies pay more is 
also very challenging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/28/sharp-rise-fines-pensions-regulator-smallest-employers>
, given they are having to find so much for the living wage and the 
apprenticeship levy.

Instead Webb thinks the government needs to look at what he calls 
“auto-escalation”. The idea is that every time someone receives a pay rise, a 
portion of that goes straight over to the pension – sort of “if you’ve never 
seen it, you won’t miss it”. Heineken, the brewers, apparently does something 
like this in the UK, while in the US a programme called “Save More Tomorrow” 
has enjoyed spectacular results, with contributions rising from 3.5% to a 
whopping 13%.

Webb is now director of policy at mutual insurer Royal London, but his focus 
remains on the pensions of the average person, not the loud protestations of 
well-off earners carping about things such as the £1m pensions cap. His idea 
for auto-escalation deserves wider consideration.

And George Osborne? Like every minister, current and former, Webb bemoans the 
overwhelming influence of the Treasury in decision making. WitnessOsborne’s 
decision to announce school academisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/15/osborne-chancellor-focus-budget-schools-reform-academies>
 in the budget, which should surely have been the job of the education 
secretary. Osborne is not actually Britain’s chancellor. He’s the domestic 
prime minister.
 