
On the morning of Saturday 25 August 2012, my husband, Tony, took a photo of 
me in my nightie, proudly showing off my bump. I was 38 and after five 
miscarriages and losing one baby in what had started as a twin pregnancy, this 
little life had clung on and I had reached 26 weeks.

My blood pressure, which my GP had asked me to monitor, was very low, so 
instead of going on a long walk as normal, I took my husband breakfast in bed 
and started reading the papers.

We had a bit of a cuddle, and that led to everything else. Suddenly, after my 
second orgasm, it was as if I’d been hit around the head with an iron frying 
pan, or swallowed an ice lolly whole: the worst brain freeze of my life. 
I’d read that I should expect migraines at this point in my pregnancy, but the 
pain didn’t stop. It got worse.

Tony called my mum and an ambulance. When my mum arrived, she stood with her 
hands on her hips and said, “What have you two been up to?” I was mortified. 
When Tony told the first responder, he replied, “Two orgasms? Can you tell me 
how to give my wife one? She’s been after it for years!”

The next thing I remember is waking up in a rehab ward about a week later. My 
mum was by my side and said, “Darling, you’ve had a stroke.” I tried to sit up, 
but the nurse told me I would fall out of bed, because I had no sitting 
balance. I thought, “Are you on crack? Of course I can sit up!” But she was 
right: I was paralysed down my left-hand side.

That’s when I found out what had happened. I’d been rushed to hospital and put 
into an induced coma, but I deteriorated quickly. After a severe stroke, 
followed by a prolonged seizure, I had four more strokes while they were 
scanning my brain. I nearly died. I had a craniotomy: they opened my skull to 
release the pressure on my brain and remove the blood that had leaked out. 
There was a team on stand-by in case an emergency delivery was needed for my 
baby, but amazingly the many ultrasound scans showed she was still happily 
bouncing around. That’s when my family found out we were having a girl.

I was unconscious for a week, but I had horrific dreams. I can remember 
fleeting images of social workers taking away my baby, and giving birth to 
twins whom I was forced to give up for adoption. I would become distressed, but 
when they put my right hand on my bump, I’d calm down immediately.

Once I’d woken up, I stayed in the rehab ward for 12 weeks, during which time 
we planned my caesarean with military precision. My beautiful baby, 
Marri-Alice, was born on 19 November, perfect in every way, undamaged by the 
drama that had surrounded her. My husband had made a playlist for the birth, 
and at the moment she was born:Johnny Nash’s I Can See Clearly Now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FscIgtDJFXg> was playing. I’ve never heard it 
since without collapsing in tears.

Related: How do I reduce the risk of having a stroke? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/25/how-do-i-reduce-risk-of-stroke>

It was a bittersweet moment, because I couldn’t hold her. She had to be placed 
in my right arm, which was full of drips. It took three midwives and my husband 
to position her on my breast. When we came home, I felt grief at the loss of my 
old self, my mobility; I wasn’t the mother I’d dreamed of being. I couldn’t 
just go and pick her up – I had to wait for someone to put her on me.

Four years on, she is bright as a button, hitting all her milestones earlier 
than anticipated, while I remain paralysed down my left side, and rely on a 
wheelchair. I hope that one day stem-cell therapy will offer me a better 
recovery.

For a long time, I was angry with the world; I didn’t know it was possible to 
feel so sad. I had to have a word with myself and say, this is your reality 
now, you’ve got the baby you wanted for 20 years. You may not be able to give 
her a sibling, but you’ve got her – and a fantastic husband and mum. I know 
they saved my life. I’m still trying to find my place in this new world of 
mine, where I can’t walk to my daughter, but she can walk to me.

• As told to Moya Sarner

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 