
It’s 5am, just before sunrise in the Himalayas. We wake to heavy snowfall, 
which has slowed our progress to the summit of Kala Patar. It soon becomes 
clear we will have to wait for the weather to improve. I am the medic with a 
group of students and staff from special educational needs schools from across 
the UK. We hunker down for the day and occupy ourselves playing games while we 
await a weather window.

The role of a medic on expedition has many faces, from doctor to chef, 
photographer, teacher, pot-washer, latrine-digger and counsellor. You have to 
earn your salt as a fully-fledged team member, which means being able to fulfil 
all of these roles and comfortably complete the expedition itself.

For me, expedition medicine offers an exciting combination of the two things I 
love: medical practice and the outdoors. I have worked all over the world in 
some incredible places, from Iceland to Belize, the Philippines to Tanzania, 
Nepal and the Arctic. But it can be challenging combining this with working in 
theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. So how do you go about 
working abroad as an expedition medic?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f8ca90ce0486739050562a44cd0629d514b0017%2F0_0_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f8ca90ce0486739050562a44cd0629d514b0017%2F0_0_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Your morning commute as a medic on expedition in Nepal. Photograph: Extreme 
Medicine 
What opportunities are available in expedition medicine? How do you find out 
about them?

There are a multitude of optionsfor medics to accompany expeditions or 
projects overseas. Companies running charity trips often seek medics, and there 
are also expeditions organised by universities, aid or relief work, commercial 
expeditions and TV work, although this is harder to come by.

Opportunities are advertised in a variety of ways. I was working in a small 
emergency department in the north of Scotland when I was contacted about a job 
in Nepal at short notice, but it is also worth following World Extreme 
Medicine’sFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/ExtremeMedicine/?ref=page_internal> for the latest 
opportunities.

Daredevil doctors: medical care on the humanitarian frontline – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/26/extreme-medicine-msf-daredevil-doctors-humanitarian-frontline>
What qualifications do you need? Are there any personal qualities that help?

Doctors usually need to be at least two years qualified; other medical 
professionals should follow guidance from their governing body. You need to 
attend an expedition medicine course, to learn how to apply your medical skills 
in remote environments. World Extreme Medicine runcourses 
<http://www.expeditionmedicine.co.uk/index.php/products/> several times a year 
all around the UK and abroad.

Experience in emergency medicine and general practice stand you in good stead 
to deal with the wide range of medical problems on expedition, and the former 
is usually a prerequisite. You should have a good working knowledge of managing 
fractures, wound management and dressings, so spending time learning from 
nursing staff in your department cannot be underestimated.

Crucially, you need to make sure you possess all of the technical skills 
required of the expedition itself, from winter mountain skills to simple 
camp-craft, to ensure you are comfortable operating in extreme environments. It 
helps to be naturally sociable and able to fit easily into a team, and it goes 
without saying that you need to be physically fit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccf44a424aa7485897133a9ac116fbe726ea36c1%2F0_114_3259_2249%2F3259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccf44a424aa7485897133a9ac116fbe726ea36c1%2F0_114_3259_2249%2F3259.jpg>
 ‘Make sure you possess all of the technical skills, from winter mountain 
skills to simple camp-craft.’ Photograph: Claire Grogan 
When is a good time to take time out of a career? How do you ensure you will 
get a job on your return?

There are natural career breaks in the traditional training paths in medicine 
and it isnow common 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/nhs/11994836/Our-junior-doctors-are-sick-of-their-uncertain-future.html>
 for doctors to undertake an “FY3” year to pursue a particular interest. Some 
people warned me that taking time out could pose problems for job applications 
on my return, but my experience was that these were unfounded. At interviews I 
was often asked more about what I had learned from my experiences as an 
expedition medic than other details on my CV.

Now I work full-time in the NHS, and it is possible to get away on trips 
within annual leave restrictions with some creative rota management and a few 
swaps here and there.

What kind of situations might you face?

Most problems on expedition are minor but occasionally full casualty 
evacuations need to be carried out, so it is worthwhile ensuring you have a 
robust system in place for this eventuality. My biggest tip is try to 
anticipate the unexpected.

In spring 2015, I was volunteering at a high-altitude rescue post in the Gokyo 
Valley in the Himalayas, running awareness talks on altitude sickness and 
providing medical assistance to trekkers and porters. A colleague and I had 
just finished the Saturday morning clinic when a7.8 magnitude earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/09/nepal-earthquake-british-doctor-everest-avalanche-rachel-tullet>
 struck. We knew immediately what was happening and ran outside to safety. Bad 
visibility masked our view but we heard avalanches roaring in the valley around 
us.

Over the coming days we established communication with home and our colleagues 
further up the valley, and helped our local community get back on to its feet. 
Our rescue post became a place for people to gather and support each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cca6f1256b5241add82a9043b9f12567afb9439%2F0_38_2549_1529%2F2549.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Expedition%20medicine%3A%20save%20lives%20...%20and%20go%20places&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fexpedition-medicine-save-lives-and-go-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cca6f1256b5241add82a9043b9f12567afb9439%2F0_38_2549_1529%2F2549.jpg>
 ‘Try to anticipate the unexpected’ – such as polar bears. Photograph: Claire 
Grogan 
Earthquakes had been one of the risks we discussed before leaving the UK, and 
we had agreed to always have a grab bag with water, passports and food ready to 
go in an emergency. It seemed like overkill at the time, but that small amount 
of forethought really helped. Now I have a grab bag on every expedition, and 
always keep a head torch by my bed in case of emergency.

How can I gain additional qualifications or experience for this kind of work?

I teach at World Extreme Medicine and we run courses in expedition and 
wilderness medicine in the UK, as well as environment-specific courses all over 
the world, such as polar medicine in Arctic Norway, jungle medicine in Costa 
Rica, and mountain medicine in Nepal. It is a fantastic way to learn when you 
are immersed in the environment.

In conjunction with University of Exeter Medical School, WEM also run a 
Masters in Extreme Medicine which may be of interest to those looking to pursue 
a formal qualification or research in this area.

The World Extreme Medicine Conference <http://www.extrememedicineexpo.com/>, 
in Edinburgh from 18–21 November 2016, is set to be a brilliant gathering. I 
love going because it is a chance to meet, share experiences and learn from 
world-renowned experts in the medical fields of pre-hospital care, expedition, 
endurance, disaster and humanitarian medicine, and sport, space and extreme 
medicine.

Claire Grogan is an emergency medical doctor, honorary clinical lecturer at 
the University of Exeter Medical School and fellow of the Royal Geographical 
Society. She is on Twitter,@grogan_claire <https://twitter.com/grogan_claire>.

 * Register here 
<http://click.mail.guardianjobs.com/?qs=d2ffb285ab4644d48a5e7206dd16d470f58e265a13889a9c3fc7e5ac1c724da8e39692b22d37c5db>
 for the World Extreme Medicine Conference and enter the code 
EXTREMEMEDGUARDIAN10 for a 10% discount on tickets.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 