
Temperatures of up to 47C were forecast for north-west NSW on Friday, with 
southernQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> also 
bracing for another day of blistering conditions.

Many parts of NSW were likely to swelter, with the mercury predicted to rise 
above 40C.

The tiny outback town of White Cliffs was likely to be the hottest place in 
the state at an expected 47C, while Bourke was due for a scorching 46C, Dubbo 
43C and western Sydney 42C.

The record for consecutive days above 40C could be broken at Bourke, which in 
1892 was set at 22 days.
ABC Emergency (@ABCemergency) 
Very high temps for parts of #NSW <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NSW?src=hash> 
and#QLD <https://twitter.com/hashtag/QLD?src=hash> today as severe to extreme 
#heatwave <https://twitter.com/hashtag/heatwave?src=hash> conditions continue. 
https://t.co/ihbBhUn5XF <https://t.co/ihbBhUn5XF> pic.twitter.com/T88p24TLCb 
<https://t.co/T88p24TLCb>
 <https://twitter.com/ABCemergency/status/819660674590601216> January 12, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/ABCemergency/status/819660674590601216> 
The hot, dry and windy conditions prompted the Rural Fire Service to issue 
total fire bans across most of the state. RFS inspector Ben Shepherd said it 
was important for the public to be on alert.

“We stand ready to respond to any situation, but it’s important the community 
play their part by A, reporting all fires to triple zero and B, having a fire 
plan in place,” he said.


In Queensland the south-western town of Thargomindah was looking at a new 
record for the state’s highest January minimum temperature.

Temperatures to soar above 40C as heatwave sweeps eastern Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2017/jan/11/temperatures-to-soar-above-40c-as-heatwave-sweeps-eastern-australia>
The current record of 34.5C was set in Birdsville in 2003. It was possible the 
mercury would not dip below that in Thargomindah on Friday, with a minimum of 
33C forecast.

“The potential is definitely there,” said Andrew Bufalino of the Bureau of 
Meteorology.

A top of 34C was forecast in Brisbane, five degrees above the average daily 
maximum for this time of year.

The mercury hit 35.6C in the capital on Thursday, but forecasters have warned 
Saturday could be hotter.

Acting health minister Stirling Hinchliffe urged people to regularly check the 
colour of their urine to ensure they stayed hydrated.

“If you are feeling that your urine is dark, you should make sure that you 
increase your fluid intake – that’s the best way of making sure you keep 
yourself safe,” he said on Thursday.

Temperatures are expected to return closer to average on Sunday when a trough 
should bring rain and thunderstorm activity.

It was expected to be much cooler near the coast in Sydney, with a forecast 
maximum of 33C for Friday, and conditions were likely to ease for the southern 
half of NSW during the weekend, the Bureau of Meteorology said.

But the heat is set to come back early next week with many areas likely to 
again experience temperatures in the low to mid 40s.
 