
In pondering why Gavin Hood’s drone-strike thriller Eye In The Sky failed to 
involve me very deeply, I keep coming back to other movies like it. These are 
the films in which soldiers, spies and politicians stand around in different 
locations worrying about moral issues as the clock ticks down to zero-hour and 
the political complications and unspeakable dilemmas become ever more 
excruciating: Sydney Lumet’s Fail-Safe, and various wishy-washy DLC-liberal 
movies by Rod Lurie, Andrew Niccol and George Clooney/Grant Heslov. My 
conclusion is that, like many of them, it allows the Big Issue to become the 
main character, and neglects to allow the drama to unfold among the characters.

In Eye In The Sky, people in different locations – military bases in England 
and Nevada, the British Cabinet Office in London, Singapore (where the UK 
foreign secretary is visiting), Beijing (ditto the US secretary of state) – 
talk to one another over satellite links as a drone hovers over the anticipated 
meeting, in a poverty-stricken, militant-controlled exurb of Nairobi, between 
five most-wanted al-Shabaab terrorists, two of them British nationals.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449666392210%2FKP_710583_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3A%20watch%20the%20UK%20trailer%20for%20the%20drone%20warfare%20drama%20starring%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Alan%20Rickman%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3A%20watch%20the%20UK%20trailer%20for%20the%20drone%20warfare%20drama%20starring%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Alan%20Rickman%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449666392210%2FKP_710583_crop_640x480.jpg>
In charge of the mission is Colonel Powell (Helen Mirren, her fabulousness 
undimmed by drab camouflage costuming), who is on the line to triggerman-drone 
pilot Aaron Paul, based outside Las Vegas (presumably the same installation 
Ethan Hawke operates from in his rather more absorbing, character-based drone 
thriller Good Kill), and to the British attorney general (Richard McCabe) and 
her boss Lt General Benson (Alan Rickman in a posthumous last hurrah).

Barkhad Abdi: Captain Phillips star's rise from limo driver to Oscars contender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/28/barkhad-abdi-captain-phillips-oscar-contender>
The latter pair endlessly debate the legal, and occasionally the moral, 
implications of drone strikes, while the British defence secretary (Jeremy 
Northam) keeps buck-passing all the big decisions up to the foreign secretary 
(Iain Glen), and even to the Americans. There is a lot of talk. And then more 
talk.

With all these people sitting in chairs (the four main actors never even met 
each other on set), it’s a relief to have Jama Farah, a Kenyan operative, on 
the ground in Nairobi being actually heroic, sending insect-sized mini-drones 
into the terrorists’ building and trying to prevent a young girl outside the 
compound from being killed. Better yet, he’s played by the excellent Barkhad 
Abdi, chief hijacker from the Tom Hanks vehicle Captain Phillips.

Abdi’s scenes are consistently riveting, and it’s always a disappointment to 
return to the yakking politicos and soldiers. That little girl injects a layer 
of sentimentality that cheapens the film somewhat, reducing it to a civics 
lesson instead of a drama with depth and soul (like the Channel 4 series Omagh, 
for instance). There’s plenty of tension here, expertly escalated, but an hour 
afterwards it had vanished from my mind altogether.
 