
Last year, Ethan Hawke and director Andrew Niccol thoughtfully took on drone 
warfare inGood Kill <http:> and audiences shrugged. Similar in scope and 
sentiment, Gavid Hood’sEye in the Sky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZeVSdKtQVY> (eOne, 15) was a grown-up hit 
this spring. It’s not appreciably a better film, but call it theHelen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/26/helen-mirren-interview-sally-hughes>
 effect: her brisk gravitas is a brand in itself and she’s on familiarly 
formidable form here as a British colonel commanding a missile attack on a 
Nairobi terrorist safehouse. Mirren’s character is merely one cog, however, in 
the heaving, not wholly effective international machine of modern remote 
warfare. From the American drone pilot (Aaron Paul) in Nevada to the Kenyan 
field agent (Barkhad Abdi) on the scene to a distracted British foreign 
secretary (Iain Glen) in Singapore, authority and accountability are dispersed 
in a manner that the film ethically debates with smart sobriety. Hood, the 
Oscar-winning South African director ofTsotsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tsotsi>, has made his best film here; if his 
style is marked by dispassionate efficiency, he’s landed on an ideal subject 
for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I1l_J9QuVk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I1l_J9QuVk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I1l_J9QuVk&media=>
Watch the trailer for Louder Than Bombs. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4I1l_J9QuVk> 
A film that could use a little less caution is Louder Than Bombs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4I1l_J9QuVk> (Soda, 15), a formally refined, 
emotionally intelligent, yet somehow disappointing foray into English-language 
film-making for NorwegianJoachim Trier 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1258686/?ref_=tt_ov_dr>, whose Reprise and Oslo, 
August 31st throbbed with complex, unresolved feeling. In this stricken family 
melodrama, pivoting on a characteristically excellent, flashback-present 
Isabelle Huppert as a deceased mother and war photographer, the conflicts are a 
little too tidy. As her weary widower (Gabriel Byrne) and respectively neurotic 
and withdrawn sons (Jesse Eisenberg and Devin Druid) negotiate her absence via 
a host of masculine insecurities, the film is certainly affecting, yet 
everybody hurts and heals in the precise places you’d expect.

A more manic Scandinavian-directed game of unhappy families is on offer in Men 
& Chicken <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYVlN5hTP0M> (Arrow, 15). Anders 
Thomas Jensen’s kooky, black-hearted comedy follows two brothers (David Dencik 
and a drastically de-suaved Mads Mikkelsen) as they belatedly trace their 
biological roots to a grotesquely dysfunctional all-male clan on the Danish 
island of Ork; it’s amiably horrible, if such a thing is possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Feye-in-the-sky-louder-than-bombs-men-and-chicken-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b37ffcbe16a4ff4dcd27fdc70d75d532002e735%2F0_13_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3B%20Louder%20Than%20Bombs%3B%20Men%20%26%20Chicken%3B%20The%20Huntsman%3A%20Winter%E2%80%99s%20War%20and%20others%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Feye-in-the-sky-louder-than-bombs-men-and-chicken-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3B%20Louder%20Than%20Bombs%3B%20Men%20%26%20Chicken%3B%20The%20Huntsman%3A%20Winter%E2%80%99s%20War%20and%20others%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Feye-in-the-sky-louder-than-bombs-men-and-chicken-dvd-reviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b37ffcbe16a4ff4dcd27fdc70d75d532002e735%2F0_13_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Emily Blunt and Charlize Theron in The Hunstman: Winter’s War. 
Female sibling rivalry provides a fleeting frisson of camp to the otherwise 
mechanically fantastical stodge ofThe Huntsman: Winter’s War 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_W65ndip7MM> (Universal, 12). As Charlize 
Theron and Emily Blunt’s duelling sister queens wage a brief battle of fire, 
feathers and ice toward the climax of this bafflingly Snow White-free 
prequel-cum-sequel toSnow White and the Huntsman, it’s gaudily exciting enough 
to make you wonder why we’ve spent most of its running time in the company of 
Chris Hemsworth’s mirthless title character. Otherwise, this flaccid fairytale 
exemplifies thesequel-for-sequel’s-sake 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/hollywoods-new-problem-sequels-moviegoers-899765>
 mentality of current Hollywood franchise-building; Kristen Stewart is well off 
out of it.

On the rerelease front, the Criterion Collection continues its UK run with a 
handsome reissue of 1979’sThe In-Laws 
<https://www.criterion.com/films/28707-the-in-laws> (Sony, E), a chipper 
screwball runaround elevated by the inspired comic pairing of Peter Falk and 
Alan Arkin as polar-opposite paters of a soon-to-wed young couple. There are 
those who regard this as a classic; funny as it is, I’m not sure Arthur 
Hiller’s film rewards quite such lacquered preservation, though its influence 
on an ensuing decade or so of action-laced bristling-buddy comedies is plain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpASs3rerRCY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpASs3rerRCY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpASs3rerRCY&media=>
Watch a trailer for Wendy and Lucy. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pASs3rerRCY> 
A less surprising candidate for discerning Blu-ray resurrection is The Shop on 
the High Street <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0059527/> (Second Run, 15), Ján 
Kádar and Elmar Klos’s elegant, Oscar-winning Holocaust fable about the 
conflicted friendship between an elderly Jewish shopkeeper and the “Aryan 
controller” she believes merely to be her hired assistant. A 1965 cornerstone 
of the Czech new wave, it tips the tragicomic balance to gradually wrenching 
effect. Also worth a revisit: Luchino Visconti’s penultimate film, made in 1974,
Conversation Piece <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiUp8ik2dQg> (Eureka, 18). 
Starring Burt Lancaster as an ageing professor opening his Rome apartment to 
hedonist invasion, it’s an alternately stilted, seductive and (for the 
aristocratically reared Visconti) self-lacerating class satire, every inch the 
curiosity implied by its title.

Finally, with her wonderful new film Certain Women 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/reviews/certain-women-review-kristen-stewart-1201687531/>
 heading to cinemas later this year, American micro-masterKelly Reichardt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/-sp-kelly-reichardt-my-films-are-just-glimpses-of-people-passing-through>
is the subject of a deserved tribute from mubi.com,streaming four of her finely 
grained features <https://mubi.com/showing> – Old Joy, Wendy and Lucy, Meek’s 
Cutoff and her newly restored 1994 debut River of Grass – until early 
September. If you’re unfamiliar with Reichardt’s school of still-waters 
humanism, I’d suggest beginning with the Michelle Williams-frontedWendy and Lucy
, a girl-and-her-dog story of rugged individualism in the American heartland 
that crushes your heart in the lowest of registers; tiny and yet vastly 
searching, it’s among the greatest films of the new century.
 