
1) City’s Caballero is too big a risk for cup final

With all the focus on Manuel Pellegrini’s team selection, the post-match 
reaction to the heaviest defeat in Manchester City’s Abu Dhabi era largely 
overlooked the fact that some of the least impressive performances came from 
their senior players. Martín Demichelis was once a centre-half of high 
reputation but those days have passed now and there is also strong evidence 
that Pablo Zabaleta, the outstanding right-back in the Premier League a few 
years ago, is in decline. More than anyone, though, Willy Caballero always 
gives City’s opponents the sense that Pellegrini’s team might be vulnerable. A 
City game never looks like it is going to be a stress-free occasion when 
Caballero is chosen ahead of Joe Hart and it must be slightly disconcerting for 
the club’s supporters that Pellegrini says he will persist with the former 
Málaga goalkeeper in the Capital One Cup final against Liverpool on Sunday. 
Caballero saved Oscar’s penalty but it is beginning to feel like a trick of the 
mind that the Argentinian was signed to give Hart genuine competition. The 
final is City’s most realistic chance of silverware and it would be a needless 
risk on the part of Pellegrini to start with him at Wembley. Or, to put it 
another way, it is fair to say Liverpool’s supporters will be desperately 
hoping Pellegrini keeps to his word. Daniel Taylor
• FA Cup quarter-final draw: Chelsea face tricky trip to Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/fa-cup-sixth-round-draw-quarter-final-chelsea-everton>
• Fàbregas bewilders Manchester City in fluent Chelsea performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/21/cesc-fabregas-manchester-city-chelsea>
• Match report: Chelsea 5-1 Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/chelsea-manchester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
2) Bentaleb: undroppable in FA Cup, unpickable in league

Nabil Bentaleb has fashioned an intriguing position in Tottenham’s squad. The 
Algerian started 25 league games last season and was involved in the first four 
of this campaign, but since then he has made one fleeting substitute appearance 
in that competition plus one substitute appearance in the Europa League. In 
Tottenham’s 33 matches in those two competitions and the Capital One Cup 
combined – a total of 2,970 game minutes, plus stoppage time – Bentaleb has 
played 216, or 7.3%, all but 50 of them in August. In the FA Cup, though, he is 
considered undroppable. This was the third successive Cup game which he has 
started and finished. Of the 360 minutes Spurs have played in the competition 
(plus stoppages), he has been on the field for 292, or 81.1%. To be fair, an 
ankle ligament injury meant Bentaleb was unavailable for selection for a couple 
of months, but since his return to fitness he has been in the Premier League 
matchday squad on six occasions, kicking his heels in the stands on five, and 
actually used for only two minutes, against Palace last month. Quite what makes 
his game uniquely suitable for the FA Cup remains unknown but Sunday’s result 
leaves him in a bit of a pickle, as an FA Cup specialist without anFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> to play in. Perhaps his 
performance in midfield, which was surefooted without being outstanding and 
allowed Eric Dier to drop into the back four while Toby Alderweireld was 
rested, might encourage Mauricio Pochettino to give him a chance during 
Tottenham’s assault on the Premier League title. Failing that, there’s always 
next year.Simon Burnton

FA Cup quarter-final draw: Chelsea face tricky trip to Everton in sixth round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/fa-cup-sixth-round-draw-quarter-final-chelsea-everton>
• Match report: Tottenham Hotspur 0-1 Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/tottenham-hotspur-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
3) Keeping Payet at West Ham may be difficult

Dimitri Payet recently signed a new contract at West Ham United, worth around 
£125,000 a week, that runs until 2021. Given the Frenchman’s scintillating 
displays, which continued with two goals in Sunday’s 5-1 hiding ofBlackburn 
Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> in the FA Cup, this is 
particularly shrewd business from the Boleyn Ground executive. After the 
fifth-round tie at Ewood Park Slaven Bilic, the manager, said Payet is in the 
same class as Luka Modric, who he coached when in charge of Croatia. Payet will 
be 29 next month. This summer is his now-or-never moment to make a move to an 
elite Champions League-level club. If he is still at West Ham by 1 September 
that will be even better business from the club hierarchy. And it will also be 
considered a sizeable surprise.Jamie Jackson
• Match report: Blackburn 1-5 West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/blackburn-rovers-west-ham-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c389ea63d5bbbfdc723c5e5fa1799e36e9c456%2F208_400_2826_1696%2F2826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fifth-round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fifth-round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c389ea63d5bbbfdc723c5e5fa1799e36e9c456%2F208_400_2826_1696%2F2826.jpg>
 Blackburn’s Jason Steele dives in vain as Dimitri Payet scores West Ham’s 
second goal. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
4) Replays are part of a debate football needs to have

When the great replay debate came into focus at the end of Arsenal’s goalless 
draw with Hull, Steve Bruce made a point that messed with all the old 
stereotypes about a smaller club getting heavyweight opponents back to their 
place. He was contemplating the notion of going directly to a penalty shootout 
after the first match, and whether it might add some excitement to the FA Cup 
if games such as Saturday’s when Hull’s effective rearguard action nullified 
Arsenal, went straight to the roulette of spot-kicks. Then he said the most 
interesting thing of all: “It would give us a better chance.” For a manager of 
Bruce’s experience, and FA Cup background, to come to that conclusion certainly 
adds to the discussions about whether, and how, to reshape the competition. He 
reckoned his team would have a better chance of beatingArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in a penalty shootout after a 
dogged away performance than back at the KC Stadium over another 90 (or 
possibly 120) minutes. Bruce’s overall argument is football’s scheduling has 
changed sufficiently that squidging in replays doesn’t really fit with the 
modern game. It is a debate about the FA Cup that does need to be had properly.
Amy Lawrence
• Suárez adds vertigo to push Barcelona towards new heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/20/luis-suarez-barcelona-arsenal-champions-league>
• Match report: Arsenal 0-0 Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/arsenal-hull-city-fa-cup-match-report>
5) When will Watford play a full-strength side? 

So far in the Cup this season Watford have rested a number of players and 
Quique Sánchez Flores made six changes to his side for the 1-0 victory over 
Leeds. It was job done as far as Flores was concerned, not a classic game but 
one that Watford never looked like losing. Odion Ighalo started on the bench, 
with Troy Deeney playing behind Nordin Amrabat in attack, but withWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> in the quarter-finals and with 
their Premier League safety assured, surely Flores will pick a stronger side in 
the last eight. They are now one game from Wembley and have a realistic chance 
of challenging for the Cup. “What I like is the feeling I have in the squad, 
they are calm and positive,” said Flores after the win, when asked about his 
squad rotation. He may be tempted to alter that approach in the next round.
James Riach
• Match report: Watford 1-0 Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/watford-leeds-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf5085e1961e5e41d09add410607dfa25256745d%2F101_136_2753_1651%2F2753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fifth-round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fifth-round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf5085e1961e5e41d09add410607dfa25256745d%2F101_136_2753_1651%2F2753.jpg>
 Odion Ighalo started the match on Watford’s bench. Photograph: 
BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
6) Hector a real talent, whether or not Chelsea realise it

Outstanding during a Reading win over West Brom that was overshadowed by the 
throwing of a coin at Chris Brunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/chris-brunt-west-brom-hit-by-object>
 after the game, Michael Hector could be forgiven for being irritated his 
outstanding contribution to the Championship side’s success was overlooked 
because of some numpty with 50p too much in his pocket and some serious issues.
Signed by Chelsea last September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/01/chelsea-reading-defender-michael-hector>
 and immediately loaned back to Reading, the languid centre-half has been 
rewired as a central midfielder since his big break. As one of 33 players on 
loan from the Premier League club, whether he will ever feature in the 
champions’ first team remains to be seen. “I spoke to Michael about playing 
that role and said to him if you can develop another string to your bow and 
play in that holding midfield role, he can play in the position for Chelsea,” 
said the Reading manager, Brian McDermott, of Hector’s excellent performance in 
the centre of the field. “I spoke to Chelsea about Michael playing in that role 
and they were happy for him to do that. He can play centre-half, he can play 
holding midfielder and I thought he was terrific today. He’s been on loan 
everywhere … a lot of places. He hadn’t been playing in the team, but we 
changed the system and he’s been terrific in training.” Hector has been on loan 
at Bracknell Town, Didcot Town, Havant & Waterlooville, Oxford City, Horsham, 
Dundalk, Barnet, Shrewsbury Town, Aldershot Town, Cheltenham Town, Aberdeen, 
Reading. That’s 12 clubs. He is 23. Barry Glendenning
• Brunt confronts West Brom fans after being hit by coin at Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/chris-brunt-west-brom-hit-by-object>
• Match report: Reading 3-1 West Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/reading-west-bromwich-albion-fa-cup-match-report>
7) Iturbe may have made Bournemouth’s effort worthwhile

Eddie Howe will not lose too much sleep about Bournemouth’s exit from the FA 
Cup. Seven changes from the Premier League relegation battlers’ last selection 
said enough and, even if they played well enough to have got something out of 
the game on another day, his post-match observation that they had not lost any 
points made the statement in duplicate. Yet Howe also explained he wanted to 
keep players match-sharp for their next dozen games and it especially pleased 
him to see Juan Iturbe put in the most productive performance of his four to 
date. There is little doubting the Roma loanee’s quality but his adaptation was 
never likely to be instant; plenty of encouragement could be taken then from 
his tracking-back to dispossess first Bryan Oviedo and then Ross Barkley early 
on, and some incisive forays from the right flank were a feature of the home 
side’s first-half performance. “I thought he did really well in the first 
half,” Howe said. “He was a big player for us with his ability to drive with 
the ball and counterattack. He carried a threat and it was his best performance 
for us. He tired a little bit in the second half but overall I’m very happy 
with him. He’s improving all the time; I only see positive things in the future 
for Juan.” Iturbe may not add substantially to Saturday’s 71 minutes when
Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> visit Watford 
this weekend but on this evidence he will soon be equipped to make an impact in 
the league.Nick Ames
• Match report: Bournemouth 0-2 Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/bournemouth-everton-fa-cup-match-report>
• Premier League: fans’ verdicts on the £8bn battle for survival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/premier-league-battle-for-survival> 