
What value does a lower-league football club provide to a small town? It was 
something to mull over on Saturday morning during a scenic ramble from Merstham 
train station to the town’s football ground for the club’s first round FA Cup 
tie againstOxford United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united>. 
The previous day I had spoken to Richard Baxter, the club’s secretary, who 
happens to be my sister-in-law’s father. “Many people who live in the town 
still don’t know where the club is,” he sighed. The size of the 1,920 crowd, 10 
times the normal gate, suggested quite a few had decided their local side meant 
something after all.

Merstham fans came hoping for a fairytale. They left with a degree in football 
realpolitik. Every mistake they made was punished as the gap of 94 places from 
Ryman Premier League to League One proved an unbridgeable chasm. Refreshingly, 
even a5-0 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/05/merstham-v-oxford-united-fa-cup-first-round-live>
 hardly seemed to matter. For there was something else in the air, something 
not always apparent in the Premier League: civic pride coupled with a simple 
desire to enjoy the experience. You heard it in the excitable cheers every time 
Merstham entered their opponent’s penalty area, in the discordant – and yes, 
annoying – burps of the vuvuzelas, and at the lingering standing ovation the 
team received at the finish.

FA Cup first round: the minnows’ stories, from Westfields to Merstham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/04/fa-cup-first-round-minnows-westfields-merstham>
It helped that tickets were £15 not upwards of £50 – when going to a game 
costs as much as a takeaway it matters less if the dish doesn’t turn out right 
– but, still, this was something worth appreciating: football for football’s 
sake, without the posturing that often comes with it in higher leagues. It was 
easy to be charmed.

Anyone who has played non-league football will also recognise the 
time‑honoured blueprint of Merstham’s preparations: training Tuesdays and 
Thursdays, match Saturday. No wages, expenses divvied out by the manager, and 
the never-ending scrimping around for cash. The clubhouse even doubles as a 
nursery during the week. Beforehand Baxter rued the fact that he had to bring 
in outside contractors to help them prepare the pitch for Saturday because 
their tractor had broken down. A windfall of around £70,000 from TV and gate 
money is a lottery win, even if £20,000 will be needed to boost their 
floodlights if they ever get promoted.

If there is research into how important the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> is to lower‑division and 
non-league clubs, or whether the benefits of a Cup run matter more or less to 
them than they once did, I have not been able to find it. But instinctively, 
with all the TV money sloshing around, it should provide more of a financial 
pick-me-up to smaller clubs than in days of yore.

We can, however, state with greater certainty that professional lower-league 
clubs do bring extra benefits to their communities that aren’t reflected in 
ticket sales.

It comes from research by the academics Andy Barlow and David Forrest, who in 
2015 published a study in the National Institute Economic Review 
<http://www.niesr.ac.uk/publications/benefits-their-communities-small-town-professional-football-clubs%C2%A3.WB9AoZOLQXo>
, which asked residents in Bury and Luton how much extra they would be willing 
to pay in council tax to ensure their club stayed in the Football League.

For those in Bury the average was £1.79 a year, while for Luton it was £1.68. 
It doesn’t sound like much. But if those figures were reflected across each 
town’s populations, Barlow and Forrest calculated there was “an annual 
community benefit” of £242,200 for Bury and £275,758 for Luton – figures not 
captured by either club in its revenue from ticket sales.

Barlow and Forrest also found that 39% of residents in Bury and 47% in Luton 
felt the quality of life in their town would reduce if professional football 
ceased. “This tells you the community has a stake in the club, too,”Forrest 
told me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jan/27/football-clubs-going-bust>
. “It doesn’t just belong to the owners or the fans.”

Perhaps similar research should be conducted on the wider benefits of the FA 
Cup. Of course the grand old competition isn’t what it was. Gone are the days 
when the final day stopped the nation – in recent years it hasn’t always 
provided a full stop to the domestic season – and there are fewer footballing 
passion killers than watching watered‑down teams play each other in half-empty 
stadiums.

FA Cup roundup: Westfields denied historic victory and MK Dons rattled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/fa-cup-roundup-westfields-curzon-ashton-mk-dons-spennymoor-town>
Still, it is worth remembering that in the competition’s early days it barely 
got any traction at all – a report in the Times of the 1874 final, for 
instance, was buried below the results of Eton’s sports day, including the news 
that the cricket ball contest was won by the Hon. A. Lyttelton with a throw of 
100 yards, and an announcement that Harrow School’s annual sports day “will, as 
usual, be held on the Saturday before Easter”.

And while those of us of a certain age long for the full-blooded romance of 
our youths, perhaps after 145 years our relationship with the FA Cup should be 
more realistic.

In a world where the Premier League bubble has turned into a zeppelin, and the 
relationship between players and supporters has never been so distant, there is 
something solid and admirable about the Cup’s modest virtues – the distribution 
of some of football’s wealth further down the food chain, the brief flashlights 
on the little guys, and allowing clubs like Merstham a cherished day in the 
Surrey sun.
 