
Yeovil set up an FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third 
round home tie against Manchester United when they scored two late goals to 
defeat Accrington Stanley at Huish Park on Tuesday.

Simon Gillett struck first after 84 minutes in the second-round replay when he 
was allowed to control and shoot into an open net after the Yeovil striker Tom 
Eaves had challenged Accrington’s goalkeeper Jack Rose in the air. The 
substitute Kieffer Moore sealed Yeovil’s victory four minutes later when he 
rose unchallenged to head home.

The Yeovil manager, Gary Johnson, said: “The pressure was on because everyone 
in Somerset wanted Manchester United to come down to Huish Park. Because of the 
prize, nobody wanted to make a mistake. When the second goal went in that was 
when the Yeovil fans could really celebrate because at that point we were in 
the ascendancy. I think all the board of directors were on their knees for 90 
minutes, praying that we’d win. They’ll be very proud of their football club.”

Tranmere will also be at home to Premier League opposition, with Swansea City 
the visitors, after Rovers beatOxford United 2-1 at Prenton Park. Max Power 
scored the decisive goal in the a 76th minute after Kayode Odejayi, who once 
scored an FA Cup winner for Barnsley against Chelsea, had equalised Oxford’s 
opener from Alfie Potter.

Matt Done hit a hat-trick as League One Rochdale defeated non-League Aldershot 
4-1 and they will entertain Nottingham Forest in January.

Barnsley will meet Middlesbrough at Oakwell thanks to a 3-0 win at Chester, 
with Dale Jennings scoring twice in the second half, adding to Kane Hemmings’ 
16th-minute effort.

Luton Town will face Cambridge United after both won their replays 1-0. Luke 
Rooney scored just after half-time for Luton against Bury at Kenilworth Road 
and Sullay Kaikai’s early goal for Cambridge at Field Mill accounted for 
Mansfield Town.
 