
One of the bidders who lost out in the race to launch a rugby league club in 
Bradford following the demise ofBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> has described the Rugby 
Football League’s handling of the affair as “amateurish”, saying he is yet to 
hear from the sport’s governing body as to why his bid failed.

Richard Lamb, the chief executive of the Championship rugby union side 
Rotherham, says he was prepared to invest a million pounds of his own money in 
a new rugby league club in the city followingthe liquidation of the four-times 
Super League champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-go-into-liquidation>
 this month.

The RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> instead opted for a bid 
believed to be led by the former New Zealand Rugby League chairman Andrew 
Chalmers, who will lay out his vision for the club this week.

Related: Bradford Bulls’ fate was down to years of mismanagement of a 
trailblazing club | Aaron Bower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-rugby-league-liquidation-rfl-championship>

In response Lamb has been highly critical of how the process was handled by 
those at the top of the sport. “The whole thing has been an absolute shambles,” 
he told the Guardian. “I was going to invest a million pounds of my own money 
into a rugby club and they haven’t even got the courtesy or decency to ring me 
until after it’s been leaked? They are morally bankrupt as an organisation.

“On Friday I had an experience of two different governing bodies; the RFU were 
ultra-professional in a meeting I had and seemed to genuinely care – but the 
other, who I’m about to spend a million pounds with, can’t even be bothered to 
ring me and talk to me. You wonder why participation is going through the floor 
in rugby league – it’s symptomatic of the problems the sport has.”

Lamb’s proposal, which involved a fans’ trust owning a majority stake in the 
new club, was overlooked in favour of Chalmers’ bid – but he says he was not 
asked once about how he planned to put a squad together to start the new season 
in just a matter of weeks. “We had coaches, staff and everything ready to go 
and we were sourcing players – we were going to bring Todd Carney in,” Lamb 
said.

“On reflection, it feels like they knew who they wanted all along – it was 
just lip service saying they were entertaining bids. I’ve never come across an 
organisation as amateurish in my entire life and this is a sad indictment of a 
governing body which is out of date and out of touch with how to run a sport. 
They should hang their heads in shame. They still won’t tell me why our bid 
wasn’t the winning one, I’ve just been palmed off with talk of how close we 
came. It doesn’t sit right.

“They asked for no paperwork whatsoever in regards to a fit and proper 
person’s test and the way fans and players have been kept in the dark is 
disgusting. I believed they were operating in an open manner but they clearly 
weren’t.”
 