
The dramatic fall in the value of sterling has dealt a heavy blow to hundreds 
of thousands of older Britons living abroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/im-devastated-its-unbelievable-brits-in-spain-react-to-brexit>
who depend on a UK pension. If the pound doesn’t recover its losses, they will 
suffer a major hit in purchasing power, which may force some to return home. 
Earlier this week, UK pensioners living in the US, Australia and Canada were in 
effect 8 to 10% worse off, though the pound later regained some ground.

John Markham, 83, who moved to Canada more than 30 years ago, gets a UK basic 
state pension of £260 a month, which he receives in Canadian dollars after it 
is converted from sterling. On the day of the referendum his pension payment 
would have been C$488, but by Friday this week the figure stood at C$451 – a 
near-8% fall. If he had been living in the US, Australia or Spain and in 
receipt of the local currency, the fall would have been 9.3%, 8% and 7.5% 
respectively.

Markham, who is chairman of the International Consortium of British Pensioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/oct/25/frozen-basic-state-pension-australia-canada>
, says many expat Brits “are still trying to absorb what the impact of it all 
is,” and whether sterling will continue downwards or recover its losses. There 
are more than 1.2 million people living abroad who receive a UK state pension, 
which is either paid into a UK bank or into an overseas account in the local 
currency, usually monthly. Those opting for the latter are used to the amount 
they get varying because of exchange rates. Markham says that during the past 
couple of years the amount he has received has ranged from about C$800 to just 
over C$1,000.

The advice website Experts for Expats <http://www.expertsforexpats.com/> 
emailed its database this week to ask how people had been affected. Brian 
Brown, a British expat in Thailand, replied that it was “minimal really. Apart 
from the 8% drop in sterling vs Thai baht, and the loss in value of my shares 
and investments”. But he added that over the past 20 years he had learned “not 
to panic”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fpound-fall-british-pensioners-living-overseas-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbeb278bfe1a965a3aaed4f7174a311c078cab445%2F0_127_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Falling%20pound%20hits%20British%20pensioners%20living%20overseas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fpound-fall-british-pensioners-living-overseas-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Falling%20pound%20hits%20British%20pensioners%20living%20overseas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fpound-fall-british-pensioners-living-overseas-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbeb278bfe1a965a3aaed4f7174a311c078cab445%2F0_127_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 John Markham, chairman of the International Consortium of British Pensioners, 
says expat Brits are still trying to absorb the impact of Brexit. Photograph: 
Frank Baron for the Guardian 
Anne Bonnet, a British expat living in France, said: “I work here and manage 
financially but I have savings and a rental property in England which will no 
doubt be affected. I occasionally transfer some money over here when necessary. 
Also, I was hoping to retire and move house soon, but in the light of the 
devaluation I’ll be putting that project on hold until the market stabilises.”

Elisabeth Staudenmayer, who has lived in Germany for several years, said: “My 
main personal concern is for the future of the UK pension and whether it will 
be increased in the future or frozen as in Australia, South Africa and Canada. 
Also, whether we expat pensioners will continue to be covered for healthcare.”

Staudenmayer was referring to the fact that around 560,000 UK pensioners live 
in countries where their basic state pension is frozen – they don’t get the 
annual increases that people who move to EU countries and certain other places 
currently get. Anyone who retires to a country within the European Economic 
Area has their state pension uprated by the “triple lock”, meaning it is 
guaranteed to rise in line with whichever is the highest of earnings, inflation 
or 2.5%. But now the UK may have to negotiate reciprocal arrangements with 
individual EU countries to maintain the status quo, and if an agreement can’t 
be reached, people retiring to those countries could see their state pension 
payments frozen, says investment firm AJ Bell.

The vote and its repercussions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/10/prices-property-pensions-30-eu-referendum-questions-answered>
 could also put the brakes on people’s plans to move abroad. On the 
ExpatForum.com website, 60-year-old Moyra said she and her 72-year-old husband 
were planning to move to Spain next year, but “now I’m not sure it will be so 
easy… We will have to wait for ‘this mess’ to sort itself out... With luck, 
Spain will not shut the door to us when everything has calmed down.”
 