
Electric car company Faraday Future unveiled “a new species” of car in Las 
Vegas on Tuesday night: an electric sedan that will have the acceleration of a 
Formula One car and the ability to learn and adapt to the driver.

The FF 91 <https://www.ff.com/en/media/>,  <https://www.ff.com/en/media/>which 
the company says will go into production in 2018, would see Faraday Future
compete with Tesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/08/tesla-adds-german-firm-grohmann-to-european-operations>
for the electric sports car market. The FF 91 has 1,050hp and can accelerate 
0-60mph in 2.39 seconds, while the Tesla Model S P100D can reach 60mph in 2.5 
seconds.

Why electric cars are only as clean as their power supply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/electric-car-emissions-climate-change>
The launch came ahead of the annual Consumer Electronics Show, which starts on 
Thursday.

Nick Sampson, senior vice president at Faraday Future, said the car would 
feature a “driverless valet” system – where the driver can leave the car and 
order it to park itself – and two “aerodynamic antennas”, which will enable the 
car to essentially act as a big wireless router. The FF 91 will unlock itself 
by recognising the driver’s face, and will learn things about its driver and 
continually adapt to those preferences.

But despite all the promises, there is growing skepticism as to whether this 
sports car-come-sedan-come-artificial brain – which would be Faraday Future’s 
first ever production vehicle – will ever be built.

In November last year Aecom, the company in charge of constructing the $1bn 
Faraday Future car factory,stopped work over unpaid invoices 
<http://www.globalconstructionreview.com/news/aecom-halts-work-1bn-fara7day-electr7ic-veh7icle/>
.  
<http://www.globalconstructionreview.com/news/aecom-halts-work-1bn-fara7day-electr7ic-veh7icle/>

In December three key executives, including Ding Lei 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/29/14112356/faraday-future-ding-lei-leeco-lesee>
, Faraday Future’s “acting global CEO”,reportedly quit 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/23/14069968/faraday-future-executive-resignation-mattiacci-sommer>
 the company in the space of a week.

Sampson himself referenced the problems at the launch. “Despite all the 
naysayers and the skeptics we will persist,” he said.

The car is a futuristic take on a four-door sedan, with wrap around tinted 
glass on the doors and roof, a check-pattern along the base, and lots of curves 
and clean lines. The FF 91 also features a circular glowing light on the hood – 
a little like the one on Iron Man’s chest.

The audience were also treated to a live, indoor drag race which showcased the 
car’s speed compared to a Bentley, a Ferrari and the Tesla S P100D. The FF 91 
was the fastest, and if Faraday Future’s claims that it can achieve 60mph in 
2.39 seconds are accurate, it would be 
<http://driving.ca/auto-news/news/top-10-fastest-production-cars-from-zero-to-60-mph>
 the second-fastest production car ever made.  
<http://driving.ca/auto-news/news/top-10-fastest-production-cars-from-zero-to-60-mph>

The trolling of Elon Musk: how US conservatives are attacking green tech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/elon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech>
Cars have become a big part of CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces>
 in recent years. This year vehicles capable of “emotion” are expected to take 
centre stage. Honda claims that its cars will be “artificially generate their 
own emotions”, while other big brands are planning to unveil their own vehicles 
that are capable of interacting with the driver.

Faraday Future was keen to stress their car’s intelligence as much as its 
speed. Hong Bae, director of advanced drive assistance systems and 
self-driving, showed off the car’s “driverless valet” feature, where the driver 
can hop out of the car, run off to a meeting and the car will park itself.

The audience watched a live video of the FF 91 parking itself in a parking lot 
outside.

There were two spaces available in the lot and the FF 91 duly found a spot, 
reversing slowly into the space without hitting any of the other vehicles in 
the lot. Bae and Sampson also talked up the ability of the FF 91 to build a 
relationship with the driver by learning and adapting to an individual’s in-car 
preferences.

Faraday Future did not respond to questions about how the factory delay and 
the departure of its executives – the company’s chief brand and commercial 
officer and VP for product marketing and growth left along with Lei – would 
impact production.

On Tuesday the company opened a section on its website where people can 
register 
<https://www.ff.com/en/account/login/?next=https://reserve.ff.com/en/&reserve=yes>
 to take delivery of the FF 91 for a deposit of $5,000.


 