
European agriculture ministers have agreed a €500m (£366m) aid package at an 
emergency meeting in Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/06/uk-farmers-join-brussels-protest-over-milk-and-meat-prices>
 as police outside clashed with farmers protesting against falling dairy and 
meat prices.




The announcement from the commission came after a day of protests, which 
police said involved 4,800 farmers – with 70 from Britain – and 1,450 tractors.

Tractors blockaded streets while some protesters pelted the police with eggs 
and sprayed milk and hay at them. At least one police officer was injured and 
water cannon were used.

Jyrki Katainen, vice-president of the European commission, said the aid was a 
“robust and decisive response” to the crisis in the industry. The €500m package 
includes cash for struggling farms, additional funds to promote European dairy 
products and the creation of a new “high level group” that will consider 
introducing new “financial and risk-hedging instruments such as futures markets 
for agricultural products”.

Katainen added: “We believe firmly that the measures I have outlined represent 
the most appropriate mix of immediate and decisive actions, coupled with 
forward-looking measures, to deal with the current difficulties in the markets.”

However, British farming leaders expressed disappointment that the EC will not 
intervene in the market to shore up dairy prices. The so-called “milk 
intervention price” that would trigger the commission to buy milk and milk 
powder stands at between 16p and 17p, below present prices.

“We owe it to farmers to make it clear that this is not the appropriate policy 
response to the current situation,” Katainen said.

UK farmers join Brussels protest over milk and meat prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/06/uk-farmers-join-brussels-protest-over-milk-and-meat-prices>
British agriculture leaders said farmers were “really struggling to pay their 
bills” and called for greater government intervention in the milk market to 
help put a floor on prices.

The NFU, NFU Scotland, NFU Cymru and Ulster Farmers Union said after the 
meeting the government needed to deliver on their promises.

Elizabeth Truss, the environment secretary, represented Britain at the meeting 
of farming ministers. She has pledged to push for the creation of afutures and 
insurance market in dairy products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/tesco-talks-dairy-farmers-protests-milk-imports-avonmouth>
 so farmers can insure themselves against price fluctuations.

The average farm gate price of milk in the UK has fallen by more than 25% in 
the last year and stands at 23.35p a litre, below the estimated production cost 
of 30p a litre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffarmers-clash-police-brussels-milk-meat-prices-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6ea694c2ab6fd4813c766a8efc976b6c65082c3%2F0_234_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farmers%20clash%20with%20police%20in%20Brussels%20during%20milk%20and%20meat%20prices%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffarmers-clash-police-brussels-milk-meat-prices-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farmers%20clash%20with%20police%20in%20Brussels%20during%20milk%20and%20meat%20prices%20protest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Ffarmers-clash-police-brussels-milk-meat-prices-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6ea694c2ab6fd4813c766a8efc976b6c65082c3%2F0_234_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
 Belgian riot police stand guard as farmers protest in Brussels city centre. 
Photograph: Jacky Naegelen/Reuters 
Falling milk and meat prices have also hit farmers in mainland Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. The demonstrators in Brussels 
were primarily from Belgium, France and Germany.

The British farming unions held talks with Truss after the European meeting. 
In a statement, they said: “We want to see a review of intervention for milk 
prices to help put a floor in the market and a review of market management 
measures to help farmers get through this short-term crisis.

In no other industry would firms think it good to milk their best suppliers dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/23/supermarkets-seem-to-milk-farmers-dry>
“There was agreement in the meeting that a widespread culture change is needed 
within the food supply chain to ensure that farmers see a fair share of risk 
and reward.

 “The government and devolved ministers need to deliver on their promises, 
work together to achieve this culture change across the supply chain and to see 
real understanding of the cost of production to farmers.”

European farmers have suffered a sharp decline in demand for their products as 
Russia blocks western imports of food and China tries to bolster domestic 
production rather than buying milk fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. One banner held up by 
protesters in Brussels said “Europe is drowning in milk”.

British farmers blame supermarkets for the slide in milk prices. They claim 
milk has been used as a weapon in the industry price war and retailers are not 
doing enough to promote British-sourced products. In protest, they have 
blockaded distribution centres andherded two cows through an Asda store in 
Stafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/09/farmers-herd-cows-asda-protest-low-milk-prices>
.

 In response, supermarkets have bowed to pressure from farmers on several 
issues.Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/13/value-uk-milk-sales-plummet-pressure-mounts-dairy-farmers>
,Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, Aldi and Lidl have 
increased the amount they pay, and Tesco has agreed to use only British milk in 
its own-brand yoghurts instead of importing from Germany, as it had done 
previously.

The British environment secretary Elizabeth Truss said: “This package of 
support shows the EU commission have listened to calls for urgent action to 
help farmers overcome the severe cash-flow pressures they are coming under.

“We now need more detail on how these measures will help our farmers in the UK 
and provide the short-term relief that is needed. We need a specific commitment 
from the commission that basic payment scheme checks can be relaxed so that 
more farmers can be promptly paid.

“We will continue to work with the commission to resolve the pressing 
difficulties facing farmers which extend beyond the dairy sector and ensure the 
support package provided is also available to help other farmers - particularly 
in our lamb, beef and pig meat sectors.”
 