
Fashion loves a trend that has not got much truck with the everyday. Enter the 
floorsweeper: pretty much unwearable on a rainy day, on public transport or a 
country walk. The floorsweeper is exactly what it describes: trousers, coats or 
dresses that sweep over the floor. See? Not exactly something that translates 
to the average norm’s commute, is it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6edf01f85d1eefbb18c566d4172d2d1eccdaaf%2F0_0_1744_2400%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion's%20floorsweeper%3A%20the%20latest%20trend%20where%20practicality%20has%20no%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%27s%20floorsweeper%3A%20the%20latest%20trend%20where%20practicality%20has%20no%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6edf01f85d1eefbb18c566d4172d2d1eccdaaf%2F0_0_1744_2400%2F1744.jpg>
 Kylie Jenner working the floorsweeper coat. Photograph: Raymond Hall/GC Images 
This trend comes from the kind of women who live in the constant glow on the 
Instagram post, moving from hotel to car, with a driver just out of shot: the 
likes ofGigi Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gigi-hadid>, Kylie 
Jenner and Rihanna. It adds an element of drama even if matched with the 
hoodies and trainers that make up these women’s wardrobes.

Hadid is a fan of a long coat that trails along the street in cream (warning: 
do not clickthis link 
<https://www.yahoo.com/style/gigi-hadids-ridiculously-long-coat-was-not-made-for-walking-172620309.html>
 if you are in any way a neat freak) and enjoys monotoning various shades of 
caramel on her coat, long trousers and, indeed, hair. Jenner is also into this 
and wears her long, long, long coat over acrop top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/mar/26/crop-top-back-dont-panic> and 
shredded jeans. Rihanna arguably started it all of course, with the most 
extreme floorsweeper of all time,the massively  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/05/how-to-make-rihannas-met-ball-dress-stylewatch>
memeable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/05/how-to-make-rihannas-met-ball-dress-stylewatch>
yellow Guo Pei design she wore for the Met Ball in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/05/how-to-make-rihannas-met-ball-dress-stylewatch>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d6b5ce9d5cbc3393bfdfef86964284c5c4358e%2F0_0_3056_4584%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion's%20floorsweeper%3A%20the%20latest%20trend%20where%20practicality%20has%20no%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%27s%20floorsweeper%3A%20the%20latest%20trend%20where%20practicality%20has%20no%20place&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffashions-floorsweeper-the-latest-trend-where-practicality-has-no-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d6b5ce9d5cbc3393bfdfef86964284c5c4358e%2F0_0_3056_4584%2F3056.jpg>
 A floorsweeper coat on the Balmain catwalk for spring 2017. Photograph: 
Dominique Charriau/WireImage 
The catwalk is on to this trend too, it being another arena where real life 
sometimes seems very far away. Extra-long trousers are a big thing in men’s and 
womenswear:Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> wore them for her 
post-show bow in September. And long coats were seen atBalmain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/29/kim-kardashian-balmain-paris-fashion-week-olivier-rousteing>
 andCéline <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine> in recent seasons. 

All of this means that floorsweepers may be in high-street shops some time 
soon, aimed at people who do have to get use public transport. But how to 
translate it to IRL? A bit of a snip to keep the fabric off the floor. Even 
Hadid has to keep her coat more ankle- than floor-length sometimes. OK, so 
anklesweeper isn’t quite as dramatic as floorsweeper but you can actually wear 
one to walk down the street. Bonus.
 