
Golden grass heads nod up and down in flowing waves at the insistence of the 
breeze.Lapwing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jun/08/birds.lapwing> are 
collecting around the edges of the pools in greater numbers than before, and 
there are also moregadwall 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/g/gadwall/index.aspx>
 and mallard paddling on the water as autumn draws in.

Clouds of soft brown and cream sand martins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/17/migrating-birds-somerset-martins-swallows>
 and black and white swallows –hirundines 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/families/swallows.aspx>
 – dance low over the water. They turn and turn, wings flickering, then 
suddenly still, as they stall, float, and snatch at the midges rising into the 
air among them.

Neighbourhood watch rumbles the raptor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/13/country-diary-bedfordshire-sandy-niemann-sparrowhawk-starlings-alarm-call>
The lapwing and ducks cry and leap up into the air, scattering in small 
groups, squealing and quacking as they fly in different directions. A dark bird 
flaps and glides above the pools. Thesparrowhawk 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/s/sparrowhawk/>
 turns and rises up against the clouds, where it joins another, larger female. 
The two raptors soar together in circles, spiralling over my head and 
“yikkering” to each other. More ducks panic and fly. Unconcerned, the martins 
and swallows swoop as before, focused on feeding.

The sparrowhawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jun/08/birds.sparrowhawk> head 
towards the woods by the river. The young bird lands on a bough, but the adult 
disappears into the trees, making a rapid “yikker-yikker-yikker” call. The 
young sparrowhawk answers and then follows her.

I sit on the river bank and watch the martins and swallows, and listen to 
their chitter-chatter calls. Another bird of prey joins them, this time with 
intent. Scything through the flock, sleek and fast-moving with flapping, black, 
pointed wings, thehobby 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/h/hobby/>
 pursues a martin, jinking right, then left, then up – faster than I can follow 
with my eyes. It’s chasing the migrating hirundines as they head south.

Flight of the falcon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/21/country-diary-mothering-heat-summer>
The hobby flaps harder, more slowly, climbing, then it levels and circles, 
before climbing again, until it becomes a black cross orbiting against the 
cloud. Then it plummets, fast and lethal, into the swarming martins, plucking 
one from the air. I’ve seen hobbies hunt smaller birds in fast, level flight 
many times, but not this way, diving as a peregrine would. The hobby, holding 
the prey in its talons, flies away over the tree-tops.

The Birds of North Wales, this year’s memorial lecture in honour of the late 
Country diary writerWilliam Condry (thecondrylecture.co.uk 
<http://www.thecondrylecture.co.uk/>), given by Jonathan Elphick, is at 
Tabernacle/MoMA, Machynlleth, 1 October, 7pm for 7.30






 