
The AFC Wimbledon film seems like a curveball – actually it's an open goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/01/the-afc-wimbledon-film-might-seem-like-a-curveball-actually-its-an-open-goal>
John Green, author of the YA novels The Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
 and Paper Towns, is to write and produce a film about English lower-league 
football club AFC Wimbledon.

Wimbledon FC were given permission by the Football Association to move 50 
miles away to Milton Keynes in 2002, and becameMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/jun/21/newsstory.mkdons>. The move 
angered fans and led to the creation of AFC Wimbledon, who worked their way 
from the bottom of the football pyramid system all the way to League Two.

In a post on Medium 
<https://medium.com/@johngreen/the-greatest-sports-story-never-told-c9039e82967e#.2egu4uuz1>
, the American writer referred to the tale as “the greatest underdog sports 
story you’ve never heard, starring a bunch of middle-aged people with 
absolutely no athletic talent” and provided more details about the project.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Ffault-in-our-stars-john-green-football-afc-wimbledon-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F719edb132bc97b67f55b286bf727954a80351e93%2F0_0_2256_1354%2F2256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fault%20in%20Our%20Stars%20author%20John%20Green%20to%20make%20film%20about%20AFC%20Wimbledon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Ffault-in-our-stars-john-green-football-afc-wimbledon-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fault%20in%20Our%20Stars%20author%20John%20Green%20to%20make%20film%20about%20AFC%20Wimbledon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Ffault-in-our-stars-john-green-football-afc-wimbledon-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F719edb132bc97b67f55b286bf727954a80351e93%2F0_0_2256_1354%2F2256.jpg>
 Is AFC Wimbledon’s rise the greatest sports story never told? Photograph: 
Richard Lee/BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
“Football is a game where adults can sing together and cry together, a 
rectangle upon which we can see in manageable scale all that is good and 
terrible about people, all the injustice and folly and joy of human life,” 
Green wrote. “And when that rectangle was taken away from Wimbledon, they built 
it again. That resilience represents the very best of us, and I am so excited 
to be part of the team working to share that story.”

In a Reddit AMA 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/soccer/comments/4cqoy0/hi_rsoccer_im_author_and_youtuber_john_greenand/>
, Green described the film as “a docudrama” with “comedic moments”.

To “prove” his interest in AFC Wimbledon, Green also posted a picture of 
himself <http://imgur.com/MC5ViRx> wearing the club’s third kit.

The film will be made with 20th Century Fox. The studio also worked with Green 
on the big-screen adaptation ofThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-fault-in-our-stars>, which became a 
surprise hit and grossed more than $300m (£209m) worldwide. Sarah Polley is set 
to direct another of Green’s novels, the teen romance Looking for Alaska.
 