
The Turnbull government signed an agreement to make a $640,000 grant to Bjørn 
Lomborg’s Copenhagen Consensus Centre nine months after plans to establish the 
centre had been abandoned.

The education department may have been under no legal obligation to make the 
grant, documents suggest.

The funding was used to support the centre’s post-2015 UN development goals 
project thatfound limiting global temperature rises to 2C was a poor investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/24/bjrn-lomborg-centre-got-640000-for-report-saying-limiting-warming-rise-to-2c-not-worth-it>
.

A breakdown of costs released on Thursday shows that $482,000 of the 
Australian funding was spent on professional fees and services including 
research, “outreach” and forums.

About $146,000 was spent on travel in an ambitious global project convening 
seminars to discuss the UN development goals in Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, 
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa and New York.

Bjørn Lomborg centre got $640,000 for report saying limiting warming rise to 
2C not worth it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/24/bjrn-lomborg-centre-got-640000-for-report-saying-limiting-warming-rise-to-2c-not-worth-it>
The project formed the basis of Lomborg’s book The Nobel Laureates’ Guide to 
the Smartest Targets for the World, which is not widely available in Australian 
shops.

Documents released under freedom of information show the department only 
entered a formal agreement to fund the project as late as 21 March 2016. Based 
on those documents and answers provided by the education department it appears 
the government did not have any ongoing commitment to the project when the 
Australian Consensus Centre was canned in June 2015.

The government’s plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/22/bjorn-lomborg-centre-government-approached-us-says-university>
 to establish the Australian Consensus Centre was put into effect in an 
agreement with the University of Western Australia (UWA) dated 24 March 2015.

But on 26 June 2015 the government and UWA terminated the agreement by consent 
because the universityrejected the funds after a public backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/08/climate-contrarian-bjrn-lomborgs-centre-dropped-by-wa-university>
. The agreement created an obligation for the government to pay UWA’s 
reasonable costs, but did not create obligations to the CCC.

An education department spokeswoman told Guardian Australia no payments were 
made to UWA under the agreement.

The $640,000 grant is disclosed in a log of education grants 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/documents/grants-announced-1-july-2015> dated 2 
July 2015 but the spokeswoman said it was only added after the grant agreement 
was signed with the CCC on 21 March 2016.

In September 2015 it was referred to in an incoming ministerial brief to 
Turnbull’s pick for education minister, Simon Birmingham.

“The department has negotiated a funding agreement which will provide a 
one-off payment to the CCC for a total of $640,000 to cover costs incurred in 
relation to the establishment of the Australian Consensus Centre prior to the 
decision to cancel this project,” it said.

When Guardian Australia asked for a copy of the “funding agreement” with the 
CCC referred to in the briefing, the education department provided the 21 March 
2016 agreement.

An education department spokeswoman said “payments were undertaken in 
accordance with the government’s funding agreement with UWA and the memorandum 
of understanding between UWA and the CCC”.

 The department did not directly respond to questions about how an agreement 
between the government and UWA and a the memorandum between UWA and the CCC 
could create legal obligations between the department and the CCC.

If there was another legal obligation to pay the CCC, such as an equitable 
duty, the education department did not identify it after detailed questions, 
nor identify its source.

Is Bjorn Lomborg right to say fossil fuels are what poor countries need? | 
Graham Readfearn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2013/dec/06/bjorn-lomborg-climate-change-poor-countries-need-fossil-fuels>
Neither the education department nor Birmingham explained why a new grant 
agreement was struck on 21 March 2016 if all or part of the $640,000 was owed 
by the commonwealth for some pre-existing legal obligation.

Asked if the $640,000 was to pay for costs incurred, as described in the 
brief, the education department spokeswoman said: “The government’s decision to 
pay the grant was based on the merits of supporting further work to complete 
the project.

“Costs for the project had been incurred. However, under the funding 
agreement, the department required additional work to be undertaken.”

Labor’s innovation, industry, science and research shadow minister, Kim Carr, 
called on the government to provide a full explanation of the grant.

“The government must explain how and why this grant was still awarded, even 
after it had terminated the agreement with the university for the Australian 
Consensus Centre following pressure from the opposition and the research 
community,” Carr said.

“Malcolm Turnbull cannot hide behind a prior deal made by Tony Abbott – his 
government signed a fresh contract on 21 March 2016.”

“This use of taxpayers’ money to promote an anti-science conservative agenda 
shows that Malcolm Turnbull is still beholden to the right wing of the Liberal 
party.”

At Senate estimates on 20 October, Birmingham said the government had made a 
“special purpose” decision to allocate funding to the consensus centre, a 
process that was “terminated”.

Cost of gathering data on new development goals could be crippling | Bjorn 
Lomborg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/sep/24/gathering-data-sustainable-development-crippling>
“Special purpose funding was allocated prior to [Christopher] Pyne deciding to 
terminate the process … It was commenced under Pyne’s tenure as well,” he said.

“The decision to initiate it and also the decision to terminate it occurred 
prior to my appointment as minister. So you are trawling over some ancient 
history really.”

Asked at estimates what the “special purpose” for the grant was, Birmingham 
said “obviously the government honoured the contractual obligations insofar as 
it was obliged to” at the time the centre was cancelled.

A spokesman for Birmingham told Guardian Australia his answers to estimates 
were factual and not misleading but refused to explain what “contractual 
obligations” the commonwealth had to the CCC before striking the new agreement 
on 21 March 2016.

A spokesman for the CCC referred Guardian Australia to the education 
department. UWA refused to comment.
 