
Sparrows had gathered in a coffee house courtyard on a late summer afternoon on
Holy Island <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/dec/20/ruralaffairs>. Most of 
the tourists were chasing the ebb tide across the causeway as the North Sea 
wiped and revealed a sacred history every few hours. With the tide out, the 
island’s holy precincts endured their heritage quietly, with a few stragglers 
and the birds.

Furtive and mouse-like, the sparrows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jun/08/birds.housesparrow> 
scuttled under tables, the lookouts venturing on to chair backs to scope out 
possibilities. They have an acute instinct for a good mark, and I had a 
sparrow-friendly vibe and a sandwich.

I’ve always thought habituating wild animals through food is ethically 
dubious; wild means distance, other. However, the writerRyszard Kapuściński 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jan/25/pressandpublishing.booksobituaries>
 said something about contact between self and other being the basis for 
harmony on Earth. So I offered the sparrows a crust and all hell broke loose.

I’d had this internal ethical argument the day before, at Eyemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/30/lets-move-to-eyemouth-st-abbs-head-berwickshire>
, in Berwickshire, the Scottish Borders. On the harbour a man selling fresh 
seafood offered the chance to feed seals by clamping a herring with a crocodile 
clip dangling from a pole above a float in the dock.

A bird in the house disturbs the order of things
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/08/country-diary-bird-house-disturbs-order-things>
I lost that argument too. A massive grey seal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jun/07/wildlife.grey.seal> with a 
daft dog’s head and propeller scars on his van-sized body rose from the water 
to snatch the bait. I was so impressed with this 14-year-old giant harbour 
master I fed him a fish by hand, and even though he must have done it a 
thousand times before he was surprisingly gentle. I’m sure there are all kinds 
of things wrong with doing this but I just found the contact inspiring and real.

The sparrows went bonkers. I’ve always felt Passer domesticus 
<http://www.garden-birds.co.uk/birds/housesparrow.htm> was a kind of popular 
movement from the past, a peasants’ revolt with its own social structure and 
communal enthusiasm. The action across the table around the crust in my fingers 
was more like a dancefloor than politics, with dominant birds and watching 
wallflowers. Most of all, it was fun – for them and for me too.

Jonathan Elphick gives this year’s William Condry memorial lecture (
thecondrylecture.co.uk <http://www.thecondrylecture.co.uk/>) on The Birds of 
North Wales at Tabernacle/MoMA, Machynlleth, 1 October, 7pm for 7.30. Admission 
£5 includes refreshments (no need to book)
 