
The number of girls and women playing Australian rules football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-rules-football> has soared, 
according to figures released by the AFL with total female participation 
increasing 19% in 2016 to 380,041.

The number of girls playing Auskick grew by 21% and 354 new community club 
teams were launched in 2016, with females now accounting for 27% of all 
footballers.


Women's AFL players strike deal over increased pay for first two seasons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/womens-afl-players-strike-deal-over-increased-pay-for-first-two-seasons>
It comes as the new AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> women’s league 
prepares to kick off its inaugural season in February, with a number of games 
expected to be played as curtain-raisers to the men’s pre-season clashes.


“[Women’s footy] has been the biggest growth part of our industry now for 
three or four years,” AFL game and development manager Simon Lethlean said.

“That momentum has taken off. There are recognisable role models now and a 
competition starting in February. We expect that to really keep on increasing 
and it’s an exciting part of our industry.”


Male participation was up 10% in 2016 to 1,024,135 but Lethlean said the 
somewhat softer growth was no cause for concern.


“I think our male growth is still solid ... 1.4 million [total] participants 
around Australia is a fantastic outcome. We intend for that to keep growing and 
we intend to keep investing,” he said.


The fixture for the seven-week women’s competition has been finalised but is 
yet to be released, with the AFL working to lock in broadcast deals for the 
games.


Melbourne marquee player Melissa Hickey said the AFL had become far more 
inclusive since her childhood. “I grew up in the country, so I was the only 
girl in my grade five and six football team,” she said.

“It probably wasn’t quite the thing to do when I was a bit younger. I think 
that’s the beauty of our women’s league. It’s becoming so common so the young 
kids know that pathway is there for them..”


Hickey also brushed off concerns female players could be at greater risk of 
concussion, with campaigner Peter Jess recently warning there was potential for 
a “catastrophic” injury.


“We’re susceptible to the same injuries [as the men],” Hickey said. “It 
happens but it’s not something I’m concerned about.”
 