
From my vantage point on the southern side of the Dyfi estuary 
<http://www.unesco-mab.org.uk/biosffer-dyfi-biosphere.html> it was clear that 
my plan for the day had been compromised. The salt marsh, with its almost 
fractally complex pattern of creeks, pools and drains, is often host in late 
autumn to large groups of geese grazing contentedly within easy reach of the 
seawall.

On this visit those few geese visible through the pervasive anticyclonic murk 
were strung out along the seaward edge of the marsh, distant and difficult to 
approach. As if by compensation a single egret, starkly white against the muted 
greys and browns of the saltings, flapped slowly up from the bed of a creek 
just in front of me.

Leatherback turtles' taste for jellyfish leads them to Welsh coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/aug/13/leatherback-turtles-jellyfish-welsh-coast>
Hoping for a break in the gloomy weather I moved on to Dovey Junction 
<http://www.ceredigioncoastpath.org.uk/dyfi.html>, one of the more remote 
railway stations in the UK. Perched by the river Dyfi and reachable only on 
foot or by bike along a gravel track, it gives access to a dramatic rail route 
along the north side of theestuary 
<https://www.bto.org/news-events/press-releases/mixed-fortunes-wading-birds-welsh-estuaries>
.

Across the river bridge, with its lonely cottage, the line follows a rocky 
foreshore edged with current-sculpted sandbanks where the main channel cuts 
close to the shore. On this day scattered groups of large jellyfish lay 
stranded near the high-water mark, oystercatchers scavenged and probed at the 
edge of the rising tide, and ducks formed sociable rafts midstream. But no more 
geese were visible.

Country diary: Dyfi estuary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/24/country-diary-dyfi-estuary>
The village of Aberdyfi marks the boundary between the river and sea, and even 
stepping from the train on to its single station platform I could hear the roar 
of the surf breaking on the sandbar at the mouth of the Dyfi.

Warm sunshine broke through briefly and from the jetty behind the lifeboat 
station children fished for crabs â€“ dropping them into buckets of seaweed and 
water as generations have done before them.

As the sea breeze began to pick up and the shadows lost their definition I 
looked inland. Fresh masses of grey cloud were starting to drag across the 
hills of Ceredigion while a solitary cormorant dived repeatedly and with 
limited success among the moored fishing boats.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>


 