
The febrile US political atmosphere seems to have stirred something 
long-dormant in three major American novelists, all of whom publish fine new 
books in the coming months. First, there’s Michael Chabon’sMoonglow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moonglow-463631.html> (Fourth Estate). Taking 
in radicalism and rocket science, this is a wildly inventive and often very 
funny novel, and such a relief after its tedious predecessor,Telegraph Avenue. 
Speaking of tedious, Jonathan Lethem’s career has never quite regained the 
heights ofMotherless Brooklyn and The Fortress of Solitude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/dec/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
.The Blot <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blot.html> (Jonathan Cape), out in 
February, tells of a telepathic backgammon shark with a brain tumour. It’s a 
return to form, absurd and digressive in a way that makes clear Lethem’s debt 
to Thomas Pynchon. Finally, and most surprisingly, there’s Paul Auster’s4321 
(Faber). Auster is 70 in 2017, which shocked me rather – I still think of him 
as a sprightly iconoclast. His new novel is so much better than anything since
The Music of Chance, you wonder if it can really be by the same author as 
Invisibleor Oracle Night. This meticulously plotted book weaves four possible 
stories out of the life of one man – Ferguson – who makes his way through the 
second half of the 20th century being buffeted by forces political and 
personal. Think a postmodern take on Kate Atkinson’sLife After Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/06/life-after-life-kate-atkinson-review>
.

One’s heart goes out to the contemporary American novelist, for whom daily 
reality seems to outstrip the reach of both satire and dystopia. All the more 
impressive that a debutant, Nathan Hill, with his scintillatingThe Nix 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nix.html> (Picador), has given us a character 
who comes close to out-Trumping Trump. Sheldon Packer is a bilious demagogue, 
just one of the many pleasures of this engaging story of a mother and son whose 
private travails become front-page news. Other first novels worth looking out 
for areSympathy (One) by Olivia Sudjic, the best fictional account I’ve read of 
the way the internet has shaped our inner lives. A literary thriller that 
confirms the arrival of a major new talent. There’s alsoThe Clocks in This 
House All Tell Different Times (Salt) by Xan Brooks – a fairytale wrapped 
within a historical novel, it’s as quixotic and dreamlike as Ishiguro’sThe 
Buried Giant. Elif Batuman’s memoir of a life in love with Russian literature, 
The Possessed, was stunning and her first novel, The Idiot (Cape), is just as 
good – a moving, continent-hopping coming-of-age story.

Brian Catling’s The Vorrh blew me away (along with my ideas of what fantasy 
novels should do) when it came out in 2012. I’ve just finished the second of 
the trilogy –The Erstwhile (Coronet) – and it’s even better. Set in London, 
Germany and Africa, the book features William Blake alongside its cast of 
monsters and adventurers. These are luminous and visionary novels –Gormenghast 
reimagined by Alan Moore on opium. Speaking of trilogies, Anthony Quinn’sEureka 
(Cape), out in July, concludes the series that started withCurtain Call 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/curtain-call.html> and last year’s excellent 
Freya. Mixing the Beatles, Antonioni and Henry James, it’s a joyful hymn to the 
1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4af1ca4e9ead7d061be7d836965a7d8b6445bff%2F0_319_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiction%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiction%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4af1ca4e9ead7d061be7d836965a7d8b6445bff%2F0_319_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Kamila Shamsie tells the story of two British Muslim families, and retells 
that of in Antigone, in Home Fire. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Last year’s procession of sucker-punches – Bowie (whump!), Brexit (pow!), 
Prince (argh!), Trump (clang!) – made us all feel like characters in a Greek 
tragedy, and so we should not be surprised that authors have turned to 
Sophocles and Aeschylus to explain the way we live now. Kamila Shamsie’sHome 
Fire (Bloomsbury) retells Antigone against the backdrop of contemporary London, 
weaving a poignant and timely tale of two British Muslim families with 
differing ideas about loyalty to the state. Natalie Haynes also takes on 
Sophocles in her vivid and affecting second novel,The Children of Jocasta 
(Mantle). Colm Tóibín, meanwhile, inHouse of Names (Viking), steps into the 
voice of Clytemnestra. This is a quite breathtaking work of fiction – every bit 
as powerful as Madeleine Miller’sSong of Achilles.

In translation, there’s the second novel from Laurent Binet, whose HHhH, 
published in 2010, is one of my favourite books.The Seventh Function of Language
 (Harvill Secker), again translated by the superb Sam Taylor, is a rollicking 
crime caper about the death of Roland Barthes. It had me rolling on the floor 
of the Paris Metro when I read it last year. There’s alsoThe Sad Part Was  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sad-part-was.html>(Tilted Axis) by Prabda 
Yoon, translated by Mui Poopoksakul. These are evocative, erudite and often 
very funny stories of Bangkok life.

This year’s historical fiction highlights have about them a distinctly macabre 
flavour, with Sarah Schmidt’s gory and gripping debutSee What I Have Done 
(Tinder Press) reimagining the crimes ofLizzie Borden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/04/lizzie-borden-40-whacks-lasting-fascination>
. Ben Myers’sThe Gallows Pole (Bluemoose) may well turn out to be 2017’s His 
Bloody Project. It’s a windswept, brutal tale of 18th-century Yorkshire told in 
starkly beautiful prose. There’s alsoThe Fatal Tree 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fatal-tree-472537.html>  (Sceptre) by Jake 
Arnott. The fictional memoir of gangster Edgeworth Bess, this is a work of 
dazzling imagination and linguistic inventiveness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de045d2e7ed9821381a675b2a1349a709129ac3%2F0_1231_3678_2207%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiction%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiction%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffiction-to-look-out-for-in-2017-arundhati-roy-paul-auster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de045d2e7ed9821381a675b2a1349a709129ac3%2F0_1231_3678_2207%2F3678.jpg>
 Arundhati Roy publishes her first novel since 1997’s The God of Small Things 
this year. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
More excitement comes from the prospect of a second novel from Arundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy>. I was only semi-pubescent 
when the last one was published, andThe Ministry of Utmost Happiness (Hamish 
Hamilton) is apparently worth the long wait. There’s also a new novel from the 
absurdly gifted Jon McGregor, seven years after the Impac-winningEven the Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/23/even-the-dogs-jon-mcgregor>. 
Reservoir 13 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/reservoir-13.html> (Fourth 
Estate) is haunting and heartbreaking, the tale of a disappearance and its 
aftermath – his best yet. Edward Docx’sLet Go My Hand (Picador) tells the 
deeply tender story of a son, his dying father, and a journey they must take 
together. You should look out for three powerful novels of married life – 
Amanda Craig’s sharply satiricalThe Lie of the Land (Little, Brown); Gwendoline 
Riley’s devastating and stylishFirst Love (Granta); and KatieKitamura’s 
electrifyingA Separation (Clerkenwell Press), which I read in one breathless 
sitting.

Finally, three short story collections that catch the eye. Tessa Hadley’s Bad 
Dreams <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bad-dreams-and-other-stories.html> 
(Cape) is typically lapidary, full of the most gorgeous sentences and brilliant 
observations. Adam O’Riordan’sBurning Ground 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/burning-ground.html>, (Bloomsbury), a 
collection of stories set in California, is wonderfully lyrical and 
bittersweet. Then there’s Pulitzer-winner Viet Thanh Nguyen’sThe Refugees 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/refugees-464658.html>, whose eight 
heart-wrenching and hopeful stories ought to be required reading for every 
politician in this era of wall-building and xenophobia.

• To order any of these titles for a special price go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 