
Fingerprints found inside the cabin of the truck that ploughed into a Berlin 
Christmas market match those of the fugitive suspect Anis Amri, Germany’s 
federal prosecutor’s office confirmed on Thursday night.

Spokeswoman Frauke Köhler said that fingerprints of the Tunisian, who turned 
24 on Thursday, had been discovered on the outside of the Polish-registered 
articulated truck, as well as the driver’s door and the vertical support beam 
in the vehicle’s window area.

Speaking at a joint press conference with the German chancellor, Angela 
Merkel, the interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said that the fingerprints 
and other evidence made it “highly probable” that the Tunisian suspect was the 
perpetrator of Monday’s terror attack.

Sadness and defiance mark the reopening of Breitscheidplatz market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/sadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market>
Merkel told the press conference that she hoped the suspect would be caught 
“soon” and that she had been heartened by the public reaction to the tragedy: 
“In the last few days I have been very proud of how level-headed the reaction 
of the majority of people to this situation has been.”

The findings came as Amri’s brother said he could not believe that his sibling 
would have carried out the atrocity. “There was no sign he had been 
radicalised. I’m sure he can’t have done this, that’s not why he emigrated. May 
God reveal the truth,” Abdelkader Amri told a reporter from Agence 
France-Presse outside his home in the town of Oueslatia, about 30 miles (50km) 
from Kairouan in eastern Tunisia.

“If my brother is behind the attack, I say to him: ‘You dishonour us,’” 
Abdelkader Amri said.

The suspect, meanwhile, remained on the run, with German police left 
empty-handed after a day of raids around the country. In Berlin’s Moabit 
district, a commando unit deployed flash grenades to storm a Salafist meeting 
point that had been frequented by Amri but left without making arrests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb06503e3ea7e1dcd460ded1e5ab7606df33fc95d%2F0_101_3831_2298%2F3831.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fingerprints%20in%20Berlin%20truck%20match%20those%20of%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fingerprints%20in%20Berlin%20truck%20match%20those%20of%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb06503e3ea7e1dcd460ded1e5ab7606df33fc95d%2F0_101_3831_2298%2F3831.jpg>
 Anis Amri, who is the subject of a European arrest warrant. Photograph: BKA/EPA
Farther south, in the city of Heilbronn, police searched a coach travelling 
from Luxembourg to Bosnia but later said the operation had been triggered by a 
case of mistaken identity. Overnight raids were conducted on apartments in 
Berlin and Dortmund, but reports of the arrest of Amri’s associates were 
unfounded.

With a man feared armed and dangerous still on the loose three days after 
Monday’s deadly attack, German politicians rounded on the country’s security 
services, with one politician accusing intelligence agencies of “catastrophic 
mistakes”. “What we are dealing with is a failure of government that cannot be 
tolerated,” the opposition politician Christian Lindner of the Free Democrats 
told the German news agency DPA.

A deputy chairman of Merkel’s Christian Democratic party accused intelligence 
agencies of incompetence, saying Wednesday’s reports on security failures had 
left him “shocked”.

Berlin Christmas market attack: a graphical guide to what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
Having first registered in the North-Rhine Westphalia region upon entering 
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in July 2015, the suspect 
had been identified as a security risk and put under close surveillance, with 
investigators even aware of his willingness to carry out a suicide attack. But 
a surveillance operation was stopped in September and Amri dropped off 
intelligence agencies’ radar in November, possibly due to a mix-up between 
regional authorities.

Criticising the work of intelligence agencies in North-Rhine Westphalia, the 
CDU deputy chair, Armin Laschet, said: “So the attitude seems to be: ‘He’s gone 
to Berlin, so the case is closed for us here. Now it’s Berlin’s turn.’”

Laschet called for better coordination between security agencies across 
Germany’s federal state system.

The delay in identifying Amri as the driver of the truck also continued to 
raise eyebrows, after police had wrongly arrested a Pakistani asylum seeker in 
the direct aftermath of the attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b744cb53eb13d36925a554e3fbda8076f3dae4d%2F0_277_5472_3284%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fingerprints%20in%20Berlin%20truck%20match%20those%20of%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fingerprints%20in%20Berlin%20truck%20match%20those%20of%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpolice-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b744cb53eb13d36925a554e3fbda8076f3dae4d%2F0_277_5472_3284%2F5472.jpg>
 A memorial to victims at the Breitscheidplatz Christmas market. Photograph: 
Sean Gallup/Getty 
A tweet by the founder of the nationalist, anti-Islam movement Pegida had 
caused speculation as to whether police already knew the correct identity of 
the attacker on Monday night. Merely two hours after the attack, Lutz Bachmann 
had tweeted that the perpetrator was a Tunisian Muslim, citing an “internal 
source” with Berlin’s police force.

But police on Thursday insisted that they had not obtained the wallet with the 
documents that identified Amri until Tuesday afternoon, stating that the truck 
had had to be moved from the site of the accident and searched by sniffer dogs 
before it could be properly scrutinised by police officers.

Anis Amri had fled Tunisia after the 2011 revolution, registering on the 
island of Lampedusa in February that year. According to Italian media, he 
started to show signs of aggressive behaviour while attending a centre for 
minors in Catania, reportedly having tried to set his school on fire. In 
October 2011, Amri was charged for robbery, arson and personal threats and 
sentenced to four years in jail.

He reportedly spent time in prisons in Catania and then Palermo.

Does the Berlin attack make the case for increased surveillance?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/berlin-terrorist-attack-surveillance-intelligence-agencies>
During his time in prison his “aggressive behaviour’’ was noted by guards, an 
official told the Guardian. After his release, Amri was sent to an immigration 
centre at Caltanissetta, from where he was due to be deported back to Tunisia. 
Since authorities in Tunisia refused to recognise Amri as a Tunisian citizen, 
however, the deportation did not take place. In the summer of 2015 Anis left 
Italy forGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, first registering 
in the town of Emmerich am Rhine.

In April 2016 Amri applied for asylum at a refugee shelter in Kleve, also in 
North Rhine-Westphalia, but his application was rejected only weeks later. Amri 
had pretended to be an Egyptian national, but German officials had noticed that 
he had already registered elsewhere under different names. He was therefore due 
to be deported back to Tunisia.

But as in Italy, authorities in his home country did not recognise him as one 
of their citizens. On 30 July, Amri was caught in a routine check of a coach in 
Friedrichshafen and moved to a prison in Ravensburg after police noticed that 
he was due to be deported and carrying fake Italian ID documents. Two days 
later the Tunisian was released again, most likely because of the missing 
documents from Tunisia.

Additional reporting by Lorenzo Tondo
 