
Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> and Napoli 
thwarted each other’s Serie A missions and forsook valuable points in an 
exciting 1-1 draw.

Napoli’s Lorenzo Insigne robbed at gunpoint before Fiorentina game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/29/napoli-lorenzo-insigne-robbed-fiorentina>
Napoli had fallen four points behind Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/28/juventus-internazionale-serie-a-match-report>
 after the leaders’2-0 win against Internazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/29/leonardo-bonucci-spotlight-inter-juventus-serie-a>
 on Sunday night and needed a victory to keep up the pressure at the top. 
Gonzalo Higuaín’s equaliser – his first goal in five matches – cancelled out 
Marcos Alonso’s early header but it was only enough toreduce the gap to three 
points <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>.

Fiorentina draw level on points with Roma in the final Champions League place, 
but remain fourth due to an inferior head-to-head record.

Alonso went from hero to villain in a pulsating opening to the game at the 
Stadio Artemio Franchi. The former Bolton defender outjumped theNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> defence to head in a corner and 
put his side ahead after six minutes.

Napoli’s attack from the restart broke down but Alonso’s clearance went 
straight to Higuaín and the Argentine sent a first-time shot into the net from 
outside the box, his 25th league goal of the season.

Nikola Kalinic was given a free run on goal and fired against the crossbar 
with only Pepe Reina to beat and Cristian Tello also curled a shot against the 
woodwork as Fiorentina created chances to retake the lead.

Leonardo Bonucci in the spotlight as Inter cannot stop remarkable Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/29/leonardo-bonucci-spotlight-inter-juventus-serie-a>
Ciprian Tatarusanu twice thwarted Napoli in the 58th minute, parrying José 
Callejón’s powerful drive after the Spaniard broke clear on the right and then 
brilliantly stopping Higuaín’s follow-up. The Romanian also foiled Lorenzo 
Insigne in stoppage time, just after Higuaín had a goal disallowed for offside.

Earlier, Sassuolo underlined their European credentials by surprising Lazio 
2-0 at the Stadio Olimpico. The Neroverde, who only arrived in the top flight 
three years ago, claimed all three points in the capital city thanks to 
Domenico Berardi’s penalty and a second-half rocket from Grégoire Defrel.

Eusebio Di Francesco’s men are now six points behind Milan and the nearest 
Europa League berth.
 