
They travelled to watch their team despite a recent run of defeats, visiting 
the home of a resurgent Milan side who had begun to earn positive results. The 
game was held on a Sunday night, long after the last cross-country train back 
to Tuscany had departed the city’s imposing central railway station. It was 
January and before kick-off the temperature had already plummeted well below 
zero degrees.

To make matters worse, this band of 700 dedicated Fiorentina fans looked on as 
an inconsistent Milan side despatched them with ease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/jan/17/acmilan-v-fiorentina>. 
Yet, high in the third tier of the San Siro’sCurva Nord, they cheered and 
chanted relentlessly, their support for the team never wavering at any point 
during 95 minutes of uninspired action.

For followers of Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>, 
it has – and always will be – this way. The dissenting voices are rarely heard 
during matches; they insist on displaying their unconditional support for the 
club’s famous purple shirt. But, the day after the squad’s shortcomings had 
been so brutally exposed in the Milan game, supporters in Florence decided to 
vent their frustration with the club’s owners.

From the outside looking in, this may have seemed an odd move. Andrea and 
Diego Della Valle had resuscitated the club, taking on ownership in 2002 after 
bankruptcy and relegation to Italian football’s fourth tier and lifting them to 
the Champions League. That would seem worthy of heroic status in Florence, but 
their behaviour since has left many fans feeling quite the opposite. These 
supporters expressed their displeasure by unfurling a banner outside the Stadio 
Artemio Franchi, which read:

2002 ... 2016
Ormai il nome ve lo siete fatto la pubblicita
Visto che era questo il vostro Progetto
Ora fatteci anche il famoso regalo
Andatavene! ... I clienti

The words, carefully chosen, make little sense when translated literally, but 
a few key phrases convey the message perfectly. It starts by accusing the two 
brothers of using the club to make their name through publicity and their 
“project”, a term frequently referred to by club officials when talking about 
future plans to placate supporters when results are disappointing. Here, 
however, those same fans had evoked the word sarcastically to infer that it 
only served to aid the interests of the owners.“Il famoso regalo” is the 
long-awaited “famous gift”, promised by the club every transfer window, 
venomously turned on its head to demand that the real gift would be the 
departure of the Della Valle brothers.

Fiorentina: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/mar/12/fiorentina-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-gabriel-batistuta>
Finally, it was signed “i clienti” – the customers – which is the very term 
used by the club’s hierarchy to describe the people who follow and love the 
team, something this passionate fanbase hate above all else. There is no doubt 
that Italian ultras have a penchant for drama, but there is an explanation for 
this vitriol in Florence.

Disappointment has become a running theme for a team that has been on the 
brink of genuine success so many times in recent years. Cesare Prandelli was 
the first man to come close, taking over in 2005-06 after the Viola – back in
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> for the first 
time the previous season – had narrowly avoided relegation. Fondly remembered 
in the city, he would become the club’s longest serving coach and take them to 
the brink of a Uefa Cup final in 2008, but he left to lead the Italian national 
team just two years later. Fans attribute his departure to a declined request 
for extra funds to push on towards silverware, which has since become something 
of a motif.

History repeated itself when, after three successive fourth-place finishes in 
Serie A and aEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> semi-final in 
2014-15, coach Vincenzo Montella met with club officials to ask for investment. 
An official statement blamed the coach’s desire to free himself from a clause 
in his contract, but the sacking of another successful boss was once again 
seemingly a financial matter.

A turbulent summer ensued when the club became embroiled in a bitter public 
row with Mohamed Salah – the Chelsea winger reneged on a pre-agreed loan 
extension and joined Roma instead. Despite having appointed a new coach – Paulo 
Sousa from FC Basel – signings were scarce as the transfer deadline approached 
and the owners significantly trimmed the wage budget as no less than 24 players 
left the club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Ffiorentina-fans-customers-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09480278d7418f1e5182feb8f7fbde61681df959%2F0_0_3072_1923%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiorentina%20fans%20are%20tired%20of%20being%20seen%20as%20customers%20by%20their%20apathetic%20owners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Ffiorentina-fans-customers-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiorentina%20fans%20are%20tired%20of%20being%20seen%20as%20customers%20by%20their%20apathetic%20owners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Ffiorentina-fans-customers-europa-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09480278d7418f1e5182feb8f7fbde61681df959%2F0_0_3072_1923%2F3072.jpg>
 Paulo Sousa before Fiorentina’s match against Tottenham in the Europa League. 
Photograph: Maurizio Degl'Innocenti/EPA 
In July, it was clear that that the squad was desperately thin in defence and 
the club’s sporting director, Daniele Prade, assured fans that the matter was 
in hand. “There is still a lot of time to go in the transfer market and we are 
confident that we will create a good team,” he said. “We know that we need a 
defender and a midfielder. Paulo Sousa has told us what he wants.”

Despite such assurances, no new defenders arrived and the team was forced to 
play the first half of the season without adequate cover. If it was a mistake 
for a club with proven European pedigree to not fill that void immediately, 
then failing to have a player in place when the window opened again in January 
was arguably a genuine lack of professionalism.

Instead, Fiorentina played on in the New Year with the same squad, picking up 
just seven points out of a possible 15 as the lack of depth began to tell. This 
was perhaps most apparent in the defeat to Milan, when key central defender, 
Gonzalo Rodríguez, served a one-match suspension and there were no adequate 
replacements. Since then, criticism from River Plate over an alleged attempt to 
change the proposed fee for Emanuel Mammana was just the latest in a series of 
episodes whereby Fiorentina were publicly lambasted over their handling of 
negotiations.

After similar issues with Prandelli, Montella and now Sousa, the club face 
gaining a reputation for poor relations with coaches. The current boss has 
already voiced his concerns to the press. “I am neither disappointed nor 
surprised. I am just concentrating on what my team is doing”, he said when 
questioned about the failure to sign Mammana. “We’ve needed a new defender 
since August. I don’t want to talk about it any more because otherwise it looks 
as if I’m complaining. The club knows what we need to compete at a certain 
level.”

Torino work with their fans to resurrect their old home and honour their greats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/jan/06/torino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund>
Prandelli appeared to sympathise with Sousa’s predicament, as the situation 
between the Portuguese tactician and the owners slowly intensified. “In all 
this carry-on, the silence of the Della Valle family speaks volumes,” said the 
former manager. “They should have taken a decisive stance on the matter.”

Sousa discussed an “air of defeat in the city” after early hopes of a Scudetto 
triumph had all but disappeared. In the last hour of deadline day, they 
eventually organised a loan deal with Leicester City for Yohan Benalouane, a 
defender who had made just four starts in the Premier League this season. The 
Frenchman is unlikely to change the minds of an increasingly pessimistic 
fanbase.

The growing disillusion has prompted some to take drastic steps and avoid 
funding the Della Valle project. Many have chosen to watch their team solely 
away from home. Declining attendances at the Stadio Artemio Franchi are 
becoming a trend. Comparing attendances in 11 fixtures to their corresponding 
games last season shows that there were 19,000 fewer supporters at the stadium 
in total, an average of 1,727 per game.

The most telling figure though was the season ticket sales, with 2,700 of the 
most loyal fans failing to renew for this season. These fans are not concerned 
with becoming one of Europe’s elite clubs; they just want their commitment to 
be matched by the owners.
ACF Fiorentina (@acffiorentina) 
"Il nostro cuore per i nostri tifosi".
Buon anno Firenze, Forza Viola. @acffiorentina 
<https://twitter.com/acffiorentina> pic.twitter.com/k166WYg8Mp 
<https://t.co/k166WYg8Mp>
 <https://twitter.com/acffiorentina/status/683308636203040768> January 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/acffiorentina/status/683308636203040768> 
Sousa has quickly endeared himself to the fans, with the coach regularly 
engaging in an open dialogue and meeting with fans. He even personally arranged 
a surprise for them at an open training session. Under his instructions, the 
squad created a purple heart around the centre circle of the pitch, applauding 
the supporters and demonstrating just how vital their backing is in this 
vibrant and passionate one-team city.


With a simple gesture, the Portuguese coach had achieved something that the 
Della Valle brothers had failed to do in 14 years of ownership; acknowledge the 
importance of those in the stands. Simply put, Fiorentina supporters are fans, 
not customers. Enough is enough.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Chloe Beresford <https://twitter.com/ChloeJBeresford> and The 
Gentleman Ultra <https://twitter.com/TheGUltraSite> on Twitter
 