
Finding the right work-life balance is a hot topic for many executives and 
leaders. Some argue there is no such thing as a balance (the balance between 
work and other aspects of someone’s life can change), and that it is more about 
what works at any given time.

Whatever that “balance” or “fit” may be for you, here are five reasons you 
should, at least, go home on time duringNational Work Life Week 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/campaigns/national-work-life-week-2016/>.

Working long hours has a negative impact on your health


Researchers pooled data from 25 previous studies, involving more than 600,000 
individuals, and foundthe risk of developing a stroke increased by a third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/20/working-longer-hours-increases-stroke-risk>
 in people who worked long hours (more than 55 hours a week) compared with 
individuals who work the traditional 9-5. The increased risk of heart disease 
was less – but still a 13% increase.


Many link working long hours to a mainly sedentary lifestyle, increasing 
levels of stress and unhealthy eating choices.


Working long hours does not benefit your bank balance


Staying late and working overtime has become routine for many workers. 
Pressures in the workplace and a rising culture of presenteeism was reported by 
more than a third of thosequestioned in research by health insurer AXA PPP 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/jobs/10890199/Overtime-becoming-a-fact-of-life-for-UK-workers.html>
.


It found that unpaid overtime has become a fact of life for one in four 
British employees, who clock up at least seven hours over their contracted, and 
salaried, working time each week. More than one in 10 (11%) of those workers 
questioned said they remained in the office because they were afraid they might 
lose their job if they didn’t put in extra hours.

Work expands into the time we have available


It is easy to make the assumption that those who work longer hours are more 
productive and achieve more than their peers who work shorter hours.


A recent study 
<http://adigaskell.org/2015/05/21/why-are-so-many-people-faking-how-many-hours-they-work/>
 from researchers at Boston University found that this is not the case. 
Managers in the study could not tell whether an employee was actually putting 
in the long hours or merely pretending to do so. They could find no evidence 
that long hourshad any impact on the amount of work done 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/adigaskell/2016/01/12/the-impact-of-long-hours-on-our-relationships/#281945117159>
.


Time away makes us more creative 


We’ve all experienced the time when the solution to a work situation suddenly 
popped into our minds while we were doing something entirely different - many 
claim they get their best ideas in the shower. Taking time out of the workplace 
enables you to take yourself away from problems and challenges and see them in 
a different light.

Even Albert Einstein had got this down to a fine art stating: “although I have 
a regular work schedule, I take time to go for long walks on the beach so that 
I can listen to what is going on inside my head.”


Work is only one part of our lives 


Our lives are increasingly busy - whether it is family commitments, a hectic 
social life, studying for a qualification, or being passionate about a hobby. 
Although for many of us our careers are hugely important, taking time out to 
pursue other interests makes us more interesting as people, and enables us to 
put other aspects of our lives into perspective.


Charlotte Sweeney was named one of the ‘Top 50 diversity professionals in the 
world 
<http://www.globaldiversitylist.com/top-50-diversity-professionals-in-industry.html>
’in 2015 and is author of the Sweeney report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/mar/04/women-on-boards-sweeney-report>
. Charlotte Sweeney and Fleur Bothwick’s book, ‘Inclusive Leadership - The 
Definitive Guide to Developing and Executing an Impactful Diversity and 
Inclusion Strategy – Locally and Globally’, will be published on 25 October

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 