
If you have back-to-work blues then you’re not alone. According to new 
research fromCrunch Accounting 
<https://www.crunch.co.uk/blog/news/2017/01/03/brits-likely-quit-jobs-31st-january/>
, 31 January is the most popular day of the year for people to quit their jobs.

It stands to reason. The festive break is a time for meeting up with friends 
and family, but also a chance to look at where life is heading. Ideas are 
dreamed up, plans are made, and by the end of January many people take great 
delight in handing in their resignation letters.

If you recognise any of the following signs then it might be time to bite the 
bullet and hand in your notice.

You obsessively watch the clock 

'I played a spirited rendition of Bohemian Rhapsody': your work walk-out 
stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/17/work-walkout-readers-stories-how-quit-job>
We’ve all done it. The day’s dragging on and you can’t wait to escape work. 
But if those occasional glances at your watch have turned into a daily regime 
of endlessly staring at the second hand as it crawls round, it’s highly likely 
a new job is what you need.

Of those surveyed, 46% 
<https://www.crunch.co.uk/blog/news/2017/01/03/brits-likely-quit-jobs-31st-january/>
 identified clock watching as the symptom that made them want to get a new job. 
When you find a job that keeps you engaged all day long, you’ll look back at 
those days of boredom with disbelief.

You suffer from Sunday night blues

For most workers, the weekend is a time to unwind and socialise. But if you’re 
unhappy in your job, it’s easy for the weekend to become a one-day affair, with 
Sunday a painful countdown to another dreadful week at work.

Banish those Sunday night blues by setting aside a couple of hours in the 
evening to look for new job opportunities. Scour job ads on LinkedIn and 
recruitment sites, update your CV, and probe your professional network for new 
openings. You might even want to consider ditching the nine-to-five in favour 
of working for yourself. There’s plenty of free advice and support available 
online.

Friends and family are fed up with your moaning

After a hard day’s work, it’s not uncommon to let off a little steam when you 
get home. But if friends and family start mentioning your negative outlook 
towards work, take their comments on board.

If you haven’t spoken to your boss about how you feel, make sure this is the 
first thing you do in January

Your nearest and dearest are likely to realise you’re stuck in a rut and need 
a change long before you do. Instead of venting at them, listen to what they’ve 
got say. It might help you to pinpoint exactly why you’re so unhappy in your 
job, and give you the impetus to take the leap and try something new.

When asked what you do, your response starts with a sigh

When you meet someone new, it’s only a matter of time before the “so what do 
you do for a living?” question pops up. Take a moment to review how you answer 
this. If you often find yourself looking to the floor, letting out a long sigh, 
and uttering something like: “Oh, it’s not very exciting,” this is a sign you 
need to change your career.

In a social setting, if you meet someone who enthusiastically tells you about 
how happy they are in their job, don’t be disheartened. Treat this as a shining 
example of how your life could be. Probe them to find out exactly what makes 
their job so rewarding. Make it your mission to discover what makes you tick, 
so you’ll actually look forward to people asking what you do for a living.

Thinking of quitting your job? Do these five things first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/nov/30/thinking-of-quitting-your-job-do-these-five-things-first>
You get no recognition

There’s nothing quite as bad as working your guts out to meet a deadline, but 
getting no recognition from your boss. It’s not about being showered with 
praise every time you get into work on time – it’s about feeling sufficiently 
valued.

If your boss doesn’t seem to notice your contributions, no matter how great 
they are, it’s likely your future with the company has a limited time span. Of 
course, your boss might leave and be replaced by your ideal mentor, but waiting 
in hope for this to happen can play havoc with your state of mind. It’s far 
better to take the initiative and do something about it yourself.

One final thing to consider. If you haven’t spoken to your boss about how you 
feel, make sure this is the first thing you do in January. It might be the 
conversation that changes everything.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 