
In her landmark speech on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
, Theresa May set out the UK’s priorities for Brexit – and it’s clear that 
young people are not among them.

Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
May revealed that Britain will leave the single market, the customs union and 
court jurisdiction when it leaves the EU. But the 12-point plan ignored the 
younger generation and failed to offer any reassurance on the mainissues 
affecting home and international students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/12/what-does-brexit-mean-for-students-we-answer-your-faqs>
.

If Brexit did actually mean breakfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/brexit-means-brexit-regulations-supermarket-bosses>
, this would be the full English of bad news. Here are five ways the 
negotiations will affect students and young people:

1. Our horizons will be narrower

The PM’s decision to quit the single market in favour of a trade agreement 
will affect our ability to live, study and work in Europe. Any of the 
alternatives, she said, would “mean not leaving the EU at all.”

The announcement will not put many young people at ease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/brexit-europe-young-people-expats>
. Plans for what happens after Britain leaves – and how many hoops we might 
have to jump through in order to spend some time in Europe – are still 
incredibly hazy.

Many students, especially those taking degrees with a year abroad, are right 
to worry that travelling to EU countries could become more complicated, even 
for education, and that our ability to work there in the future may be 
restricted. At worst, our freedom of movement could be taken away altogether.

2. EU students in the UK face an uncertain future
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffive-ways-theresa-mays-brexit-strategy-hard-on-young-people-eu-international-students-erasmus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f6700fddcc29d6d4f02a6b359f0d32785f1985c%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20ways%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20strategy%20is%20terrible%20for%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffive-ways-theresa-mays-brexit-strategy-hard-on-young-people-eu-international-students-erasmus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20ways%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20strategy%20is%20terrible%20for%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffive-ways-theresa-mays-brexit-strategy-hard-on-young-people-eu-international-students-erasmus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f6700fddcc29d6d4f02a6b359f0d32785f1985c%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Students voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU last June. Photograph: Luke 
Macgregor/Reuters 
Taking back control over our borders is paramount for the prime minister, yet 
she hasn’t given much indication of the kind of immigration system she wants 
for Britain after we leave.

Anxious international students turn away from UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/04/anxious-international-students-turn-away-from-uk>
What we do know is that the number of EU students is likely to nosedive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/08/brexit-could-see-eu-student-numbers-nose-dive-cambridge-warns>
 as a result of Brexit. University applications from the EU arealready down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/27/uk-university-applications-from-eu-down-9-ucas>
 by 9% for the next academic year. We want the brightest people from around the 
world to continue coming to study and work alongside us in the UK, but 
hostility towards immigrants and uncertainty over their future status has 
already been cited as a deterrent.

3. Erasmus is under threat

The promise of a “clean break” from the EU puts increased threat on future 
students’ chances of a year abroad under the Erasmus scheme – one of the 
outstanding successes of the European project.

The government has already dodged opportunities to commit to the exchange 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/13/government-urged-to-protect-eu-student-exchange-scheme>
, which has helped more than 200,000 UK students since it started in 1987, and 
a special arrangement is likely to be low on the negotiating agenda.

We’re yet to see whether universities minister Jo Johnson, who studied in 
France and Belgium, will intervene.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&media=>
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
4. Our universities will take a big financial hit

Vice-chancellors have already warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/11/university-leaders-academics-hard-brexit-disaster-germany>
 that the kind of hard Brexit proposed yesterday could cause the “biggest 
disaster” in higher education for many years. May’s speech gave no indication 
of protecting or replacing the current EU funding that British universities 
receive. EU research money generatedmore than £1.86bn for the UK economy 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Pages/economic-impact-on-the-uk-of-eu-research-funding-to-uk-universities.aspx>
 in 2014-15 alone.

5. Our futures look ever more precarious

The prime minister has said that if she doesn’t get what she wants in a “bold 
and ambitious” trade agreement with the EU, she will “change the basis of 
Britain’s economic model”. We have no guarantee that the economy won’t suffer, 
which leaves the younger generation vulnerable.

Theresa May’s Brexit plan has potentially disastrous gaps in it | Keir Starmer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-plan-disastrous-gaps-labour>
We’re in a precarious position as it is, burdened by student debt, poor 
employment prospects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/02/uk-graduate-jobs-market-shrinks-by-8-since-2015>
 and an impenetrable housing market. Anxiety over whether to go to university 
in the first place, let alone how we’ll get by once we graduate, will only 
become a bigger issue.

And whatever promises Donald Trump makes about British prospects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/a-uk-trade-deal-with-trump-be-careful-what-you-wish-for>
 post-Brexit, students remain at the back of the queue.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 