
The Flaming Lips <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-flaming-lips> frontman 
Wayne Coyne has added another string to his pop culture bow in the shape of 
illustration, revealing plans to release a fantasy comic book entitled The Sun 
Is Sick on 22 July.

To tie in with this week's Comic-Con in San Diego, the 40-page title is a 
sci-fi nightmare presented in vibrant, skewed Technicolor. Coyne's imagery is 
said to be somewhat disturbing and was initially rejected by some printers: 
"Make no mistake; this is not suitable for children and depending on what sort 
of person you are, it may not be suitable for some of you non-children either. 
If you have doubts at this moment then 'The Sun Is Sick' is not for you," read 
a warning statement from the band.

By the looks of the page previews featured on Paste Magazine's website 
<http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2013/07/exclusive-preview-flaming-lips-frontman-wayne-coyn.html>
, Coyne's illustrations – a blind woman cradling a dismembered eyeball baby 
here, a cosmic Grim Reaper there – will dip its toes into themes such as love, 
birth and death, allin his typically trippy style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/flaming-lips-interview>. Rough 
illustrations for the comic stem from doodles gathered over the past year's 
worth of Flaming Lips promotion, harvesting ideas during phone press interviews 
and in the time spent loitering after live sessions.

The 52-year-old psychedelic rock singer's love of the absurd has been a 
constant throughout his band's career – let's not forget, this is the same man 
who onceprinted posters using his own blood 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tWOYXFU5boQ>, played eight cities in 24 hours 
and shut down a whole airport aftertrying to pass through security with a 
grenade in his suitcase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/21/wayne-coyne-oklahoma-airport-grenade>
.

The Sun Is Sick is on sale at this weekend's Comic-Con 2013, before being made 
available atFlaming Lips online store <http://www.flaminglips.com> from July 22.
 