
We have more power than ever to work hours that fit around our lives. Since 
June 2014 <http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1616]>, employees have 
had the right, by law, to request flexible hours. Meanwhile, technology has 
made it practical to work remotely.

But, is this growing opportunity to work flexibly actually eating into our 
personal time? With no set end to the working day do we actually work longer 
hours?

Five reasons to go home on time (at least during National Work Life Week)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/04/five-reasons-to-go-home-on-time-national-work-life-week>
Despite the rise in flexible working (the number of Brits working from home 
increased by800,000 to more than four million 
<http://www.personneltoday.com/hr/one-seven-now-working-home/> last year), 
research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/27/britons-working-longer-hours-with-no-gain-in-productivity-study-finds>
 by the Smith Institute, a UK think tank, found that more than two-thirds of 
employees are working longer hours than two years ago.

Sarah Jackson is chief executive of Working Families 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/>, an organisation that encourages work-life 
balance and is behindGo Home on Time day 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/gohomeontimeday/>. She says there’s a “huge 
problem” with Brits working long hours. “The boundaries between home and work 
are blurring – not many people are clocking off anymore and the rise of 
technology means work follows you home.”

Meanwhile, Dr Gail Kinman, professor of occupational health psychology at the 
University of Bedfordshire, says there are many advantages to flexible working, 
such as allowing people to juggle the demands of their work and personal life. 
But she admits there are plenty of downsides too. “Technology encourages 
employees to be ‘always on’ and employers and clients may increasingly expect 
availability and a prompt response,” says Kinman.

There are also issues around putting in longer hours when you are working 
remotely. “People who feel they are not trusted to work at home unsupervised 
may be more likely to put in extra hours in order to show that they are worthy 
of trust and justify the ‘favour’ of being allowed to work remotely,” Kinman 
says. “The potential to work all of the time means that some people have 
problems detaching themselves from work – both physically and mentally – and a 
lack of recovery time can impair health, personal relationships and 
productivity.”

This isn’t just affecting employees, it is an issue many entrepreneurs face 
too. “People have to self regulate their time and this may be challenging under 
conditions of high demand or when people are deeply engaged in their work,” 
says Kinman.

This was the case for Grace Gordon <https://www.grace-gordon.com/>, founder of 
her eponymous accessories label. In the first two years of setting up her 
business, Gordon worked 12-hour days, plus weekends. “It was counterproductive 
– I was working so many hours but it didn’t equal productivity because it would 
take longer to do something,” she says. “I was knackered.” To prevent this, 
she’s given herself set hours – 8am to 6pm plus the odd hour on an evening or 
weekend. “I’ve got my work-life balance back,” she says. It’s also helped that 
she’s now working from a studio in Lewes rather than her home, which gives her 
the sense that she’s finished work for the day.

Flexibility has taken off within small businesses, helping to not only attract 
staff but also retain them. Digital marketing agencyTypeface Group 
<http://thetypefacegroup.co.uk/> allows staff to work flexible hours – letting 
them work longer days (to make up time) or to complete a project from home. So 
how do they ensure staff have a good work-life balance?

“We monitor hours to ensure that none of the team are heading for burn-out,” 
says Typeface Group director Natalie Weaving. She says the businesses makes it 
clear that staff are not expected to to check work emails at weekends or while 
they are on holiday. “We’ve started to make it clear to freelancers and 
contractors that after certain time on weekdays, or throughout the weekends, 
they are not going to get an immediate response. We are conscious if we start 
getting emails at random times of the night from employees or contractors that 
we need to speak to them to check they are not taking too much on.”

At London-based digital marketing agency Platypus Digital 
<http://www.platypusdigital.com/> staff don’t have set working hours, instead 
the goal is to hit deadlines. “It’s been beneficial for work-life balance, 
simply because they can fit in work around life, not life around work,” says 
Matt Collins, chief executive at Platypus.

But does such an approach mean that staff are unable to switch off? “For most, 
work emails are just a tap away on their phones, day and night, weekdays and 
weekend,” admits Collins. “Switching off is a state of mind and I go to great 
lengths to encourage a healthy attitude to our work along with the flexible 
working,” he says. “I’ve made it clear that I’m not impressed by presenteeism, 
only outputs.”


Time-saving tools for e-commerce businesses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/may/31/time-saving-tools-ecommerce-businesses>
For Jackson, the issue isn’t flexible working, it’s the workload. “People have 
got so much to do that they’re still having to do extra hours and they’re 
stressed. It’s having a negative impact on people’s physical and mental 
wellbeing. The real burden is the amount of work, not flexible working.”


For those working at home, experts recommend downing tools at a certain time 
and then focusing your attention on something else. Kinman says: “Go for a run, 
take the dog for a walk, cook dinner, watch TV – do something that allows you 
to transition from work mode.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 