
In some of its last business of the year, the Senate on Friday passed a bill 
that included $170m in funding to remove lead-tainted pipes from the water 
supply in Flint, Michigan.

Environmentalists were concerned, however, about a “poison pill” in the 
legislation which rolled back environmental protections in California’sBay-Delta
 <https://www.epa.gov/sfbay-delta> estuary.

“We should not have to trade delinquent congressional action in Michigan for 
the erosion of endangered species protection and a threat to fishing jobs in 
California,” saidScott Slesinger <https://www.nrdc.org/experts/scott-slesinger>
, legislative director at the Natural Resources Defense Council, in a statement.

Bottled water must be delivered to Flint residents in lead crisis, judge rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/flint-michigan-lead-bottled-water-delivery>
“But that is the result of the partisan games at play in this bill.”

Drought relief was cited as the reason for the easing of protections in the 
Bay-Delta. The bipartisan bill, crafted by two Californians, the Democratic 
senator Dianne Feinstein and the Republican representative Kevin McCarthy, will 
steer more water from the bay to farms for irrigation. It also opens the door 
to new dams, desalination and other water projects.

The outgoing California senator Barbara Boxer strongly opposed the measure, 
calling it “dangerous” and a “disgrace” in remarks on the Senate floor.

“You’re destroying the Endangered Species Act,” Boxer said, “and what right 
does anybody have to do that, in the middle of the night?”

Feinstein said: “After three years and dozens of versions of legislation, I 
think this is the best we can do.”

The bill was one of dozens passed in a mad dash before lawmakers return home 
for the holidays. Senators also passed a resolution to keep the government 
funded through April.

The outlays to tackle Flint’s water crisis were celebrated by Michigan 
government officials.

“It’s past time for Congress to put partisan politics aside and help the 
people of Flint, who are still without access to clean, safe drinking water 
from their taps,” said SenatorGary Peters <http://www.peters.senate.gov/>.

The new money will be used to replace more than 29,000 leaden service lines 
that channel water from water mains to homes and businesses in the city.

Flint’s water supply began carrying dangerously high levels of lead after 
officials approved a change in the municipal water source. After the switch, 
water carried in from the Flint river was not properly treated to prevent the 
leaching of lead from decades-old underground pipes.

Emergency order for Flint water crisis should have come sooner, EPA admits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/flint-water-crisis-epa-emergency-order-slow>
The resulting crisis exposed tens of thousands of children, who are now at 
increased risk of permanent health issues. Studies show the contamination may 
have beenresponsible for other health problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/flint-lead-tainted-water-crisis-skin-rashes-hair-loss-michigan>
 in the city.

The Flint crisis generated national attention and prompted a visit from Barack 
Obama. Several municipal officialsfaced criminal charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/flint-water-crisis-attorney-general-files-charges-six-more-state-employees>
 for tampering with or altering water quality tests.

The city has returned to its original water source and testing increasingly 
showssamples taken in the city to be within normal limits. 
<http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2016/12/state_says_96_percent_of_homes.html>

Regardless, Flint’s mayor, Karen Weaver, has said the only thing that can 
restore full confidence in the city’s water is the complete replacement of the 
ageing lead infrastructure.

 * The Associated Press contributed to this report
 