
If the foresight which prepares for the very worst is not to be regarded as 
one of the essential qualities of government, this will explain, as the Home 
Secretary suggested yesterday, why no Government has never thought it necessary 
to organise a system of public warning against floods.

True, by noon on Saturday, warnings were sent by the Meteorological Office at 
the Air Ministry to Scotland Yard and the main East Anglian River Boards. The 
tides should then have been watched by the authorities in the area. But, though 
they had at least twelve hours notice, the last and vital stage, the passing on 
of the warning to the public, was clearly left until too late (the fact that 
the day was Saturday and high tide was due in the small hours may have 
contributed to this dilatoriness).

At a King's Lynn inquest, the police have said that they were mobilised as 
soon as the warning was received, and loudspeakers were used to pass it on to 
the public. But in the time left to them their resources were quite inadequate. 
The Government is now devising a proper warning system.

It will not be enough merely to tighten the liaison between the police and the 
authorities who watch the tides, nor to arrange for warnings to be broadcast by 
the BBC (people do not listen all the time, and country people go early to 
bed), nor even to ensure that the police are given earlier warning (for they 
cannot be expected to reach every outlying farm).

Few people, on the other hand, can sleep through the noise of an air-raid 
siren. If areas liable to floods could be covered more closely with extra 
sirens, even a gale should not carry away the noise if it were prolonged 
sufficiently (a special combination of notes would have to be arranged to 
prevent confusion with fire warnings).

This seems to be an indispensable last line of defence - and since the danger 
is not yet over, an improved warning system should be instituted now.
 