
Dr Wu, the very interesting man who runs Aiba, the governing body for amateur 
boxing, sent the sport into a minor frenzy this week when he suggested – not 
stated – thatprofessionals would be able to box in the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/professional-boxers-eligible-rio-olympics>
 ... the upcoming Olympics, that is, in Rio.

Two issues spring to mind.

Firstly, elite amateur boxing is already professional, with two competitions 
set aside for the very best to compete against each other at individual and 
franchised club levels. These fighters, who compete without headguards over 
five rounds, are professional in every acknowledged sense, subsidised by their 
own governing bodies or by the teams for whom they compete.

No sane admirer of its work wants to see Radio 5 Live go online-only | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/25/radio-5-live-online-only-sport-bbc>
Second, why does Dr Wu want to rush this through? There has hitherto been no 
discernible urgency on the issue. It might make sense to move into line with 
other professional sports at the Olympics, such as tennis and golf – although 
that, also, is another argument to be had.

But what is obvious is the horse bolted some time ago. Where in the Olympic 
movement does amateurism linger? On the very fringes. Archery, fencing, that 
rubbing-the-ice-with-a-mop thing from Scotland, and a few others perhaps.

But the main highway of international sport is now crammed with highly 
expensive motors whizzing at high speed to ever greater riches. The Olympics as 
we thought we knew it died a very long time ago. Some would say that is no bad 
thing, given the hypocrisy that attended the sham, and the high-handedness of 
the people who were the movement’s detached overlords.

But, as for boxing, this is now an intriguing scenario. There seems little 
chance that Anthony Joshua, for instance, will be tempted – or even have the 
time – to return to the circumstances of his greatest amateur triumph and reach 
for a second gold medal to go with the onehe won in London in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/anthony-joshua-wins-gold-boxing>.

However, what of Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, cruelly denied Olympic 
gold long ago and now allegedly retired? How he would love a chance to strut 
the world stage again.

I have asked his people, and his people say they are putting the question to 
him. Expect an answer of sorts next week ... if he is not busy on another 
meet-and-greet tour, such as the one that left punters just a little less than 
gob-smacked in the UK recently.

It is a bold statement of intent by Dr Wu, if not altogether coherent or 
logical. I would bet that all the genuine “amateurs” who have been striving for 
a place in Rio over the past four years will be less than pleased if they lose 
out on a place to boxers who threw away their vests a long time ago. But the 
fight game is always full of surprises.
 