
International aid agencies ramped up appeals for cyclone-hit Vanuatu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vanuatu> on Wednesday, warning that the 
powerful storm which affected more than two-thirds of the south Pacific island 
nation had wiped out crops and destroyed fishing fleets, raising the risk of 
hunger and disease.


 Residents of the southern island of Tanna said food and basic supplies were 
running low while relief workers were still battling to reach many islands 
pummelled by cyclone Pam’s gusts of more than 300km/h (185 miles per hour) on 
Friday and Saturday.

The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> said the 
official death toll was 11, but many officials anticipate that number will rise 
once they are able to more thoroughly inspect the outer islands of the 
scattered archipelago.

 Sweden said on Tuesday a Swedish man aged around 80 who had emigrated was 
among the dead.

 “We are extremely concerned for the safety and wellbeing of many communities 
affected by the cyclone, particularly in the more remote regions of the country 
that are only accessible by boat,” said Aurélia Balpe, regional head of the 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

 “For a small nation like Vanuatu this is a huge disaster that requires an 
international response.”

 Sune Gudnitz, Pacific head of the UN Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs, said food supplies were a concern.

 “The challenge of getting things out, whether it’s people or goods, remains. 
We want to avoid creating a bottleneck in Port Vila so we very quickly need to 
work out a plan for getting things out,” Gudnitz said, referring to the Vanuatu 
capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Ffood-concerns-mount-in-vanuatu-after-cyclone-pam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84e7331c79a0d0f0108ab1a41e8a375915e67825%2F0_69_2400_1440%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20concerns%20mount%20in%20Vanuatu%20after%20cyclone%20Pam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Ffood-concerns-mount-in-vanuatu-after-cyclone-pam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20concerns%20mount%20in%20Vanuatu%20after%20cyclone%20Pam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Ffood-concerns-mount-in-vanuatu-after-cyclone-pam%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84e7331c79a0d0f0108ab1a41e8a375915e67825%2F0_69_2400_1440%2F2000.jpg>
 Lana Silona prepares food with her son Costello in front of their ruined home 
on the island of Tanna, Vanuatu. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
 The UN’s World Food Programme said it was working with aid agencies on the 
ground to help distribute food and other aid after banana, coconut and other 
crops were destroyed, livestock was killed and boats and fishing canoes wrecked.

 The UN Children’s Fund (Unicef) said the government was kicking off a measles 
prevention campaign because of low immunisation rates.

 Tourism, which accounts for about 40% of Vanuatu’s economy, has also been 
badly affected, with Port Vila closed to cruise liners indefinitely.

With communications cut off and reconnaissance flights revealing destroyed 
houses, shredded forests and damaged buildings, aid agencies had been 
particularly worried about Tanna, which bore the full force of the storm.


 On Tuesday, a Reuters reporter on the island of 29,000 people, about 200km 
(125 miles) south of the capital, said that while damage was extensive, it 
appeared most of the population had survived by sheltering in schools, churches 
and other sturdy buildings.

 “People sheltered in school buildings. We were helping one another,” Ropate 
Vuso, 67, said in Tanna township.

 “We are running short of food, water, shelter and electricity. We have no 
communications, we are still waiting for the people from parliament, the chief 
and the president, but still nobody is coming.“

 There were reports of five deaths in and around the main town of Tanna.

 Oxfam’s Vanuatu country manager, Colin Collett van Rooyen, said an assessment 
flight over the island of Erromango, north of Tanna and with a population of 
around 2,000, had revealed devastation.

 “What we have seen is damage in some villages, at the upper range, of 70, 80, 
90%, one village in particular 100%,” he said.

 Aircraft flying over other outlying islands had seen large white “Hs” marked 
on the ground, or residents trying to signal for help with mirrors, he added.

 Formerly known as the New Hebrides, Vanuatu, one of the world’s poorest 
nations, is a sprawling cluster of more than 80 islands and 260,000 people, 
2,000km (1,250 miles) north-east of the Australian city of Brisbane.

 Perched on the geologically active “ring of fire”, it suffers from frequent 
earthquakes and tsunamis and has several active volcanoes, in addition to 
threats from storms and rising sea levels.
 