
Easter weekend is the time when destinies are supposed to be decided, but for 
much of today it seemed that nothing would be sorted out. That was until Andy 
Keogh popped up with an 87th-minute winner for Wolves at Pride Park. Results 
elsewhere mean that Mick McCarthy's side are seven points clear of third-placed
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> with 
three games to play. Promotion can be assured when QPR visit Molinuex on 
Saturday.

But at one point Wolves trailed 2-1 at Pride Park. Birmingham trailed 
Plymouth. Sheffield United were preparing to tear into Nottingham Forest's 10 
men at Bramall Lane. Reading were 2-0 up at Blackpool. Cardiff led Burnley at 
Ninian Park. It looked as if the table was set to concertina up to a level not 
seen yet this season. Then Reading imploded at Bloomfield Road, letting 
Blackpool recover from 2-0 down to 2-2. Franck Queudrue brought the 10 men of 
Birmingham level with Plymouth at St Andrew's. Sheffield United toiled against 
Forest without success.Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> 
equalised against Cardiff. And Matty Jarvis and Andy Keogh scored the goals 
that meant Wolves are the big Easter winners.

So Wolves are all but there. They need just one more victory. Behind them the 
race is hotting up further. Cardiff shook off the blow of that equaliser to win 
3-1 at Ninian and, with a game in hand, are right back in the promotion race. 
The Blades' winning run has come to an end but, while they will be thoroughly 
frustrated that they have failed to capitalise on their Good Friday win over
Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>, they remain just a 
solitary point behind Birmingham, who dug deep to secure two draws over the 
weekend. If the Royals had held on to their lead at Blackpool they would also 
have been in the running, but Steve Coppell's side are limping over the line.

It looks, then, like it's between Birmingham, Sheffield United and Cardiff for 
that second promotion spot. Momentum swings between sides so quickly that 
predictions at this stage are fairly futile. Nevertheless, the Bluebirds, with 
two convincing victories over the weekend, might just be the team to beat.

• The top six could have been confirmed today, but Burnley's defeat in the 
Welsh capital and wins for Preston and Swansea mean only the top three are 
certain of a play-off spot at least. And North End could still have a serious 
say in the promotion race — they face both Birmingham and Cardiff in the next 
few weeks.

• Charlton live to fight another day after earning a point against Coventry, 
but the Addicks are only delaying the inevitable. Elsewhere at the foot of the 
table,Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> and 
Norwich, 23rd and 22nd at the start of the day, both picked up vital wins. 
Barnsley, despite having a game in hand, look vulnerable.

• And it was a fiery weekend across the Championship: Bristol City accused 
Chris Gunter and Nottingham Forest of a "disgusting" lack of sportsmanship, 
Cardiff are considering legal action overCrystal Palace's Claude Davis's elbow 
on Roger Johnson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Elln4RG3SCY>, and QPR are 
looking for their fourth manager in 18 months afterthe controversial sacking of 
Paulo Sousa last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/09/qpr-sack-manager-paolo-sousa>.

• In League One Steve Howard's howitzer of a header in stoppage time that gave 
Leicester victory over Leeds in the lunchtime kick-off sent the vast majority 
of the 25,000 at the Walkers into raptures. It meant the Foxes would be 
promoted if MK Dons failed to beat Bristol Rovers. The Dons, though, failed to 
oblige. Again, it only seems to delay the inevitable. Two more points for City 
in their remaining three games will see them promoted. It's a superb 
achievement by Nigel Pearson's side who appear to have avoided the fate of 
Leeds,Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 
and Sheffield Wednesday in recent years by bouncing back into the Championship 
at the first attempt.

• Peterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> still seem 
set to join Leicester in the Championship next season, but they have the added 
pressure this evening of the late kick-off. Victory over Millwall will very 
nearly be enough.

• At the foot of the table both Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> and Hereford could have been 
relegated today, but Carlisle's defeat (not to mention Cheltenham's win over 
Yeovil) means hope, however slender, still remains. Hereford's 2-1 defeat at 
Tranmere means they'll need a set of results beyond freakish to survive.

• In League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, 
Luton's brave battle against relegation finally ended in front of 6,494 at 
Kenilworth Road, terminating their 89-year stay in the Football League. They'll 
be back. Blue Square Premier leaders Burton Albion had a chance to seal their 
place as Luton's replacements, but slipped to defeat at Kidderminster.

• "When Brentford are doing well, people going to Brentford say they want to 
go to Brentford," said a Bees-supporting taxi driver who had found his way into 
the seat next to me in the Griffin Park press box on Saturday. "When they're 
not doing well, people going to Brentford say they want to go to Twickenham." 
People have, in the main, been asking forBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> this season, but a five-game 
winless run brought the jitters to Griffin Park. Today's win over Bournemouth 
will have eased nerves.

• Exeter, who held the Bees on Saturday, jumped back up to second with a 1-0 
win over Wycombe, a result that dents Wanderers' own promotion hopes. Bury and 
Rochdale failed to take advantage, butGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> moved to within three points 
of the top two with victory over Dagenham.
 