
Last night the gongs were handed out at the annual Football League awards, 
with Sylvan Ebanks-Blake, Leicester's Matty Fryatt and Grant Holt of Shrewsbury 
picking up the Championship, League One and League TwoPlayer of the Year Awards 
<http://www.football-league.co.uk/page/News/FLAwardsDetail/0,,10794~1605866,00.html>
, and Leeds' Fabien Delph taking the Young Player of the Year award.

Ebanks-Blake's 24 goals for Wolves, all in the league, make him a worthy 
winner, following in the footsteps of Phil Jagielka (2006), Jason Koumas (2007) 
and Kevin Phillips (2008), the three previous recipients.

I do have a bit of a problem with the selection process, however. It's hard to 
argue with Ebanks-Blake as the Championship's top player this season, but Kevin 
Doyle second and Michael Kightly third? The problem is that the awards are 
based on FourFourTwo's Top 50 Football League Players list. Surely there's a 
distinction to be made between the best players and those having great seasons? 
I certainly wouldn't argue that Doyle isn't one of the Championship's best 
players (in fact I'd put him above Ebanks-Blake in that regard), but, despite a 
rip-roaring start, he's not had a vintage season, scoring only three goals 
since November, his influence waning asReading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> have struggled for form. Kightly 
has been in-and-out and I'd suggest that the man behind him on the Wolves right 
flank, Kevin Foley, has been a more important player for Mick McCarthy's side 
this season. Again, in a list of the 'best players' in the Football League, 
you'd struggle to put Foley above Kightly, simply because of the latter's 
ability to come up with match-winning moments, but for a Player of the Year 
award ...

So, I'd argue it's a flawed process, even if it has, on this occasion, 
probably come up with the right winner. As for the other places on the podium, 
Cardiff's Roger Johnson has been a pillar of strength in one of the 
Championship's best defences and why not someone as unfashionable as the 
ultra-reliable Foley? Any other suggestions welcome below, and feel free to 
riff on the awards to Fryatt and Holt as I haven't really seen enough of either 
this season to comment on their claims to their respective titles.

• Are there a hint of nerves kicking in at Leicester? Defeat at Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> on Saturday means that the 
Foxes have won only twice in their last 11 games and have lost two of their 
last four. Such was their lead at the beginning of this recent slump, however, 
that it's difficult to shoehorn even a soupçon of excitement (can you shoehorn 
a soupçon?) into the League One title race, even if the Posh have closed to 
within four points (they were 17 behind 11 games ago).

• For the more pragmatic Leicester fans, the title would be a bonus - 
promotion is the key. And as such, Millwall's injury-time winner at Crewe will 
have been greeted with frustration in the east Midlands. Jason Price, making 
his debut on loan from Doncaster, scored it, giving the Lions a sixth 
successive away win. The gap to Leicester is now nine points, but Kenny 
Jackett's side have a game in hand. Though, let's be honest (just to shake that 
soupçon out of our collective shoes like the irksome piece of gravel it is), 
it's most likely a race between Millwall and Peterborough for second place 
(even if Leeds and MK Dons would have something to say about that). Easter 
Monday,Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> v Peterborough 
at the New Den, looks likely to be crucial.

• Leeds kept their own slim automatic promotion hopes alive with a 2-0 win over
MK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>. One win in nine has 
stopped Roberto Di Matteo's side from looking optimistically at the top and 
prompted them to look nervously over their shoulders at those on the play-off 
fringes. They should still comfortably make the top six, as should Leeds, who 
have won six of their last eight and will hope they are not peaking too early.

• Any fears Di Matteo and co were fostering will have been eased by a poor 
weekend for the play-off chasers. Though Scunthorpe tightened their grip on 
sixth spot with a 3-0 win over Colchester and Southend kept pace with a 
hard-fought 3-2 win overHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> on Friday, Tranmere, 
Stockport and Oldham could muster only one point between them. The Iron have 
taken full advantage of a fixture list that threw up three eminently winnable 
home games in the space of 11 days, claiming three wins at an aggregate of 8-0. 
Nigel Adkins could not have asked for much more ahead of the Johnstone's Paint 
Trophy final at Wembley on Sunday.

• At the foot of the table, the bottom four going into the weekend remain the 
bottom four today, though Yeovil ended a run of eight games without a win with 
a 1-0 victory over Swindon. It would have pulled the Glovers out of the 
relegation zone were it not forNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> fighting back for a point at 
Carlisle, themselves by no means safe. In what is likely to be a 
cuticle-shreddingly nervy occasion, the Cobblers visit Huish Park tomorrow 
evening.

• The bottom three look cut adrift but games in hand mean the picture is 
slightly more clouded than it first appears.Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham>, in particular, and Hereford 
look set, barring something miraculous, for a return to the division they both 
left in 2006 and 2008 respectively. But Brighton showed signs in their goalless 
draw with Tranmere on Saturday that an escape could be on the cards. The return 
of Glenn Murray, who has made just three appearances in 2009, might have come 
just in time.

• Down in League Two it's certainly been a season of two halves for Peter 
Taylor's Wycombe 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=11&CPID=69&TEID=494&pStr=Team_Stats>
. Imperious and undefeated in their first 18 games, they've won only five of 
their 20 matches since and, after Saturday's 1-1 draw with Shrewsbury, find 
themselves down in fifth, their lowest position since the opening weeks of the 
season. Again games in hand mean automatic promotion is well within reach, 
although Taylor's concession that "We aren't playing with the belief and 
confidence" does not bode particularly well.

• The other big game of the day at the top of the division saw Brentford held 
at home by Gillingham, the second time in the space of a fortnight that the 
Bees have picked up just a point at home against promotion rivals. Andy Scott's 
side, though, are five points clear at the top having played a game less than 
many of the other challengers. Bury were the only side in the top eight to win 
this weekend and leapt from fifth to second with their 1-0 win over 
Bournemouth. It was a set of results that has opened the door toChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield>, who beat Port Vale on 
Saturday, have been in great form since the end of January and have well and 
truly put paid to my suggestion a couple of weeks ago that the promotion race 
was an eight-horse affair.

• Luton's dream of a great escape to end all great escapes remains on, just, 
after the Hatters' 2-1 win at Morecambe. The gap to Grimsby remains 11 point 
after the Mariners' victory over Aldershot, but Luton have a game in hand and
Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> are just a point 
further up the table. It'll probably take six wins from the last seven (at 
least) to see them survive, but they've managed four from their last five. The 
Johnstone's Paint Trophy final will at least provide some relief.
 