
Police were pelted with bottles and missiles after trouble broke out between 
football fans following the local derby between Port Vale andWolverhampton 
Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves>.

Officers arrested 23 people after the League One match on Saturday. 
Staffordshire police said officers were confronted by a significant group of 
home fans involved in violent disorder who had gone out of their way to target 
police lines.

The force is searching CCTV from the game, which Wolves won 3-1, in an attempt 
to trace the troublemakers.Port Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> said it would back any police 
action against any of its fans found to have been involved.

After the final whistle, trouble spilled over into nearby Burslem town centre 
inStoke-on-Trent <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent>, where 
missiles were thrown at officers and a marked police car was attacked. There 
were reports that innocent bystanders were also caught up in the mel√©e.

Two adults suffered dog bites from police dog units and were treated by 
paramedics, according to the force. Nine people were detained before kickoff 
while a further four were arrested during the match for offences including 
setting off flares and going on to the pitch.

Police said a significant number of fans had decided to cause trouble at the 
fixture, despite lengthy preparation between club officials and officers aimed 
at preventing problems.

The force added that fans from both sides had been involved but praised a 
group of Wolves fans who co-operated with police by waiting in the away coach 
park while police worked to clear the area.

Chief Inspector Dave Bird, of Staffordshire police, said: "We are disappointed 
by the actions of this significant number of so-called fans who attended 
today's fixture intent on becoming involved in disorder.

"The behaviour of this significant minority doesn't represent the club or our 
city. We will now continue to work with Port Vale to reduce the opportunity for 
future disorder."

Bill Lodey, the Port Vale club secretary, said: "The club are bitterly 
disappointed regarding the violence that has been reported in Burslem town 
centre. We will fully support any actions taken by the police in apprehending 
those responsible and they can expect severe penalties."
 