
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
might have breezed through their Champions League group scoring an average of 
649 goals per game, but after a scan of the nation's news outlets this morning, 
the Mill can't help but feel that one or two people's confidence might be 
getting out of hand. After all, in the middle of the Telegraph's football site 
this morning was a link reading: "[Peter] Crouch: we're not afraid of anyone in 
Europe".

Not afraid of anyone? What about Chris Ryan, Bear Grylls or Supernanny? That's 
without even leaving the UK. According to Wikipedia, in Spain they have a
"shapeless, sometimes hairy" bogeyman called Ogro who hides in closets and will 
eat your offspring just for misbehaving at bed time 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bogeyman>.

But if it sounds like Crouchie has lost the run of himself then far more 
troubling news awaits for Tottenham supporters in the Daily Express. Apparently 
Harry Redknapp has become so convinced of his own managerial powers that he now 
believes he can turnGlen Johnson into a world-class full-back. Of course, if 
Spurs get lucky one of Juventus orBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> might get to the Liverpool 
right-back first.

Over at Anfield, Roy Hodgson will get over Johnson's departure by doing a 
celebratory jig and heading out to find a defender who, y'know, defends every 
once in a while. We'll have no childishness about stories he'sout chasing 
(Rennes defender Rod)Fanni. Best of all, Liverpool even reckon they'll have 
enough left over to signAshley Young from Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>.

Not that Crouch would be around, in any case, to watch that particular 
disaster play out. Roman Pavlyuchenko's agent has been discussing his client's 
future at the club with Tottenham's top brass, you see, and claims that "
[Robbie] Keane will most likely be sold and maybe Crouch". Aston Villa's Ged 
Houllier is already waiting outside White Hart Lane with £6m and a small, 
grubby photo to identify the Irishman by.

That may come as some relief to Keane, since the only other team being linked 
with him this morning isLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>. Sven-Goran Eriksson has 
already been snubbed by David Beckham, and apparently has been told that the 
club's owners "want a big signing". Reports that he has also bid forRoque Santa 
Cruz suggest some clarification is required over what sort of "big" they are 
after.

It doesn't really matter, of course, since Sven will probably get bored and 
start looking for a new job before too long, and his ears have no doubt pricked 
up at news that two positions may soon be coming vacant. The Sun reckonsCarlo 
Ancelotti's days at Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> may 
be numbered, while Italy's Gazzetta dello Sport's front page declares this 
morning that "The world is not enough for [Rafael] Benítez". By which they mean 
he'll probably get the boot even if Inter win the World Club Cup.

In other news, Stoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> 
want to keepJermaine Pennant at the end of his loan spell, but Real Zaragoza 
want £6m to let that happen. Wolverhampton Wanderers are contemplating an offer 
for the Newcastle United defenderSteven Taylor in January, and Gary Speed is 
being tipped to be the next Wales manager. And that's your lot.
 