
Poor José Mourinho. With the exception of one red top, each of this morning’s 
newspapers refer to him being “humiliated” by Antonio Conte. The failure to 
complete the clean sweep will only compound matters afterone of his heaviest 
career defeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/chelsea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, and with Manchester United in crisis (yes, crisis!) they will dive deep into 
the winter window.

The Dozen: the weekend's best Premier League photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/oct/24/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
It is only natural that Mourinho will spend big – again – to revamp a squad 
that had around £160m of summer investment but currently looks like it needs to 
be torn to shreds and built from scratch. “He’ll drive a bus through the club 
in the next six months,” said Gary Neville on TV after the 4-0 hammering at 
Stamford Bridge, which may be a nice change from Mourinho parking it. Then 
again if they had done that, Chelsea may not have led after half a minute.

Anyway, the Mill digresses because the first piece of movement at Old Trafford 
will see Mourinho recallingCameron Borthwick-Jackson from his loan at 
Wolverhampton due to the defender being unable to get a game of late in the 
Championship. And that aside, er, the Portuguese will come up with some options 
before the January window opens.

Things are going a little better 30-odd miles west, where Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have answered Tony Pulis’s 
accusation that their attack on Saturday cost £200m (it was actually a little 
over £70m) by making their young players the priority. Kevin Stewart has been 
given a new five-year contract and more are set to follow, with Ben Woodburn 
and Trent Alexander-Arnold expected to scribble their name on expensive paper.

At the same time Lorenzo Insigne’s agent would quite like the striker to move 
from Naples to Anfield after he was booed by Napoli fans following a missed 
penaltyagainst Besiktas last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/champions-league-roundup-psg-basel-arsenal>
, and reports in Spain suggest Athletic Bilbao’sIñaki Williams could also be on 
his way if Liverpool meet his €50m buyout clause.

Athletic Bilbao’s Iñaki Williams signs new contract with €50m release clause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/21/inaki-williams-athletic-bilbao-new-contract>
Across Stanley Park, Everton may have a battle on their hands to keep James 
McCarthy from joining Celtic on the basis he was pictured at Hampden Park on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/celtic-rangers-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
.

Further afield Real Madrid have shown interest in signing Juventus striker 
Paulo Dybala but Barcelona will attempt to outbid them, according to Italian 
media. The Serie A champions want just €100m in return. And they will get it if 
either Spanish club are desperate enough.

Reports in Germany suggest the king of ruthlessness, Pep Guardiola, is ready 
to cut offSergio Agüero and replace him at Manchester City with Dortmund’s 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang despite the Bundesliga’s most exciting striker 
seemingly keen on La Liga rather than the Premier League. The Dortmund coach, 
Thomas Tuchel, is also being “monitored” by Real - which does not mean a whole 
lot.

Finally Arsenal are close to sorting a deal for Petr Cech’s eventual 
replacement -Lucas Kayombo of Solitaires, who at 13 must be the youngest player 
to feature in this column and is very unlikely to remember a time when his 
potential new club won league titles.
 