
At the end of last year, the state of social care finally gained some traction 
in the popular media ... for a few days. The trigger? The prospect ofa rise in 
council tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/12/council-tax-hike-being-considered-to-cover-social-care-costs>
.

At best, the government’s decision to give councils the “permission” to raise 
a local tax will delay social care’s day of reckoning. But relying on council 
tax to help cover the costs of social care will simply entrench disadvantage – 
such a tax would raise money most in the areas that it is needed the least.

How can we ensure social care is placed on a more equitable and sustainable 
footing?

Begging for more cash is not enough. The prime minister may have acknowledged 
the pressures on social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/theresa-may-pledges-to-seek-long-term-solution-to-social-care-squeeze>
 but Downing Street and the Treasury remain unconvinced about the case for 
increased funding. Quite simply, there isn’t the political will.


Theresa May recognises social care crisis – but solution seems far off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-recognises-social-care-crisis-but-solution-seems-far-off>
I believe the case for increased funding is just. As the minister of state for 
care services in 2010, I agreed on a settlement for social care with the 
Treasury that, on paper, would have maintained the funding status quo.

But that is not what has happened in practice. Spending has fallen in real 
terms. This is hardly surprising given the scale of cutbacks in local 
government, among the largest experienced by any part of government.

We need a fresh way of paying for care, and we need a new offer, too.

The option I prefer is the creation of a dedicated tax to pay for care and 
health. This could be achieved by earmarking the proceeds of national 
insurance, or by carving out a portion from income tax. The Office for Budget 
Responsibility could provide an independent forecast of future funding 
requirements. Creating a care tax would be a start, but is not enough on its 
own.

We also need to tackle the means test for social care. It is the meanest of 
means tests, leaving many to face massive care costs. There are few incentives 
to save.

Introducing a cap on lifetime care costs and a more generous means test would 
recognise those who save, and could create the conditions for new financial 
products to contribute to the costs of care, up to the cap. It would leave a 
more predictable set of care costs, for which people could plan.

To realise the full benefit of introducing a cap there must be a new offer – 
preventive services should be free at the point of need. The new offer must 
also address productivity challenges. In 2012, as minister, I provided the 
Local Government Association (LGA) with seed funding for a project that would 
support local authorities to increase the productivity of adult social care. 
The results have been impressive and the LGA has continued to invest in this 
work.

In June, the LGA published a report outlining how £1 bn of efficiency could be 
achieved in adult social care 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/documents/10180/11553/Productivity+and+commisssioning+-+LGA+Efficiency+opportunities+through+integration+FINAL-WEB.pdf/5c920eb6-a86e-43d9-96dc-f6fab7015846>
 (pdf) while delivering better outcomes for service users. At the heart of this 
work was a deep dive into the data, looking at practitioner–level decisions to 
understand why older people ended up in the care setting they did.

For change in social care to bring value, it must be messy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/jan/04/for-change-in-social-care-to-bring-value-it-must-be-messy>
The study, which covered five local councils, found significant variation in 
the decisions being made, often with life-changing consequences. Opportunities 
were being missed to prevent or postpone the need for more heavy duty care, 
insufficient attention was being paid to avoid hospital admissions and poor 
discharge practices meant that people ended up with the wrong kind of care in 
the wrong place.

Every council should apply this analytical approach to drive out unwarranted 
variation and increase productivity.

There is a compassionate and compelling case for allocating proper funding for 
equitable social care. There is a powerful economic case too. A growing number 
of people in their 40s, 50s and 60s are juggling childcare, work and caring for 
other family members. The lack of reliable and affordable substitute personal 
and household services can be the trigger for people quitting or scaling back 
on work. The carer pays many times over with their own health, lost earnings 
and savings potential.

Investing in a sustainable care system fit for the future is an investment in 
essential economic infrastructure and flexible labour markets.

Social care had its week of headlines, but will the Christmas break and the 
social care precept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/theresa-may-pledges-to-seek-long-term-solution-to-social-care-squeeze>
 take the heat out of the story? I hope not.

As 2017 gets going, we social care leaders must redouble our efforts. We must 
build a social movement, provide the logistics and infrastructure to amplify 
the voices of service users and carers, and talk to the unusual suspects in 
business and civil society about why sorting out social care matters to us all.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 