
On the eve of the home match against Crystal Palace last weekend, the players 
and staff ofLeicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> 
interrupted their final training session to stand in a circle and observe a 
minute’s silence in memory of King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand, whose 
70-year reign had ended with his death a few days earlier. The following day, 
on the pitch at their stadium, they posed for a rather unusual pre-match team 
picture. Front and centre, held by their captain, Wes Morgan, was a large 
gold‑framed photograph of the monarch. The players were wearing black armbands. 
It was one of the strangest images in the history of English football – and, 
coming in the week of the first signs of a threat to the prosperity of the 
Premier League, perhaps one of the most significant.

In the six years since the Bangkok‑based duty-free magnate Vichai 
Srivaddhanaprabha bought the club, Leicester have gone from the lower reaches 
of the Championshipto the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-champions-league-fc-copenhagen>
, while acquiring a substantial following in Thailand. This is a great success 
story and probably not a single fan will begrudge the chairman’s decision to 
put himself – rather than, say, Claudio Ranieri – on the cover of the programme 
for their first Champions League match, or question the team’s public show of 
mourning for the late Thai king. To anyone outside the Leicester ranks, 
however, it might look a bit odd, even a bit uncomfortable, to see a 
132-year-old English football club acknowledging its new allegiance so 
explicitly.

Is the unthinkable happening – are people finally switching the football off? 
| Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/sky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off>
The widespread takeover of English football clubs by foreign owners over the 
past 20 years has resulted in many outcomes. Leicester’s story has been a happy 
one, as has the partnership of Manchester City and Sheikh Mansour of Abu Dhabi, 
whose infinite riches bankrolled not just aPremier League‑winning all-star squad
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/11/manchester-city-v-west-ham-premier-league-title-race-live-football>
 but a new campus in east Manchester. The first of the new generation of 
foreign owners was Mohamed Al Fayed, who took Fulham from the third tier to a 
solid existence in the top flight and a European final during his 16 years of 
flamboyant stewardship. At Watford the Pozzo family assumed control in 2012 
and, despite getting through managers at an indecent rate, succeeded in 
returning the club to the Premier League.

For others the experience has been rather different. Massimo Cellino at Leeds 
United, Fawaz al-Hasawi at Nottingham Forest and Roland Duchâtelet at Charlton 
Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/charlton-athletic-letter-forcing-fans-social-media>
have enraged their supporters with quixotic and sometimes downright ignorant 
decisions and have demonstrated little sense of responsibility towards the 
stewardship of historic and much cherished institutions. Shahid Khan, to whom 
Fayed sold Fulham in 2013, has shown nothing of his predecessor’s ability to 
listen to and act on the right advice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fforeign-ownership-english-football-clubs-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15bf32e95c61bec8ed17cb829f8dae742db5e9d1%2F0_254_3959_2376%2F3959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20ownership%20of%20English%20football%20clubs%20may%20chip%20away%20at%20game%E2%80%99s%20core%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fforeign-ownership-english-football-clubs-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20ownership%20of%20English%20football%20clubs%20may%20chip%20away%20at%20game%E2%80%99s%20core%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fforeign-ownership-english-football-clubs-leicester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15bf32e95c61bec8ed17cb829f8dae742db5e9d1%2F0_254_3959_2376%2F3959.jpg>
 Leicester players paid their respects to the deceased Thai king, Bhumibol 
Adulyade, before their home game against Crystal Palace. 
It is important to recognise that supporters never revolt against success. The 
protests in 2010 against the Glazer family’s financial stewardship of 
Manchester United, symbolised by the wearing of green and yellow Newton Heath 
FC scarves, quickly died away. But in a wider and more profound sense the 
ownership of clubs rooted in their communities by foreign entities, whether as 
investment vehicles or trophy purchases, may be having the effect of 
disengaging the emotions of the domestic football fan base from the game as a 
whole. In the phrase currently fashionable in political debate, it is 
“hollowing out” the feeling that fans have for their sport.

What is to be made of the situation in the West Midlands, a virtual petri dish 
for the ownership of English football clubs by Chinese businessmen, with 
Guochuan Lai at West Brom, Paul Suen Cho Hung at Birmingham City, Tony Xia at 
Aston Villa and Guo Guangchang at Wolves? If any of those owners were to bring 
real success to their clubs, they would receive the grateful adoration of their 
season-ticket holders. But the suspicion that they are not in it simply for the 
pleasure of owning a football club, or even for the local prestige that 
motivated the chairmen of earlier eras, is seeping like a slow-acting poison 
into the body of the league.

Perhaps it helps to explain the recently announced decline in TV viewing 
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/sky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off>
 for live matches transmitted by Sky and BT this season. No doubt several 
factors are in play, including the feeling that the introduction of the regular 
Friday night match has finally created a surfeit of live football. The 
rebranding of the unloved League Cup as the EFL Cup has succeeding in making 
the competition even more of an irritating irrelevance, cluttering up the 
fixture list in a way that no major American sport would permit. And there may 
also be a growing boredom with the domination of the narrative by the small 
group of celebrity managers – Mourinho, Guardiola, Klopp, Wenger, Conte, 
Pochettino – at the top clubs, created and fuelled by the media.

By other measurements, the Premier League is as healthy as it is wealthy. TV 
income continues to enrich many participants, deserving and otherwise. Stadiums 
remain full because fans are committed to their individual clubs. For the 
television audience, however, there seems to be a growing resistance to the 
relentless hysteria of the promotional buildup. When every Sunday is a Super 
Sunday, no Sunday is really super.

Swansea City’s owners to make huge profit with sale to US investors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/swansea-city-owners-sale-takeover-us-investors>
But if there is indeed a gathering indifference rather than just a statistical 
blip, the withering of emotional identification and deeper engagement with the 
game – an underlying cynicism far more profound than a distaste for Louis 
Vuitton washbags, pimped Range Rovers and giant earphones – may be the biggest 
problem, because it is hard to reverse.

Not only West Ham’s supporters felt a sense of cultural loss when their owners 
cut a deal to turn Upton Park into luxury apartments while luring them to a 
wholly unsuitable new home. Swansea City’s fans were not alone in feeling 
betrayed when the local men, whose vision, hard work and investment saved the 
club from ruin a few years ago, announced thedecision to cash in their 
shareholding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/swansea-city-owners-sale-takeover-us-investors>
.

Perhaps Huw Jenkins and his colleagues could not be blamed for taking the 
opportunity to make millions for themselves by selling Swansea to an American 
consortium, against the wishes of the supporters’ trust with whom they had 
collaborated on the original rescue operation. But in providing yet another 
example of the willingness to exploit a football club as a means to 
self-enrichment, the decision added a further drop or two to the reservoir of 
cynicism and resentment that may be destroying the foundations of a global 
entertainment phenomenon all too willing to treat its set of core identities as 
transferable assets.
 