
This week, heads of state are gathering in New York to sign the UN’s new 
sustainable development goals (SDGs). The main objective is to eradicate 
poverty by 2030. Beyoncé, One Direction and Malala are on board. It’s set to be 
a monumental international celebration.

Given all the fanfare, one might think the SDGs are about to offer a fresh 
plan for how to save the world, but beneath all the hype, it’s business as 
usual. The main strategy for eradicating poverty is the same: growth.


It will take 100 years for the world’s poorest to earn $1.25 a day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/30/it-will-take-100-years-for-the-worlds-poorest-people-to-earn-125-a-day>
Growth has been the main object of development for the past 70 years, despite 
the fact thatit’s not working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/30/it-will-take-100-years-for-the-worlds-poorest-people-to-earn-125-a-day>
. Since 1980, the global economy has grown by 380%, but the number of people 
living in poverty on less than $5 (£3.20) a day has increased by more than 1.1 
billion. That’s 17 times the population of Britain. So much for the 
trickle-down effect.


Orthodox economists insist that all we need is yet more growth. More 
progressive typestell us 
<http://www.cgdev.org/publication/end-global-poverty-within-generation-historical-growth>
 that we need to shift some of the yields of growth from the richer segments of 
the population to the poorer ones, evening things out a bit. Neither approach 
is adequate. Why? Because even at current levels of average global consumption, 
we’re overshooting our planet’s bio-capacity bymore than 50% 
<http://www.overshootday.org/> each year. 


In other words, growth isn’t an option any more – we’ve already grown too 
much. Scientists are now telling us that we’reblowing past planetary boundaries 
<http://news.wisc.edu/23409> at breakneck speed. And the hard truth is that 
this global crisis is due almost entirely tooverconsumption in rich countries 
<http://www.footprintnetwork.org/ecological_footprint_nations/ecological_per_capita.html>
.


Instead of pushing poor countries to 'catch up' with rich ones, we should be 
getting rich countries to 'catch down'

Right now, our planet only has enough resources for each of us to consume 1.8 “
global hectares 
<http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/frequently_asked_technical_questions/#method>
” annually – a standardised unit that measures resource use and waste. This 
figure is roughly what the average person in Ghana or Guatemala consumes. By 
contrast, people in the US and Canada consume about 8 hectares per person, 
while Europeans consume 4.7 hectares – many times their fair share.

What does this mean for our theory of development? Economist Peter Edward 
argues <http://courses.arch.vt.edu/courses/wdunaway/gia5524/edward06.pdf> that 
instead of pushing poorer countries to “catch up” with rich ones, we should be 
thinking of ways to get rich countries to “catch down” to more appropriate 
levels of development. We should look at societies where people live long and 
happy lives at relatively low levels of income and consumption not as basket 
cases that need to be developed towards western models, but as exemplars of 
efficient living.


'Those sitting on wealth and power aren't going to stand aside and do the 
right thing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/15/income-inequality-debate-wealth-poverty-sustainable-development>
How much do we really need to live long and happy lives? In the US, life 
expectancy is 79 years and GDP per capita is $53,000. But many countries have 
achieved similar life expectancy with a mere fraction of this income. Cuba hasa 
comparable life expectancy to the US 
<http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.688> and one of the highest literacy 
rates in the world with GDP per capita of only $6,000 and consumption of only 
1.9 hectares –right at the threshold of ecological sustainability 
<http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/frequently_asked_technical_questions/#gen6>
. Similar claims can be made of Peru, Ecuador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Tunisia.


Yes, some of the excess income and consumption we see in the rich world yields 
improvements in quality of life that are not captured by life expectancy, or 
even literacy rates. But even if we look at measures of overall happiness and 
wellbeing in addition to life expectancy, a number of low- and middle-income 
countries rank highly. Costa Rica managesto sustain one of the highest 
happiness indicators 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/datafreaks/2014/11/13/want-to-be-happy-move-to-costa-rica/>
 and life expectancies in the world with a per capita income one-fourth that of 
the US.


In light of this, perhaps we should regard such countries not as 
underdeveloped, but rather as appropriately developed. And maybe we need to 
start calling on rich countries to justify their excesses.


70% of people in middle- and high-income countries believe overconsumption is 
putting our planet and society at risk

The idea of “de-developing” rich countries might prove to be a strong rallying 
cry in the global south, but it will be tricky to sell to westerners. Tricky, 
but not impossible. According torecent consumer research 
<http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/next_economy/jennifer_elks/havas_smarter_consumers_will_significantly_alter_economic_>
, 70% of people in middle- and high-income countries believe overconsumption is 
putting our planet and society at risk. A similar majority also believe we 
should strive to buy and own less, and that doing so would not compromise our 
happiness. People sense there is something wrong with the dominant model of 
economic progress and they are hungry for an alternative narrative.


The problem is that the pundits promoting this kind of transition are using 
the wrong language. They use terms such asde-growth <http://www.degrowth.org/>, 
zero growth 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/blog/entry/policies-for-a-zero-growth-economy> or 
– worst of all – de-development, which are technically accurate but off-putting 
for anyone who’s not already on board. Such terms are repulsive because they 
run against the deepest frames we use to think about human progress, and, 
indeed, the purpose of life itself. It’s like asking people to stop moving 
positively thorough life, to stop learning, improving, growing.

The pope v the UN: who will save the world first?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/23/the-pope-united-nations-encyclical-sdgs>
Negative formulations won’t get us anywhere. The idea of “steady-state 
<http://steadystate.org/>” economics is a step in the right direction and is 
growing in popularity, but it still doesn’t get the framing right. We need to 
reorient ourselves toward a positive future, a truer form of progress. One that 
is geared toward quality instead of quantity. One that is more sophisticated 
than just accumulating ever increasing amounts of stuff, whichdoesn’t make 
anyone <>happier anyway. What is certain is that GDP as a measure is not going 
to get us there and we need toget rid of it 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/the-end-of-g-d-p>. 


Perhaps we might take a cue from Latin Americans, who are organising 
alternative visions around the indigenous concept ofbuen vivir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/buen-vivir-philosophy-south-america-eduardo-gudynas>
, or good living. The westhas its own tradition of reflection on the good life 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eudaimonia> and it’s time we revive it. Robert 
and Edward Skidelsky take us down this road in his bookHow Much is Enough? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/29/how-much-is-enough-skidelsky-review>
 where they lay out the possibility of interventions such as banning 
advertising, a shorter working week and abasic income 
<http://www.basicincome.org/basic-income/>, all of which would improve our 
lives while reducing consumption.


Either we slow down voluntarily or climate change will do it for us. We can’t 
go on ignoring the laws of nature. But rethinking our theory of progress is not 
only an ecological imperative, it is also a development one. If we do not act 
soon, all our hard-won gains against poverty will evaporate, as food systems 
collapse and mass famine re-emerges to an extent not seen since the 19th 
century.


This is not about giving anything up. And it’s certainly not about living a 
life of voluntary misery or imposing harsh limits on human potential. On the 
contrary, it’s about reaching a higher level of understanding and consciousness 
about what we’re doing here and why.


Jason Hickel is an anthropologist at the London School of Economics. Follow 
@jasonhickel <https://twitter.com/jasonhickel> on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 