
I’ll let you in on a secret: I have never seen any of the Star Wars films. 
Perhaps more egregious still: I have zero desire to see any of the Star Wars 
films. And yet I feel thedeath of Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
 as keenly as any sci-fi fan. Because Carrie Fisher was so much more than 
Princess Leia – although that may come as a surprise to editors at the Mirror 
who saw fit to headlineits front page 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/813871971343728640>: “Princess Leia dead 
at 60.”

Hollywood pays tribute to Carrie Fisher: 'Smart, talented and a hell of a fun 
time'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-celebrity-tributes>
Carrie Fisher died at 60. Carrie Fisher the actor, sure. But Carrie Fisher the 
actor not just famous for Leia, but for a long list of performances. Carrie 
Fisher the writer of seven full-length books and aprolific script consultant 
<http://www.themarysue.com/carrie-fisher-script-doctor/>. Carrie Fisher the 
mental health advocate 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/carrie-fisher-inspirational-mental-health-9524897>
 who did so much to clear the dark plumes of others’ depression and guide them 
towards light. Carrie Fisher,the dog lover 
<https://twitter.com/gary_thedog?lang=en-gb>, the eccentric tweeter 
<https://twitter.com/carrieffisher?lang=en-gb>, the mother, the storyteller.

I have nothing to say on Fisher’s performance as Leia. Leia I know only as a 
pop culture icon, a Halloween costume; two plaited doughnuts and aFriends 
episode <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E38p1w3Sui4>. I know she means a lot 
to a lot of people, however. I know kids who grew up in the 70s adored her; I 
know fans paid thousands for cosplays and meet-and-greets and that the 
instalment of the franchise in cinemas now has herdigitised presence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/filmblog/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-death-hollywood-actor-writer>
. Tributes from her fellow cast and crew members havepoured forth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-celebrity-tributes>
.

But Leia wasn’t the Fisher I held close. The first time I encountered her, the 
big brown eyes and the flared nostrils and that husk’n’cackle, was in 2006, 
watchingThe Secret Life of the Manic Depressive 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FtImgnj5DN0>. Stephen Fry visits a manic 
Fisher at home. I didn’t recognise her but I recognised the mania. Who was this 
woman? Immediately I fell down a YouTube rabbit hole of interviews and 
performances. Hour passed. My eyes went wet with laughing, then dried with 
tiredness, and the black outside turned grey and flat. I crawled into bed and 
felt somehow changed. Somehow, and it might sound trite but who cares – she’d 
say it as it was – less alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcarrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c86c4bde2044253f7598ab45598584ea7b68d44%2F0_0_4941_3244%2F4941.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20gold%20bikini.%20For%20people%20with%20mental%20illness%20Carrie%20Fisher%20was%20a%20queen%20%7C%20Hannah%20Jane%20Parkinson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcarrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20gold%20bikini.%20For%20people%20with%20mental%20illness%20Carrie%20Fisher%20was%20a%20queen%20%7C%20Hannah%20Jane%20Parkinson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fcarrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c86c4bde2044253f7598ab45598584ea7b68d44%2F0_0_4941_3244%2F4941.jpg>
 ‘Her creative writing about mental illness was brilliant.’ Carrie Fisher in 
1980. Photograph: Express/Getty Images 
Fisher always spoke about addiction and mental illness straight up: “I am 
mentally ill <http://abcnews.go.com/Primetime/story?id=132315&page=1>. I can 
say that. I am not ashamed of that. I survived that. I am still surviving it, 
but bring it on.” Fisher was saying these things years before the rest of us; 
before celebrity as advocacy; before think pieces; before people were awarded 
with actual awards for it (she has an hilarious bit on being namedBipolar Woman 
of the Year <https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/5026857-wishful-drinking>).

After a manic episode on a cruise ship in 2013 which was, as so often these 
days, filmed and put on social media, Fishersimply said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXoTxnWg7B0>: “My medication had a little 
problem with itself. It’s a balance and I went out of balance in public.” And 
that was that. She broke down the stigma of medication and of diagnosis. She 
gave others advice, includingthis letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/carrie-fisher-advice-column-mental-illness-bipolar-disorder>
 just weeks ago in the Guardian. “As difficult as it seems like it can be, 
you’re ahead of the game … As your bipolar sister, I’ll be watching.”

We saw her at her best but she showed us the workings out too.


Her creative writing about mental illness was brilliant. There aren’t many 
people who can write it well; who can peel back the truth of it and get to the 
rawness and somehow make it soft, or at least, make it not as raw, touchable; 
but she did.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ww5v_CYXBw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ww5v_CYXBw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ww5v_CYXBw&media=>
 When Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Ww5v_CYXBw&feature=youtu.be> 
Often Fisher made it funny too, which is an even greater gift. Her 2008 memoir 
Wishful Drinking 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Wishful_Drinking.html?id=2f1nyv9Pi80C&source=kp_cover&redir_esc=y>
 – what a title, what cover artwork – is a great example (“No matter how I go, 
I want it reported that I drowned in moonlight, strangled by my own bra”). Her 
1987 semi-autobiographical novel,Postcards from the Edge 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postcards_from_the_Edge>, detailed time in 
rehab. Her second memoir,the Princess Diarist 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/princess-diarist.html>, revealed her affair 
with Harrison Ford, writing of her feelings for him (“at least five, sometimes 
as many as seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/20/princess-diarist-carrie-fisher-review-harrison-ford>
”).

Ask Carrie Fisher: I'm bipolar – how do you feel at peace with mental illness?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/carrie-fisher-advice-column-mental-illness-bipolar-disorder>
Then there is the non-Star Wars acting career. As Marie, Sally’s best friend 
in When Harry Met Sally, she carried aRolodex of potential suitors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Ww5v_CYXBw> for friends. (Today, Marie would 
be the friend who stopped you drunk-dialling your ex at three in the morning. 
Fisher would probably be that friend too.) There were excellent cameos inSex 
and the City <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGxunGZ8CM8> and, in particular, 
sending herself up in30 Rock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_dhmV7_hc5c&t=2s>
. More recently, she was introduced to another generation playing Rob Delaney’s 
fierce mumin Catastrophe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_X87PbxC04g> 
(starring alongside Gary Fisher, her beloved French bulldog).

I read an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/pms-christmas-poirot-goose-and-church-before-presents>
 this week in which the British prime minister, Theresa May – stay with me – 
said she had “never had a female role model”. Bizarre. I’ve lost three of mine 
this year alone:Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>, 
Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne> and now 
Carrie Fisher. Because Fisher was afemale role model for me. She pushed back 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/30/carrie-fisher-blasts-star-wars-body-shamers-twitter-social-media>
 against insidious sexism (“stop debating whether I aged well”). She was a 
woman with mental illness who refused to be painted as an hysteric, a 
histrionic; sexist archetypes beloved by the early psychoanalyst set. She was 
successful not because of agold bikini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Princess_Leia's_bikini> or because of famous 
parents but because of smarts and talent and, yes, beauty, and wit and 
determination and kindness.

She crackled with life on this planet, in this galaxy. One of the things she 
would say 
<http://www.geek.com/culture/carrie-fisher-is-so-much-more-than-princess-leia-1675426/>
 to reassure those with mental illness was: “you can lead a normal life, 
whatever that is”. Hers was an extraordinary one.
 