
Japan’s former prime minister Junichiro Koizumi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jul/01/justinmccurry.theobserver> has 
labelled the country’s current leader, Shinzo Abe, a “liar” for telling the 
international community that the situation at the wreckedFukushima Daiichi 
nuclear power plant <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima> is 
under control.

Koizumi, who became one of Japan’s most popular postwar leaders during his 
2001-06 premiership, has used his retirement from frontline politics to become 
a leading campaigner against nuclear restarts inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> in defiance of Abe, a fellow 
conservative Liberal Democratic party (LDP) politician who was once regarded as 
his natural successor.

Abe told members of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in Buenos Aires 
in September 2013 that the situation at Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant 
was “under control”, shortly before Tokyo wasawarded the 2020 Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/07/tokyo-host-2020-olympic-games>.

IOC officials were concerned by reports about the huge build-up of 
contaminated water at the Fukushima site, more than two years after the 
disaster forced theevacuation of tens of thousands of residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/08/japan-nuclear-disaster-fukushima-homes>
.

“When [Abe] said the situation was under control, he was lying,” Koizumi told 
reporters in Tokyo. “It is not under control,” he added, noting the problems 
the plant’s operator, Tokyo Electric Power (Tepco), has experienced with a 
costly subterraneanice wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/13/doubts-giant-ice-wall-fukushima-nuclear-reactors>
 that is supposed to prevent groundwater from flowing into the basements of the 
damaged reactors, where it becomes highly contaminated.

“They keep saying they can do it, but they can’t,” Koizumi said. He went on to 
claim that Abe had been fooled by industry experts who claim that nuclear is 
the safest, cleanest and cheapest form of energy for resource-poorJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>.

“He believes what he’s being told by nuclear experts,” Koizumi said. “I 
believed them, too, when I was prime minister. I think Abe understands the 
arguments on both sides of the debate, but he has chosen to believe the 
pro-nuclear lobby.”

After the Fukushima crisis, Koizumi said he had “studied the process, reality 
and history of the introduction ofnuclear power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/nuclearpower>, and became ashamed of 
myself for believing such lies”.

Abe has pushed for the restart of Japan’s nuclear reactors, while the 
government says it wants nuclear to account for a fifth of Japan’s total energy 
mix by 2030. Just three of the country’s dozens of nuclear reactors are in 
operation, and two will be taken offline later this year for maintenance.

Koizumi, 74, has also thrown his support behind hundreds of US sailors and 
marineswho claim they developed leukaemia and other serious health problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/aug/20/us-navy-sailors-legal-challenge-fukushima-radiation-tepco>
 after being exposed to Fukushima radiation plumes while helping with relief 
operations – nicknamed Operation Tomodachi (friend) – following the 11 March 
2011earthquake and tsunami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan-earthquake-and-tsunami>.

In 2012 the service personnel launched a lawsuit accusing Tepco of failing to 
prevent the accident and of lying about the levels of radiation from the 
stricken reactors, putting US personnel at risk.

Most of the 400 plaintiffs were aboard the USS Ronald Reagan, a 
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier that was anchored off Japan’s north-east coast 
while helicopters flew emergency supplies to survivors of the tsunami, which 
killed almost 19,000 people.

Medical experts, however, said the sailors would have received only small, 
non-harmful doses of radiation; a US defence department report published in 
2014 said no link had been established between the sailors’ health problems and 
their exposure to low doses ofFukushima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima> radiation.

Koizumi, who met several of the sick servicemen in San Diego in May, plans to 
raise $1m by the end of next March to help cover the sailors’ medical expenses.

“I felt I had to do something to help those who worked so hard for Japan,” he 
said. “That won’t be enough money, but at least it will show that Japan is 
grateful for what they did for us.”

Despite his opposition to Abe’s pro-nuclear policies, Koizumi was 
complimentary about his performance as prime minister during his second time in 
office in the past decade.

“As far as nuclear power is concerned, we are totally at odds,” Koizumi said. 
“But I think he’s reflected on the mistakes he made during his first time as 
leader and is doing a much better job second time around.”

In political longevity terms, Abe’s performance could hardly be worse. He 
resigned in September 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/sep/12/japan.justinmccurry> after less 
than a year in office, following a series of ministerial scandals, a 
debilitating bowel condition and a disastrous performance by the LDP in upper 
house elections.
 