
David Thorne, the former CEO and owner of the rugby union side Wasps, is one 
of the parties interested in re-forming Bradford Bulls following theclub’s 
liquidation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-go-into-liquidation>
 this week.

Thorne registered a company called Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> Capital Limited with 
Companies House on Wednesday, before meeting the remaining members of playing 
staff at the club’s Odsal stadium.

That meeting was not sanctioned or attended by anyone involved with the Rugby 
Football League, and while the New Zealand-born businessman told the Guardian 
that the meeting was not held to undermine the RFL’s bidding process for the 
club – the deadline for expressions of interest in forming a new club is Monday 
– he believes the former Super League champions and World Club Challenge 
winners are an “iconic brand” worth rescuing.

Related: Bradford Bulls' demise should worry second-tier clubs in other sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2017/jan/06/bradford-bulls-liquidation-second-tier-clubs-league-union>

“In no way do we want to be seen to be trying to usurp the RFL’s process, this 
was an innocent and perhaps naive meeting and maybe we should have waited,” he 
said. “But as an interested party I thought it was important to speak to the 
players and staff from a humanitarian perspective in person, because they’re 
all in limbo not knowing what is going on.

“I’ve been through this process with Wasps before so I know what it’s all 
about, and I see Bradford Bulls as an iconic brand within sport. If there’s 
something we can bring to the table and help remedy the situation then we feel 
we can contribute. But, of course, it’s down to the RFL to decide.”

Thorne previously worked with the current Wasps owner, Derek Richardson, 
during his time with the rugby union side, but the Guardian understands that 
neither Richardson nor anyone currently involved with Wasps is part of Thorne’s 
bid to assume control at Bradford.

Despite registering his interest with the RFL in the past 48 hours, Thorne 
admitted he has yet to finalise the details of his bid to the governing body. 
“We have a clear plan which we will submit to the RFL in due course,” he said. 
“They will make their own determination based on what everyone brings to the 
table but having registered the company with Companies House, it’s clear we’re 
putting things in place in case we’re given the go-ahead.”

The RFL is understood to be keen on receiving long-term financial plans for 
the new club from prospective bidders following the Bulls’ third administration 
in four years, which culminated in liquidation on Tuesday. So far, five of the 
club’s former players have agreed deals with other sides before a possible 
re-formation of the club in time for the start of the new Championship season 
next month.

The newly formed Toronto Wolfpack, who are starting life in League 1, would be 
willing to take Bradford’s place in the Championship, said the head coach of 
the Canadian side, Paul Rowley. “We fully supported starting at the bottom, I 
think that’s right,” he said. “But if you are asking me if we would take the 
opportunity, absolutely yes, we would go now. I know that Barrow would do the 
same, I’m not too sure about the other two, Whitehaven and Workington, although 
I’d be surprised if they refused it.

“The whole situation is confusing and not consistent with messages that have 
been given out previously when other clubs have been in similar situations. It 
creates unrest and debate.”
 