
A former Conservative health secretary has said it was unfair for Downing 
Street to hint that the NHS England boss,Simon Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/simon-stevens>, was to blame for the 
winter crisis gripping the health service.

Stephen Dorrell, now chair of the NHS Confederation, issued the rebuke after 
Stevens told MPs on Wednesday that Theresa May was “stretching it” by saying 
the health service had got more money than it had requested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-boss-simon-stevens-defended-by-mps-health-funding-row>
. His intervention came as new figures revealed the extent of the strain 
already on the system before the Christmas period.

Our NHS trust is close to a tipping point – and we are not alone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2017/jan/11/our-nhs-trust-is-close-to-a-tipping-point-and-we-are-not-alone>
Sources close to May had suggested to the Times that Downing Street thought 
Stevens was “not enthusiastic” and was annoyed by his political interventions, 
particularly on social care funding. The prime minister’s spokeswoman denied 
relations were frosty, saying May had full confidence in Stevens.

Dorrell said he believed that any allegations of political interference, and 
the insistence that theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> had 
received the funding it had requested, were not fair to Stevens.

He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I do think it is unfair on him, 
because he’s made it clear from the beginning … He set out, he is the author 
of, the five-year forward view; he is the author of the government’s policy of 
the health service as part of a broad range of public services.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&media=>
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
“He’s been the strong advocate of the need to integrate, to change the way we 
deliver health and care in our communities in order to deliver more joined-up 
services with proper emphasis on care as well as on the essential elements of 
acute medicine.”

Dorrell said the government “should be addressing the evidence about what is 
happening on the ground rather than engaging in a rather high-profile 
discussion about, frankly, what sound to the public like telephone numbers of 
public expenditure”.


Later on Thursday, the NHS Confederation warned that the NHS had reached a 
“tipping point” and that it was time the Government accepted that “limited 
investment” had “consequences”. The November figures revealed acute problems 
with delayed discharges - where patients are medically fit to leave hospital 
but are stuck in beds due to problems arranging care in the community. This 
impacts on A&E as hospitals struggle to find beds for incoming patients.

Snapshot figures on delayed discharges at midnight on November 24 show there 
were 6,825 people waiting to be discharged - the highest on record, and up 22% 
on the figure for November 2015 (5,573). Trolley waits of over four hours after 
a decision has been made to admit the patient totalled 52,769 - the second 
highest figure on record and 54% higher than November 2015. Waits of over 12 
hours totalled 456 - again, the second highest figure on record, and 16 times 
higher than the number for November 2015.

The proportion of people seen at A&E within four hours in November was 88.4%, 
against a 95% target, and lower than the 91.3% in November last year. 
November’s figure of 88.4% is the lowest since March 2016 (87.3%).


Tim Gardner, senior policy fellow at the Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Foundation, said: “The NHS has 
begun this winter in a worse position than at any time over the last five years.


“The NHS is being squeezed between rising cost pressures and an underfunded 
social care system that is reaching breaking point.”

Speaking to the Commons public accounts committee on Wednesday, Stevens said 
“there are clearly very substantial pressures, and I don’t think it helps 
anybody to try and pretend that there aren’t”. He pointed that out the extra 
£10bn the government had referred to was being granted over six years, meaning 
the health service had less than it had asked for in its five-year-plan.

Stevens even appeared to take aim at May’s experience as home secretary, 
saying that dealing with challenges posed by an ageing population was “quite 
different to the criminal justice system”.


The row came as it was reported that at least 23 NHS trusts in England had 
declared a black alert in the past week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-crisis-20-hospitals-declare-black-alert-as-patient-safety-no-longer-assured>
, while freezing temperatures are expected to exacerbate the strain on the UK’s 
overstretched hospitals and heath services.


On Wednesday, May said claims by the Red Cross that the health service was 
suffering a humanitarian crisis were “irresponsible and overblown” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/red-cross-description-of-nhs-irresponsible-and-overblown-says-pm-may-pmqs-a-and-e-demand>
 in a series of clashes with the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, over the issue. 
“Our NHS, Mr Speaker, is in crisis, but the prime minister is in denial,” 
Corbyn said.

The shadow health secretary, Jon Ashworth, published a letter he sent to May 
about Stevens’ performance, asking if she agreed with his assessment of funding 
levels and the effects of cuts to social care.

“Failure to take Simon Stevens’ warnings seriously would risk deepening a 
crisis that has already pushed the NHS to breaking point,” he wrote.
 