
For the American writer Laura Kasischke, the first inkling of her second life 
in France came when a former student wrote to say her portrait was on the cover 
of Le Monde. Kasischke was teaching creative writing at a community college in 
Michigan, with two collections of poetry and a couple of novels already under 
her belt. But when her first novel appeared in France asÀ Suspicious River in 
1999, it launched a spectacular literary career in translation that took her 
completely by surprise and is still going strong nearly two decades on.

Today, Kasischke is better known in the US as a poet, winning prizes including 
the National Book Critics Circle award for her 2011 collection Space, in Chains 
– though she jokes that in the US no one is really well-known for their poetry.


But in France it’s her novels that have found success, featuring prominently 
on bestseller lists, with 2014’sEsprit d’hiver winning Elle magazine’s Grand 
prix des lectrices. Her appearance at this year’sFestival America in Vincennes 
<http://www.festival-america.org/> left her “staggered to be asked for hundreds 
and hundreds of autographs, and stopped on the street, recognised, asked for 
photographs and so on”.

Kasischke is just one of a number of writers in our increasingly globalised 
world who have made their names far from their own countries, with British 
authors such as Robert McLiam Wilson, David Mark andRosamunde Pilcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/04/rosamunde-pilcher-german-tourists-cornwall>
 finding substantial audiences in France and Germany.


One possible reason Kasischke suggests for her own success – based on a 
comparison of reader comments in France and the US – is that “the French enjoy 
protagonists and narrators who aren’t necessarily likable in a way that 
Americans may not, and also that the French may have more patience with … 
endings that are elliptical. These things are praised by some of the French 
customers and very much frowned upon by some of the American customers.”


For translator Frank Wynne, her suggestion that continental readers are more 
tolerant of unappealing characters seems all too plausible: “Literature does 
not exist to be heartwarming – even Watership Down is filled with violence and 
savagery – yet there is a large readership that longs for the familiar and the 
reassuring, and I think perhaps that is more in evidence among British and 
especially American readers.”

But differences in literary taste are forged by the different structures of 
the publishing industry in the UK and the US, Wynne points out. “Anglo-American 
publishing is now dominated by four publishers. Penguin Random House alone has 
dozens of imprints – Heinemann, Vintage, Chatto, Harvill, Cape, Crown, Bantam, 
Ballantine – which gives the impression of a greater diversity than truly 
exists. Anglo-American publishers search for ‘breakout’ books, for authors who 
‘repeat’. This is much less true in France, where authors still regularly move 
between publishing houses [and] where reviews, word-of-mouth and prizes can 
still propel sales of individual titles.”

Europeans read serious fiction in great numbers, and it is common to hear 
people speak seriously about literature
Donna Leon 
Wynne says that the vibrancy and diversity of literary culture in France and 
Spain is still protected by regulations preventing retailers from selling 
popular books at large discounts, restrictions that disappeared in the UK 
during the 1990s, adding: “Literature is a sufficiently major part of French 
culture that there are still radio and television programmes discussing books, 
and many authors are also major public figures, something that would be all but 
unthinkable in the UK or the US.”

The bestselling American crime writer Donna Leon, who says she owes her career 
to Swiss publisher Diogenes Verlag, puts the contrast in starker terms.

“I think Europeans read less crap,” Leon says, “and most of [the crap] they 
read, they get from the US. Since this is true about food and entertainment, 
why should it not be true about books? Europeans, especially Germans, read 
serious fiction, read it in great numbers, and it is common to hear people 
speak in social situations seriously and at length about literature.”

It isn’t a new phenomenon. After publishing four Inspector Brunetti novels in 
the early 1990s, Leon found herself without a publisher in the US. “Then Danny 
Keel at Diogenes read one and liked it,” she says. “They made a publicity fuss 
about them, and off they went. Thus it was Switzerland that created the success 
of the books in the German language.” It wasn’t until the eighth Brunetti novel 
was published in both English and German in 2000 that Leon began to realise her 
commercial impact.

The latest Brunetti novel, The Waters of Eternal Youth, featured on the New 
York Times list of hardcover fiction bestsellers when it appeared in 2015.

According to Leon, part of the novels’ appeal for German readers is that they 
are set in Venice, where the author – who now divides her time between Venice 
and a small village in the Swiss Alps – lived for many years. “It seems to be 
the city of their dreams, the way Florence has been for the British. It does 
not hurt that the books deal with serious political and social issues and bang 
the ecological drum very hard. This grim undercurrent catches the attention of 
people who face similar problems and who, unlike the Americans, are prepared to 
talk about them and attempt to solve them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffound-in-translation-the-english-language-writers-who-succeed-abroad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c95a7db0b800edf874d89d59261b24a90602ab%2F192_0_768_960%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Found%20in%20translation%3A%20the%20English-language%20writers%20who%20succeed%20abroad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffound-in-translation-the-english-language-writers-who-succeed-abroad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Found%20in%20translation%3A%20the%20English-language%20writers%20who%20succeed%20abroad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffound-in-translation-the-english-language-writers-who-succeed-abroad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c95a7db0b800edf874d89d59261b24a90602ab%2F192_0_768_960%2F768.jpg>
 ‘I live very, very far from the French literary scene’ … Laura Kasischke. 
Photograph: Normand / Opale 
German readers are certainly enthusiastic about crime fiction that touches on 
social and political issues, agrees the translator Katy Derbyshire, citing 
writers such as Oliver Bottini, Juli Zeh and Frank Schätzing who have been 
picked up by publishers in the UK. The country has also been keen on portraits 
of Italy since Goethe, she says, but she’s not convinced they read “any less 
‘crap’ – perhaps they just read more in total. There’s a sense that it’s fine 
to read easier stuff as long as you balance it out with something more 
challenging.”

International success might be gratifying, but how does it affect a writer’s 
work? Very little, according to Leon. “The humour is still more English than it 
is anything else, and I suspect the ethical sense is more Anglo-Saxon than 
Mediterranean,” she says. “I’ve lived outside of the US for about 50 years, 
most of them in Europe, so the things that concern me are European. My politics 
have surely moved away from the current Manichaean thinking that characterises 
current politics in the US.”

For Kasischke, the barriers are both cultural and geographic: “If I lived 
there, and could speak the language, and perhaps speak with other French 
writers, or if I could even … speak French with my French fans, their thoughts 
might influence how I think about my own writing. But I live in Chelsea, 
Michigan – and that’s very, very far from the French literary scene.”

I was boarding a plane when someone ran after me shouting my name. I thought 
there must be a problem with my ticket
Simon Beckett 
Simon Beckett, a British crime writer who has found an audience in Germany 
that as yet far outnumbers his audience at home, agrees that it’s impossible to 
tailor his writing for readers abroad. “I can’t see how that could work,” he 
says. “You just have to write the best story you can and then hope people enjoy 
it. Which is what I’ve always done anyway.”

A couple of psychological thrillers he published during the 1990s appeared in 
German translation. But when the first in his series featuring the forensic 
anthropologist David Hunter, The Chemistry of Death, came out asDie Chemie des 
Todes in 2007, Beckett realised his career had moved to an entirely different 
level.

“I was boarding a plane at Leipzig when someone ran after me shouting my 
name,” he recalls. “I thought there must be a problem with my ticket, but it 
was an airport worker who’d recognised me in the departure lounge. She’d dashed 
to a bookshop to buy one of my novels and then run all the way back so I could 
sign it.”

The Hunter series has done well in the UK and has been translated into 29 
languages, but the reaction in Germany is very different to anywhere else, 
Beckett continues. “They seem to have a lot of literary festivals, and crime 
fiction in particular is very popular, as it is in the UK. But whereas here I 
might do an informal talk in a library to 20 or 30 people, in Germany it’s 
usually on a stage in front of several hundred. There’ll be an interviewer 
who’ll also translate, since I don’t speak German, and an actor who’ll read out 
extracts from the book.”

There’s such an appetite for Beckett’s fiction abroad that his latest novel 
appears in German translation before it has even been published in English.
Totenfang, in which Hunter investigates a body discovered in the Essex marshes, 
shot up German bestseller lists when it was published in October. English 
readers will have to wait until April for the case to be resolved in The 
Restless Dead.

Beckett is at something of a loss to explain why his novels have struck such a 
chord in Germany. “In my experience, readers are pretty much the same in 
Germany as the UK, except that there are more of them,” he says.

As for the translators who have brought his work to a new audience, Beckett 
says he doesn’t have much contact with most of them, but gets on well with 
those he meets.

I think reading a translation is an act of faith
Donna Leon 
“It’s odd when a book arrives in the post with your name on the cover, and you 
can’t understand a word of what’s inside,” he says. “Translation is a real 
skill, and since I don’t speak any other language, let alone 29, I have to take 
it on trust that it’s a true representation of what I’ve written.” A lot 
depends on the translator capturing the style, tone and atmosphere of the 
original, he continues. “But it’s still the novel whose story and characters 
I’ve created and sweated over. A good translation takes that and makes it 
accessible to people who otherwise wouldn’t be able to read it.”

Donna Leon puts it a little differently. “I think reading a translation is an 
act of faith,” she says. “We have to trust in that person’s intelligence, taste 
and choice to render a text in our language into a similar text in the one in 
to which it is being translated. The translator should have a deep 
understanding not only of the languages but of the culture of the place in 
which the book is set so as to understand reference, allusion, humour and the 
prevailing moral code of the other country.”

According to Kasischke, cultural connections are even more important when you 
move beyond prose. “I’ve worked more closely with my most recent translator, 
Céline Leroy, because, in addition to the fiction, she has translated my first 
book of poetry.” Wild Brides, which appeared earlier this year asMariées 
rebelles “required more discussion than the fiction,” she adds, “some of it 
rather hilarious like, what do you mean to suggest by the angry sandwich?”

But for all these discussions, the fundamental mystery of her fame in France 
leaves Kasischke with an abiding feeling of luck. “It’s been an unexpectedly 
wondrous source of surprise income,” she says, “for which I feel I had to do no 
work whatsoever, since I was simply writing, in English, novels I’d have 
written anyway.”
 