
Would you love to be the creative mind behind the next Coca-Cola Christmas 
advert, or do you fancy making something as catchy as Compare the Meerkat? 
Great ads can leave a lasting impression. Whether you want to dazzle people 
with your copy, dream up new ideas or decide where the advert will be seen, 
there’s a wide range of careers in the industry. So where to start?

Show commercial awareness

First, look at developing your skills. Advertising jobs require a good 
commercial and mathematical mindset, says Aadil Seedat, digital marketing 
executive atVision Support Services Group 
<https://www.visionsupportservices.com/>. “You need to show that you’re 
knowledgeable about the industry you’re advertising for,” he says. “As well as 
that, you need to be able to put a number on everything about that campaign – 
measuring the success of the campaign, so looking at return on investment, how 
many potential views the ad may have had, etc.”

Paul Earnden, head of consultancy at digital marketing agency Prodo Digital 
<http://www.prodo.com/>, says that while you certainly don’t need to be an 
artist to work in advertising, you do “need to be able to think creatively, 
react quickly to the market and ultimately provide value to a client”.

Build up your work experience

Starting a career in advertising – live chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/aug/28/starting-a-career-in-advertising-live-chat>
Aside from building skills, how else can you make yourself an attractive 
potential employee to an ad agency? Like many industries, it’s about building 
up work experience with agencies. “These are likely to be unpaid at first, but 
will give you a good idea of the sort of scenarios you’re likely to get in to 
while working for an agency,” says Earnden.

But how should you go about organising work experience when you have no 
contacts? “My stock answer for gaining experience in most fields is 
volunteering and making use of your time at university,” says Jenny Lowthrop, 
freelance digital advertising expert atShe Gets to Work 
<http://shegetsaround.co.uk/work-with-me/>. “It is amazing what skills and 
experience you can gain through getting involved with clubs and societies. I 
write atravel blog <http://www.shegetsaround.co.uk/> and have gained so many 
skills through practising creating adverts for my own blog, which I have since 
used to get jobs and clients. It was primarily my blog that helped me make the 
switch from volunteering to digital advertising.”


JWT <https://jwt.co.uk/> lead talent Kate Bruges advises advertising wannabes 
to use the resources available from the ad industry body, theIPA 
<http://www.ipa.co.uk/>. “It’s a one-stop shop with details of all the 
agencies, their work, contact details, etc,” she says. “Use this information to 
target your requests for work experience and internships. Make sure you make 
each approach really personal and specific to that agency, their clients and 
their work.” Also check the IPA’s website regularly as agencies advertise 
internships on there.

For those already in the ad industry who wish to jump sides from client to 
agency, Bruges advises approaching the agencies you’ve worked with to see if 
it’s possible to gain some experience from their side of the fence.

“Many of our clients like their staff to get direct agency experience and all 
agencies want to understand their clients’ business better so these placements 
can be of great benefit to both sides,” says Bruges. “You will also better 
understand what it’s like to be in a service business, and can make sure that 
suits you.”

Getting a job in advertising: top 10 tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/tips-to-get-a-job-in-advertising> 
Write a succinct and targeted CV

Look at how you position yourself on your CV. “It’s important to make it sing 
for the audience,” says Hamish Nicklin, chief revenue officer forGuardian Media 
Group <https://www.theguardian.com/uk>. “So, what discipline is it that you’d 
like to get into at an agency? If it’s account management, for example, it 
might be worth thinking about the skills required to be an outstanding account 
handler and making sure that a) you have them and b) you’re able to demonstrate 
their performance at a high level. Once you can do this, focus your CV so it 
demonstrates these skills at every turn.”


Know the latest trends

To stand out from the crowds when it comes to interviews, it’s also worth 
keeping abreast of what’s happening in and around the industry. “I know the 
digital world is constantly changing so read up on the latest advertising 
trends, social media trends, and always have good examples of what has worked, 
even just from noticing good TV ads or Facebook ads. Recruiters want to know 
you have an eye for good advertising,” says Lowthrop.

And a final word of advice from Diana Caplinska, a strategist with experience 
across brand, communications and innovation. “In the world of ideas, you will 
find yourself presenting personal thoughts to big groups of people who will 
push back on them, again and again.” With criticism coming in quick and fast, 
you’ll need to develop a thick skin.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 