
The future of devolution in the north-east of England has been thrown into 
doubt after council leaders voted against the multimillion-pound plans.

Four out of seven councils in the region voted against the proposals that 
include the contentious issue of electing a mayor for the region. Newcastle,
Northumberland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northumberland> and North 
Tyneside all voted to move forward with the plans, but Sunderland, Durham, 
South Tyneside and Gateshead voted against.

The move is a fresh blow to the government’s plans to devolve more powers to 
regions across England, a cornerstone of ex-chancellorGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>’s “northern powerhouse” 
vision.

Why devolution must survive the Brexit vote and move power out of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/20/brexit-government-power-devolution-councils>
Sajid Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>, the secretary 
of state for communities and local government, said he was disappointed with 
the decision but indicated devolution was not dead in the north-east. A 
spokeswoman for his department said: “It is disappointing that some north-east 
councils have been unwilling to support this deal, which would certainly have 
benefited local people. If councils in the region wish to discuss devolution 
proposals further, our door remains open.”

While devolution plans have progressed in Manchester, Sheffield and Teesside, 
the proposals have been fraught with difficulty in the north-east. In May, 
Gateshead voted against supporting the devolution deal because of concerns 
about funding and its future.

Leaders from the seven north-east councils have also repeatedly sought 
assurances fromTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s 
government about hundreds of millions of pounds of EU funding pledged before the
Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 on 23 June.

The current devolution deal would guarantee £30m a year for the region to 
spend, in addition to being given control of a £3.4bn pool of investment cash. 
It would also devolve powers over areas such as transport, skills and housing 
with the proviso that the north-east has a directly elected mayor by May 2017.

Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the shadow 
home secretary, was last month voted Labour’s candidate for themayor of Greater 
Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
. Labour MP Steve Rotheram was voted the party’s candidate formayor of the 
Liverpool city region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/corbyn-ally-steve-rotheram-named-as-candidate-for-liverpool-city-region-mayor>
.

Paul Watson, chair of the North East Combined Authority (Neca 
<http://www.northeastca.gov.uk/>) of the seven councils, described the vote as 
disappointing. He said: “Each of the seven councils which make up the Neca has 
always made clear that they support the principle of devolution for the 
north-east. Following the outcome of theEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and the subsequent changes 
within government, council leaders have been equally clear that to move 
forward, the new government must provide assurances regarding the terms of the 
region’s devolution deal.

“Extensive discussions and negotiations have taken place with government and 
within the region over recent months but unfortunately, despite our best 
efforts, it has not been possible to reach an agreement which all of the seven 
local authorities feel able to support. Although this is disappointing we will 
continue to work together with government to achieve our ambition of a stronger 
regional economy with improved opportunities for residents and businesses.”

Alexandra Jones, chief executive of thinktank Centre for Cities 
<http://www.centreforcities.org/>, said: “It is deeply regrettable that local 
leaders in the north-east have been unable to agree upon taking forward the 
proposed devolution deal for the area, which could have boosted the region’s 
long-term economic prospects. But this should not signal the end of devolution 
in the north-east. Now may be the time to think instead about devolving power 
on a different basis within the region: for example to a ‘Newcastle city 
region’, which would more closely reflect the geography over which people in 
that area live, work and access public services. National and local leaders 
must continue to work together to explore these options, and to ensure that 
devolution in the north-east does not come to a standstill.”
 