
Wayne Bennett says he doesn’t have a problem with Mal Meninga, but he appears 
to have a major beef with the way the Australian Rugby League Commission 
decided on the new Kangaroos coach.

Not that he would elaborate further.

The seven-time premiership coach has tried to clear the air after a tumultuous 
tenure as England coach ahead of Sunday’s must-win Four Nations clash against 
Meninga’s Australia in London.

Wayne Bennett under pressure going into England’s must-win Australia Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/wayne-bennett-england-australia-four-nations>
Bennett again bristled at critics claiming he did not promote the game, but 
claimed he had had peace talks with Meninga after the Rooscoach’s controversial 
News Corp column 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/nrl/four-nations/kangaroos-coach-mal-meningas-sensational-revelation-about-relationship-with-wayne-bennett/news-story/102dc5e9ab517a0dfeeca74931b07817>
.

Meninga accused Bennett of undermining him and refusing to move on after 
missing out on the Kangaroos job.

Bennett claimed he was still friends with Meninga after a Wednesday chat but 
still seemed miffed with how the Roos job was appointed.

“In the end with the Roos job where I was at a different place was the process 
they went through in the end,” Bennett told Fox Sports TV.

“Which I thought was, I have to be careful what type of word I use, anyway 
when that was over I moved on.

“It (Kangaroos process) is a story worth telling one day but I am not going to 
tell it today.”

Asked if he had undermined Meninga, Bennett said: “No.”

Asked if he respected Meninga, Bennett replied: “I always have.

“I’ve got quite a good relationship with Mal, I spent some time with him 
yesterday (Wednesday) – it’s all good.”

Pressed, Bennett said: “I am not going further with the conversation here – 
it’s not me or Mal.

“I have always been friends with him, nothing’s changed from my point of view.”

Bennett also took another swing at critics claiming he did not promote the 
game in England.

Bennett’s abrupt, monosyllabic sideline interviews have earned the ire of the 
UK press, with the likes of TV expert and former Wales boss Iestyn Harris 
accusing the 65-year-old of being disrespectful.

He defended his stance during a mid-week team press conference but elaborated 
further ahead of England’s crunch clash.

“I am just Wayne. I have been getting that criticism for some 38 years now,” 
he said.

“I’m over here, five weeks away from my home ... I don’t know how they work 
out that I’m not promoting the game.

“I mean the critics are sitting at home in the lounge rooms in Australia 
drinking their wine and I’m out here at the coal face getting the job done.”
 