
The two interns who won a landmark case against Fox film studio after working 
unpaid on the set of Black Swan have succeeded in their five-year campaign to 
push the studio into paying those who had undertaken unpaid work experience at 
the company,according to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/07/black-swan-intern-lawsuit-fox-settles-1201785666/>.

Fox, which lost and then appealed a landmark ruling in a lawsuit filed by 
former interns Alexander Footman and Eric Glatt in 2013, has decided to settle 
rather than take the case back to court.


The settlement is yet to be approved by a judge, but it would see everyone who 
interned for free at Fox Entertainment Group, Fox Filmed Entertainment, Fox 
Networks Group and Fox Interactive Media in the first nine months of 2010, as 
well as certain people who worked unpaid in their New York and California 
offices between 2005-2010, receive about $495 (£373) each. Footman and Glatt 
would receive $7,500 and $6,000 respectively, while Eden Antalik, another 
plaintiff who joined them in 2012, would get $3,500. As Deadline notes, their 
lawyers will have made approximately $220,000 in fees by the time the 
settlement is agreed.Black Swan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/black-swan>, 
released in 2010, took $330m at the global box office.


Footman and Glatt first sued Fox Searchlight in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/black-swan-interns-sue-studio> 
after claiming that the studio was breaking US law by requiring interns to 
perform tasks that had little or no educational value for no financial 
recompense. At the time the company defended themselves by saying the pair had 
been working for Aronofsky’s production company and that the lawsuit was 
meritless.

The plaintiffs expanded their suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/14/black-swan-interns-sue-fox> to 
cover all internships at parent company Twentieth Century Fox in 2012. In 2013 
federal jdge William Pauleysided with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/12/black-swan-interns-win-landmark-case>
, agreeing that the work they had been tasked with should have been carried out 
by paid employees. Fox appealed, but it seems to have now decided to settle.


Just saying no: US interns challenge employers over exploitation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/just-saying-no-us-interns-challenge-employers-over-exploitation>
The Black Swan lawsuit is thought to have influenced a number of Hollywood 
media companies’ practice regarding internships. Studios have increasingly 
started paying interns for their work, which has resulted in the number of 
available internships decreasing.

In March this year, Glatt, a 40-year-old who quit his career in finance to 
become a documentary film-maker ahead of his work on Black Swan, told the 
Guardian how satisfying it was to fight back against the practice of menial 
unpaid internships. “It has been great and empowering to finally call bullshit 
on bullshit,”he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/just-saying-no-us-interns-challenge-employers-over-exploitation>
.

In a statement, Fox spokesman Chris Petrikin said: “Having decisively 
prevailed in our appeal, Fox wishes to put this matter completely behind us. We 
will refocus on a return to our proud history of offering dynamic, educational 
internships.”
 