
It’s January, the “month of unrest 
<http://www.nfws.org.uk/fox-calendar-of-events.html>”, mating and shrieking 
season in the fox community, which is also causing unrest among Mavis’s 
neighbours. While the foxes are barking, urinating and defecating along the 
borders of their territory, and having noisy, wild and uninhibited sex, members 
of the neighbourhood association are busy sending bossy fox-related emails and 
enraging each other.

Mavis was outraged by an email instructing everyone to check their gardens for 
evidence of foxes, and reminding them that an untidy garden is thefoxes’ 
absolute favourite place to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/03/foxes-fox>.

“Just ’cause she cuts her lawn with nail scissors,” snapped Mavis, and rang 
the fox preservation people, who advised her to block up some holes and 
redirect the foxes. Anyway, what else can poor Mavis do if she spots tell-tale 
signs of fox? Report them to the local stasi? Sadly, yes. We are that harsh.You 
can hire a fellow to come and shoot foxes 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/hundreds-of-foxes-to-be-culled-in-london-after-christmas-celebrations-a3426776.html>
, £350–450 a session, plus £50–£75 a corpse. He’s always especially busy and 
coining-it in town after Christmas, what with all those turkey carcasses and 
leftovers scattered about, and screaming fox noises keeping residents awake.

Why bother tidying up, keeping your bins covered properly, recycling waste 
efficiently and wearing earplugs at night for a couple of weeks, when you can 
get someone to briskly mass-murder the pesky foxes instead?

Luckily, my neighbours are generally rather keen on foxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/07/stop-hounding-britain-urban-foxes>
. Why not? We’re not farming sheep or keeping chickens round here. And I 
haven’t heard a peep out of those foxes at night. We have our own local 
fox-rescuer, and instead of bossy emails, I get charming Facebook photos of our 
foxes lolling about on shed roofs or sauntering along the pavements, and in 
April, of the sweetie-pie cubs emerging.

Culling doesn’t work anyway 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn23167-culling-urban-foxes-just-doesnt-work/>
. Another fox will just move in and fill the gap. But in spring 1994, sarcoptic 
mange hit foxes in Bristol (where foxes have been monitored long-term). Within 
two years, more than 95% had died, leaving a fox ghost-town. As Stephen Harris 
wrote in the New Scientist, no one was heard “celebrating their disappearance. 
Only mourning their loss.” Be careful of what you wish for.
 