
Police are investigating allegations of fraud made against the Ukip MEP Nathan 
Gill. Officers are reportedly looking into whether Gill misused European 
parliament allowances and expenses for political purposes.

A complaint was made to the UK’s national fraud and cyber crime unit, Action 
Fraud, in July, and the matter was referred to North Wales police on 11 August.

A spokeswoman for North Wales police said: “We can confirm we have recently 
received correspondence concerning allegations of fraud against an Anglesey man 
… That matter is now under investigation.”


Gill said the claims against him were “entirely bogus”. In a statement, he 
said: “I am in no doubt whatsoever these claims have been made against me as 
part of an ongoing strategy to harry me out of [my] position and to damage my 
reputation.

“I trust that those wilfully attempting to harm me will face appropriate 
charges. I find it utterly incredible that this ongoing, baseless and vicious 
campaign against me is being pursued as a priority by some.”


He added: “I wish to make it very clear that I have done absolutely nothing 
wrong and am well aware of who are behind this latest poisonous and deeply 
malicious attack.”

Gill has been an MEP for Ukip <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ukip> 
since 2014. In May he was elected as a Welsh assembly member, and this week he 
quit Ukip’s group in the Senedd to sit as an independent AM.

A Ukip spokesman told BBC Wales 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-politics-37125219> that Gill had not been 
spoken to by detectives and no comment could be made when “no facts were known”.


Ukip’s leader in the Welsh assembly, Neil Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/ukip-group-neil-hamilton-elected-lead-welsh-assembly-wales>
, said Gill should make public all details of his MEP expenses claims. “This is 
taxpayers’ money,” he said. “We have a right to know how it is spent.”

Gill quit his party’s group in the Welsh assembly this week amid an ongoing 
row about “double jobbing”. Ukip AMs had called on him to resign either from 
his Cardiff Bay position or from his Brussels job. The 43-year-old opted to 
become an independent AM while staying on as an MEP for Ukip.
 