
Everyone is talking about the gig economy, with recent research showing that 
between 20-30% 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/independent-work-choice-necessity-and-the-gig-economy>
 of people in Europe and the US are now self-employed.

While much of the talk around freelancing has been negative, with claims that 
giggers are exploited, underpaid, and lack job security,reports show 
<http://repec.iza.org/dp3974.pdf> that some prefer the flexibility, freedom and 
control self-employment affords them.

What’s more, there are many ways you can boost your job security as a 
self-employed worker, so you’ll spend less time worrying about winning your 
next project and more time enjoying your flexible lifestyle. Here’s how to make 
freelancing work:

10 ways to work from home and not end up as dogsbody-in-chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/05/work-home-not-be-dogsbody-get-dressed-family-mess-chores>
Diversify

As a self-employed worker, your client contracts are likely to be quite 
flexible, which usually means they can end at any time with very little 
warning. And while that may sound scary, the key to minimising the risk is to 
have a number of different sources of work, so that losing one doesn’t feel 
like the end of the world. Try to cover a variety of industries and even 
different services within your portfolio, while being careful not to rely on 
one client for too much of your work. That way if one of your income streams 
drops off a cliff, you have the others to fall back on, while you line up some 
new projects to fill the gap.

Be financially savvy

You need to get used to fluctuating earnings and no holiday pay, which means a 
rainy day fund is essential to give you peace of mind and cover any dry spells. 
Some freelancers also opt have two bank accounts – one as a current account and 
the other to receive client payments. They then pay themselves a regular 
monthly income from the payment account into their current account (the amount 
based on slightly less than their average monthly earnings). This means that 
whether you have a particularly busy or quiet month, your income will remain 
stable.

Also remember that, unlike permanent employees, any money that comes into your 
business account won’t be taxed until the following year, so you might be less 
flush than you think. Always save more than you think you need for HMRC and 
Companies House, or you could be in for a nasty shock later on. A good 
accountant is essential to help you plan your finances and stay on top of your 
responsibilities.

Make sure your services are in demand

In an ideal world, you should be turning down work, so never be complacent and 
make sure your services are always in demand. There are plenty of online tools 
you can use for your own marketing and PR, whether that’s social media, online 
talent platforms, or creating a website or blog. These ensure you remain 
visible even when you’re busy with other projects, while also giving you a way 
to showcase examples of your work and boost client confidence in your ability 
to deliver. The investment will be more than repaid with a steady stream of 
exciting new projects.

Cultivate a mix of long and short-term clients

Just working on short-term, ad hoc projects can be tiring and inefficient, as 
you’re constantly having to look for new work and build new client 
relationships. Plus, you have no way of planning your earnings on a 
month-to-month basis, making feelings of insecurity all the more likely. It’s 
better if you can secure a couple of retained clients that guarantee a certain 
income every month, while also giving yourself a bit of flexibility for any 
interesting (or lucrative) projects that come up.

Wanderlust: five ways to keep your job while travelling the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/15/wanderlust-five-ways-to-keep-your-job-while-travelling-the-world>
Join freelancer networks and platforms

Being self-employed doesn’t have to mean being alone. There are now a number 
of online networks and talent platforms that can help you manage your career, 
providing a support system and access tobenefits style packages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/14/freelance-payment-sickness-leave>
, similar to those enjoyed by permanent employees. One example isBroodfonds 
<http://www.broodfonds.nl/>, in the Netherlands, which works by creating small 
groups of 20-30 whose participants pay into a mutual sickness fund. Meanwhile, 
employees in the UK canpurchase relatively affordable private income protection 
insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/aug/31/income-protection-off-work-sick>.

Be very clear about payments due

Online platforms, such as the website I run, can provide you with a place to 
manage your projects and organise payments. They can help to formalise the 
client relationship, so both sides have increased security, while also helping 
to resolve any disputes or payment issues that may arise. There are also 
growing opportunities to collaborate with other freelancers through these 
sites, so you can take on additional support when you need it and go for bigger 
projects by working together.


Get it in writing

Most clients are trustworthy and will pay in a timely fashion, but that 
doesn’t mean you shouldn’t take precautions. Even if you don’t have a formal 
contract in place, make sure that you have agreed in writing the activity, 
deliverables, how much you are charging and payment terms, before you start 
work. That way, if there are any disagreements down the line, you have 
something to fall back on. For ad hoc projects, it can also be a good idea to 
charge 50% of the fee upfront to give you additional security. Talent platforms 
can charge the client and hold the funds for both of you, releasing them when 
the work is successfully completed. This gives both you and the client 
protection.

Whatever you want to call it, there’s no doubt we’re entering a new era of 
employment, where the job for life is becoming more rare, while self-employment 
booms. With both businesses and individuals discovering more flexible and 
efficient ways of working, it’s time to redefine job security for the 21st 
century.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 