
A boycott of far-right controversialist Milo Yiannopoulos’s publisher Simon & 
Schuster will have “a chilling effect” on authors and publishers and will not 
prevent the spread of “noxious ideas”, according to free-speech campaigners.

Led by the National Coalition Against Censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship>, eight groups have issued a 
statement criticising the backlash over his $250,000 (£203,000) book deal as 
the latest attempt to stifle books likely to cause offence.

The statement 
<http://ncac.org/blog/free-speech-groups-release-statement-in-support-of-publisher-of-milo-yiannopoulos-book>
, signed by among others Index on Censorship, the Authors Guild and the 
National Council of Teachers of English, said: “The suppression of noxious 
ideas does not defeat them; only vigorous disagreement can counter toxic speech 
effectively”.

It added: “Shutting down the conversation may temporarily silence disfavoured 
views, but does nothing to prevent them from spreading and resurfacing in other 
ways.”

The move follows a vociferous campaign against the publisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/milo-yiannopoulos-book-deal-simon-schuster-dangerous-outcry>
 for signing the so-called “alt-right” figurehead and Breitbart News technology 
editor to write Dangerous, due out in spring. The book will appear under the 
publisher’sThreshold Editions <http://www.thresholdeditions.com/> imprint, set 
up as an outlet for conservative voices. Dick Cheney, Glenn Beck and Rush 
Limbaugh have also been published by the imprint.

Last week, the Chicago Review of Books announced that it would not review 
Simon & Schuster authors in 2017 in protest at the deal. Writing in the 
Guardian,editor-in-chief Adam Morgan defended the decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/simon-schuster-alt-right-hate-breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos>
 as “nothing to do with political ideology and everything to do with human 
rights and decency”.

Morgan accused Yiannopoulos of being “a clickbait grifter who has made a name 
for himself spewing hate speech”. He added: “As the editor-in-chief of a small 
literary review, I wanted Simon & Schuster to know that broadcasting his 
rhetoric would have real-world consequences.”

Signatories of the NCAC statement claimed Morgan’s move would have unintended 
consequences for authors that readers may wish to support and cited the 
publisher’s two dozen imprints, includingSalaam Reads <http://salaamreads.com/>
, which focuses on books with Muslim characters.

The statement added: “Because other readers may disagree … publishers and 
writers need the freedom to express and disseminate ideas, even if they are 
controversial and offensive to some. We need not endorse the ideas contained in 
a book to endorse the right to express them.”

Alarm has grown among US free-speech campaigners at a rise in campaigns to 
boycott or withdraw controversial books. Last monthonline protests about spoof 
title Bad Little Children’s Books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/06/bad-little-childrens-books-satire-pulled-following-racism-accusations>
 led to the book’s withdrawal by publisher Abrams.

Scholastic withdrew Ramin Ganeshram’s children’s book A Birthday Cake for 
George Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/17/scholastic-george-washington-book-slave-controversy>
, about the former president’s slave Hercules and his daughter Delia. The book 
was criticised for its smiling depiction of the slaves and failure to mention 
that Hercules eventually fled captivity.

British publishers have shied away from publishing Yiannopoulos’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/04/uk-publishers-shy-away-from-alt-right-star-milo-yiannopoulos>
, deeming it “too risky” because they fear booksellers would not stock it and 
existing authors would protest. In the US, Simon & Schuster’s authors were in 
the vanguard of online protests against the Yiannopoulos deal.

Earlier this week, comedian Leslie Jones added her voice to protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/03/milo-yiannopoulos-250000-book-deal-fury-leslie-jones-simon-schuster-breitbart-alt-right>
, and accused the publisher of helping the likes of Yiannopoulos to “spread 
their hate”.The British-born provocateur was banned from Twitter last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
 after he was alleged to have encouraged a harassment campaign towards Jones.
 