
Wild Tales from the Village 

7.30pm, BBC2 


Planet Earth was all very nice, but some of us prefer our nature shows a 
little less remote. The Beeb’s next offering is a highly stylised film about 
toads, hedgehogs and pigeons surviving a year in a French village. Narration 
from The Missing’s Tchéky Karyo reminds you that these aren’t just any old mice 
loose in someone’s home. Thoroughly dramatised, sadly the plight of rodents 
just isn’t that exciting – even in slow-mo.Grace Rahman

The Morecambe and Wise Story: Look Back in Laughter 
9pm, Channel 5


In 1954, the telly critic for the People wrote that the definition of a TV set 
was “the box they buriedMorecambe and Wise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/morecambe-and-wise> in”. Some 23 
years later, the duo’s 1977 Christmas show drew 28 million viewers – roughly 
half the UK. This festive cracker traces the journey of the beloved Des 
O’Connor-baiting pair, the specs-waggling clown and his “short, fat, 
hairy-legged” foil, from variety theatre to big ratings.Ali Catterall

The Last Leg Christmas Special
9pm, Channel 4 


Adam Hills, Josh Widdicombe and Alex Brooker offer up some pre-Christmas punch 
as the team look back over the year, and forward to the festive season. Grayson 
Perry brushes mince pie crumbs from the spare seat to join the Leggers as they 
sift through 2016’s nice and naughty lists. Is it OK to hope they have 
uncovered at least a few morsels of merriness from the wreckage of a year that 
spawned Brexit, president-elect Trump and Cruz Beckham’s debut single?Mark 
Gibbings-Jones

Stella Christmas Special 
9pm, Sky1


Compounding the fact that the comedy-drama isn’t going anywhere (creator and 
star Ruth Jones told of “how cross” she was earlier this year over rumours it 
was facing the axe after five series), here’s a festive special. As the season 
of goodwill approaches, it’s a time for families coming together, with some new 
faces in Pontyberry (including folk singer Kate Rusby making a cameo), as well 
as a few familiar ones returning.Ben Arnold

Walliams & Friend
9.30pm, BBC1


Walliams’s sidekick tonight is Miranda Richardson, which is obviously no 
problem: her turn in Blackadder II remains a pinnacle of sitcom performance. 
However, having a different sparring partner each week emphasises the 
patchiness of sketch shows; plus, this week it launches with a lazy riff on 
avaricious estate agents. The lawyers specialising in hurt feelings 
compensation feels like satire waiting for reality to catch up, though.Andrew 
Mueller

American Commandante 
10.15pm, PBS America


From the day he ran away with a circus at the age of 14, William Morgan was 
restless. After years of aimlessness, this American drifter found his niche in 
Cuba in the late 50s. Sheer thirst for adventure drove him to hook up with 
pro-Castro guerrillas. But gradually, his convictions grew. This enthralling 
doc tells Morgan’s story, from revolutionary warfare in Castro’s inner circle 
to an inevitably sticky end.Phil Harrison

Film choice


Saving Mr Banks (John Lee Hancock, 2013) Friday, 8.30pm, BBC2

The origins of the film legend that is Mary Poppins, here. Emma Thompson is a 
wonderfully crotchety PL Travers, the awfully protective author of the book 
that Tom Hanks’s Walt Disney is desperate to bring to semi-animated cinematic 
life. Travers is witheringly dismissive of Disney’s art (“I can’t abide 
cartoons”) and carries a poignant backstory (Colin Farrell plays the banker 
father in her childhood scenes), while Disney masks his steely will to win with 
twinkly charm. Delightful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffriday-best-tv-wild-tales-village-last-leg-stella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F541a0d625ac57afc6466709347dc14f583526fc3%2F0_118_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Friday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Wild%20Tales%20from%20the%20Village%3B%20assorted%20Christmas%20specials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffriday-best-tv-wild-tales-village-last-leg-stella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Friday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%20%E2%80%93%20Wild%20Tales%20from%20the%20Village%3B%20assorted%20Christmas%20specials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffriday-best-tv-wild-tales-village-last-leg-stella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F541a0d625ac57afc6466709347dc14f583526fc3%2F0_118_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Sweaty dancing and marvellous music … Northern Soul. Photograph: Stubborn 
Hear/Rex/Shutterstock 
Northern Soul (Elaine Constantine, 2014) 10.45pm, Film4

Set in the fictional town of Burnsworth, this is a loving recreation of 1970s 
Lancashire and the dancehall revolution that was northern soul. Elliot James 
Langridge is a winning presence as John, who rejects teacher Steve Coogan’s 
sneery values to bond with new mate Matt (Josh Whitehouse) over dreams of a 
vinyl-buying trip to the US. It’s a bit flimsy, but the sweaty dancing and 
marvellous music are a pure joy.

And Now For Something Completely Different (Ian MacNaughton, 1972) 12.05am, 
BBC2

The Monty Python’s Flying Circus team’s first big-screen guffaw is a rerun of 
some of their famous TV sketches. The anarchic battiness of these early 
sketches doesn’t quite hold up; the later efforts, in which the Pythons 
harnessed humour into a mock-historical context, were more successful. But it’s 
fun to see Cleese, Palin, Idle and all in the loopy pomp of their youth.

Sport


World Darts Championship 1pm, Sky Sports 1 

The afternoon session on day nine of the event.

Premiership Rugby Union: Northampton v Sale Sharks 7pm, BT Sport 1 

Coverage of the match from the 11th round of fixtures.

Scottish Premiership Football: Motherwell v Aberdeen 7.30pm, BT Sport 2 

The top-flight encounter from Fir Park (kick-off 7.45pm).
 