

On 26 September, staff with the Atlanta Botanical Garden 
<http://atlantabg.org/> found a frog dead in his enclosure. The frog had big 
brown eyes, massive feet with thick webs between the toes, and brownish skin 
speckled with little yellow dots. His name was Toughie. He was big for a frog 
and he didn’t like it when humanshandled 
<http://www.usatoday.com/media/cinematic/video/2580713/toughie-is-last-of-his-species-of-tree-frog/>
 him. He’d lived a long time: 12 years.

And he was the last of his kind. 

On 26 September 2016, the world very likely lost Rabbs’ fringe-limbed treefrog 
(Ecnomiohyla rabborum) to extinction. The species, only discovered by 
scientists in 2005, lived inPanama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> 
before it was wiped out in the wild by habitat destruction and the amphibian 
disease, chytridiomycosis. The last one was heard calling in the wild in 2007. 
But before this, a small number of Rabbs’ fringe-limbed treefrog had been taken 
into zoological facilities for captive breeding. Unfortunately, the attempt 
failed. Toughie was the last to die.

Despite the fact that we can actually trace the extinction of Rabbs’ 
fringe-limbed treefrog to an exact date, it occurred with very little media 
interest. Sure, the species’ demise was covered by many standard science media 
sites, such asScientific American 
<http://www.usatoday.com/media/cinematic/video/2580713/toughie-is-last-of-his-species-of-tree-frog/>
,National Geographic 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/09/toughie-rabbs-fringe-limbed-tree-frog-dies-goes-extinct/>
, andMongabay 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/10/rabbs-fringe-limbed-tree-frog-now-presumed-to-be-extinct/>
.

But the list of what media outlets thought the story not interesting enough is 
perhaps more notable, including the BBC, the Sun, and CNN. Even this outlet, 
the Guardian, did not devote a full article to the extinction.

Many news sites simply reprinted the Associated Press’s story, which spilled 
264 words on the extinction of Rabbs’ fringe-limbed treefrog (in contrast, the 
AP wrote three times as many words, 798, on Taylor Swift’s concert at Formula 
One). The New York Times at first only carried the AP article, though it later 
published a beautifulop-ed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/opinion/a-frog-dies-in-atlanta-and-a-world-vanishes-with-it.html?smid=tw-nytopinion&smtyp=cur>
 by one of the researchers.

How humans are driving the sixth mass extinction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/oct/20/the-four-horsemen-of-the-sixth-mass-extinction>
Still, I waited a little while to see if news coverage would pick up as the 
story trickled out – it didn’t.

A week after the extinction, I gave a presentation to a local herpetological 
society, ie devoted to amphibians and reptiles. When I brought up the recent 
demise of Rabbs’ fringe-limbed treefrog, there were audible gasps in the room. 
Even herp lovers hadn’t heard of it.

This begs the question: how could the public care about global mass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
 if they aren’t even told about its victims? How can we care if we don’t grieve?


Scientists have repeatedly warned that if we don’t change our ways we could 
see amass extinction event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/oct/20/the-four-horsemen-of-the-sixth-mass-extinction>
 with potentially hundreds of thousands, even millions, of species wiped out by 
human actions.


The impact – and scale – is impossible to imagine. The last time the Earth 
suffered such a mass extinction event was when an asteroid slammed into it, 
killing off all the non-avian dinosaurs. We didn’t show up for another 64m 
years.

Despite this, most media outlets chose to ignore a story that could not only 
inform readers of the loss of one distinct species, but also connect them to a 
global crisis that rarely makes its way on to the front page – or any page for 
that matter.

I don’t know why so many outlets ignored the story – but it may be because the 
species that went extinct was a frog and not a big mammal like the baiji (which 
also didn’t get thecoverage 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2007/04/the-news-of-extinction-western-medias-response-to-the-demise-of-the-baiji/>
 it deserved when it vanished, but got plenty more than Toughie’s species).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frabbs-fringe-limbed-treefrog-frog-amphibians-extinct-extinction-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29becb2af588e2dd9bfbf8c6a5b462ab6045b867%2F0_108_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frog%20goes%20extinct%2C%20media%20yawns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frabbs-fringe-limbed-treefrog-frog-amphibians-extinct-extinction-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frog%20goes%20extinct%2C%20media%20yawns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frabbs-fringe-limbed-treefrog-frog-amphibians-extinct-extinction-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29becb2af588e2dd9bfbf8c6a5b462ab6045b867%2F0_108_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 The golden toad, another victim of our current biodiversity crisis, was last 
seen in 1989. Photograph: Conservation International/PA 
Still, Rabbs’ fringe-limbed treefrog was truly amazing. Living in the canopies 
of Panama’s cloud forests, this species glided through the air via the webbing 
connecting it toes. Scientists also believe that it was the only frog species 
to feed its tadpoles by allowing them to nibble at the skin of adults.

If a frog such as this is not noteworthy, what does that mean for the 
reptiles, fungi, plants, insects or fish that vanish? What does that say about 
any species that doesn’t grip the public’s imagination – are they somehow 
lesser for not having evolved (or vice versa) to be easily loved by us?

Amphibians are the canary in the coalmine for our current biodiversity crisis. 
Having been around for 370m years, amphibians make dinosaurs look babyish. But 
experts believe we may have lost more than 150 species in the last few decades 
alone, many of them to chytridiomycosis. On top of this amphibian plague, 
amphibians are being hard hit by deforestation, habitat loss, pollution, 
pesticides, the illegal wildlife trade for pets and even consumption and yes, 
of course,climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/jan/06/-paris-agreement-biodiversity-coral-reefs-forests>
 (which may beexacerbating 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-19199197> the stunning death tolls 
of chytridiomycosis).

Unfortunately, Toughie will not be the last frog to vanish or the last 
species. How many more will depend on us. But it’s hard to imagine anything 
changing when a story like Toughie’s is so easily swept aside. We can’t care 
about what we don’t know.

 