
A profoundly depressing FA Cup tie which was halted by Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> fans for 25 minutes and ended 
with a frightening riot, produced a rather tame victory for Luton at Kenilworth 
Road last night.

A first-half goal by Brian Stein, proved enough to secure a place in the 
semi-finals against the holders, Everton, at Villa Park on April 13. Persistent 
attempts by Millwall fans to invade the pitch in the closing minutes were 
foiled by the police.

However, it was a night in which football died a slow death, with both teams 
clearly intimidated by the volatile atmosphere. At the final whistle the mob of 
Millwall fans ripped up a large area of seating in the Bobbersâ€™ Stand and then 
attacked the police who were forced to draw truncheons in self-defence.

At one stage scores of police officers had to flee for their safety down the 
pitch towards the Kenilworth Road stand with an ugly rampaging mob of Millwall 
fans in hot pursuit. But the beleaguered officers managed to regroup, mustering 
sufficient organisation to counter-attack and drive the fans back to the 
terraces. Many policemen were struck by flying missiles, mainly dismembered 
seats.

It was hardly surprising that football took a back seat with the constant 
threat of a pitch-invasion during the game. When play was halted after 15 
minutes the police showed admirable calm, making shrewd use of their Alsatian 
dogs to subdue a series of vicious scuffles at the front of the main stand. 
Over-reaction at that stage would probably have caused a full-scale riot and 
led to the game being abandoned.
The referee David Hutchinson had no option but to lead both teams from the 
pitch while the police struggled to restore order. Once the hundreds of fans 
had been despatched back to the terraces and stands the referee appealed to 
them over the public-address system to allow the game to continue without 
further interruption.


Sadly, there was so little rhythm or sense of continuity in what had become a 
macabre exercise that the players could have been forgiven for deciding to 
stage the tie at a later date. Ironically, the Millwall team seemed completely 
overawed by the behaviour of their own supporters who heavily outnumbered the 
Luton fans and not surprisingly, created a deafening volume of noise.

This is an edited extract, read on here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/3/12/1426177810511/Guardian-14-March-1985-001.jpg>

 