
Rebecca by Daphne du Maurier

“Confidence is a quality I prize, although it has come to me a little late in 
the day,” writesRebecca’s narrator, Mrs de Winter. “I suppose it is his 
dependence upon me that has made me bold at last. At any rate I have lost my 
diffidence, my timidity, my shyness with strangers. I am very different from 
that self who drove to Manderley for the first time ... handicapped by a rather 
desperate gaucherie and filled with an intense desire to please.” Rather like
Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte>’s Jane 
Eyre, Mrs de Winter wins her confidence when she tames a wild husband. Unlike 
Jane, she never gets a first name.

Great Expectations by Charles Dickens

It is not just women in fiction who are beaten into submission by life and 
their families. Pip’s sister’s husband, Joe Gargery, inGreat Expectations, is 
“a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easygoing, foolish, dear fellow – a sort 
of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness”. This put-upon, gentle man is 
reminiscent of Quoyle in Annie Proulx’sThe Shipping News: “a great damp loaf of 
a body … As a child he developed stratagems to deflect stares; a smile, 
downcast gaze, the right hand darting up to cover the chin.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd471aab2bd4496f8c0574eb85049b4cb41e24ffa%2F141_0_1845_1107%2F1845.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Roald%20Dahl%20to%20Harper%20Lee%2C%20six%20books%20for%20shy%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Roald%20Dahl%20to%20Harper%20Lee%2C%20six%20books%20for%20shy%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd471aab2bd4496f8c0574eb85049b4cb41e24ffa%2F141_0_1845_1107%2F1845.jpg>
 Echoing common feelings of awkwardness … Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka in Charlie 
and the Chocolate Factory. Photograph: Warner Bros 
Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen

Austen’s Mr Darcy embodies a particular sort of shy person: one so stricken by 
social anxiety that he ends up coming across as arrogant. He snubs Elizabeth at 
the Meryton ball, because dancing embarrasses him. His first marriage proposal 
is excruciating: “In vain have I struggled. It will not do …” A contemporary 
equivalent is Douglas Peterson in David Nicholls’Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/01/us-david-nicholls-review-fiction>
: a good man whose stuttering inability to say the right thing makes him 
slightly unbearable.

Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl

Roald Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> was a master of 
writing characters for children who echoed common feelings of shyness and 
awkwardness: Charlie inCharlie and the Chocolate Factory; Miss Honey in Matilda
; even, sometimes, the BFG … Novels set in childhood are perfect arenas in 
which to explore shyness and, usually, how it can be overcome. For older teens 
and young adults, there is Lee Fiora, who contends bravely with boarding school 
in Curtis Sittenfeld’sPrep; and Little Women’s Beth March, whose shyness tends 
more towards being a moral trait that defines an entire life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8e95831afd26a3f738544de3f0f5243841b59b%2F0_0_1600_1040%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Roald%20Dahl%20to%20Harper%20Lee%2C%20six%20books%20for%20shy%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Roald%20Dahl%20to%20Harper%20Lee%2C%20six%20books%20for%20shy%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Froald-dahl-harper-lee-six-books-shy-readers-austen-dickens-du-maurier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8e95831afd26a3f738544de3f0f5243841b59b%2F0_0_1600_1040%2F1600.jpg>
 Robert Duvall as Boo Radley in To Kill a Mockingbird 
To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee

Shyness as a self-fulfilling prophecy is portrayed with great tenderness in 
the character of Boo Radley, “an unknown entity the mere description of whom 
was enough to make us behave for days on end”. His fear makes him hide, which 
makes the neighbourhood children fear him. A similar affliction befalls 
Christopher John Francis Boone in Mark Haddon’sThe Curious Incident of the Dog 
in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/15/fiction.markhaddon>, whose 
shyness stems from a real fear of loud noises and crowded places. For him, 
conquering his fears is more than a matter of just putting on a front.

Maurice by EM Forster

Some characters are timid for a reason. Maurice, in Forster’s novel, written 
in 1913-14, hides himself because he has to, but the book is a brave one. “A 
happy ending was imperative,” wrote Forster. “I was determined that in fiction 
anyway two men should fall in love and remain in it for the ever and ever that 
fiction allows …” In The Perks of Being a Wallflower by Stephen Chbosky, 
Charlie knows that he’s a “freak”: “I’m the one who beat up Sean and couldn’t 
stop crying after he did it. I guess I’m pretty emotional.” Much later, the 
reader learns why.
 