
Despite having the results of physical brutality in front of our eyes, when it 
comes to violence against women, seeing, sadly, is still not believing.

On Monday, adult film actress Christy Mack took to Twitter and posted pictures 
of herself <https://twitter.com/ChristyMack/status/498937852382965761/photo/1> 
bruised and battered – allegedly the result of a beating that she said she 
received from her ex-boyfriend, Jon Koppenhaver, a mixed martial arts fighter 
who goes by the name War Machine. Along with the pictures, she tweetedher 
account of the attack 
<http://jezebel.com/christy-mack-releases-statement-photos-following-attac-1619896390>
, writing that Koppenhaver beat her, forced her to undress and shower in front 
of him, threatened to rape her (but couldn’t get aroused), chopped off her hair 
with a knife, and stabbed her. Mack says her injuries include 18 broken bones, 
various lesions and missing teeth.

Koppenhaver is under investigation by Las Vegas police in connection to the 
beating 
<http://www.reviewjournal.com/news/las-vegas/police-seek-mma-fighter-battery-case>
, but has posted a “defense” of himself on Twitter (where his bio reads simply: 
“I do Alpha Male shit”). Koppenhaver claims in his tweets that he went to 
Mack’s house intending to propose but found her there with another man.“I’m not 
a bad guy,” he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/WarMachine170/status/498676636196552704>. In response, 
some fans offered words of encouragement, saying“everyone deserves fair 
treatment” <https://twitter.com/AndrewEscobear/status/498828618391252994>, and 
that“we don’t know all the facts 
<https://twitter.com/ev777ev/status/498965582134272001>”. Others suggested that 
it was actually Koppenhaverwho was attacked 
<https://twitter.com/KenPavia/statuses/498601551225946113>.

Mack is not the first reasonably well-known woman to use social media in this 
manner.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are laying bare 
the violence done to them using the best technology they have at their 
disposal: social media.

But in the 1980s, the biggest technological breakthrough for survivors of 
domestic violence was the instant camera. Esta Soler, founder of Futures 
Without Violence, saidin her 2013 TEDWomen talk 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/esta_soler_how_we_turned_the_tide_on_domestic_violence_hint_the_polaroid_helped/transcript>
 that after activists would go to the emergency room for what the police called 
“a lovers’ quarrel,” they would “take our Polaroid camera, we would take her 
picture, we would wait 90 seconds, and we would give her the photograph.”

“And she would then have the evidence she needed to go to court. We were 
making what was invisible visible.”

Decades after the Polaroid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/polaroid>
, domestic violence victims have proof for the world (and, perhaps later, for 
the courts):this is still happening.

But sometimes the internet shines a harsh spotlight on domestic violence even 
when victims don’t want the world to know the specifics (or that it happened at 
all). Last month, after Baltimore Ravens player Ray Riceknocked his wife 
unconscious 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/sports/ravens/ravens-insider/bs-sp-ray-rice-pretrial-program-20140520,0,90587.story>
, avideo of him 
<http://deadspin.com/heres-ray-rice-dragging-his-unconscious-fiancee-out-of-1525926834/1526306217/+samer>
 dragging her limp body out of an elevator went viral.Last year 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/nigella-lawson-photos-see-shocking-1955564>
, pictures of celebrity chef and authorNigella Lawson distressed, her husband 
Charles Saatchi’s hands around her neck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/21/charles-saatchi-nigella-lawson-photographs>
, hit the web. And, of course, no one could ever forget the leaked 2009 images 
of singer Rihanna’s beaten face after she wasattacked by then-boyfriend Chris 
Brown 
<http://www.thesmokinggun.com/documents/crime/lapd-details-rihanna-beating>.

But even those stark images weren’t enough for the world to rally behind these 
victims. Rice wassuspended <http://time.com/3030545/ray-rice-suspended-nfl/> 
for two games and settled charges with no jail time. During a press conference, 
the Ravenstweeted out <https://twitter.com/Ravens/statuses/469918292061061120> 
that Rice’s wife Janay, “deeply regrets the role that she played the night of 
the incident”. Saatchiaccepted a police caution for assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/18/charles-saatch-caution-nigella-lawson>
, and the media – including one Australian DJ whodemanded 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2343150/Australian-DJ-provokes-outrage-implying-people-boycott-Nigella-Lawsons-books-stands-husband-Saatchi-following-throttle-pictures.html>
 that Lawson make a stand on domestic violence – followed victim-blaming suit. 
(There was even aSaatchi-like statue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/jul/03/charles-saatchi-nigella-lawson-throttling-art-normalises-violence-women>
 in a London gallery with which the public was encouraged to take pictures of 
themselves “being strangled”.) Brown – whosettled for community service in his 
case 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/lanow/2009/06/settlement-might-be-near-in-chris-brown-case.html>
 – was widely forgiven by fans and music industry folks alike – anda study of 
Boston teens 
<http://www.feministe.us/blog/archives/2009/03/14/more-chris-rihanna-this-time-with-extra-victim-blaming/>
 showed that nearly half of them thought Rihanna was responsible for the 
physical abuse.

How is it that we don’t believe women, even when there is a preponderance of 
horrifying proof?

Ruth Glenn, the interim Executive Director of the National Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence <http://www.ncadv.org/> tells me that while victim-blaming 
has been around for a long time, we’re seeing it “exposed in its rawest form” 
online.

“There’s so much anonymity in social media, so people can say what they really 
feel.”

As to the safety of victims posting their stories online, Glenn says that’s a 
matter of each individual case – and no one knows a woman’s danger level better 
than the women themselves. “Victims have a right to do what they want, and what 
they’ve assessed to be able make them safe,” she says.

But survivors of domestic violence coming forward and using technology to tell 
their stories will only be safe, and their tactics effective, if we – the 
viewers – believe them. We have to, as a society and as individuals, stop 
protecting abusers and believing their protestations out of hand simply because 
they’re famous, or charming – or because we’ve decided their victims aren’t 
sympathetic enough (as though anyone could be). It’s time to stop making 
excuses. Victims are showing us their truth, if we’re willing to open our eyes.

• This article was amended on 14 August 2014 to clarify that the Australian DJ 
used the word ‘fearful’ in a different context than initially written. The 
Guardian regrets the error.
 