
Following a week in which Jimmy Armfield celebrated his 80th birthday and 
Francesco Totti scoredhis 300th goal for Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/21/as-roman-as-whatever-it-is-romans-do-when-in-rome>
, it seems as good a time as any to acknowledge the increasingly rare breed of 
professional that is the one-club footballer. It is an occasion to salute their 
unwavering commitment, unconditional loyalty and relentless indefatigability. 
Or depending on your point of view and who happens to be under the microscope, 
their laziness, lack of motivation and understandable reluctance to undergo the 
tedium of moving house and the stress it entails.

These are accusations that were often and unfairly levelled at Matthew Le 
Tissier, who was content to spend a distinguished playing career atSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>, untroubled by the many 
trophy presentations his somewhat misguided critics seemed to think it would 
have been his duty to endure if he hadn’t finally thought better of it and 
pulled out of that famous nearly-move to Spurs.

The one-club man. That player who begins and ends his career with a single 
team, becoming as much a part of the stadium furniture as the turnstiles, 
scoreboard and that possibly as yet non-commissioned bronze statue honouring 
his devotion to the cause. A constant, reassuring presence in a money-driven 
football soap opera that boasts an ever-changing cast of often indifferent 
characters who just happen to be passing through, these stalwarts help fans 
maintain the illusion that wearing a replica shirt and supporting those who 
play in the real thing does not necessarily have to feel, as the comedian Jerry 
Seinfeld memorably put it “like you’re actually just rooting for the clothes”.

Ryan Giggs <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ryan-giggs> is a classic 
example of the genre, with Manchester United’s most decorated player having 
made 963 appearances for the club in a playing career spanning 24 seasons 
before taking up a coaching role. He is to be lauded for his loyal service, as 
are men such as Paolo Maldini, Jamie Carragher and more vintage versions such 
as Stan Cullis and Nat Lofthouse. The anti-Adebayors, they generally go about 
their business diligently and without fuss. Think Paul Scholes blithely 
renewing contract after contract in the Old Trafford boardroom with similar 
levels of fuss and fanfare one might expect him to accompany the inking of his 
scrawl on a young fan’s shirt or autograph book. Who couldn’t love Tony 
Hibbert, still diligently shuttling a few yards left and right for Everton 
after more than 15 years?

One of football’s true gentlemen, Armfield played on 626 occasions for 
Blackpool without ever winning a medal. At the unveiling of his bronze outside 
Bloomfield Road, where a stand is also named in his honour, the former England 
right-back was humility personified. “I must be honest, I will be very proud to 
see it as I am with the stand, asBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> is my team and my town,” he 
said. “It is nice to think that anything I have done has been appreciated. All 
people like to think that.” They don’t and Jimmy almost certainly knows it, 
just as he was far too polite to say.

Still playing despite celebrating his 39th birthday on Sunday, Totti’s 
reaction to his 300th goal in 23 seasons as a Roma player was 
uncharacteristically low key for a man fabled for the choreography of his 
celebrations in the immediate aftermath of several landmark goals. Rather than 
emulate previous high jinks such as commandeering a television camera to pan 
across the exultant faces of his public or producing a mobile topose for a 
selfie in front of Roma’s Curva Sud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/francesco-totti-selfie-roma-lazio-serie-a-blog>
, the forward simply walked rather glumly to the centre circle holding three 
fingers aloft.

“I don’t know if it is melancholy because it is a time in which he is not 
playing very much,” said a former coach, Marcello Lippi. “Or maybe he is 
starting to realise that he is approaching the end of his fantastic career.” 
Whatever the cause of hisennui, Totti’s allegiance to the Giallorossi cause 
ought to ensure he will forever be as iconic a Roman institution as the 
Colosseum and Sistine Chapel. Like these iconic landmarks, he and his one-club 
ilk are increasingly viewed with admiration as ancient relics of a time that 
was in some way better. To be admired while they still stand, because we are 
unlikely to see their like again.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fmatt-le-tissier-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422524058271%2Fcrop_KP_80990_640x480.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Le%20Tissier%3A%20'I've%20never%20drunk%20a%20pint%20of%20lager%20in%20my%20life'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fmatt-le-tissier-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Le%20Tissier%3A%20%27I%27ve%20never%20drunk%20a%20pint%20of%20lager%20in%20my%20life%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fmatt-le-tissier-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422524058271%2Fcrop_KP_80990_640x480.jpeg>
 Guardian Football meets … Matt Le Tissier. 
It’s not difficult to see why. Beyond the blindingly obvious observation that 
high-profile players who never move clubs are of little use to increasingly 
influential agents who tend to dictate the drum-beat to which modern football 
marches, the enormous wages commanded by such men means clubs are less inclined 
to keep ageing icons on the payroll unless they continue delivering on the 
field.

Long lauded as a one-club man, albeit rather comically in some quarters even 
after it was announced he was off elsewhere, Steven Gerrard has made it 
abundantly clear that he would have liked to finish the career he started at 
Liverpool if the club had made more of an effort to let it be known that they 
wanted him to stay. With his powers clearly on the wane and a more lucrative 
option to play out his dotage in the comparatively sedate environs of Major 
League Soccer up for grabs, the Liverpool captain was instead forced to make do 
with one of the most protracted and mawkish farewells in recent memory.

Ageing and with his powers similarly diminished, a tearful Iker Casillas was 
forced out of Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/iker-casillas-real-madrid-la-liga-porto>
 for more Machiavellian reasons. A player who began his Bernabéu career as a 
schoolboy plucked from the classroom mid-lesson for his debut, ended it as a 
grown man crying salty tears in front of journalists with not a single Real 
official present to wish him well on his way out of an institution he had no 
desire to leave. Such is the way of the modern game; small wonder the one-club 
breed is approaching extinction.
 