
It is written like a school report – “could try harder” – although the phrase 
that recurs through theUK Climate Change Assessment 
<https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/> released 
last week is “more action needed”. Subjects like flooding and soil loss need 
“new stronger or different government policies” to deal with them.

UK poorly prepared for climate change impacts, government advisers warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
But that is not all. There are a significant number of new problems being 
caused by the already-changing weather patterns and warming climate that are 
“research priorities” because no one yet knows enough about them to form a 
response. Among these are risks to food supply and some forest trees dying from 
drought and heat.

A major problem for an island with large stretches of populated coastline is 
ever-faster sea level rise. The general belief is that the problems of the 
south-east are potentially worse because the land is sinking but it seems the 
north is not in the clear, either.

Waves do the most damage to coastal defences, so during a high tide on an 
exposed coast their size matters. Mathematicians from Strathclyde University 
have just calculated the effect onScottish North Sea coasts 
<http://www.alphagalileo.org/ViewItem.aspx?ItemId=165935&CultureCode=en>, on 
communities like Aberdeen, of a combination of spring tides, strong winds and 
high waves. Examining just three storms in 2010 they took into account locally 
produced waves, swell from distant storms, and tidal currents.

Climate change 'will wreak havoc on Britain's coastline by 2050'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/06/climate-change-coastline-joseph-rowntree>
The research showed that as these three interacted they could either reduce 
wave height or increase it by two metres. So depending on the circumstances, 
with locally-generated waves already 3.5m high and storm swell waves from the 
Norwegian Sea up to 5m, local communities could in the future face a severe 
battering.





 