
Last weekend, because I am a masochist, I read an interview with Ella Mills 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4098184/The-dirty-truth-clean-eating-Queen-Green-Deliciously-Ella-shot-fame-ditching-meat-dairy-sugar-distances-health-fanatics-saying-fad-complex.html>
, nee Woodward, aka Deliciously Ella, the figurehead of the clean-eating 
movement.I’ve been writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>
about the bread-phobic brigade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/11/hadley-freeman-dont-blame-the-wellness-fad-for-anorexia>
 for a few years now (like I said, I’m a masochist), and I check in with them 
occasionally to see how, exactly, they’re stretching their glamorisation of 
disordered eating yet further. Yet on reading this latest dispatch, I had an 
unexpected epiphany: Deliciously Ella is the precursor to Donald Trump. A 
sylph-like, wildly privileged girl from west London looks a little less 
aspirational when you realise she’s from the same mould as a race-baiting Oompa 
Loompa with a Weetabix (gluten!) on his head, doesn’t she?

And it’s not just Deliciously Ella. Like John Cusack in Being John Malkovich, 
I suddenly see the face of my man everywhere. I am finally realising that so 
many of the things that have frustrated me, that I have been trying to 
understand over the past year, come under one umbrella: the umbrella of 
bullshit.

In 2005, the philosopher Harry G Frankfurt wrote an essay called On Bullshit 
<https://www.stoa.org.uk/topics/bullshit/pdf/on-bullshit.pdf>. (It will always 
please me that Harry G Frankfurt is exactly the sort of name a bullshitting 
philosopher would have in a Marx brothers movie.) Lies and bullshit are both 
about deception, Frankfurt wrote; but while lying is a conscious act of 
obscuring the truth, bullshitting has no interest at all in the truth, “An 
indifference to how things really are,” is the way Frankfurt puts it.

Related: Green is the new black: the unstoppable rise of the healthy-eating 
guru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>

Which brings me to the connection between Deliciously Ella and Donald Trump. 
In her latest incarnation, Mills professes herself shocked that some of her 
followers have “taken healthy eating to extremes” and insists she “can’t take 
responsibility”. Then, in the next breath, she talks enthusiastically about 
how, for Christmas dinner, she ate just carrots and brussels sprouts. She says 
she doesn’t believe that food should be classified as either good or bad. So, 
as the righteous food bloggerThe Angry Chef has noted 
<http://angry-chef.com/blog/clean-eating-is-dead>, it must be a different Ella 
whoon her own website <http://www.good-looks-ca.com/philosophy/faqs/index.html> 
writes that “to really thrive”, you should say goodbye to dairy and gluten.

Meanwhile, Trump has been furiously insisting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>
 that, contrary to what Meryl Streep (“the most overrated actress in 
Hollywood”) said at the Golden Globes, he “never mocked a disabled reporter”, 
even though there is widely circulatedTV footage of him doing just that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video>
. Trump has also insisted he can’t possibly take responsibility for the number 
of racists who have supported him or committed crimes in his name, having 
apparently forgotten about the timeshe made racist remarks himself 
<http://fusion.net/story/312578/trump-curiel-definitely-about-mexican-heritage/>
. The president-elect is interested only in his own self-promotion; he is not 
lying, because for him an objective truth isn’t even a consideration – he is 
bullshitting.

Related: Grief comes in five stages. But when it comes to Trump, I can’t get 
past anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/grief-five-stages-trump-cant-get-past-anger>

The denigration of experts, as I wrote last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/two-weeks-till-trump-takes-office-time-for-plan-hadley-freeman>
, is an essential component to this bullshitting culture, because expertise 
provides a bulwark against nonsense. Food writer Bee Wilsonrecently described 
<https://www.the-pool.com/food-home/food-honestly/2016/42/bee-wilson-on-clean-eating>
 how she and a registered dietician, Renee McGregor, were jeered by several 
hundred people at the Cheltenham Literary festival when they dared point out 
some of the flaws in clean-eating cook Madeleine Shaw’s thinking (coconut sugar 
is still sugar). When the leading lights of the Brexit movement are called out 
on their lies and lack of preparedness, they cry “elitism” andpose in front of 
a gold door with a billionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-nigel-farage-picture-trump-tower>
.

We live in a blog culture where it’s pitched as a triumph of democracy that 
everyone can claim authority, which means anyone who says that, actually, there 
is an objective truth is condemned. Feelings rather than facts are what matter, 
these purveyors of bullshit claim, and the success of this, as Tom Nichols 
writesin his upcoming book The Death Of Expertise 
<http://thefederalist.com/2014/01/17/the-death-of-expertise/#.WG8bb8G6j2F.twitter>
, represents “the full flowering of a therapeutic culture where self-esteem, 
not achievement, is the ultimate human value, and it’s making us all dumber by 
the day”.

Nothing proves this more starkly than the way celebrities have filled the 
vacuum where experts used to be, because who appears to have more self-esteem 
than a celebrity? And so people with popular Instagram accounts are trusted 
over registered dieticians, panel-show politicians such as Nigel Farage and 
Boris Johnson are validated, and a reality TV star is elected president. Yet, 
as Trump proves daily, few people have more fragile self-esteem. And what do 
you get once their facade is proven to be false? Just bullshit. That’s gross in 
a cookbook, but genuinely terrifying in politics.
 