
“I did it to make things more exciting, more emotional,” Carlos Castro said, 
and he had too. From suicide in Mieres to resurrection in the Molinón in 160 
seconds, unable to believe what had happened the first time and unable to 
believe what had happened the second time either. No one expected redemption 
and certainly not this quickly. One moment theSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> forward stood alone and 
lost, the next he lay buried under a pile of bodies while 24,861 supporters 
erupted in celebration around him. On the touchline his manager thumped 
furiously at his heart with his fist. Abelardo Fernández was celebrating, but 
he could just as well have been trying to get the bloody thing going again. It 
had been that kind of day.

Gianluigi Buffon humble as clean sheet record tumbles, but delight not 
universal | Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/21/gianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi>
That kind of season, in fact. And it was as if it all came together on 
Saturday afternoon, concentrated in both a few minutes and one man. Down in the 
relegation zone at the weekend’s start, level with bottom-placed Levante, three 
points from safety, without a win in eight, beaten four times running, Sporting 
Gijón had managed to get a 79th-minute equaliser againstAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid>. Seven minutes later, it 
happened. Arnaldo Sanabria chased a ball up the left, reaching it just before 
it went out of play. As he got there, Atlético’s Uruguayan central defender 
José María Giménez pulled up alongside him, grabbing the hamstring that he had 
torn on route, and so, suddenly, Sanabria was clear. This was it.

Sanabria raced into the area and as Jan Oblak came towards him he played a 
pass across to Castro. Six yards out, no one in the way, just him and the net 
and all those cheering supporters, all he had to do was nudge the ball. Which 
he did … up and back off the bar.

“I wanted to die,” Castro said afterwards, and no wonder. It was the worst 
miss of the season; not just because of how incredibly bad it was – and he 
admitted that although the ball bounced up a bit, it was “easy” to score – but 
because of what it meant. And what it meant was everything: for Sporting, in 
crisis off the pitch, prevented from making signings because of their debts, in 
desperate need of the money thatprimera generates, survival really might mean 
survival.

“If we hadn’t got promoted last season we could be playing at Las Callejas 
[home of CD Lealtad in the regional Second Division B], rather than the 
Bernabéu,” Abelardo had said. When he went on a long rant a fortnight ago, 
talking about the club’s 111-year history and the “Guajes” [Asturian for kids] 
destroyed and crying in the dressing room, he insisted: “We’re playing for our 
lives, for our existence.” Rescuing the team means rescuing the club, so the 
chance was huge; it was also the kind of chance you might get once if you were 
lucky but you don’t get again. Atlético, after all, have the league’s best away 
record, had lost from a winning position only once and had conceded more then 
one on just two occasions in the league – each time against Barcelona, the club 
that was alone responsible for a third of the goals Atlético had conceded all 
year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLHkwbvfuYw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLHkwbvfuYw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpLHkwbvfuYw&media=>
Yep, Castro had wasted the kind of chance that doesn’t come back, alright. Not 
against this lot; not when you’re down at the bottom; not when there are only 
four minutes left. But then, amazingly, it did. Another attack, Jony Rodríguez 
providing the pass this time, and there he was in exactly the same place: 
right-of-centre, six yards out, an open goal. The clock had shown 85.56 when 
the ball hit the bar; when it hit the net, the clock showed 88.36. Castro and 
his team were resurrected. Up in the stands, they went wild; under the bodies 
Castro looked blank, eyes a little glazed, as if he was still in shock. Over on 
the touchline, Abelardo looked like he was going to cry.

“When he missed the first one I thought to myself: ‘Poor thing, if we don’t 
get the second …’,” Abelardo said afterwards. “If we hadn’t won, he might have 
gone back to Ujo [his birthplace in Mieres] and turned to suicide.”

Castro had much the same idea. “If I hadn’t scored the second, I would have 
turned to suicide” he said. By then, he could afford to say that; he could 
afford to laugh, too. As could Pichu Cuéllar, the Sporting goalkeeper: “We knew 
that Castro would sort it out; he’s not the kind of person to do things by 
halves,” he said. He is the kind of person,though, to tweet 
<https://twitter.com/carlos9castro/status/711238402738413568>: “Relax, 
Sportinguistas, I did it to make things more exciting, more emotional.”

Relax? Hardly. But this was a huge moment and a huge win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
. It was also a deserved one. “We’ve won for once so I am going to say it is 
not about their flaws but our merit. We hit the post twice against a team that 
has only conceded 12 all season and one of the best teams in Europe didn’t get 
past the halfway line,” Abelardo insisted. He would say that, of course, but 
others said similar things, even if there was no escaping the part played by 
Atlético’s fatigueafter 120 Champions League minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/atletico-madrid-psv-eindhoven-champions-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday night. “There are no excuses; Sporting dominated us,” Saúl 
admitted. “Sporting played well,” Simeone added. “We couldn’t escape the 
pressure they put on us.”

Atlético Madrid trip up in title race after Sporting Gijón fight back to win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Atlético had opened the scoring with a superb Antoine Griezmann free-kick on 
the half-hour, at a timewhen literally nothing had happened 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/711852092672049152>, and when that happens 
against Atlético it tends to be the end of it. But the home side responded. 
Abelardo particularly. On went Castro, on went Carlos Carmona and into a deeper 
midfield position went Nacho Cases, who had started for the first time in 10 
games.

Or, as Patricia Cazón put it in AS, beating the metaphor into submission: 
“Abelardo had spent the whole week locked in his lab, wearing an alchemist’s 
coat, looking for the formula to give his team oxygen. He knew what the 
principles were: high pressure would be mercury, quick transitions would be 
sulphur, and the left wing, Jony and Isma, would be salt. In the first 25 
minutes, the mix worked until an unexpected element appeared: Griezmann … he 
thought about what he had on the bench to change the formula … He put in 
Castro, he put in Carmona andvoila, the formula worked at last. The game went 
from lead to gold.”

Sporting were the better side in the second half but mostly their metal base 
turned to gold in the final frantic 15 minutes when everything seemed to come 
in twos: when players turned to the fans and gestured for them to shout and 
fans shouted back, when the volume rose until it exploded. One free-kick hit 
the post; two minutes later another from a very similar position flew into the 
net to make it 1-1, scored by Sanabria. Then that chance for Castro hit the bar 
and two minutes after that, another one from exactly the same position went in, 
the relief releasing them all, a huge victory proving the start of an almost 
perfect weekend.

Las Palmas’s superb form continued as they won again to climb to a league 
position that suggests they will survive, perhaps even comfortably, but results 
mean that Sporting have gained two points on Getafe, Rayo and Granada, and gone 
three past Levante. With eight games to go, Levante are bottom, four points 
from salvation. Above them, there are four teams within a point of each other – 
Sporting (27), Getafe (28), Granada (28) and Rayo (28) – with a gap to Las 
Palmas (33), Valencia (34) and Betis (34). Sporting are not safe, but nor are 
they sunk. And before this weekend, without a win in eight, having endured four 
defeats in a row, they felt like they were.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
16 Rayo Vallecano 30 -22 28 
17 Granada 30 -24 28 
18 Getafe 30 -24 28 
19 Sporting Gijon 30 -20 27 
20 Levante 30 -26 24 
Sporting have always known that survival would be hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/24/sporting-gijon-real-madrid-miraculous-la-liga-return>
, that even being here is overachieving, but recently the talk has been of a 
team who were just not good enough and that pessimism had permeated the 
players. Some had even come to feel uneasy at the way the discourse from their 
manager, which had been born of what he saw as injustice and an attempt to 
apply pressure and make a “Bombonera” of the Molinón, served almost to dismiss 
them. There were hints of fault lines opening and signs that belief might ebb 
away; already was, in fact. On Saturday, it returned. But not before that miss 
seemed to have taken it from them for good.

“Their heart beats strongly!” ran the headline in La Nueva España, its match 
report opening thus: “The great news is that Sporting are very much alive.” The 
points mattered; so, too, did the way in which they won them, the performance 
and the impact that this result could have, the seemingly inevitable slide into
segunda stopped, or at least slowed. “The morale boost is vital,” Jony said. “I 
don’t know what other jobs are like but when you win, football player is the 
loveliest job around,” Isma López smiled. “We needed a result like this,” 
Cuéllar admitted. Asked if fortune had smiled on them, he replied: “No, hard 
work has.”

The supporters responded too, the noise deafening. “We had to get the fans on 
our side,” Abelardo insisted. “And the Molinón rocked like never before.” Even 
the 1,000 or so Atlético fans joined in, singing: “Sporting belong inprimera!”

“Yes, we can!” chanted the Sporting fans.

They believe they can, too. “We’re still in the relegation zone but we’re 
closer to our target now; we’re in the fight,” Abelardo said. It won’t be easy 
and the next game, at Levante, is huge, while they also have to go away to Las 
Palmas and Getafe. But nor is it impossible any more. Not when they have done 
this, not when Simeone says: “they’re on the right path”, not when they can 
pass up a never‑to‑be‑repeated opportunity one minute only for it to be 
repeated two and a half minutes later. “We won’t know who survives and who 
doesn’t until the very end,” Sanabria said and he was right. But one thing’s 
for sure: it’s going to be emotional.

Talking points
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdown-and-out-resurrection-sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358172d4649e0de17ea0c782e3f5c0b66b7b6f1d%2F0_94_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20down%20and%20out%20to%20resurrection%3A%20how%20Sporting%20Gij%C3%B3n%20defied%20Atl%C3%A9tico%20Madrid%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdown-and-out-resurrection-sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20down%20and%20out%20to%20resurrection%3A%20how%20Sporting%20Gij%C3%B3n%20defied%20Atl%C3%A9tico%20Madrid%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdown-and-out-resurrection-sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358172d4649e0de17ea0c782e3f5c0b66b7b6f1d%2F0_94_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
 Gary Neville was booed by Valencia fans as his side were beaten 2-0 by Celta 
Vigo. Photograph: Maria Jose Segovia/Cordon Press/Corbis 
• “Neville, go now! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/valencia-gary-neville-celta-vigo-la-liga>
” sang Valencia fans after his team were defeated 2-0 by Celta thanks to two 
absolutely superb goals. And he probably will, too.Just not yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/gary-neville-england-valencia>
. [More to come on this later …]

• Speaking of tasty goals, Giuseppe Rossi’s for Levante was lovely. His team 
were unable to get a win, or even a point. An 85th-minute own goal from 
goalkeeper Mariño, the ball rebounding in off his back, gave Deportivo a 2-1 
victory – their first win this year.

Mestalla crowd turn on Gary Neville after Valencia lose to Celta Vigo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/valencia-gary-neville-celta-vigo-la-liga>
• “It’s easier to score for Athletic [like Aritz Aduriz] than it is for Eibar 
[like Borja Bastón], but we’re a small, little team and people don’t talk about 
us,” José Luis Mendilíbar said after Bastón joined Aduriz as the league’s 
top-scoring Spaniard with a classy backheel in the rain at Getafe on Friday 
night.

• “If we play like this we can do great things,” Zinedine Zidane said. The 
Champions League, in other words. Real Madrid were certainly impressive at times
as they defeated Sevilla 4-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/real-madrid-sevilla-la-liga-cristiano-ronaldo>
, with Karim Benzema returning to make sense of those around him. Madrid will 
be concerned by how many chances they are allowing – Keylor Navas was superb in 
goal for them again – but there were reasons for them to be cheerful. “Madrid 
win credibility,” said AS. There was a goal each for the BBC, including the 
strike that made Gareth Bale the all-time top-scoring Briton in La Liga. Not 
that he knew, until a friend texted to tell him.

Bale scored the third of the night to take him beyond Gary Lineker’s record of 
42 goals <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/711901468622757888> for 
Barcelona between 1986 and 1989. The Welshman has 15 league goals in 18 games 
this season and 43 in total since his world-record transfer to Real Madrid in 
the summer of 2013. He has racked up the goals even quicker than Lineker, 
having taken 76 games to reach 43, compared to the former England striker’s 42 
in 103, but there was no special celebration.

“I only just found out: my friend texted me,” Bale said afterwards. “It’s 
obviously nice to break records but as long as the team are winning and 
improving, that is the main thing.”

“Well played, Gareth Bale, really pleased for you,” Lineker tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/711658378469179393>. Bale had already 
overtaken the 33 league goals scored by John Aldridge in two years at Real 
Sociedad earlier in the season. He has also surpassed Steve Archibald, who 
scored 24 in 55 for Barcelona; Laurie Cunningham (16 in 74 for Real Madrid); 
and Alan Campbell who scored 15 in 63 games for Racing Santander. Michael Owen 
scored 13 in his solitary season at Madrid, while David Beckham got the same 
figure in 116 games.

• Barcelona were 2-0 up when Villarreal’s secret weapon entered the fray: 
Jérémy Mathieu.It finished 2-2 at the Madrigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/villarreal-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
 in a game that was as enjoyable as they usually are between these two teams. 
Albeit one that was also marked by some bizarre referring from a man who seemed 
to be on a bet to see how many decisions he could get wrong. (Presumably with 
the referee who then took charge at the Bernabéu a few hours later.)People 
aren’t really talking about Villarreal much 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/villarreal-top-la-liga-first-time-history>
, but they should be. Fourth place is almost certainly theirs now and in the 
Europa League, where Dortmund v Liverpool and Sevilla v Athletic are getting 
all the attention, they are genuine contenders. “We deserved to win clearly,” 
Marcelino said afterwards. “What these players have done deserves a lot of 
credit.” As for Barcelona, El Mundo Deportivo’s cover declared them “more 
leaders”, which they sort of are, despite dropping two points on Madrid, 
because they gained one on Atlético and they’re one game closer to the end. “A 
point more, a match less,” Luis Enrique says.

Results: Getafe 1-1 Eibar, Sporting 2-1 Atlético, Real Sociedad 0-1 Las 
Palmas, Granada 2-2 Rayo, Deportivo 2-1 Levante, Betis 0-1 Málaga, Espanyol 2-1 
Athletic, Villarreal 2-2 Barcelona, Valencia 0-2 Celta, Real Madrid 4-0 Sevilla.
 