
The end of Italian football is nigh. Or at least, that is how Claudio Lotito 
may view things. The Lazio owner had much to celebrate on Saturday night, his 
team taking another big stride toward the Champions League as they won 1-0 away 
to Sampdoria. But his joy will have been tempered by the news thatFrosinone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone> had secured their promotion to 
Serie A earlier in the same day.

To most observers, this was a footballing fairytale. Frosinone represent a 
town of 46,000 people, tucked in among the Ernici and Lepini mountain ranges 
just south of Rome. Their team, first founded in 1912 has never competed in
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. This time last 
year they were playing in the Lega Pro – Italy’s third-tier.

Lotito, though, takes a less romantic view. He made that much clear during a 
now-infamous phone call to Pino Iodice, a director at the Lega Pro club Ischia 
Isolaverde, whichwas published on the website of La Repubblica this February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/16/serie-a-unheralded-side-response-ban-from-elite>
. In among a broader discourse on Italian football’s power structures, and his 
own importance within them, Lotito stressed the damage that he felt would be 
done by having smaller clubs promoted to the top-flight.

Specifically, he referenced both Frosinone and Carpi – the latter representing 
a town of 70,000 people in Emilia-Romagna. The transcript ran as follows: “I 
said to [the Serie B president] Abodi: ‘Andrea, we need to change. If you bring 
me upCarpi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carpi> … One can come up … If 
you bring me teams who are not worth a fuck, in two or three years we will not 
have a lira left.’

“Because when I go to sell the TV rights – which brought in €1.2bn thanks to 
my skill, I managed to bring Sky and Mediaset together, in 10 years nobody had 
managed that – in three years, if we have Latina, Frosinone, who the fuck will 
buy the rights? They don’t even know that Frosinone exist.”

Carpi’s supporters responded with wit, presenting a banner at their next home 
game that read, “Lotito, il tuo calcio ci fa Skyfo 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Lotito,+il+tuo+calcio+ci+fa+Skyfo&biw=2066&bih=1244&tbm=isch&source=lnms&sa=X&ei=5L1ZVY2FNueM7Ab5koLwBA&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAg#imgrc=8PPdtQR77vrGxM%253A%3B8YiaiTcrO9Zm_M%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.ansa.it%252Fwebimages%252Fimg_700%252F2015%252F2%252F14%252F89d3c44c7ab38b715861028194baa703.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.calcionews24.com%252Fcurva-carpi-contro-lotito-il-tuo-calcio-fa-skyfo-427711.html%3B700%3B466>
”. They were telling the Lazio owner that his view of football disgusted them 
but intentionally misspelled the final word,schifo, in a nod to the 
broadcasters whose views he professed to represent.

Their team came up with an even better response, sealing promotion to the top 
flight at the end of last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/29/carpi-promotion-serie-a>. Two 
and a half weeks later, Frosinone have now joined them. As the latter club’s 
president, Maurizio Stirpe, remarked on Saturday evening: “Lotito is a great 
soothsayer. He saw it all coming.”

If the Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> owner was no doubt 
correct that Carpi and Frosinone – with average attendances of 2,991 and 5,087 
respectively – hold less appeal to broadcasters than rivals such as Bologna or 
Bari, then he might also have wanted to consider the positive example each club 
can set. Neither appears to have spent beyond their means to reach this point, 
building their success not on the backs of overpaid stars but instead 
well-rounded collectives.

At a time when prominent figures within Italian football have expressed 
anxiety about the lack of opportunities being afforded to young domestic talents
 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/these-football-times/2015/feb/18/arrigo-sacchi-italy-football-ethical-dilemma-racism-foreign-players>
, Carpi arrive boasting a first-team squad whose average age is just 24.4 years 
old, and which contains only a handful of foreign players. Their annual player 
wage bill is a paltry €3m (£2.17m). They turned a profit, even if only a very 
modest one (€51,922) on their accounts for 2014.

Frosinone’s squad is a little older, with an average age of 26.4, but once 
again dominated by Italians. The stars of this campaign have been a pair of 
journeyman lower-league strikers. Daniel Ciofani and Federico Dionisi, 29 and 
27 respectively, have played a combined four games of top-flight football in 
their careers but have banged in 26 goals between them this season in Serie B.

Both clubs will need to strengthen to survive at the highest level but they do 
have good role models to follow. Empoli have comfortably kept afloat in Serie A 
with a squad whose combined salary at the start of this campaign stood at €11m. 
Sassuolo have stayed up for two consecutive seasons by relying on a core of 
cheap Italian footballers.

The Neroverdi had just one foreign player in the team that beat Milan 3-2 this 
weekend. Saphir Taïder put in a so-so shift before being substituted early in 
the second-half but the stage belonged principally to his team-mate Domenico 
Berardi.After scoring four against Milan in the corresponding fixture last 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/13/domenico-berardi-milan-sassuolo-allegri-serie-a>
, the Italy Under-21 striker had to settle for three this time around.

His first goal, admittedly, should never have stood. The Milan goalkeeper 
Diego López blundered in allowing an unremarkable shot to bounce off his chest
but recovered to pull the ball back before it had crossed the line 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/600008750888398848>. Somehow, the 
fourth official saw things differently.

Such errors will hopefully be eliminated in Serie A next season, when Hawk-Eye 
will be introduced to help adjudicate on goalline decisions. It was supposed to 
be given a first run in this season’s Coppa Italia final between Lazio and 
Juventus but that plan has now been aborted after the game was moved from the 
end of the season to the middle of this week.

This late switch – brought on by Juventus’s success in reaching the Champions 
League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/13/real-madrid-juventus-champions-league-semi-final-match-report>
, scheduled to take place one day before the original Coppa Italia final date – 
has led to entirely predictable problems that the footballing authorities have 
(entirely predictably) failed to prepare for.

Lazio had been due to face Roma this coming Sunday, in a derby with huge 
implications for the top-three race. Lotito has protested that it is unfair to 
play this game so soon after the rescheduled cup final, and requested that it 
be moved back by one day – to Monday 25 May. Roma are less keen on this switch, 
as indeed will be the many hundreds of fans (and, ahem, journalists) with 
travel and hotel plans constructed around the game.

A decision is expected from the league by the end of today. Unlike in the 
cases of Frosinone and Carpi, the suspicion is that this time Lotito will get 
his way.

Talking points

• Lotito’s Lazio, incidentally, remain one point behind Roma in the standings 
– after theGiallorossi recovered from a goal down to beat Udinese on Sunday 
night. Roma remain a very long way from the team that we saw in the first half 
of this season but if any one player has maintained a high level throughout 
then it is Radja Nainggolan, who scored his fifth goal of the season andvery 
nearly added a stupendous second <https://vine.co/v/eAKvD3HZbpm>, meeting Juan 
Iturbe’s cross with a glorious inside-of-the-heel flick that Orestis Karnezis 
just barely managed to push on to the post.

• Also in that game: a first Serie A goal for Udinese’s 19-year-old Chelsea 
loanee Stipe Perica <https://vine.co/v/eAmxlqwA3pz>.

• Lazio’s goal against Sampdoria was scored by Santiago Gentiletti – in what 
was the defender’s first appearance after an eight-month injury lay-off. The 
setting might have provided him with an additional layer of closure. He had 
torn his knee ligaments in the first place at the Marassi, during a 1-0 loss to 
Genoa in September.

• Cagliari have now been mathematically relegated, after defeat at home to 
Palermo. Their slide into Serie B had been on the cards for months but they had 
hoped at least to achieve a stay of execution against opponents who had won 
only twice away from home all season. Their caretaker manager, Gianluca Festa, 
insisted on taking his share of the blame afterwards but suggested that he 
would be willing to stay on next season if the club was keen. He has collected 
seven points from his five games in charge.

• Noteworthy from that game was the omission of Paulo Dybala from Palermo’s 
team. Giuseppe Iachini, the coach, confirmed that the player – who has scored 
13 goals this season – would be sold to Juventus this summer but added that the 
Argentinian’s strike partner was expected to remain. “[Franco] Vázquez said he 
does not know where he will play next year? The club wants to keep him,” said 
Iachini. “Dybala, on the other hand, is a Juventus player. We are working for 
the future.”

• A low-key Derby d’Italia at San Siro on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/16/internazionale-juventus-serie-a-match-report>
, Juventus beating Internazionale even with a weakened side. TheNerazzurri had 
started well, Mauro Icardi opening the scoring with his sixth strike in five 
Serie A appearances against Juve before Marcelo Brozovic had a goal wrongly 
disallowed for offside. But Inter reminded us of their defensive frailty soon 
enough with Nemanja Vidic giving away his fourth penalty of the season after 
being outpaced by Alessandro Matri. Claudio Marchisio equalised from the spot 
before Álvaro Morata put Juventus in front with the help of a goalkeeping 
howler from Samir Handanovic. Inter remain in the Europa League hunt only 
because Genoa were denied a Uefa licence.

• Things might have worked out differently for Inter, of course, if it were 
not forthe outlandish efforts of Marco Storari <https://vine.co/v/eKYM931hIdb>. 
Even at 38 he must still be one of Europe’s best back-up goalkeepers.

• As for Genoa, that’s nine goals in two games for Gian Piero Gasperini’s 
team. Iago Falque alone has scored 11 goals since the start of 2015.

Results: Atalanta 1-4 Genoa, Cagliari 0-1 Palermo, Internazionale 1-2 
Juventus, Roma 2-1 Udinese, Sampdoria 0-1 Lazio, Sassuolo 3-2 Milan, Torino 2-0 
Chievo, Verona 2-1 Empoli
 