
The sudden importance of two humble reptiles in the context of what would be 
Australia’s largest coal mine represents yet another stumbling block for Indian 
corporate giant Adani.

But on their own, the snake and the skink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/16/greg-hunt-ignoring-advice-on-danger-to-wildlife-from-carmichael-coalmine>
 are unlikely to sink the Carmichael mine.

Coalition will take six to eight weeks to revise its Carmichael coalmine 
approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/05/coalition-will-take-six-to-eight-weeks-to-revise-its-carmichael-coalmine-approval>
Yes, the federal court ruling – that the environment minister, Greg Hunt, 
failed to consider all departmental advice on protecting the two vulnerable 
species when approving the project – sends both the company and the 
commonwealth back to the drawing board.

Yes, the alleged bureaucratic paperwork bungle, which deprived Hunt of 
evidence he had seen all relevant documents, will add another two months 
minimum to an approval the company previously assumed it had in the bag.

Yes, it feeds into the Adani narrative that it is delays in government 
approvals that are forcing the company to make moves that some in the industry 
interpret as putting the project well and trulyon ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/22/adani-dissolves-50-strong-project-team-from-troubled-165bn-carmichael-mine>
, if not in permanent deep freeze.

Little things like axing their entire project management team, sending staff 
from potential equity partner Posco back to Korea and a small army ofcontract 
engineers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/adani-halts-engineering-work-on-controversial-carmichael-mine-sources>
 off to find work elsewhere as the coalmining downturn bites.

The only ones left at Adani’s Eagle Street office in Brisbane, apart from 
in-house engineers who are reportedly on notice, appear to be the lawyers, 
lobbyists and senior managers and executives fromIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> who once had enough confidence in the 
company’s long-term outlook in Australia to plunge into the local property 
market.

A perusal of local property records shows none of those are selling up – not 
yet, at least.

Greg Hunt urged to scrap Carmichael mine plan after new evidence of impact
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/03/greg-hunt-urged-to-revoke-carmichael-mine-approval-after-new-evidence-of-impact>
And there is no reason at this stage to think the commonwealth will not arrive 
at a defensible mitigation strategy for the impact on the yakka skink and the 
ornamental snake and reissue approval under the Environmental Protection and 
Biodiversity Conservation Act.

Or that the Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
government will not go ahead and grant a mining lease and environmental 
authority to Adani, even if a looming state land court ruling on a separate 
challenge by conservationists recommends against it.

‘The clock is ticking’

But in the end the future of Carmichael is far more likely to hinge on its own 
problematic business case than whether it ticks all the boxes for governments 
who in public remain broadly supportive (whatever doubts they may have 
expressed privately).

In short, on a read of Adani’s own modelling, the tipping point for the 
Carmichael project lies somewhere between US$80-100 for the price of thermal 
coal, in the form of the Newcastle benchmark. It currently sits at US$60.

Set aside for a moment the argument made by critics that Adani’s Carmichael 
coal would be worth 30% less than the Newcastle benchmark because of its higher 
ash content and its lower energy count. The best guess over the next five 
years, according to the futures market, is that by 2020 the Newcastle benchmark 
will sit at US$58.

This hints at what some analysts have referred to as a “structural decline in 
the global seaborne thermal coal market”.

According to Michael Roche, the Queensland Resources Council’s chief 
executive: “The clock is ticking on this project.”

But the rebound that makes the project viable, on paper at least, could be a 
long time coming. It is not as if Adani has spent too much on Carmichael 
already that it can’t walk away. The figure often cited is something just shy 
of $4bn.

But of Adani’s Australian spending, more than $2bn went to the purchase of the 
existing T1 port at Abbot Point. The port is already given over to other coal 
exporters such as Glencore, Rio and BHP and will be accepting nothing from 
Adani’s own Carmichael mine, hence the need to build the new T0 terminal. The 
purchase was so highly geared, at 90% debt funding, that it cannot be used as 
collateral to leverage more money for the Carmichael project. It is in effect a 
separate play for Adani altogether.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Ffuture-of-carmichael-mine-hinges-not-on-skinks-or-snakes-but-its-business-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a9ad9b8bcb4c27637493307fcf159551fa3c810%2F0_0_2958_1779%2F2958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Future%20of%20Carmichael%20mine%20hinges%20not%20on%20skinks%20or%20snakes%2C%20but%20its%20business%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Ffuture-of-carmichael-mine-hinges-not-on-skinks-or-snakes-but-its-business-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Future%20of%20Carmichael%20mine%20hinges%20not%20on%20skinks%20or%20snakes%2C%20but%20its%20business%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Ffuture-of-carmichael-mine-hinges-not-on-skinks-or-snakes-but-its-business-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a9ad9b8bcb4c27637493307fcf159551fa3c810%2F0_0_2958_1779%2F2958.jpg>
 There are questions about whether Adani can actually build the associated 
infrastructure to a smaller scale. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty 
Images 
That leaves $1.3bn that Adani has spent directly on its own mining export 
project, including land, engineering plans (now suspended) and so on. In any 
case, Rio sank $4bn itself before walking away from a project in Mozambique.

While the ultimate price tag for the mine, rail and new terminal will be 
$14bn, Adani says it needs to stump up just $4bn to get the project off the 
ground.

It indicates this is possible because it has broken the project into two 
stages. The first is an operation producing 32m-34m tonnes of coal a year with 
a 30-year mine life, the second – which will attract the additional investment 
once the cash is flowing – a 40m tonnes-a-year operation that lasts 60 years.

But there are questions about whether Adani can actually build the associated 
infrastructure in the rail and the port to a smaller scale in the first 
instance.

Can a rail line – which according to longstanding projections needs to be a 
60m-tonnes-a-year operation to be viable – or a jetty be half built? Will $4bn 
really cut it?

The funding is a labyrinth that could make Adani’s path to government 
approvals seem like a walk in the park

And where is the money coming from? The only investor in Adani mining in 
Australia to date is its Indian parent, Adani Enterprises.

The company has indicated Adani Enterprises would fund the mine up to $4.5bn 
but the private Adani family companies would fund the rail line and port 
costing up to another $4bn each.

Adani Enterprises announced last week it would seek shareholder approval to 
raise US$2.7bn through debt and equity raising.

A major restructure of Adani Enterprises in June, by hiving off operations 
including the valuable Indian port assets into other companies, turned an 
entity worth US$10bn into one worth US$1.5bn.

Which makes borrowing tougher. And a bank is yet to explicitly bankroll 
Carmichael. The prospects appear even dimmer in light of the Commonwealth bank
ending its advisory role 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/mining-and-resources/adani-and-commonwealth-bank-part-ways-casting-further-doubt-on-carmichael-coal-project-20150805-gisd1l.html>
 over financing the Carmichael project.

It also raises the prospect Adani will get a grilling from the equity market 
on why it should sink nearly US$1bn into a greenfield coalmine that doesn’t 
appear viable on the coal price for the next five years.

Which still leaves the Adani family companies covering the rest. One option is 
a margin loan, using the genuine value of Indian ports in particular as 
collateral. But margin loans are difficult to get in India – not to mention a 
dangerous move that would invite share price attacks on Adani interests once 
hedge fund raiders smell blood.

The funding of Carmichael is a labyrinth that could make Adani’s path to 
Australian government approvals seem like a walk in the park.
 