
Hi Gary, thanks for chatting to us. Not a problem, Small Talk, not a problem.

You’re the star of House of Flying Arrows, Universal’s new darts documentary 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/House-Flying-Arrows-Daniel-Mendelle/dp/B01KO7G9CQ>. 
Tell us a bit about it.I watched it today actually. It’s good: it shows what 
kind of people we are. We all come from working-class families and that’s what 
we are, a bunch of boys who have a laugh and play some good darts at times.

And the film concentrates on last year’s World Championships, particularly you 
and Michael van Gerwen?Yes. They took their chance, because you never know what 
will happen in the Worlds as there are so many good players around. I think 
they thought that me and Michael would get to the final but it could have been 
a disaster if we’d gone out in the first round.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhouse-of-flying-arrows-a-clip-from-the-darts-documentary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20of%20Flying%20Arrows%3A%20a%20clip%20from%20the%20darts%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhouse-of-flying-arrows-a-clip-from-the-darts-documentary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20of%20Flying%20Arrows%3A%20a%20clip%20from%20the%20darts%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhouse-of-flying-arrows-a-clip-from-the-darts-documentary-video&media=>
House of Flying Arrows: a clip from the darts documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/11/house-of-flying-arrows-a-clip-from-the-darts-documentary-video>
. 
And then MvG lost an epic game to Raymond van Barneveld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/29/raymond-van-barneveld-michael-van-gerwen-pdc-worlds>
 in the last 16 …I actually thought Barney would beat him, just with the way 
Barney had been playing, and he did. It’s getting so hard now, there are that 
many good players.

Treble top! The film that captures the party power of darts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/25/treble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts>
You say that, but you never really looked like getting beaten throughout the 
tournament.I played well. I had the same year as I’ve had this year – I was 
struggling, but then in November I started to play really well and that gave me 
a confidence boost. Once I got on the stage I was fine, but beforehand I was 
absolutely shaking. I was getting up early, going to bed late, just thinking 
about the first-round match. That’s the way it is.

Do you think you might be more relaxed this year now that you’ve won it twice 
in a row?I hope so. The pressure’s on Michael – with the way he’s been playing 
this year he’s odds-on favourite to win it and he’ll want a second title. Is 
that gonna help him or put him off a bit? I think the weight will be on his 
shoulders. It was great for me to win it the first time and an absolute bonus 
to win it the second time. I’m getting old so I’m just gonna relax and enjoy 
playing.

You slaughtered Jelle Klaasen 6-0 in the semi-finals, including a nine-darter. 
What does that feel like?It’s weird. Everyone goes on about the nine-darter but 
it’s just one leg of darts. There’s a wee myth going about in darts that if you 
hit a nine-darter, you lose the game. That’s always in the back of your mind. 
It came in the third leg, so I thought: ‘That’s a bit early to be hitting one. 
But I came off stage at the break, put it out of my mind and played well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVGtQfSkIDN0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVGtQfSkIDN0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVGtQfSkIDN0&media=>
When you won your first world title in 2015, you beat Phil Taylor 7-6 in the 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/04/gary-anderson-phil-taylor-pdc-world-darts-final>
. What do you remember about that triple bounce-outthat cost you 180 points 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvOEuZYoTcE>? I was thinking: ‘I’m not meant 
to win this.’ I’ve done it a few times. People were on about the board, which 
was a load of rubbish. If your darts go in near each other, it loosens the 
treble up and then they can fall out. It was just one of those things. It 
probably did me the world of good as it made me even more determined. I lost 
that leg but I came back to win the set. The Gary of four years ago would 
probably have given up when that happened. But I’ve got the wee fighting spirit 
now.

Where has that come from? I’ve just been enjoying the game. It’s one of those 
things, if you’re struggling you’re not happy, and if you’re behind you go, 
‘Ah, what’s the use, the boy’s gonna beat me anyway’. But now I think, ‘Nah, 
nah, it’s just one leg.’

Was the manner of your defeat to Michael van Gerwen at the 2014 World 
Championships <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mC4uYcJbJoM> a turning point 
moment in your career?I was absolutely gutted. I never, ever get upset when I 
get beat but that day I was sick as a pig. I got straight back home, changed my 
darts, got straight on the practice board and I vowed that he’d never do that 
to me again. That hurt, getting beat 4-3 when I was 3-1 up.

And then you beat him in the semis a year later on the way to your first world 
title.Yeah, that was good.

You played sensational darts throughout that tournament apart from in the 
first round, when you averaged 86 against Scott Kirchner. What do you remember 
about that?The American? Lovely bloke, one of the nicest people you could ever 
meet. I’d never seen him play. I knew he played a lot of soft-tip darts and the 
soft-tip boys can be very slow, but his extra dart had me in bits. (Kirchner 
threw a phantom dart before each turn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rIgPtYXmykE>.) I didn’t know what to do! I 
normally look down, and you can tell when somebody has thrown their third dart, 
so I was getting ready to walk and then I’d realise he still had one dart left. 
It did mess with me a bit. That was a hard game, I was glad to get through it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F737d865fcfa2b59d388c4682ddf426139c649b9a%2F0_98_4602_2762%2F4602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Anderson%3A%20'We're%20a%20bunch%20of%20boys%20who%20have%20a%20laugh%20and%20play%20some%20good%20darts'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Anderson%3A%20%27We%27re%20a%20bunch%20of%20boys%20who%20have%20a%20laugh%20and%20play%20some%20good%20darts%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F737d865fcfa2b59d388c4682ddf426139c649b9a%2F0_98_4602_2762%2F4602.jpg>
 Gary Anderson celebrates his victory over Michael van Gerwen en route to 
winning his first World Championship. Photograph: Ben Hoskins/Getty Images 
Is it true you didn’t start playing darts until you were 24, and then hit 140, 
180 and 140 with your first three throws?Yeah, 24/25. I’ve been playing exactly 
20 years.

And it all started because you didn’t have the money for a game of pool? 
That’s it.Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> is a free game. You 
can get a set of darts for next to nothing and it doesn’t cost you to play. It 
was 50p or £1 for a game of pool, so if you play 20 games that’s maybe £20. I 
have the same mentality now: a pound’s a pound.

Who’s the funniest bloke on the darts circuit? Aidy Lewis. He’s a good friend 
of mine. He’s just so funny, he’s great to be around; he’s always having a 
laugh and a carry-on.

You beat him in the final of the worlds earlier in the year. Is it hard 
playing against a mate?I find it hard. But at the end of the day, they’re 
trying to take money off you. It took me a long time to get that into my head: 
that as soon as the darts start, you’re not mates. You’re there to win.

If you could change one thing about darts, what would it be? I’d probably have 
a few more weekends off! It’s absolutely hectic. It’s part and parcel of the 
game but I do like to get home. The youngsters coming through, it’s very easy 
for them, but the older lads might need to starting picking and choosing. 
Living out of a suitcase for 20-25 years is not good for your personal life: 
hotel, airports, hotel, airports. It’s like any job. Some days you wake up and 
go, ‘I can’t be doing this.’ Other days you really enjoy it. Barry Hearn are 
the PDC have put something together than really works and it’ll get bigger and 
bigger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe14da61b93afcab239a6b11164a57aa1a2ca247%2F0_252_5308_3184%2F5308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Anderson%3A%20'We're%20a%20bunch%20of%20boys%20who%20have%20a%20laugh%20and%20play%20some%20good%20darts'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Anderson%3A%20%27We%27re%20a%20bunch%20of%20boys%20who%20have%20a%20laugh%20and%20play%20some%20good%20darts%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgary-anderson-were-a-bunch-of-boys-who-have-a-laugh-and-play-some-good-darts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe14da61b93afcab239a6b11164a57aa1a2ca247%2F0_252_5308_3184%2F5308.jpg>
 The world’s best players at the Sydney Darts Masters, part of the World 
Series. Photograph: Pacific Pres/Rex/Shutterstock 
What’s the best country you’ve visited on the darts circuit? I love Japan. 
I’ve never met so many polite people. When the darts is finished, they all 
stand up, they clear their rubbish away and the place is absolutely spotless. 
We could learn a few things. They’re such nice people, they’ll do anything for 
you. The culture is fantastic.

What was the best performance of your career? Probably the way I played 
against Jelle in the worlds. There’s also the first time I played Phil, which 
was in the final of the World Darts Trophy in Holland in 2007. Phil was odds-on 
favourite. I vowed that I’d beat him the first time I played him and I did - I 
think it was 7-3 in sets. Unfortunately I paid the price for the next five or 
six years because he pounded me all over the place!

Your walk-on song is Jump Around by House of Pain. What’s the story behind 
that?Don’t know. Don’t know when I got it, don’t know how I got it. Not got a 
clue!

Do you dream about darts? I have nightmares sometimes! Usually a week before 
the worlds, I wake up in a sweat. It’s something to do with darts but I can 
never remember exactly what it is.

Tell us about your animals. We’ve had a few. We had three Burmese mountain 
dogs, though we lost the oldest one this year. We’ve got a blue-tongued skink 
lizard as well. I like animals. They do what they’re told and they don’t argue 
with you!

Last year William Hill offered 501-1 on your son Tai becoming world champion. 
How’s he getting on?He’s doing well. He’s two and a half and he’s always in the 
practice room. He absolutely loves it. I think it’s in his blood. I wanted to 
kind of keep him away from darts, but no chance. He’s got to be a darts player.

How do you relax when you do get home? Getting home to the family is my 
relaxation – I take the dogs out, sit and watch a bit of telly, just chill out. 
I don’t like to leave the house when I’m home.

What sort of TV do you watch? I actually sit and watch a lot of the Discovery 
channels – anything about cars and animals, that’s what I like.

It doesn’t sound like being world champion has changed you. Did you ever worry 
that it would?Nah. I’ve always said if I turn into a different person, give me 
a slap across the chin. I’m still same old Gary.

House of Flying Arrows is available now on digital download and on Blu-Ray and 
DVD from Monday 14 November 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/search?keywords=B01KO7G9CQ|B01KO7G8I6&tag20=thesunhofatrailerbreak-21&index=blended&linkCode=ur2>

 