
Nigel Clough will be back at the Pirelli stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/07/burton-albion-confirm-return-nigel-clough-manager>
 on the Saturday before Christmas, once again leaning against the metal rail 
between the tunnel and the dugout as he watches his Burton Albion players 
attempting to consolidate their challenge for promotion to the Championship. It 
will be his first home match since returning to the club he left in January 
2009, when the Brewers were 13 points clear at the top of the Conference 
Premier andpoised to enter the league for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/apr/17/burton-albion-promotion-league-blue-square>
.

This is the club he managed for a happy and successful 10 years before 
departing to take over at Derby County, one of his dad’s old clubs.Four years 
at Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/28/derby-county-sack-nigel-clough>
 and ayear and a half with Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/sheffield-united-sack-manager-nigel-clough>
 both ended in the sack. In his early days as a manager, Clough used to wonder 
aloud whether he really wanted to test himself at the highest level. Now, three 
months away from turning 50, he has perhaps taken a step back in order to make 
progress.

Garry Monk’s Swansea team were unravelling and his sacking is no surprise | 
Stuart James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-swansea-sacking>
These are strange days for English football managers. Condemned, like all of 
their calling, to rise and rise until one day their wings no longer find the 
warm currents of air and they crash to earth, they also suffer from a distrust 
in their ability, as a breed, to operate successfully at the very top of the 
game. While comparative veterans like Sam Allardyce and Alan Pardew are 
entrusted with rescue jobs that sometimes come off and sometimes do not, their 
younger colleagues struggle to establish themselves in a world of freakishly 
high demands.

Last week Gary Neville answered the call from his friend Peter Lim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/02/gary-neville-valencia-england-spain>
, the Singaporean billionaire, to take over at Valencia. Few 40-year-olds in 
England could be better qualified to embark on a career as a manager, but this 
seemed a curiously risk-laden way to start, in the middle of the season and on 
the eve of a vital Champions League fixture.

After more than 600 appearances for Manchester United and 85 England caps, and 
with a shrewd intelligence anda gift for communication revealed to a wider world
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/23/gary-neville-rules-mnf-sky-football>
 in his capacity as an analyst for Sky Sports, as well as a complete set of 
Uefa coaching badges and an amount of coaching experience at international 
level under Roy Hodgson, Neville would be an obvious choice for many Premier 
League owners. But he has never worked in La Liga and speaks no Spanish. He 
looked understandably grim as Valencia made their exit on Wednesday night after
losing 2-0 to Lyon in front of their own fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/valencia-lyon-champions-league-match-report-gary-neville>
, and you have to hope that his Spanish adventure does not derail what could be 
a substantial career in football management.

In the closing days of last season it seemed plausible to advance similarly 
optimistic predictions for the careers ofTim Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/25/tim-sherwood-sacked-aston-villa-manager>
 andGarry Monk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-swansea-sacking>
, two Englishmen whose efforts on behalf of Aston Villa and Swansea City were 
delighting their respective fans. Perhaps they would be the ones to reverse the 
trend that has led owners and chairmen in need of an immediate fix to make the 
first call to a Chilean, a Dutchman, an Argentine, a Frenchman, a German, a 
Spaniard or a Portuguese.

In February this year the self-confident Sherwood had emerged from a mildly 
bruising experience withTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> – where he had 
promoted the claims of Harry Kane, Ryan Mason and others – to take the reins at 
Villa Park, a more troubled place. Briefly, as he rescued Villa from the threat 
of relegation, he appeared to have done Roy Hodgson a favour by assembling a 
new all-English midfield of Fabian Delph, Ashley Westwood, Tom Cleverley and 
the prodigy Jack Grealish.

A fat lot of good it did him. The reverse, in fact, since Delph was sold to 
Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/17/fabian-delph-manchester-city-u-turn-aston-villa>
 in the summer for £8m and Cleverley, who had been on loan from Manchester 
United, perhaps sensed a lack of ambition at the club and opted fora move to 
Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/05/tom-cleverley-joins-everton-manchester-united>
 when his contract expired in July. Grealish’s promise was damaged by youthful 
indiscretions and in recent matches just Westwood has remained from the quartet 
that helped lift Villa clear of the relegation zone while taking them tothe FA 
Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/fa-cup-final-arsenal-aston-villa-alexis-sanchez>
 for only the third time since the war.

After he had started the new season with a win, six league defeats in a row 
did for Sherwood. Randy Lerner’s absentee ownership of the club, while often 
uninspired, has not been wholly discreditable, and he cannot be blamed for 
wanting to safeguard Villa’s slice of next season’s vastly enhanced 
broadcasting squillions, thus preserving the club’s attractiveness to potential 
buyers.

You are the Ref No352: Gary Neville
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/you-are-the-ref-no352-gary-neville>
Swansea, by contrast, would be many people’s nomination for the best-run club 
in the Premier League, given the sense of community and the progressive 
football encouraged by a board under the chairmanship of Huw Jenkins, whose job 
it was to relieve Monk of his duties this week. He did it, he said, with a 
heavy heart, and there was no hint in his words of the usual hypocrisy towards 
a man who had served the club for 12 years.

As an emergency replacement for the sacked Michael Laudrup in February 2014, 
Monk saved Swansea’s Premier League and was given the job on a permanent basis. 
His only full season began with the first league win at Old Trafford in their 
history and ended with eighth place in the league, the club’s highest ever 
finish. But the signing of a three-year contract this summer prefaced a dismal 
collapse of form, morale and results which some blamed on the poor relationship 
between the players and the manager’s assistants. “Ashen-faced” barely 
described the 36-year-old’s demeanour at the end oflast weekend’s 3-0 home 
defeat to Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/swansea-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, the league leaders.

Of all the young English candidates to succeed Hodgson, Eddie Howe would 
surely have the best claim even if Bournemouth were to return to the second 
tier next season. At 38, he has guided the club to three promotions through the 
application of enlightened footballing principles that could be seen intheir 
win at Stamford Bridge last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
. A wish to see him applying his ideas at a Champions League club is tempered 
by a desire not to see him chewed up and spat out.

So maybe Nigel Clough knows what he is doing in returning to the place he 
started out in management. When he took over at Derby six years ago, he asked 
for time and patience.

“It took a few years at Burton,” he pointed out. For young English managers 
hoping to test their wings in the stratosphere, those years are simply not 
available.
 