
Before his team’s win against Guiseley last Saturday, Gary Johnson spoke of 
“little icebergs that keep getting in the way” as he attempts to chart the 
course of good shipCheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> 
Town through the waters of the National League and back into the League Two. 
“We have to keep steering around them,” he said. “I’ve got a list of the 
icebergs we’ve had this season and I’ll bring ‘em out when me book comes out.”

The specific iceberg Johnson was alluding to from last week was the suspension 
of Danny Wright, who had just incurred a three-match ban for wiping his feet on 
Grimsby’s goalkeeper, James McKeown, leaving Cheltenham without the services of 
a striker who has scored 21 league goals this season. Johnson was philosophical 
about the absence of a player who, as it transpired, Cheltenham did not need. 
“Every time we’ve lost somebody we’ve been able to bring somebody in who’s been 
able to do a job and that’s why we are where we are in the league table,” he 
said. “It’s credit to the squad, really and credit to their picking up 
everything we’ve been doing with them.”

Would cheaper tickets in the Premier League damage non-league clubs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/in-bed-with-maradona/2016/apr/15/football-ticket-prices-premier-league-non-league-clubs>
Late goals from Rob Dickie and Dan Holman, who has scored 12 times in 15 games 
since signing in January, secured three points against Guiseley, and the 
failure of second-placed Forest Green to beat Braintree Town means victory 
against Halifax Town on Saturday would as good as guarantee promotion for 
Cheltenham. Such is the superiority of their goal difference over their 
Gloucestershire rivals, who trail by six points with three games to go, that 
one win is really required to secure the only automatic promotion place up for 
grabs in a league from which it is fiendishly difficult to escape. Johnson 
hopes to triumph at the first time of asking, in the process ensuring that no 
football ground in the world is more appropriately named than Cheltenham’s 
World of Smile Stadium.

“We’ve been working hard. We haven’t had a jolly-up because we’re close,” he 
says. “We’re in this position because we’ve always respected the opposition. 
We’ve worked as if we’re playing Barcelona. It’s our party, but only if we beat 
Halifax and they’ve not been the worse team in the league for a while. It’s 
going to be about what we do and if we win the game I’ll be treating it like 
we’ve won the league because it’ll be nice to have done it at home ... even if 
[Forest Green] can keep themselves in it by scoring 24-plus goals over two 
games, which I don’t think has ever been done in the history of football. I, 
for one, will celebrate with supporters if we win the game.”

Johnson was in the wheelhouse when Cheltenham failed to steer their way around 
enough icebergs to avoid sinking into the murky depths of the National League 
last season. “I said that I would come and help for seven games to try and get 
them out of it,” he told the Gloucestershire Echo. “Had I seen the team that 
was here, I would have probably not done it. We had seven games, no transfer 
window and I remember saying that I would try my best, but we didn’t have the 
characters or the drive to stay up.”

Upon taking over, Johnson made his players sign a handwritten pledge promising 
to do all they could to keep Cheltenham in the League. “Some signed and meant 
it,” he says. “Some signed it and didn’t mean it.”

A major overhaul was required last summer, bolstered by a windfall of 
£200,000. It was the lion’s share of the estate of a long-standing Cheltenham 
fan, Bryan Jacob, who passed away in 2013 and generously bequeathed his life 
savings to the Robins Trust. Last April they voted to invest the money in the 
club and Johnson embarked on a recruitment drive that resulted in Cheltenham 
signing 18 players, many of whom were interviewed in the 60-year-old’s living 
room after being shown a DVD outlining his plan to get the Robins back on their 
Football League perch. One, the midfielder Harry Pell, was left with little 
option but to sign after spilling coffee all over Johnson’s pristine new carpet.

Johnson claims to have enjoyed every minute of an intriguing managerial 
career. It has taken him as far afield as Latvia, where he was handed the reins 
of the national team in 1999 after helping the country’s football association 
raise £7m by recommending assorted players, including the Southampton cult hero 
and the current national team manager, Marians Pahars, to various English clubs.

Closer to home, in two stints at Yeovil Town he won the FA Trophy, the 
Conference and League Two title, before steering the tiny West Country club 
into the Championship for the first time in a triumph of fairytale proportions. 
In a five-year spell at Bristol City, the Championship club now managed by his 
son Lee, Johnson won promotion from League One and flirted with promotion to 
the Premier League before enduring the misery of defeat in a play-off final 
against Hull City in 2008.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fcheltenham-town-attempt-complicated-free-kick-routine-and-fail-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cheltenham%20Town%20attempt%20complicated%20free-kick%20routine%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20fail%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fcheltenham-town-attempt-complicated-free-kick-routine-and-fail-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cheltenham%20Town%20attempt%20complicated%20free-kick%20routine%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20fail%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fcheltenham-town-attempt-complicated-free-kick-routine-and-fail-video&media=>
Cheltenham Town attempt complicated free-kick routine … and fail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/feb/21/cheltenham-town-attempt-complicated-free-kick-routine-and-fail-video>
. 
These experiences have provided him with a healthy dose of perspective that he 
is eager to share with Cheltenham’s players and supporters. “It’s a fantastic 
time of the season,” he says. “This is what you’re in the game for: this sort 
of pressure, this sort of feeling. We’ve got to embrace it, we’ve got to enjoy 
it because it goes really quick and you don’t get it every season.

“Some of these lads are really keen to play in the Football League because a 
lot of them haven’t and that’s massive for them. So they’ve got the right 
spirit and if you’re good enough, hopefully you get there in the end. If we do 
our job for the rest of the season then we’re promoted.”

With one win required from three matches, it is unlikely to take that long.
 