
Gary Locke has resigned as Kilmarnock manager, the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> club have announced.

Locke reached his decision after the 1-0 home defeat by Hamilton on Saturday 
that kept the Ayrshire club in the relegation play-off position.

He will be replaced by Lee McCulloch on an interim basis pending a permanent 
appointment.

Scottish roundup: Kane Hemmings’ late penalty earns draw for Dundee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/dundee-motherwell-rangers-scottish-premiership>
A club statement confirming Locke’s departure said: “McCulloch will be 
assisted by Peter Leven and under-20 head coach Alan Robertson. The board of 
directors would like to thank Gary for his time with the club and wish him 
every success in the future.

“Lee McCulloch is the holder of a Uefa Pro Licence and has been acting as a 
first-team coach this season, although he remains registered as a player.”

McCulloch’s first game in charge of Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> will be in the Scottish Cup 
tie against his former club Rangers at Ibrox next Saturday.

Locke, who replaced Allan Johnston in February 2015, came under pressure 
following poor results, with last week’s5-1 defeat to the bottom side Dundee 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/dundee-united-kilmarnock-inverness-scottish-premiership>
 at Tannadice particularly damaging.

The former Hearts coach was heavily criticised by some fans during the defeat 
by Hamilton at Rugby Park. The result left the home side 11 points ahead of 
United although Dundee United have two games in hand after their match against 
Partick Thistle was postponed on Saturday.

Asked afterwards about the criticism he had to endure against Accies, the 
former Kilmarnock defender Locke said: “You are going to get criticism when you 
are in the position in the league that we are. I am not going to shirk away 
from that, that’s football. Every manager gets stick when the team is not doing 
well.

“I would rather I get it than the players as there are one or two lacking 
confidence at the minute and it is difficult to play well when they are playing 
with such a lack of confidence. The only way you can get through that is by 
digging in and working hard and that is what we have to do.”

Hamilton came away from Rugby Park with only their second win in 17 matches 
but it took them into eighth place, two points away from sixth-placed Dundee.
 