
The former England and Manchester United defender Gary Neville has said he 
will not return to management in the next five years and his job at Valencia, 
from which he wassacked after less than four months in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
, may be his final job in coaching.

Gary Neville left Valencia in ignominy – but at least he bit the bullet| Barry 
Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/01/gary-neville-valencia-ignominy-analyst>
Neville returned to his job as a pundit on Sky Sports this season after a 
stint in management with the Spanish club in 2015-16. However, his time in 
management proved disastrous: after taking over in December, he won just three 
of 16 league matches and none of his first nine, took the club from ninth to 
14th in La Liga and just five points above the relegation zone, oversaw their 
elimination from both the Champions League andEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/valencia-athletic-bilbao-europa-league-gary-neville>
 and his side werehumiliated in a 7-0 Copa del Rey thrashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/lionel-messi-luis-suarez-hat-tricks-barcelona-valencia>
 by Barcelona. Neville was sacked by the club’s owner, Peter Lim, and replaced 
by Pako Ayestarán in March.

The former right-back, who also stepped back from his role as an England coach 
after their exit from Euro 2016,told Sky Sports 
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11827/10574714/gary-neville-has-no-plans-to-return-to-football-coaching-after-valencia-stint>
 that he would focus primarily on his business interests for the time being. 
These includeSalford City FC, whom he co-owns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/gary-neville-peter-lim-class-of-92>
 with Lim and his former “Class of 92” Manchester United team-mates Phil 
Neville, Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt.

“I always say ‘never say never’ because my love of football is too great,” 
said Neville, “but I genuinely believe it will be very difficult for me to go 
back into coaching because of my commitment now to so many different things.”

Gary Neville’s Valencia experiment comes to an undignified end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-valencia-experiment-undignified-end>
He added: “It’s my obligation to deliver Salford City to the Football League.” 
He named a number of other business ventures with which he is involved.

“It could be that I’m no longer ever a coach in football but that’s not a 
loss. Some people might think it is, but the fact of the matter is it’s not to 
me.”

Neville also talked about his time at Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> and refused to blame the 
notoriously difficult environment at the six-times La Liga champions for his 
failure.

“I can’t go to Spain for four months, be coach of Valencia and blame the fact 
there was a difficult dressing room, I didn’t speak the language, we had bad 
luck and we missed some chances. I knew I didn’t speak the language before I 
went, I knew it was a difficult dressing room, I knew they had sacked lots of 
managers and I didn’t deal with it.

“I thought, ‘When am I going to get offered an opportunity like this again?’ 
An English manager coaching a top-four club in Spain. There were two or three 
big things I did wrong and should have been more insistent on.

“Holland have the solution. Ajax have the solution. Barcelona have the 
solution. There are models out there. They create pathways and they keep you on 
the pathway.”
 