
Eighty minutes after we walk into Gary Lockett’s empty gym, at the end of a 
raw and moving interview, we take a breather. The boxing trainer has spoken 
with compassion and honesty while moving from his bruising years as a 
professional fighter who was good enough to headline aworld title 
<http://www.hbo.com/boxing/fights/2008/06-07-kelly-pavlik-vs-gary-lockett/video/pavlik-vs-lockett.html?autoplay=true>
 contest in Atlantic City to the darkest night of his life.

Two months ago this week Lockett was in Nick Blackwell’s corner when, after a 
bout against Chris Eubank Jr, his fighter ended up in aninduced coma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-in-coma-title-fight-defeat-chris-eubank-jr>
 for nine days. At least the story has a happy ending for, even ifBlackwell 
will never box again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/nick-blackwell-boxing-chris-eubank-jr-no-hard-feelings>
, he has recovered and remains close friends with his trainer.

Nick Blackwell: Eubanks were ‘inhuman and disgusting’ for going public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/nick-blackwell-eubanks-inhuman-disgusting-coma>
Lockett looks drained as the sound system in the fitness centre outside echoes 
around us. It is an ordinary morning in Cardiff and the world keeps turning. 
But in the hushed sanctuary of his gym, in this private space, tears have been 
shed and memories turned inside out. We have reached a place where he can smile 
again.

The 39-year-old Welshman nods and leans forward when asked if he can imagine 
himself working in boxing years from now. “I’ve been involved in boxing 30 
years and, even with kids who’ve never boxed, you see the difference it makes. 
It’s a wonderful, wonderful sport. I’m currently working with expelled children 
and the two big things you want is for them to avoid prison and become more 
employable. You need to improve their attitude, get them to think for 
themselves, become more disciplined and take some qualifications. You can make 
a positive difference through boxing.”

Lockett pauses before, sinking back into his chair, he speaks clearly. “I can 
honestly say that if I won the lottery on Saturday I will still be working with 
my fighters on Monday. I think so much of them. It’s not a job – it’s a hobby I 
love. But, after everything that happened with Nick, it took me three weeks to 
come back. The first day I nearly stopped myself three or four times. But 
everyone at the gym has been brilliant. The man downstairs at reception gave me 
a bear hug.”

Lockett mimics his embarrassment at that man-clinch. “I was like: ‘Yeah. OK. 
You all right?’ The guy said: ‘It’s so empty without you boxing fellers. You’re 
all such characters.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbf17040784b3a8cf9c0ab98cc6a432a9d212b3d%2F0_104_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Lockett%3A%20seeing%20Nick%20Blackwell%20on%20life-support%20will%20haunt%20me%20forever%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Lockett%3A%20seeing%20Nick%20Blackwell%20on%20life-support%20will%20haunt%20me%20forever%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbf17040784b3a8cf9c0ab98cc6a432a9d212b3d%2F0_104_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A swelling grew over Nick Blackwell’s eye during his bout with Chris Eubank 
Jr. Photograph: TGSPhoto/REX/Shutterstock 
The best boxing men are not just characters. They are people who, dealing with 
hurt every day, can express fear and vulnerability in stark yet vivid language. 
Lockett, typically, talks with fierce, flowing eloquence. “It’s still very raw, 
it’s still very painful,” he says of the near tragic night when Blackwell faced 
Eubank Jr. “I’ve never seen the fight back and I’ll never watch it as long as I 
live. Luckily it turned out OK in the end but, obviously, it will never leave 
me.”

Lockett starts to cry. But he is such a strong and proud man that he keeps 
talking even as he instinctively brings his hands to his face to wipe away the 
tears. He rightly feels no shame in showing his emotions because that grave 
night marked him.

“Fighters always say: ‘Oh, I know the risks’, but you don’t expect the risks 
to be bestowed on you. To see Nick on a life-support machine will haunt me the 
rest of my life. To see a happy-go-lucky, lovely, lovely boy, who I have a 
special relationship with, on a life-support machine …”

The trainer shudders, and then continues. “But you can’t stop a fight at the 
first sign of trouble. I know Nick better than most people. He’s as hard as 
nails and always comes back. I know he was losing by a long way but I’m trying 
to think of ways to help him change the flow.

“I spoke to [the referee] Victor Loughlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-balls-of-wrath/2016/mar/29/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-boxing-corner-referee>
 the following Wednesday. Vic is possibly the best ref in the country. If there 
was a time to stop it earlier Vic would have seen that. Vic refereed Blackwell 
when he was behind after the first five against Damon Jones and then knocked 
him out. Vic knew this kid starts slow and then, boom, he fires. It was very 
hard for Victor. He was in turmoil over whether to referee the next weekend. I 
said: ‘If you refereed one of my boys I would not have 1% less confidence in 
you than I did last week.’ Hopefully he took some positivity from that.”

I’ve never seen the fight back and I’ll never watch it as long as I live

Blackwell himself has since been interviewed by The Sun and on ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/nick-blackwell-eubanks-inhuman-disgusting-coma?CMP=twt_gu>
 by Piers Morgan. In Monday’s newspaper interview Blackwell is quoted as saying 
that if he throws one more punch in his life he would like it to land on the 
jaw of Chris Eubank. Blackwell told Morgan that ‘I can’t actually remember 
saying that.’ He also said ‘No’ when asked by Morgan if he would like to punch 
Eubank. But he dismissed the argument that Eubank Sr had acted compassionately 
by telling his son to aim for Blackwell’s body rather than his head towards the 
end of the fight. “As anyone in boxing knows, it’s more of a tactical thing,” 
Blackwell said. “He couldn’t stop me to the head, so he went to the body to try 
and get rid of me.”

Considering his own role, and preferring not to discuss the Eubanks, Lockett 
talks powerfully. “If there was any sign of anything in the corner I would have 
stopped it straightaway. Remember how I got criticised forpulling Ricky Owen 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/boxing/8706849.stm> out of Prizefighter? He’d 
won two fights and was in the final against Willie Casey, a strong man. Rick 
was cut over his eye, and knackered, so I pulled him out.

“It cost him £8,000 but when it comes to protecting someone, money is 
irrelevant. If it had cost him £150,000 I would have still pulled him out. I 
pulled out Kerry Hope against Darren Barker.Gavin Rees had two good rounds 
against Adrien Broner <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uKHjUtf9bYY> before he 
was dropped. As soon as I threw in the towel I got criticised: ‘Lockett is too 
close to his fighters.’”

Lockett had an impressive 30-2 record <http://boxrec.com/boxer/14966> as a 
professional and in his final bout in 2008, he lost his world title challenge 
againstKelly Pavlik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/08/pavliklockettmiddleweight> – 
then considered the hottest fighter in the US. Steeped in boxing, Lockett was 
convinced Blackwell could beat Eubank. He had watched from the corner when, 
after a fitful start, Blackwell found the spark tostop John Ryder 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/20876/9870349/nick-blackwell-wins-british-middleweight-title-with-stoppage-victory-over-john-ryder>
 and win the British middleweight title last June. He did the same two months 
later when stopping Jones.

“We were very confident because, in the right mood, Nick is relentless. Eubank 
likes to produce these 20-punch flurries. But then he needs a big breather. The 
plan was to pressure Chris and not give him respite. But Nick never switched 
on. He was jabbing and that’s about it. Nick just couldn’t execute the game 
plan.”

A dominant Eubank snapped Blackwell’s head back repeatedly with hurtful 
uppercuts. A grotesque swelling formed above Blackwell’s left eye. “I kept 
thinking Nick’s going to switch on but we got to round seven and he lost it 
big,” Lockett recalls. “He hadn’t landed a punch and Eubank was teeing off. I 
told Nick he had to fight back and asked: ‘What’s his power like?’ Nick said: 
‘He can’t hurt me. He’s not got much power – he’s just snappy. But when he lets 
them go he’s relentless and I’m finding it hard to tuck up and come back with 
my shots.’

“After that Chris wasn’t the same. He’d used a lot of energy. I still had Nick 
losing every round but some people said he pinched one or two. I said: ‘You’re 
way behind but he looks knackered, this kid. If you jump on him now, pour out 
all your emotions and every bit of hard work. Throw as many punches as you 
can.’ I felt, with Eubank tiring, if Nick came on strong who knew what might 
happen. It was never a case of sending a beaten fighter out to take more 
punishment.”

Eubank stopped him in the 10th round when the referee asked the doctor to 
examine Blackwell’s swollen eye. After much deliberation the doctor ended the 
fight. Blackwell smiled sadly as he congratulated his opponent and listened to 
consoling words from Eubank Sr. But when did Lockett realise something was 
terribly wrong?

Nick Blackwell’s plight again underlines the risks boxers take | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-coma-chris-eubank-british-middleweight-bout>
“When Nick collapsed in my arms. I’d said: ‘Don’t worry about it. You weren’t 
yourself tonight. Just have a good rest.’ He said his head was starting to 
hurt. Then he started to slip. I got my right hand under his left armpit and 
called for the stool. I thought it was exhaustion but he slumped to the ground 
and they put the oxygen mask on his face. They did a wonderful job of getting 
him anaesthetised within 13 minutes of the fight ending.”

Did Lockett know the situation was critical? “I knew then. It’s horrific. I 
would have felt it if it had been any boxer. But with it being someone I’m 
particularly close to it’s horrendous.”

Lockett accompanied Blackwell and his family to St Mary’s hospital in 
Paddington. “After two and a half hours the doctor said: ‘It’s a bleed on the 
edge of the skull and we don’t need to operate. That’s very positive. We’ve 
seen encouraging signs. But I won’t lie to you. It is very serious.’”

His father-in-law, a former orthopaedic surgeon, tried to reassure Lockett. 
“It was still the worst time of my life by some distance,” the trainer says. 
“But imagine how much worse it was for Nick’s family. They’re very close.”

Lockett spent most of the next nine days at hospital but he was on a rare 
break with his own family when he spoke to Mick Hennessy, Blackwell’s promoter. 
“Mick said: ‘Nick’s awake. He’s talking and he’s laughing.’ The relief was 
huge. Absolutely huge. I had a pint of Guinness. And another. And a couple of 
glasses of wine when I got home.”

The impact on his family and his other fighters had been acute. “My wife is a 
brilliant mother and a very strong woman. But it affected her and the boys in 
the gym.Liam Williams <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/wales/35146482> [his unbeaten 
light-middleweight] was meant to defend his British and Commonwealth title the 
week after Nick. Alex Hughes and Jay Harris were on the undercard. I told them: 
‘You’re not boxing.’ Liam said: ‘I wouldn’t want to.’ He was in Nick’s corner 
with me and not in the right frame of mind to fight.

“We were supposed to go on a family holiday in the Easter break. I cancelled 
that. I couldn’t go on holiday with my boxer lying in hospital in a coma. Some 
people said: ‘You should go, take your mind off it.’ I said: ‘Take my mind off 
it? I want to be there for him. He’s my fighter. He’s my friend.”

How is Blackwell now? “I saw him yesterday. He’s great. He’s back to normal. 
Absolutely. I asked him: ‘How are you?’ Nick said: ‘Oh mate, I’m fine. How are 
you?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa508ba866d96c7e595da69569031d433f0e4573f%2F0_197_4418_2650%2F4418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Lockett%3A%20seeing%20Nick%20Blackwell%20on%20life-support%20will%20haunt%20me%20forever%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Lockett%3A%20seeing%20Nick%20Blackwell%20on%20life-support%20will%20haunt%20me%20forever%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fgary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa508ba866d96c7e595da69569031d433f0e4573f%2F0_197_4418_2650%2F4418.jpg>
 Gary Lockett said of Blackwell’s fight against Eubank Jr: ‘I kept thinking 
Nick’s going to switch on but we got to round seven and he lost it big’ 
Photograph: Adam Holt/Reuters 
Trainers are often the forgotten men in boxing and so Lockett hesitates. “I’m 
OK. I go back into the ring for the first time on 4 June. Liam is fighting. I’m 
very strong. I’m also confident I didn’t do anything wrong. I can honestly say 
I tried to act in Nick’s best interests. I tried to help him win the fight. I 
care about him.”

Lockett thinks hard when asked how he might react if Williams hits trouble. 
Can he stay calm and clear-thinking and allow Williams to find a way out of 
such danger? “I guess we’ll see. Do I have extra concerns? Of course. I will be 
even more careful. Everyone says they know the risks. But, really, you’re not 
quite in touch with the risks until this happens. It make you think much more 
deeply about everything.”

Then, like sunlight breaking through a dark bank of cloud, Lockett looks up 
and smiles. “You know, after a period of doubting myself, there were just too 
many positive messages for me to turn away. I decided to stop thinking about 
the negatives and start focusing on the positives. We’ve got so much good work 
to do. We’ve all got so much hope again.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fboxer-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-press-conference-coma-fight-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boxer%20Nick%20Blackwell%20criticises%20Eubanks%20for%20giving%20press%20conference%20after%20coma%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fboxer-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-press-conference-coma-fight-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boxer%20Nick%20Blackwell%20criticises%20Eubanks%20for%20giving%20press%20conference%20after%20coma%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fboxer-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-press-conference-coma-fight-video&media=>
Boxer Nick Blackwell criticises Eubanks for giving press conference after coma 
fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/may/23/boxer-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-press-conference-coma-fight-video> 