
Britain’s triumphant Olympians and Paralympians partied beneath sunny skies as 
they deservedly took the acclaim of the crowds in Trafalgar Square.

But during the first leg of their 48‑hour victory lap on Monday, it was not 
just the traditional Manchester weather that threatened to rain on Team GB’s 
parade but the bad vibes emanating from the structure in the east of the city 
that up to now has been championed as the symbol of all that is good about the 
great National Lottery-fuelled charge up the Olympic medal table.

It wasn’t the traditional Manchester weather that threatened to rain on Team 
GB’s parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/you-can-feel-the-atmosphere-britains-olympians-and-paralympians-enjoy-rainy-victory-parade>
 on Monday but the bad vibes emanating from the structure in the east of the 
city that up to now has been championed as the symbol of all that is good about 
the great national lottery-fuelledcharge up the Olympic medal table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/aug/05/rio-olympics-2016-medal-table-and-results-in-full>
.

The freebie foam hands with crossed fingers wielded by many in the crowd were 
a reminder of the funding mechanism that combined with a brutal “no compromise” 
strategy to alchemise an extraordinary run of success that culminated in the 
sight of Britain leapfrogging China to finish second in the medal table in Rio.

They are also an apt symbol for the unusual, uneasy trepidation with which the 
architects of that revolution might be tracking public sentiment as they turn 
their eyes to Tokyo in 2020.

'You can feel the atmosphere': Britain's Olympians and Paralympians enjoy 
rainy victory parade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/you-can-feel-the-atmosphere-britains-olympians-and-paralympians-enjoy-rainy-victory-parade>
Watching the excitable hockey goalkeeper Maddie Hinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/oct/17/heroes-parade-in-manchester-in-pictures>
 filming her team-mates, most of whom appear not to have come down sincethat 
incredible night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
 under the lights in Rio de Janeiro, it was hard to be cynical. Kate 
Richardson-Walsh, their redoubtable leader who retired on the highest of highs, 
called the parade “an amazing send-off to an amazing summer”.

Likewise on seeing the excited, beaming faces of the youngsters snapping 
selfies with Lutalo Muhammad or Nicola Adams it was easy to park doubt for an 
afternoon. Or hearing Hannah Cockroft pay tribute to those who had flooded into 
central Manchester despite the teeming rain to acclaimthe Paralympians who 
defied dire predictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/kadeen-cox-sarah-storey-symbols-paralympicsgb-rio>
 about Rio’s readiness to again cut through with the help of Channel 4.

Yet despite the stage-managed saccharin rush of the Manchester parade and the 
second leg in London, it was impossible to entirely erase the nagging questions
engendered by the Fancy Bears leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks>
.

To believe in the sanctity of the Great Medal Rush you must also invest fully 
in the transformation of British cycling

The drip, drip corrosiveness, no doubt exactly what the Russian hackers had in 
mind when they began to leak the medical records of Rio medallists on to the 
internet, has probably had an effect on the public mood.

And the longer Sir Dave Brailsford goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/dave-brailsford-team-sky-bag-bradley-wiggins>
 without being able to quell the pressing questions surrounding British Cycling 
and its professional offshoot Team Sky, so indivisible particularly in their 
earlier days, the more damaging it is likely to become. That is the unwanted 
side-effect of a PR disaster that is teeteringon the brink of becoming a crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
 of confidence in the methods used by Team Sky and, by extension, British 
Cycling over a long period.

The delay in producing satisfactory answers is increasingly unfair on everyone 
else at the Manchester velodrome. For to believe in the sanctity of the Great 
British Medal Rush you must also invest fully in the transformation of British 
cycling over that period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Folympic-parade-manchester-fancy-bears-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F583d54dedd86647bd9d126fb358e1975d8f38049%2F0_181_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GB%20victory%20parades%3A%20cycling%20questions%20and%20Fancy%20Bears%20leaks%20cast%20cloud%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Folympic-parade-manchester-fancy-bears-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GB%20victory%20parades%3A%20cycling%20questions%20and%20Fancy%20Bears%20leaks%20cast%20cloud%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Folympic-parade-manchester-fancy-bears-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F583d54dedd86647bd9d126fb358e1975d8f38049%2F0_181_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Foam hands and tickertape greet Britain’s Rio 2016 stars in Manchester, but 
nagging questions over cycling won’t go away. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Before the Rio Games, cycling was under huge pressure for different reasons – 
the doubts were all about whether, in the wake of thedeparture of Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/british-cycling-team-chaos-shane-sutton-rio-olympics-2016>
 and searching questions over an alleged culture of bullying and sexism, it 
could still come up with the goods in terms of precious metal.

The sport did – and how – with Bradley Wiggins front and centre as he grabbed 
the team pursuit gold that made him the most decorated British Olympian in 
history.

Wiggins, so ubiquitous throughout the Olympic summer of 2012 and the 
celebrations that followed, was conspicuous by his absence in the wake of the 
controversy over the ethics of the therapeutic use exemptions (TUE) granted 
before each of his major targets in 2011, 2012 and 2013.

None of which should detract from the achievements of those who giddily 
received the acclaim of the crowds but all that has followed in the weeks since 
golden-nosed planes ferried home triumphant Olympians and Paralympians cannot 
but help take the shine off a little.

Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> is also the sport that 
embodies the theory elite success can be somehow transformed into increased 
grassroots participation. A glut of gold medals has, through investment from 
national lottery players and sponsorship from a media giant, been turned into 
increased participation.

The hope is that with last week’s capture of the 2019 road race world 
championships by Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/yorkshire-host-cycling-2019-road-world-championships>
, and an attendant £15m boost to facilities funding, the virtuous circle will 
keep turning. Yet what should have been a good news story for the sport was 
drowned out by the continuing static.

For all the rhetoric, the jury is still out on whether the hundreds of 
millions invested in elite sport over the past 12 years has had a commensurate 
effect on the rest of the population.

It is only through hard yards and proper investment in facilities and coaching 
– not well-deserved parades and podium places – that there can be any kind of 
link between the two.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fgatecrasher-pretends-to-be-olympic-fencer-on-manchester-parade-bus-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gatecrasher%20pretends%20to%20be%20Olympic%20fencer%20on%20Manchester%20parade%20bus%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fgatecrasher-pretends-to-be-olympic-fencer-on-manchester-parade-bus-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gatecrasher%20pretends%20to%20be%20Olympic%20fencer%20on%20Manchester%20parade%20bus%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fgatecrasher-pretends-to-be-olympic-fencer-on-manchester-parade-bus-video&media=>
Gatecrasher pretends to be Olympic fencer on Manchester parade bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/18/gatecrasher-pretends-to-be-olympic-fencer-on-manchester-parade-bus-video>
Theresa May, who wrung every last drop out of the flag-waving feelgood factor 
engendered by the Games, will have to prove more committed than her predecessor 
in staying the legacy course if the summer achievements of Hinch and co are not 
to dissolve in the autumn rain.

Meanwhile, those who built Britain’s medal factory, its sayings and systems so 
closely modelled on cycling’s, will simply have to hope for no long-term 
lasting damage to the public’s faith in their project.
 