
Gene Wilder <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gene-wilder> was a smart, 
industrious and often very funny actor and writer who earned a slow-burn cult 
status as the weirdo chocolate mogul Willy Wonka in the Roald Dahl adaptation 
Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory (1971).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcFvrvtH0psI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcFvrvtH0psI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcFvrvtH0psI&media=>
His sharp, handsome face with intense blue eyes became more cartoon-like as he 
got older and he had a regular paycheck by teaming up with Richard Pryor in 
broad comedies like Silver Streak and Stir Crazy — a double-act which perhaps 
showed neither to his full potential. He also directed and adapted the 80s 
romantic comedy The Woman in Red, which got an Oscar for its hit Stevie Wonder 
tune, I Just Called To Say I Love You.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGpDa6C296Iw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGpDa6C296Iw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGpDa6C296Iw&media=>
But his claim to fame lay in his partnership with his great comedy 
collaborator,Mel Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mel-brooks>, 
effortlessly in tune with each other’s classic vein of American Jewish comedy. 
With Brooks he created three giant comic hits: The Producers (1967), Blazing 
Saddles (1974) and Young Frankenstein (1974). And the first of these is a 
masterpiece, whose resonance continues to this moment. Did Donald J Trump only 
run for office so he could increase his TV earnings potential? Is he making 
increasingly outrageous statements so that he will be released of a burden he 
never really wanted — and which may end in disastrous revelation of his tax 
affairs — only to find that his poisonous provocations only make him more 
loved? Did he get this idea from The Producers?

Gene Wilder plays Leo Bloom, the nerdy little accountant who comes to work for 
Max Bialystock, played by Zero Mostel (with a weird Trump-ish combover) a 
failed Broadway producer. Out of pure academic interest, Bloom notes that if 
Bialystock can persuade enough of his little-old-lady backers to put in far 
more money than he needs, and the show is a spectacular flop, then he can keep 
all the excess cash and never be investigated by his notional investors or the 
tax authorities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtCNjOBzg8tc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtCNjOBzg8tc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtCNjOBzg8tc&media=>
Bialystock of course declares the idea to be pure genius, and they hit on the 
idea of a Hitler musical which naturally becomes a hit. Gene Wilder’s face is 
perfect: seething and wincing and gibbering with nerves and excitement, 
especially when he was reduced to a cringing mess of anxiety by being deprived 
of his childhood “blue blanket”. Wilder was far better thanMatthew Broderick in 
the stage show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/apr/29/features.review27>, who 
didn’t have half the neurotic rocket-fuel that Wilder brought to the role. (I 
thinkSimon Helberg’s nervy pianist in Florence Foster Jenkins  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/05/simom-helberg-big-bang-theory-cartoonish-pianist-florence-foster-jenkins>
took a little from Wilder’s Leo Bloom.)

In the raucous spoof western, Blazing Saddles, Wilder plays legendary 
gunfighter Jim, who teams up with a black sheriff called Bart, played by the 
distinguished Shakespearian actor Cleavon Little, although the part was 
originally penciled in for Richard Pryor: the Wilder/Pryor partnership would 
only come into being later. As ever, good deadpan stuff from Wilder who was 
however rather upstaged by the uproarious setpieces — like the deafening “fart” 
medley — and also the other cast members, including veteran players Slim 
Pickens and Harvey Korman as the horribly corrupt politician Hedley Lamarr.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA&media=>
Wilder probably came into his own more with Young Frankenstein which he fully 
co-wrote with Brooks and which he put his stamp on. He is Dr Frankenstein, a 
modern-day neurophysiologist, tormented by the memory of his notorious 
grandfather and by his sense of destiny. Again, he was in danger of being a 
straight-man to huge comedy turns like Marty Feldman as Igor and Peter Boyle as 
the monster, but Wilder’s strange beady-eyed, frizzy-haired intensity always 
allowed him to dominate each scene in exactly the right way. He really did look 
mad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw1FLZPFI3jc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw1FLZPFI3jc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw1FLZPFI3jc&media=>
The late 60s and early 70s were Gene Wilder’s moment, and perhaps he never 
quite equalled it later. But with Leo Bloom, Willy Wonka, Jim and Dr 
Frankenstein is a glorious quartet of comic performances.
 