
Gene Wilder exemplified a certain kind of crazed comic intensity that found a 
mass audience in the 1970s and 80s, with Wilder seeming to function best in 
partnership with other comedy greats: principally Mel Brooks, with whom he made 
three masterpieces, andRichard Pryor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/richard-pryor>.

The Producers
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpTW2ZSjG5N0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpTW2ZSjG5N0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpTW2ZSjG5N0&media=>
Wilder had a small role in a TV production of Death of Salesman, and another 
minor part in Bonnie and Clyde, but the film that really put him on the map was 
Mel Brooks’ celebrated The Producers, released in 1967. Wilder played highly 
strung accountant Leo Bloom (named in homage to James Joyce’s central character 
in Ulysses) opposite Zero Mostel as the pair work a scheme to swindle wannabe 
theatrical backers on Broadway. Brooks originally tried to cast Peter Sellers 
as Bloom, but Sellers dropped out; Brooks remembered the “natural comic” he had 
met some years previously and the rest is history.

Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFdSORiSaRW8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFdSORiSaRW8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFdSORiSaRW8&media=>
Roald Dahl didn’t much like Wilder’s version 
<https://uk.movies.yahoo.com/why-roald-dahl-hated-willy-wonka-and-the-chocolate-120115179.html>
 of eccentric sweetmaker Willy Wonka, having lobbied to get Spike Milligan the 
role. Be that as it may, the pop-art design and nifty musical soundtrack has 
meant the film remained a candy-coloured cult classic, and Wilder’s fizzing 
energy works well in the role.

Blazing Saddles
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTr9xVmCL0bA&media=>
Wilder did his best work in the 1970s with Brooks, and this spoof western 
nailed it – and was commercially huge. As the Waco Kid – a boozed-up gunslinger 
who recovers to help the new sheriff see off a gang of racist goons – Wilder 
carried it off brilliantly. As he did in Young Frankenstein, Brooks’ 1975 
parody monster movie, which includes the edifying sight ofWilder hoofing with 
his lumbering creation to Puttin’ on the Ritz 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1FLZPFI3jc>.

The Frisco Kid
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoOZP2iKns3M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoOZP2iKns3M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoOZP2iKns3M&media=>
In outline, this sounds like the western Mel Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mel-brooks> should have made, but bizarrely 
it was directed by The Dirty Dozen’s Robert Aldrich. Wilder plays a Godfearing 
rabbi trying to get a Torah scroll across the old west in the mid-19th century; 
he runs across Amish, native Americans, con artists and a bankrobber (played 
by, yes, Harrison Ford).

Stir Crazy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL5ylel-imFg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL5ylel-imFg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL5ylel-imFg&media=>
Wilder found another comedy partner in the shape of Richard Pryor; they were 
first cast together in Silver Streak, which features the slightly less edifying 
sight ofWilder hamming it up in blackface 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UE__QBVpEmg>. They came together a second time 
on Stir Crazy – which was directed by Sidney Poitier – as two friends who end 
up in jail after being framed. There’s a pleasing equality to his and Pryor’s 
onscreen relationship, which represented a considerable advance in Hollywood’s 
appreciation of African American talent.
 