
George Groves, whose world chances arrived like London buses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/george-groves-boxing-world-title-fights>
 but ended up splashing his boots and leaving him behind, says he is in prime 
shape to rekindle his career, starting with what might be a tricky engagement 
at Wembley Arena on Friday against the 34-year-old Eduard “Energy Eddy” 
Gutknecht.

If, as he predicts, he beats the seasoned Kazakh – a former European 
light-heavyweight champion who has mixed in elite company for much of his 
career – Groves expects to fight for the WBA’s vacant super-middleweight title 
against the excellent Russian Fedor Chudinov.

Money might tempt Carl Froch but Gennady Golovkin fight doesn’t add up | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/14/money-carl-froch-comeback-gennady-golovkin-canelo-alvarez>
The Londoner and other super-middleweights in the WBA rankings have been 
gifted an unexpected opportunity as their “super” champion, Germany’s Felix 
Sturm, is temporarily at least out of the picture after his B sample taken for 
his controversial rematch win against Chudinov in Februarytested positive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/felix-sturm-lose-wba-super-middleweight-belt-failed-drugs-test>
 for the anabolic steroid stanozolol.

“He’s vacated the belt,” Groves said, “and I think he’s cleverly done that, 
thinking next year he’ll come back. It’s up to the WBA whether they want to be 
hard with him or not. It’s now a criminal offence in Germany.”

Clouding – or maybe enhancing – the picture is Tyron Zeuge, the German who 
holds the WBA’s regular title – and is managed by Groves’s London-based German 
promoter, Nisse Sauerland. Groves is not short of options. He does not expect 
an easy time of it against Gutknecht, although it would be a serious setback 
were he to lose, or perform poorly.

Groves is a smart operator – too smart to dismiss Gutknecht as a mere warm-up. 
He needs to pick up on the momentum he has clearly had since joining Shane 
McGuigan, and he looked as sharp as ever beating Martin Murray last time out.

“People say I’m back to the old George Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/george-groves>. I understand that and I 
appreciate that. When I turned pro, and worked with Adam Booth, he taught me 
how to punch, punch clean, punch crisp. I became a counter-puncher. After the 
[James] DeGale fight, we were spending so much time on the back foot, that it 
became really comfortable.

“When that relationship broke down, I was fighting the fight [Booth] wanted, 
and ultimately it didn’t work out for me. I think I’ve improved, being a volume 
puncher, a pressure fighter. I’m best being able to adjust my fight quickly, 
punch hard, punch fast. What Shane has done now is not just setting up the shot 
with a feint, but getting me to vary punch power and punch speed. I’ve always 
had good punch variety, different combinations and different shots.

“I feel I notice it more and more in sparring that sparring partners are 
suffering, struggling with my power. And in the fights we’ve had good momentum. 
Each fight has been a step up in opposition, but it’s also been a step up in 
performance – considering a lot of people felt the Martin Murray fight was 
going to be 50-50.”

Beyond Gutknecht and possibly Chudinov there is the tantalising prospect of a 
second fight against DeGale, whom he beat five years ago in one of the great 
domestic grudge matches, but who has gone on to become world title holder and 
has a unification bout againstGroves’s most recent conqueror, Badou Jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/george-groves-loses-third-world-title-fight-this-time-to-badou-jack>
, in New York in January.

The 20 best pound-for-pound boxers in the world right now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2016/nov/03/best-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford>
“I’d love a fight with James DeGale,” Groves said. “So would he. And I’d love 
another fight with Badou Jack. If I had to choose, I’d love to fight for the 
vacant WBA belt, wherever that may be, then fight Jack, and I’m sure James must 
be super excited that he’s in a unification fight. I’m sure he’ll be confident 
about winning. Jack is an underrated fighter, even against me. I didn’t box at 
my best [losing on points after a first-round knockdown]. I didn’t box how I 
could have or should have against him. But I’ve learned from that.

“Certainly, if push comes to shove, if nothing else is working, I’m sure I can 
get a fight with James at some stage. I think that fight sells even without a 
world title.”

After some tough times, especially his stoppage losses to Carl Froch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jun/01/carl-froch-george-groves> 
(who has scotched rumours of a comeback against Gennady Golovkin), Groves seems 
to be in a good place again.

He says DeGale v Jack is “a 12-round chess match that could go either way. If 
Badou Jack figures out James DeGale, which fighters can, then he will beat 
James. If he can’t, then he won’t. James has got a style with which some 
fighters just cannot get to grips. But as soon as you get the measure of him, 
when to work, when to not work, how to engage with him, then you beat him.

“He won’t be able to lay on the ropes for two and a-half minutes a round, like 
he has done previously. He has to be mentally switched on. Mental fatigue is 
probably what hits him before anything else. I’ve done sessions with Jim 
McDonnell [DeGale’s trainer] and they are sessions you have to switch your mind 
off for, because they can drone on.

“James has obviously made it work for him but the flip side is he does switch 
off mentally. I’m not discrediting anything he does, because he’s performed 
well with it. He’s a world champion. I don’t think [his training methods] would 
suit me, but it’s horses for courses.”
 