
Georginio Wijnaldum has said it is essential Liverpool follow victory over 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> with 
another three points at Sunderland on Monday to increase the pressure on 
Premier League leaders Chelsea.

Liverpool are the closest challengers to Antonio Conte’s side having moved 
four points ahead of City with ahard-fought win at Anfield on New Year’s Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. Jürgen Klopp’s team, who remain six points behind the leaders, kick off at 
struggling Sunderland less than 44 hours after the conclusion of the City match 
and may be without their captain, Jordan Henderson, as well as the confirmed 
absentees Philippe Coutinho and Joël Matip. Henderson was withdrawn with a heel 
injury against Pep Guardiola’s team, although it is not the same heel that 
sidelined the midfielder for sustained spells last season.

Sunderland v Liverpool: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/sunderland-liverpool-match-preview>
Chelsea do not play until Wednesday’s awkward assignment at Tottenham Hotspur 
and Wijnaldum, who secured Liverpool’s win over City with an outstanding 
header, believesSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> is 
an opportunity for Klopp’s team to pressure the leaders by cutting the gap to 
three points.

The Holland international said: “You always have to put pressure on an 
opponent. We just have to win the game. Will it put pressure on them? I don’t 
know, maybe. Sunderland is a tough game as they also want to win because of the 
threat of relegation. Chelsea are flying right now and doing great but we have 
to focus on our own game and we will see if we come closer but the main thing 
is to keep doing what we are doing now, win our own games and not look at 
Chelsea because we don’t control that performance.

“We have to give 100% and show how good we are. We can go far but we have to 
show it game by game. It is going well now but we don’t know how it will be 
going in two months so we must make sure we go all the time.”

Klopp said it must be “annoying” for Chelsea to have won 13 league games in 
succession and findLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
still on their coat-tails, and Wijnaldum credited the manager for instilling in 
his players the belief to beat Guardiola’s expensively assembled side.

Liverpool defence starts with Roberto Firmino to nullify Manchester City | 
Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/liverpool-defence-roberto-firmino-manchester-city>
“He just gives us confidence. In my opinion he does not do a lot special, just 
gives us the confidence we need, the confidence in our own quality and that we 
are a good team,” the midfielder explained. “He spoke in the team meeting and 
said, ‘We have to show our quality and show them how good you are.’

“I was not here before Klopp came so I can’t give my opinion on how the 
football has changed but in my opinion it is great to work under the manager. 
He gives players a happy feeling to play for Liverpool. What he wants is that 
we have joy in the things we do – training, games – and that is important for a 
footballer.”

Wijnaldum also claimed Quincy Promes, his international team-mate, would 
succeed at Liverpool should Klopp develop his interest in the Spartak Moscow 
midfielder this month. “I think he knows how great Liverpool is, I knew it 
before I came here,” said the summer recruit from Newcastle United. “I don’t 
know if everything is true about what they say as I don’t speak with him about 
that. Of course I want him to come to Liverpool because I know he is a good 
player and also a good person who can help the team but it is something for the 
manager and the scouts, not for me.”
 