
The chess players of Ströbeck have a habit of frustrating their opponents. 
Throughout the ages, strangers visiting the village in the foot of the Harz 
mountains in centralGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> have 
been confronted with a community that has not only been steeped in the “royal 
game” from an unusually early age, but has also developed its own idiosyncratic 
rules, including special moves, additional pieces and cryptic commands.

“That’s the accusation this place has always had to live with,” said Kathrin 
Baltzer, who manages the chess museum overlooking Ströbeck’s village square. 
“Little wonder we always win, when no one else understands how we play the 
game.”

For the last decade it looked as if demographic change might spell the endgame 
for Germany’s onlySchachdorf, or “chess village”, but in 2017 its 1,060 
inhabitants are newly confident that their customs will continue to unsettle 
opponents long into the future. Shortly before the end of last year Ströbeck’s 
chess traditions were officially added to Germany’sinventory 
<https://www.unesco.de/en/kultur/immaterielles-kulturerbe/german-inventory.html>
 of “intangible cultural heritage” after aUnesco recommendation 
<http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/en/convention> to take steps to safeguard 
threatened customs and traditions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f5620e47d0bd12f81e9e8ee47cc397f56dd2eb3%2F0_15_1700_1020%2F1700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany's%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20'leap%20of%20joy'%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%27s%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20%27leap%20of%20joy%27%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f5620e47d0bd12f81e9e8ee47cc397f56dd2eb3%2F0_15_1700_1020%2F1700.jpg>
 Ströbeck children in a live chess game. Photograph: Alamy 
“In a region which many intelligent young people are leaving, keeping alive 
our chess traditions isn’t easy,” said Baltzer. “But the Unesco name will offer 
us some symbolic protection.”

According to a local legend celebrated in artworks across the village, chess 
arrived in Ströbeck thanks to a nobleman who was imprisoned in the village and 
taught his guards how to play in the year 1011, only a relatively short time 
after the game had spread from India and Persia toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

A 17th-century manual by the scholar Gustavus Selenus first described a 
Ströbeck variant of chess, which was played on a special board with 96 squares, 
as opposed to the usual 64, and featured an additional cast of figures known as 
“advisers”, “old men” and “couriers”.

Also known as “courier chess”, the rules included a special move known as the 
“Ströbeck leap of joy”, whereby a pawn had to jump back to its starting 
position before it could be converted into a new piece.

Other traditions irked players who passed through the village. If, in spite of 
the home advantage, a Ströbeck player was about to walk into a trap set by the 
visiting opponent, members of the audience were allowed to shout out the 
warning “Vadder, mit Rat!” meaning “Father, be careful” in the local dialect.

Other customs demanded that anyone who wanted to marry a woman born in the 
village had to first challenge the mayor to a game on the black and white 
boards.

By the 20th century, chess had come to define Ströbeck’s identity. A glass 
case in the museum contains a bundle of emergency currency notes with chess 
motifs, issued locally at the height of hyperinflation of the early 1920s. One 
note, entitled “fool’s mate”, shows the US president Woodrow Wilson 
metaphorically checkmating Germany with the “14 points” speech that became the 
basis for the treaty of Versailles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4c8e71fbb3fbc4b689fff0aae94deb26769f21b%2F0_0_661_434%2F661.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany's%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20'leap%20of%20joy'%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%27s%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20%27leap%20of%20joy%27%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4c8e71fbb3fbc4b689fff0aae94deb26769f21b%2F0_0_661_434%2F661.png>
 An emergency banknote from Ströbeck, issued in 1921. Photograph: Schachmuseum 
Ströbeck 
After the second world war, when Ströbeck found itself on the eastern side of 
the new border dividing Germany, the village’s chess customs received a further 
boost thanks to the Soviet Union’s own gaming prowess. “East Germany’s big 
brother was a great chess nation. That helped,” said Volker Heinholdt, the 
primary school’s headteacher.

Measurable success, however, remained limited. In the late 1980s the village 
claimed its first and only notable trophy when one of its residents won the 
GDR’s speed chess championship.

When the Berlin Wall fell and the old political order with it, it was 
Ströbeck’s chess tradition that proved the most stable civic institution. At 
the first free council elections after reunification, the local chess club got 
the largest share of the vote, beating the Christian Democratic party into 
second place.

Since then, declining economic fortunes and a dwindling population have 
threatened to put an end to Ströbeck’s heritage. The local school, where chess 
lessons have been mandatory from the second to fourth year since 1823, had to 
close down its secondary branch in 2004 because student numbers had fallen 
below the required minimum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93fdee73f0aa631af9ac68270ecd3b034468c287%2F0_290_5332_3199%2F5332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany's%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20'leap%20of%20joy'%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%27s%20chess%20village%20hopes%20heritage%20listing%20proves%20%27leap%20of%20joy%27%20move&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgermany-chess-village-heritage-listing-strobeck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93fdee73f0aa631af9ac68270ecd3b034468c287%2F0_290_5332_3199%2F5332.jpg>
 Children in Ströbeck play chess in the early 1900s. Photograph: Ullstein 
Bild/Getty Images 
The village pub, where locals used to hone their skills over a beer, now only 
opens sporadically for tournaments and the annual “human chess” festival, 
during which Ströbeckers in medieval dress are directed across the chequered 
village square by two players perched on tennis-umpire chairs.

Local students traditionally played the pieces, but in recent years older 
people have had to step in. “The school is the important thing for Ströbeck. 
Without the school, our traditions will die out,” said Lisa Försterling, one of 
the senior members of the chess club.

The village mayor, Jens Müller, said he has not had to play a game of chess 
against someone keen to marry a local woman since 2011, when he won the match 
but let the groom off for a €70 donation to the chess club.

Being recognised as part of Germany’s cultural heritage has reinjected 
Ströbeck with optimism, said Müller, a member of the Social Democratic party. 
The village’s official status could help secure funding in the future. There 
are plans to seek sponsors to manufacture new “courier chess” boards and 
pieces, possibly for a new tournament using the old rules.

With a bit of luck, Ströbeck could one day even be upgraded to Unesco’s 
international heritage list 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UNESCO_Intangible_Cultural_Heritage_Lists>, 
unlocking further financial support. To get there, however, it faces local 
competition in a similar discipline. The town of Altenburg, famous as the 
birthplace of the popular cardgame Skat, was also declared part of Germany’s 
intangible cultural heritage last year.
 