
Germany’s interior ministry is seeking to overhaul the country’s security 
apparatus and make it easier to deport rejected asylum seekers in the wake of
last month’s terrorist attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/terrifying-berlin-market-attack-witnesses-describe-carnage-germany>
 on a Berlin Christmas market.

Outlining a raft of measures in an article for the Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Zeitung <http://www.faz.net/> , the interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said 
recent terror attacks, as well as reports ofcyber attacks on the Bundestag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/07/pro-russian-group-cyber-attack-german-government-websites-angela-merkel-ukraine-prime-minister>
, meant “we have to face the fact that our state has to be better prepared for 
difficult times than it is now”.

One step towards such an overhaul would be to centralise the country’s 
counter-terrorism apparatus, said De Maizière, who is a member of Angela 
Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union party. “We don’t have federal jurisdiction 
to deal with national catastrophes. The jurisdiction for the fight against 
international terrorism is fragmented,” he said.

“The federal police’s scope of action is restricted to railway stations, 
airports and border controls,” he wrote, stressing that “it is time” to 
re-examine Germany’s security setup.

Man wrongly arrested over Berlin attack says he fears for his life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/naveed-baloch-man-wrongly-arrested-berlin-attack-fears-for-his-life>
Anis Amri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man>
, the Tunisian man believed to have been behind the attack at Berlin’s 
Breitscheidplatz on 19 December, when an articulated lorry was used to plough 
into a busy Christmas market, had dropped off German security agencies’ radar 
even though he had been identified as a potential terrorist threat. In the 
aftermath of the attack some officials pointed to a mix-up of regional 
competences.

“The current remit of the federal police is too limited,” De Maizière wrote. 
“We need a set of common rules and better coordination, for instance in 
checking dangerous individuals.” The federal government should be given greater 
powers to steer domestic intelligence services, said the minister.

German authorities have also been criticised for failing to deport Amri, 24, 
despite his asylum appliction being rejected. Officials in North 
Rhine-Westphalia said paperwork required to extradite him had only arrived from 
Tunisia in the days after the attack.

In his article published on Tuesday, De Maizière called for a nationwide 
effort on the issue of deportation, suggesting that centralised departure 
centres should be set up to hold asylum seekers in the weeks or days leading up 
to their expulsion.

Berlin attacker manhunt ends in shootout but questions remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
In Italy, where Amri was shot dead during a confrontation with police on 23 
December, the new prime minister,Paolo Gentiloni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/italy-paolo-gentiloni-to-succeed-matteo-renzi-as-prime-minister>
, has signalled a similarly hardened stance on the issue of migrant expulsions.

Italy’s police chief, Franco Gabrielli, last Friday sent a two-page directive 
to police stations across the country ordering them to increase efforts to 
identify and deport migrants, telling officers to take “extraordinary action” 
before the “growing migratory pressure in an international context marked by 
instability and threats” to “control and remove irregular foreigners”.

The interior minister, Marco Minniti, plans to open several new detention 
centres that hold migrants ahead of their expulsion, a ministry source told 
Reuters.
 