
Germany is to consider new laws that would force social media platforms such as
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and search engines 
such as Google to take a more active role in policing illegal hate speech on 
their sites.

Measures considered by Angela Merkel’s coalition government include forcing 
companies to set up clear channels for registering complaints, to publish the 
number of complaints they receive and to hire legally qualified ombudsmen to 
carry out deletions.

Facebook's plan to tackle fake news raises questions over limitations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/facebook-fake-news-system-problems-fact-checking>
Online platforms that fail meet such legal requirements could be hit with 
fines calculated on the basis of their global annual turnover, or face 
on-the-spot fines of up to €500,000 if they neglect to remove posts in breach 
of German hate speech law within 24 hours.

Concerns over social media’s power to fire up populist narratives and boost 
conspiracy theories has increased after Britain’s vote to leave the European 
Union and Donald Trump’s shock election in November, with politicians across 
Europe looking anxiously ahead to elections in France andGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> next year.

In Germany, which has some of the toughest laws around hate speech – including 
prison sentences forHolocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> 
denial and inciting hatred against minorities – political frustration with tech 
companies’ refusal to take responsibility for content posted on their sites has 
increased markedly in recent months.

A hate speech taskforce including representatives from Google, Facebook and 
Twitter, set up by German justice minister Heiko Maas in autumn 2015, vowed to 
aim to delete illegal postings within 24 hours. But agovernment report 
published in late September this year 
<http://www.fair-im-netz.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Artikel/09262016_Testergebnisse_jugendschutz_net_Hasskriminalitaet.pdf;jsessionid=F742D7DC6FF0FE4673CF297A34EFA8AD.1_cid297?__blob=publicationFile&v=1>
 found that tech companies were still struggling to react adequately to 
breaches of law, with Facebook only deleting 46%, YouTube 10% and Twitter 1% of 
illegal content flagged up by normal, non-privileged users.


According to a investigation 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/digital/exklusive-sz-magazin-recherche-inside-facebook-1.3297138>
 by Süddeutsche Zeitung, Facebook currently employs about 600 people via the 
service provider Arvato to each carry out 2,000 deletions per day on its 
German-language accounts. But German officials say they have received no such 
information from the tech companies themselves.

If another report due at the start of next year showed no further improvement, 
the German government would take steps towards sanctioning companies, Maas told 
The Observer.

“We are already looking in detail at how we can make providers of online 
platforms criminally liable for undeleted content that breaks German law. Of 
course, if other measures don’t work we also need to think about fines. That 
would be a strong incentive for quick action.”

While German law currently sets an upper limit of €10 million for the amount 
companies can be fined for criminal offences, the justice ministry is 
independently looking into whether fines in the future can be calculated on the 
basis of a company’s global annual turnover.

“We urgently need more transparency,” said Maas, a member of the centre-left 
Social Democratic party. “We could imagine obliging social networks to publish 
at regular intervals how many complaints they have received about illegal hate 
speech and how they dealt with them. That way it would be visible for everyone 
how many complaints there are and how many deletions. That too would increase 
the pressure on Facebook,Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, Google and others.

“Companies that make money with their social networks have social obligations 
– it cannot be in any company’s interest that their platform is used to commit 
crimes”, he said.

While the debate in Germany has mostly focused on postings on Facebook, 
Twitter and YouTube, such law changes would also have wide-ranging consequences 
for theGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> search engine.

Last Sunday, an Observer article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/google-frames-shapes-and-distorts-how-we-see-world>
 pointed out that the top Google search result for the question “Did the 
Holocaust happen” linked to an article on a neo-Nazi website. While typing the 
same question in German into German Google does not yield this link, the first 
page of results still includes links to Holocaust-denial articles.

According to Christian Solmecke, a Cologne lawyer specialising in hate-speech 
offences, such statements are “unequivocally” covered by section 130, paragraph 
3 of the German criminal code, which states that “whosoever publicly or in a 
meeting approves of, denies or downplays an act committed under the rule of 
National Socialism [...] in a manner capable of disturbing the public peace 
shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding five years or a fine.”

While Google does not have to seek out illegal content out of its own accord, 
it has to react to any complaint, whether by deletion or by blocking access, 
Solmecke said: “According to German law, a complaint would immediately oblige 
Google to delete such content and avoid a future repeat of such a violation”.

Unlike the three social media sites at the heart of the German government’s 
current investigation – Facebook, Twitter and Google-owned Youtube – the search 
engine itself does not offer a prominently displayed channel for lodging 
complaints, such as Facebook’s abuse button.

A “send feedback” window at the bottom of Google’s search page allows ordinary 
users to message the search engine, but since there is no separate field for 
contact details, the process is a one-way street. The Guardian used the 
feedback box to Google about a link to a website by Ursula Haverbeck – a 
prominent German holocaust denier who has been repeatedly sent to prison under 
the incitement of hatred law – but the website was still listed as one of the 
engine’s top search results 24 hours later.

Josef Schuster, the president of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, 
called on Google and other tech companies to take a more active role in 
stopping the spread of hate speech online. “Websites that deny the Holocaust, 
stoke antisemitism and resentments against minorities, or spread other inhuman 
messages, are completely unacceptable”, Schuster said.










 