
Dr David Davies sees more than his fair share of 60 somethings. His clinic is 
situated in the medieval, west Somerset village of Dunster, which has one of 
the densest populations of older people anywhere in Britain.

But these days, sexagenarians don’t shuffle in looking sorry for themselves. 
Instead, he says, they are more likely to appear clad in lycra having cycled to 
their appointment across Exmoor National Park.


“They come to see me for unspecified aches and pains which, because they are 
so fit and think of themselves as young, they think must be caused by something 
really serious,” he says. “It generally takes at least three appointments 
before they can begin to even consider that their bodies might just be ageing – 
and then their reaction is one of absolute horror.

“People up to their late sixties nowadays really struggle with the fact that 
the ageing process is starting to affect them. It’s partly that people live so 
long and partly that we’ve picked up the idea that we can defeat the ageing 
process more or less entirely, thanks to a combination of medical advances and 
individual, personal care.”

 Like some of its rich-world peers, Britain has entered the age of the aged. A 
report by theResolution Foundation think-tank 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/> reveals that almost a third of people 
born today can expect to live to 100. In 2014 the average age in the UKexceeded 
40 for the first time 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/future-of-an-ageing-population> and 
by 2040 nearly 1 in 7 people will be over 75.

The report also reveals that 2017 marks a dramatic demographic turning point 
as the ratio of non-workers to workers (economically defined as the ‘effective 
dependency ratio’) starts to rise for the first time since the early 1980s, 
driven by the baby boomer generation entering retirement.

This demographic profile is unprecedented in human history. Our vastly 
improved life expectancy –growing by five hours a day 
<http://%282%29%20http//www.nature.com/nature/journal/v444/n7122/full/4441015a.html#B1>
 – was one of the great triumphs of the last century. It is now, however, the 
source of the greatest challenges – and opportunities – of this era.


It is a truly seismic, if quiet, transformation of not just our country but of 
our world.Alan Walker 
<https://www.shef.ac.uk/socstudies/staff/staff-profiles/walker>, professor of 
social policy and social gerontology at Sheffield University, leads theFuturage 
Road Map <http://futurage.group.shef.ac.uk/> project which will provide the 
European research agenda for ageing over the next 10 years. He puts the 
magnitude and far-reaching consequences of our ageing population on a par with 
climate change as one of the great global challenges of the immediate future.

 “The ageing population has implications for every aspect of society – 
personal relationships, family, labour market and public policy,” said Walker, 
who is also the director of the £22m,New Dynamics of Ageing programme 
<http://www.newdynamics.group.shef.ac.uk/> and was made a CBE in 2014 for his 
services to social science. “All of us will have to get used to there being 
more older people and fewer younger ones.”

 Between 2015 and 2020, over a period when the general population is expected 
to rise 3%, the number of those aged over 65 – already 10 million – is expected 
toincrease by 12% (1.1 million) <http://(4) 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/lifeexpectancies>
 and is projected tonearly double to around 19 million by 2050 <http://(5) 
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/key-issues-for-the-new-parliament/value-for-money-in-public-services/the-ageing-population/>
.

 The dramatic impact our ageing population is going to have on every aspect on 
human life and lifestyles can also be compared to that wrought by the 
Industrial Revolution. Every part of our lives will have to be rethought and 
restructured, from the formal economy – especially employers used to 
rejuvenating their workforces; advertisers and the visual media who rely 
overwhelmingly on images of youth; product manufacturers who neglect older 
consumers; and popular perceptions and representations of old age as grey, 
lacking vitality, past-it and dependent; to our private lives – our 
relationships with our parents, children and grandchildren – to our finances, 
our transport system, and our towns, cities and houses.

But according to Deborah Price, president of the British Society of Gerontology
 <http://www.britishgerontology.org/> and professor of gerontology at the 
University of Manchester where she directs Micra, theManchester Institute for 
Collaborative Research on Ageing <http://www.micra.manchester.ac.uk/>, what we 
must not do is lump all older people together.

“We have a tendency to depict people aged 50 to 74 in the press and in public 
life as rich and successful, even powerful and it’s really important to know 
that this is only one of a number of different experiences of old age,” she 
said. “But the inequalities are greater in this age group than in any other: 
living in poverty, with difficulties maintaining and heating houses, suffering 
from malnutrition, needing help and care and being unable to find it – these 
are all also common experiences of this age group”.

The population of West Somerset, where Dr Davies has his surgery, has one of 
the oldest average ages in the UK in 2009, at 52 years old, compared to 40 
across the UK (and to  
<http://%2811%29%20https//www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/england-wales-oldest-youngest-populations-eastbourne-bury>
Eastbourne’s 71.5 years). More than one in three of the population are of 
retirement age and there are fewer people in the 25 to 44 year old age group 
than anywhere else in the country. According to the 2011 census, it is also the 
local authority with the highest percentage – 7.4% – of people working over 65.

 Many of these older workers, however, have goals more radical and 
far-reaching than their own career path. Four years ago, David Salter, 71, and 
Roger Hall, 69, set up the charity,Porlock Futures,  
<http://www.porlockbayoysters.co.uk/tag/porlock-futures-c-i-c/>to try to combat 
the impact of the area’s high concentration of people aged over 65:almost 34% 
of people in Porlock are over 65 compared to 16.4% in England and Wales 
<http://www.somersetintelligence.org.uk/age-group-profiles-for-somerset.pdf>. 

 “David and I are the two of the youngest ones here: it’s become an OAP 
village. We have to encourage young people to move here if we’re going to 
survive,” said Hall.

 A benefit of a workforce aged over 65 which is not inconsiderable is the 
wealth of experience brought to the table: Porlock Futures’ executive committee 
of six has an average age of 70 and boasts retired executive directors of FTSE 
100 companies, multinational managers, and international consultants. Their 
expertise helped them to crowd-fund £107,000 from 850 households in the local 
area. That, plus grants, enabled the groups to set up affordable housing 
projects, projects for younger people and Porlock Oysters, which they hope will 
sell 1.8m oysters across the UK by 2022 and make a vital and fundamental 
difference to the demographic of the area.

 In fact, it is hard to find an active, older person in west Somerset who is 
not in either paid employment or involved in intense volunteering. Most 
volunteer in more than one business.

70-year-old Barbara Middleton intended to indulge herself when she retired. “I 
thought I’d play my horn in the local brass band and generally kick back,” she 
said. Instead, the former deputy headteacher has become a trustee and manager of
Accessible Transport West Somerset <http://www.atwest.org.uk/>, a community 
transport service offering wheelchair-friendly and accessible transport for the 
residents of west Somerset.

“The reality of ageing and my retirement has been very different to what I 
thought it would be,” she said. “When retirement came, it made me feel old not 
to be doing something constructive and active. And people in the community who 
are even older than myself, or younger but more vulnerable, need people like me 
to do things for them.

“I couldn’t do the things I do now without having had years as a busy, 
multi-tasking professional with heavy responsibilities,” she said. “I’m 
reinvesting the skills accrued over a lifetime in my community. It’s not an 
easy ride to be doing so much at my age: it’s quite the reverse. But I have 
never had such a good time as I’m having now”.

By quietly examining their community, then getting down to work, the older 
population of west Somerset has discovered something that governments, 
companies and legislators are still struggling to comprehend: that demographic 
change of this scale requires a long-term perspective.

Policy makers, whose thinking is invariably short-term face the biggest 
challenges of our ageing population: ageing needs to be seen in the context of 
other major changes like the globalisation of our economies and migration, and 
major and disruptive technological change.

“Our policy-makers operate in narrow departmental bunkers when the scope of 
ageing is very broad and requires, at least, joined-up thinking and action,” 
said Walker. “Almost everywhere you look policy makers are about 20 years 
behind the demographic curve – what is called the structural lag. So, seismic 
demographic change lacks a suitably radical and far-reaching response.”


Walker’s analysis is endorsed by the new Resolution report, which delves into 
the huge opportunities the ageing population brings – but its challenges too. 
According to the report, the tax burden associated with an ageing society and 
higher dependency ratio rises to £15bn a year by 2060 – equivalent to a 4p 
income tax rise for working age population.


There are “coping mechanisms”, the authors found, but they are not just about 
bringing forward further increases in the State Pension Age “as the government 
is currently considering”, it says. “A successful pursuit of full employment 
could maintain the ‘effective’ dependency ratio for many decades to come,” they 
write. “The main beneficiaries of this will be disabled and older workers who 
are struggling to return to the labour market.”

In the absence of long-term responses, however, the ageing babyboomers are 
seizing the reins for the second time. When they were teenagers, this 
generation transformed the morals and structure of the Sixties with their 
mantra of ‘I Want’. Their new mantra is ‘I Need’ and, thanks to both low birth 
rates and high life expectancies, their voice is once again the dominant one.
 