
Not everyone was cheering Gigi Buffon as he closed in on a remarkable record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/torino-juventus-serie-a-match-report-gianluigi-buffon-record>
. The Juventus captain had not conceded a goal in 926 minutes of league 
football heading into Sunday’s Turin derby. Just four more would be enough to 
make this the longest such sequence of any goalkeeper in Serie A history.

Few opponents, though, could have been more eager to rain on his parade than 
Torino.Juventus’s rivalry with their city neighbours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/apr/16/torino-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-lentini>
 has not always been especially fierce – it is indicative that Claudio 
Marchisio’s father, Stefano, used to buy season tickets for both teams when his 
son was a boy – but in recent years tensions have risen.

Premier League increasingly a wealthy couch potato on the European stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/premier-league-couch-potato-european-stage>
Only last month we had a preliminary court hearing for a Juventus fan who 
stands accused oflobbing a paper bomb 
<http://www.corrieredellosport.it/news/calcio/2016/02/18-8618358/bomba_carta_al_derby_juventus-torino_al_via_il_processo/>
 into a Torino section at the Stadio Olimpico during the previous meeting at 
the venue, in April 2015. That match, just like Sunday’s, was preceded by ugly 
scenes outside, with rocks and bottles thrown against the windows of the
Bianconeri’s team bus.

No club would condone such behaviour and any rivalry between the players 
themselves is of a strictly sporting nature – but Torino as a team did want to 
deny Buffon this record. That much could be seen in the very first seconds of 
the game, as Ciro Immobile sprinted at fullpelt after Leonardo Bonucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/29/leonardo-bonucci-spotlight-inter-juventus-serie-a>
 in a successful bid to pressure the defender into a bad pass.

Moments later, Giuseppe Vives barged Mario Mandzukic violently off the ball in 
midfield before attempting to launch an immediate counter. For those first, 
frantic few minutes, everyTorino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> 
touch seemed designed to take their team up the pitch as swiftly as possible.

It was not enough. The hosts, for all their efforts, never managed an attempt 
on goal in those opening four minutes, Immobile falling and losing possession 
on the one occasion his team threatened to penetrate the penalty box. 
Juventus’s supporters roared with satisfaction as Buffon reached his milestone.

Meanwhile, in a Mediaset TV studio, Sebastiano Rossi crossed his legs, blinked 
and then blinked some more <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNF2JvKhgLE>. It 
was his record that had fallen and the disappointment was writ large across his 
face.The former Milan goalkeeper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/apr/27/theknowledge.sport> did 
praise Buffon and called him a worthy successor but it was plain that he took 
no pleasure in having his name written out of the history books.

Perhaps, deep down, he might feel that his achievement was more worthy. It was 
accomplished in 1993-94, at a time when Serie A was the envy of Europe. Such 
gifted forwards as Beppe Signori, Roberto Baggio, Gianfranco Zola and Ruud 
Gullit dominated that season’s scoring charts.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 30 39 70 
2 Napoli 30 38 67 
3 Roma 30 31 60 
4 Fiorentina 30 18 55 
5 Inter Milan 30 12 55 
This point was raised during Mediaset’s post-game analysis. Ciro Ferrara, 
alongside Rossi in the studio, was jokingly asked why he had never helped 
Buffon to break the record back when they were together atJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> from the mid-1990s into the 
2000s. “Some of the attackers were a lot harder to mark back then,” came his 
curt reply.

Some of his peers might beg to differ. On Sky, Giuseppe Bergomi argued that 
“being a defender today is far more difficult than in my day” because there are 
“so many more variables”. Referees, for one thing, used to be an awful lot more 
lenient with defenders.

Besides which, Rossi was protected by one of the all-time great back fours – 
with Franco Baresi and Alessandro Costacurta at centre-back, accompanied by 
Paolo Maldini and Mauro Tassotti on either side. That entire group was called 
up to Italy’s World Cup squad at the end of the season. Rossi himself was left 
at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c409449de3d9cd0643e00c88f33b91cfe01114%2F0_37_2361_1415%2F2361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gianluigi%20Buffon%20humble%20as%20clean%20sheet%20record%20tumbles%2C%20but%20delight%20not%20universal%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gianluigi%20Buffon%20humble%20as%20clean%20sheet%20record%20tumbles%2C%20but%20delight%20not%20universal%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c409449de3d9cd0643e00c88f33b91cfe01114%2F0_37_2361_1415%2F2361.jpg>
 Juventus’ Álvaro Morata, left, celebrates with team-mate Paul Pogba after 
scoring against Torino Photograph: Alessandro Di Marco/AP 
Not that Buffon has exactly been short-changed when it comes to defensive 
team-mates. Bonucci, Andrea Barzagli and Giorgio Chiellini – Juve’s very own 
BBC – might one day be remembered in similar terms. They have lost only four 
times in 63 league matches when they start together as a trio.

That was not the case on Sunday. Chiellini remains sidelined by a calf injury, 
leaving Daniele Rugani to fill in. Signed from Empoli in the summer, the 
21-year-old looks increasingly assured in such company and put in a solid 
performance here. There was nothing he could have done to prevent Torino from 
finally ending Buffon’s resistance at the start of the second half.

It was Rugani’s team-mate, Alex Sandro, who dived recklessly into a challenge 
on Bruno Peres, bringing the Torino player down from behind. Andrea Belotti 
swept the ensuing spot-kick into the bottom corner. For the first time in 974 
minutes, Buffon had been beaten. Or perhaps it was only 973 minutes, depending 
on whose stopwatch you were checking.

All that really mattered was that Rossi’s record had been broken. Well, that 
and the fact Juventus had won.After the agony of a last-gasp reversal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/bayern-munich-juventus-champions-league-match-report>
 away against Bayern Munich in midweek, Buffon had been quick to stress the 
importance of keeping focus on the home stretch of a delicately poised title 
race.

A 4-1 final scoreline made Juve’s victory look emphatic. In reality, this game 
might easily have gone another way. Sandro, already on a yellow card, was 
fortunate to avoid a second booking for that challenge on Peres. And Torino, 
who had been 2-0 down before Belotti’s penalty, could have pulled level 10 
minutes later – Maxi López’s equaliser was ruled out by a dubious offside 
decision.

Gianluigi Buffon sets goalkeeping record as Juventus sweep aside Torino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/torino-juventus-serie-a-match-report-gianluigi-buffon-record>
You could excuse Juventus for lacking sympathy after Álvaro Morata had an even 
more obviously valid goal chalked off against Bayern in midweek. It should also 
be said that theBianconeri were scintillating at times. Paul Pogba’s free-kick 
to open the scoring was superb 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/711562405256376320>, and his assist 
for Morata on the third goal 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/711593894484381696> even better. 
The day, though, belonged toBuffon – even if he was quick to share the credit 
with his team-mates. After the game 
<https://www.facebook.com/GianluigiBuffon/photos/a.301164849972199.73821.280290668726284/966101773478500/?type=3&theater>
, he posted a message on Facebook praising each one of them individually (I’ll 
translate in the talking points below). He was deferential when talking to 
Rossi as well.

“I was luckier than you because my team-mates made sure that I faced very few 
shots on goal,” Buffon insisted. “You had to earn it more, with superlative 
saves.”

It is true that the Juventus keeper has not needed to make many eye-catching 
interventions on the way to this record. He made a total of 33 saves over the 
10-and-three-quarter games he went without conceding. Some of those have been 
good –a close-range parry from Éder during the win against Inter springs to mind
 <https://www.facebook.com/Juventibus/videos/560650347426592/> – but none 
especially spectacular.

So perhaps Rossi should not begrudge Buffon this record as much as he should 
begrudge the Juventus manager who has allowed the keeper to enjoy such success 
at 38 years old. That manager is a man whose identity provides this story with 
a neat sense of symmetry. When Rossi’s own run came to an end back in 1994, 
Gazzetta dello Sport asked him which of his saves had been the best. His reply? 
“The one I made from [Massimiliano] Allegri.”

Talking points
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ce3b43076ff440b1fad066b68efc21b70ef54b%2F0_136_3407_2044%2F3407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gianluigi%20Buffon%20humble%20as%20clean%20sheet%20record%20tumbles%2C%20but%20delight%20not%20universal%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gianluigi%20Buffon%20humble%20as%20clean%20sheet%20record%20tumbles%2C%20but%20delight%20not%20universal%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fgianluigi-buffon-clean-sheet-record-juventus-torino-sebastiano-rossi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ce3b43076ff440b1fad066b68efc21b70ef54b%2F0_136_3407_2044%2F3407.jpg>
 Gonzalo Higuaín helped keep Napoli in touch with Juventus at the top of the 
league Photograph: Ciro de Luca/Reuters 
• Buffon is not the only player to have hit unprecedented heights in this 
campaign. Gonzalo Higuaín helped to keep Napoli within three points of Juventus 
at the top, grabbing his 29th goal in 30 league games to break a second-half 
deadlock at home against Genoa. He needs six from his remaining eight fixtures 
to equal Gunnar Nordahl’s record for most in a 20-team Serie A season. In the 
meantime, he’ll just have to content himselfwith the love of his club’s 
supporters <https://twitter.com/SerieA_TIM/status/711648608123285505> and the 
knowledge that he has helped thePartenopei to amass more points (67) and more 
wins (20)than they have ever had at this stage of a top-flight campaign 
<https://twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/711629592067481601>.

• Defeat left Genoa in 12th but still only six points clear of the relegation 
zone. However, it was not all bad news for them on Sunday. Raúl Albiolgave them 
the gift of free sponsored pasta 
<https://twitter.com/sscnapoli/status/711635392747991040> in the changing room 
afterwards.

• On the day that Buffon broke Rossi’s record, Milan’s 17-year-old goalkeeper 
Gianluigi Donnarumma gave us another glimpse of why many people are already 
tipping him to one day take over as Italy’s No1. His positioning could have 
been better on this save from Felipe Andersonbut the reflexes and agility to 
push the ball around the post 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/711670147757576192> are still 
breathtaking.

• Roma’s run of eight consecutive Serie A wins under Luciano Spalletti was 
ended by Inter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/roma-internazionale-serie-a-match-report>
 – who might consider themselves unfortunate to only have drawn at the end of 
their most spirited and disciplined league performance in months. TheGiallorossi
 had a lot of the ball but few ideas of how to break down a tightly packed 
defence and their eventual equalising goal – after Ivan Perisic had opened the 
scoring – owed more to luck than design. Edin Dzeko’s shot was mis‑hit so badly 
that instead of heading towards goal it screwed sideways across the Inter 
penalty area and Radja Nainggolan was extremely sharp in reacting to jab the 
ball home.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
16 Udinese 30 -19 31 
17 Carpi 30 -18 28 
18 Palermo 30 -23 28 
19 Frosinone 30 -26 27 
20 Verona 30 -25 19 
• Don’t look now but Carpi are out of the relegation zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table> – even if only by 
virtue of a tiebreaker ahead of Palermo. Carpi have the bit between their teeth 
after beating Frosinone and Verona over the past two weeks (as well as drawing 
their three games before that). Kevin Lasagna’s winner, furthermore,might be 
one of the best-struck free-kicks you’ll see all season 
<https://twitter.com/TransfersCalcio/status/711583620738236418>.

• And finally, as promised, a translated version of Buffon’s thank you to all 
his Juventus team-mates:

Internazionale end Roma’s eight-match winning run in race for third
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/roma-internazionale-serie-a-match-report>
 “No record belongs to just one person and there are no No1s outside of a 
group. So I want to say thank you to …

… Neto for the calmness that he gives to the whole team every time it goes out 
on to the pitch

… Rubinho, a patient and quiet leader 

… Chiello, because #finoallafine [Juventus’s staple social media hashtag, 
meaning ‘until the end’] he never relents

… Alex Sandro because watching him beat his man is always a pleasure 

… Barzagli: who needs to be cloned, immediately 

… Bonucci, for his head-held-high personality, always at the service of the 
team

… Rugani, because knowing how to listen is a rare quality 

… Stephan, legs and lungs of this Juve 

… Evra, if he was not here, we’d need to buy him 

… Khedira: the right man, always in the right place 

… Marchisio, the only player I know who is coloured black and white 

… Pogba, because he does not live football, but invents it 

… Hernanes, because every team needs to have its Prophet 

… Lemina, simply Juve-worthy 

… Padoin, wherever you put him he will be, and be very well 

… Asamoah, his desire for football is stronger than any injury 

… Sturaro, “fight, fall, get back up and always win” 

… Pereyra, because fantasy is the salt of this sport 

…. Zaza, born to score from any position 

… Morata, there is always a need for him 

… Cuadrado, because every time that he sets off he seems to say “catch me if 
you can”

… Mandzukic, the first to attack and always the first to defend 

… Dybala, if after Thuram, Zidane and Pirlo, the No21 shirt went to him, then 
there must be a reason

… And to the boss, a winner in pantheon of winners!” 
Results: Atalanta 2-0 Bologna, Empoli 0-0 Palermo, Frosinone 0-0 Fiorentina, 
Milan 1-1 Lazio, Napoli 3-1 Genoa, Roma 1-1 Inter, Sampdoria 0-1 Chievo, 
Sassuolo 1-1 Udinese, Torino 1-4 Juventus, Verona 1-2 Carpi
 