Which player has won the FA Cup more than any other?  Ashley Cole Cole won it 
three times with Arsenal and four with Chelsea  Wayne Rooney  Jimmy Greaves  
Sir Tom Finney Who was the last player-manager to feature in an FA Cup final?  
Dennis WiseWise managed and played for Millwall in the FA Cup final. The 3-0 
defeat to Manchester United was to be the last match of his professional career.
 Garry Monk  Kenny Dalglish  Ryan Giggs Who are the lowest ranked side in this 
year’s third round?  Barrow  Fleetwood  Sutton United  Stourbridge Stourbridge 
play in the seventh tier and had never reached the third round. They travel to 
Wycombe Wanderers on Saturday hoping to make more history. Who was the last 
English manager to lead a team to victory in a Cup final?  Roy Hodgson  Joe 
Royle  Howard Wilkinson  Harry Redknapp When Portsmouth beat Cardiff City in 
the 2008 final. Who is the youngest ever scorer in an FA Cup final?  Jesse 
Lingard  Cristiano Ronaldo  Jack Grealish  Norman Whiteside Aged 18 years and 
19 days. When was the last time a Manchester United FA Cup game was not 
televised?  2005 That's a run of 55 matches.  2009  2011  2014 Which of these 
clubs has won an FA Cup final 6-0?  Manchester United  Liverpool  Bury They 
hammered Derby County in the 1903 final.  Preston North End Roberto Di Matteo 
set the record for the quickest goal in an FA Cup final in 1997 when he scored 
for Chelsea against Middlesbrough after 42 seconds. Who has since broken that 
record?  Jesse Lingard  Aaron Ramsey  Louis Saha Saha scored or Everton against 
Chelsea after 25 seconds in the 2009 final.  Frank Lampard How many clubs were 
accepted into the FA Cup this season?  92  184  368  736 The tournament began 
with the Extra Preliminary Round on 6 August 2016 and will conclude with the 
final on 27 May 2017. Who were the last team to play in a Cup final and be 
relegated in the same season?  Middlesbrough  Wigan Athletic Wigan are the only 
club to have won the Cup and gone down in the same season.  Portsmouth  
Brighton & Hove Albion  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  