
Birmingham City have appointed Gianfranco Zola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianfranco-zola> as Gary Rowett’s 
successor after the Championship club terminated the manager’s contract and 
those of his backroom staff on Wednesday.

Zola, who has managed West Ham United and Watford, was in the running to take 
over at Hull City in the summer. The 50-year-old was keen to get back into 
management in England and has agreed a deal to takeover at St Andrew’s. The 
former Parma and Chelsea forward’s agent travelled to London to meet Birmingham 
representatives to finalise contract details, with the Midlands club confirming 
his appointment on Wednesday evening.

The sacking of the 42-year-old Rowett came as a surprise with Birmingham 
outside the play-off places only on goal difference after winning 2-1 at home 
to Ipswich on Tuesday. Their previous two results were 4-0 and 3-0 defeats to 
Newcastle and Barnsley respectively but they were the only two reverses in 
their past seven league matches.

Birmingham City FC (@BCFC) 
OFFICIAL: Birmingham City has appointed Gianfranco Zola as new Manager. More 
details to follow shortly#BCFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BCFC?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/07bQ0j1U8l <https://t.co/07bQ0j1U8l>
 <https://twitter.com/BCFC/status/809114539438510080> December 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BCFC/status/809114539438510080> 
Birmingham’s new owner Trillion Trophy Asia Limited said the decision to 
relieve Rowett of his duties had been taken “with a strategic, long-term view 
and with the club’s best interests at heart”.

A statement on the club’s website, bcfc.com 
<http://www.bcfc.com/news/article/2016-17/birmingham-city-gary-rowett-panos-pavlakis-3468386.aspx>
, said: “This has not been an easy decision to make. The board would like to 
thank Gary and his backroom staff for their efforts and wish them all the best 
for the future.

“Gary came in and immediately stabilised the team amid difficult circumstances 
and during his tenure improved the club’s fortunes on the field. He has 
conducted himself professionally on behalf of the club at all times and there 
is a genuine sadness at this course of action.

“However Trillion Trophy Asia Limited remains determined to lead the club to a 
bright and exciting future. Supporters can rest assured the decision has been 
taken with a strategic, long-term view and with the club’s best interests at 
heart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbirmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68758a61474e7fd83577815b4147b9e354392b84%2F0_63_3968_2381%2F3968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gianfranco%20Zola%20takes%20charge%20at%20Birmingham%20City%20after%20Rowett%20sacking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbirmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gianfranco%20Zola%20takes%20charge%20at%20Birmingham%20City%20after%20Rowett%20sacking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbirmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68758a61474e7fd83577815b4147b9e354392b84%2F0_63_3968_2381%2F3968.jpg>
 Gary Rowett during Birmingham’s win over Ipswich on Tuesday. Photograph: 
ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
“An immediate replacement will be sought in order to afford the new manager 
the time to assess where the existing playing squad needs strengthening. The 
board recognises the urgency required given the transfer window will open at 
the start of January and funds have been made available. TTAL has been involved 
with the club for more than 18 months and has reviewed all playing and 
non-playing matters during that period.”

Rowett, a former Birmingham defender left Burton to replace Lee Clark as the 
manager at St Andrew’s in October 2014 and steered the club away from 
relegation to a 10th-place finish in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> that season. His first full 
campaign in charge again brought a 10th-place finish.

Birmingham City make their point against Steve Bruce’s Aston Villa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/birmingham-city-aston-villa-championship-match-report>
There were signs Birmingham may be able to sustain a play-off challenge and 
Rowett’s departure has been met with anger by some fans on social media. 
However, the director Panos Pavlakis has urged supporters to trust the board 
despite getting rid of someone widely regarded as one of the brightest young 
managers in the Football League.

Pavlakis said: “Such a parting of the ways is always difficult, particularly 
so on a personal level as I have worked very closely with Gary and have got to 
know him well. Our relationship was very strong but in football you can never 
stand still. I would ask our supporters trust our judgment and look forward to 
and embrace the future as we begin to implement the exciting vision of TTAL. 
The club will be making no further comment at this stage.”

Birmingham host title-chasing Brighton on Saturday and victory, combined with 
several other results going their way, could leave them in third place in the 
table.
 