
All the Old Lady really needed was a nice young man to put the spring back in 
her step. At 22 years old Sebastian Giovinco might still look like a child but 
on Saturday night at Turin's Stadio Olimpico he proved himself to be anything 
but. In the first 45 minutes against Bologna he was the only Juventus player to 
manage a shot on target. In the second he added a goal, an assist and countless 
more deft touches and incisive passes to help his teamturn a half-time deficit 
into a 4–1 victory 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9XKviMSPlqA&feature=channel_page>.

"Juvinco is born," bellowed Gazzetta's front-page headline on Sunday morning, 
though the player can hardly be said to have emerged overnight. Giovinco first 
trained with Juventus at the age of six, and has represented Italy at every 
youth level from under-16 upwards. In 2008 his25-yard strike against Honduras 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OCna-iX0nHM> was one of few highlights for 
Italy's Olympic side in Beijing. Earlier in the same year he was named player 
of the tournament as Italy won the annual under-21 competition in Toulon.

An attacking player who professes to be most comfortable in the trequartista 
role (just behind the attack), but who has mostly played on the left wing thus 
far inSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, Giovinco 
has inevitably drawn comparisons with Alessandro Del Piero. Although he is 
nothing like the first, it has been some time since a player emerged from the 
club's Primavera (youth team) with such expectation resting on his slender 
shoulders. And they truly are slender. Listed on Juventus's website as just shy 
of 5ft 4in tall, Giovinco weighs little more than nine stone.

But if he is troubled by such a burden then Giovinco does a good job of hiding 
it. He had played only a handful of Serie A games on loan at Empoli last season 
when he batted away a question about his size by declaring himself "like Sergio 
Agüero and Lionel Messi". Nicknamedla Formica Atomica (Atom Ant), a reference 
to the Hanna-Barbera cartoon hero, by team-mates and fans, Giovinco has been 
unafraid to carry his teams on his back when necessary and on Saturday was 
responsible for almost single-handedly draggingJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> out of their post-Champions 
League funk.

"Last year with Empoli I proved that I was capable of playing in Serie A," 
reflected Giovinco, who scored six goals in 35 games for the Tuscan side 
includinga stunning free-kick <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSjJ8Ef7C_E> that 
earned his team an unlikely draw with Roma, after Juve's win over Bologna. "All 
I needed was a bit of continuity, which I got by playing in the last three 
games on the trot. Before I was playing one game and then missing the next 
three."

If that sounded like something of a dig at manager Claudio Ranieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri>, then Giovinco was quick to 
follow it up with praise for the Tinkerman. Thanking Ranieri for allowing him 
more creative freedom in the second half, Giovinco insisted he had no 
complaints at being used as a winger in Pavel Nedved's absence and added that 
he was confident the manager knew his best position.

Giovinco's words and performance came as a timely boost for Ranieri following 
his public falling out with David Trezeguet. Despite having only just returned 
from a long-term injury, the French striker was livid at having been 
substituted by Ranieri during the second leg of Juventus's defeat to Chelsea, 
and was branded a "spoilt child" by his coach after complaining over the 
decision to the French magazine L'Equipe.

A divided crowd at Saturday's game attempted to show support for both sides 
but already the suspicion is that Trezeguet will not remain with Juventus past 
the end of the current campaign. Rather optimistic speculation in Italy has 
Trezeguet moving to Lyon in a part-exchange deal involving Karim Benzema, but 
in the likely event that such a deal does not transpire, Ranieri may well 
decide his team is now capable of proceeding without the striker.

It certainly won't hurt to know he has another shaven-headed attacking prodigy 
waiting in the wings.

Round 28 talking points

• Just when Serie A needed a lift after seeing all three of its 
representatives crash out of the Champions League, it got one in the form of 
the most high-scoring weekend of the season. Ten games brought 34 goals this 
weekend, while 10 different players scored twice.

• Jose Mourinho's popularity at Internazionale would appear to be have reached 
a new low after a banner was hung at the team's Appiano Gentile training ground 
telling him to "get out of Milan". Whether or not he will consider his future 
at the club come this summer remains to be seen but for now Inter continue to 
roll on towards another Scudetto. They were far from convincing at times during 
a2–0 win over Fiorentina at San Siro 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4k4KdRcdzc>, but the result will be all that 
matters for Mourinho.

• Hats off to both Javier Zanetti and Filippo Inzaghi. After playing against 
Fiorentina, Zanetti has now made 634 appearances for Inter – leaving him 
joint-second with Giacinto Facchetti on the club's all-time list. Only Beppe 
Bergomi, with 759, has more. Inzaghi, meanwhile, scored his 299th and 300th 
career goals asMilan thumped Siena 5–1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a32QTTm-Ns4&feature=channel_page> at Stadio 
Franchi. Both the feat and the result were all the more impressive for the fact 
Siena had previously conceded only seven goals in 13 home games in Serie A.

• Former Italy coach Roberto Donadoni got his Napoli reign under way with a 
1–1 draw at Reggina 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8PxV2pReJqM&feature=channel_page>. The result 
was a respectable one for a team who had picked up only two points in their 
previous nine games, but he may still have a hard time winnning some people 
over after replacing the popular Edy Reja, who had been in charge of the club 
since they were playing in Serie C in 2005. "It's an inconceivable crisis," 
said the team's director of sport, Pierpaolo Marino, after the decision to 
remove Reja from his post was announced early last week. "I wish Donadoni good 
luck but it's upsetting that a man like Reja should go after giving Napoli so 
much."

Results: Atalanta 2–0 Torino, Cagliari 0–1 Genoa, Inter 2–0 Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>, Juventus 4–1 Bologna, Lazio 
0–3 Chievo, Palermo 5–2 Lecce, Reggina 1–1 Napoli, Sampdoria 2–2 Roma, Siena 
1–5 Milan, Udinese 1–1 Catania
 