
Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan announce baby girl – and $45bn charity 
initiative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
Mark Zuckerberg’s decision to donate $45bn of Facebook shares to charity  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
makes him the latest in a long line of US business moguls who have given away 
large chunks of their fortunes.

The tradition dates to the founding fathers of the US and includes the 
illustrious and infamous of the US super rich. Universities, museums, cures for 
disease and programmes to combat poverty have all been set up with the proceeds 
of business empires.

Some of the biggest US philanthropists were the so-called robber barons of the 
19th century who made vast fortunes as the country industrialised. John D 
Rockefeller was perhaps the most generous giver and richest self-made man ever. 
He gave away about $540m before his death in 1937, amassed from his stake in 
Standard Oil, which controlled 90% of the US petroleum business at the time.

Other philanthropists of the era included the steel baron Andrew Carnegie, who 
gave away about $350m, or 90% of his wealth. Rockefeller and Carnegie built 
their fortunes using methods outlawed today such as predatory pricing and 
strike-breaking but deployed their money for the common good.

Bill Gates and Warren Buffett, the richest people in the US, have encouraged 
other wealthy people to give away at least half their fortunes, either in their 
lifetime or in a will. They set up the Giving Pledge in 2010 and the programme 
has attracted 138 subscribers. Most are from the US, but British signees 
include Michael Ashcroft, David Sainsbury andRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson>.


Hong Kong opens £193m luxury Buddhist monastery to public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/16/hong-kong-opens-193m-buddhist-monastery-to-public>
Here are some of the most high-profile givers in recent history

Warren Buffett was the most generous philanthropist in the US last year, 
according to Forbes <http://www.forbes.com/top-givers/>. Buffett, who made his 
$73bn fortune from investments, gave away $2.8bn in 2014 to take his lifetime 
giving to almost $23bn. Buffett has pledged to give away most of his money 
through the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, launched by the Microsoft 
founder and his wife to combat poverty. One of Buffett’s most famous aphorisms 
is that rich people should give their children “enough to do anything but not 
enough to do nothing”.

Bill and Melinda Gates were last year’s second-biggest US givers, donating 
$1.3bn and bringing their total giving to $31.5bn. The Microsoft founder and 
his wife, who are worth $79bn, set up their foundation in 2000 and its 
endowment was more than $44bn at the end of 2014, making it the biggest private 
foundation in the world. It aims to combat poverty globally and improve 
healthcare. It has funded research into HIV, sanitation in developing countries 
and education in the US. Critics have accused Gates of funding eye-catching 
activitieswithout questioning the system that made his fortune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2015/dec/01/will-bill-gates-and-his-billionaire-friends-save-the-planet>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fworld-top-philanthropists-mark-zuckerberg-warren-buffett-bill-melinda-gates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_13_2726_1636%2F2726.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Givers%20that%20keep%20on%20giving%3A%20the%20world's%20top%20philanthropists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fworld-top-philanthropists-mark-zuckerberg-warren-buffett-bill-melinda-gates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Givers%20that%20keep%20on%20giving%3A%20the%20world%27s%20top%20philanthropists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fworld-top-philanthropists-mark-zuckerberg-warren-buffett-bill-melinda-gates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_13_2726_1636%2F2726.jpg>
 Carlos Slim, Mexican telecoms tycoon. Photograph: Henry Romero/Reuters 
Carlos Slim, the Mexican telecoms tycoon who rivals Gates and Buffett to be 
the world’s richest man, has expressed scepticism about the US pair’s approach 
to philanthropy and has not signed up to the Giving Pledge. Slim, worth $77bn, 
has argued education and jobs are the key to ending poverty and said in 2007 he 
would not try to be Santa Claus like Gates. But Slim has increased his 
charitable giving in recent years bydoubling the endowments to his two main 
foundations to about $8bn 
<http://www.institutionalinvestor.com/Article/3266168/Carlos-Slims-Giving-Side-The-Billionaire-Is-Ramping-Up-Philanthropy.html#.Vl7v3mThCUk>
. Slim’s near monopoly of Mexico’s phone market has provoked suspicion that his 
giving is designed to soften his image against regulatory intrusion.

Li Ka-shing, the Hong Kong business magnate, calls the foundation he founded 
in 1980 his third son and has promised to give away a third of his estimated 
$32bn wealth. The foundation’s aim is to promote education and health, mainly 
in greater China, and to encourage others to give their money away like Asia’s 
richest man. The foundation is reported to have pledged about $2bn to causes 
including the faculty of medicine at Hong Kong University, Hong Kong’s hospice 
movement andestablishing a Buddhist monastery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/16/hong-kong-opens-193m-buddhist-monastery-to-public>
.

Azim Premji, India’s third richest person, said in 2013 he had given away a 
quarter of his fortune <http://www.webcitation.org/6FzpFoYI6> and that he 
intended to do the same again within five years, in line with his commitment to 
the Giving Pledge. The outsourcing mogul, now worth about $16bn, launched his 
foundation aimed at improving Indian education in 2001. His giving includes 
$2bn to improve school education by transferring 213 million shares of his 
Wipro business to a trust. He has also funded a university named after him that 
promotes educational thinking.

Sir Richard Branson signed up to the Giving Pledge in early 2013, promising to 
invest in “entrepreneurial approaches to help make a difference to the world” 
<http://givingpledge.org/pdf/pledge-letters/Branson_Letter.pdf> when his family 
takes its money out of his Virgin empire. Branson’s fortune is small compared 
with those of Gates and Buffett but with an estimated wealth of $5bn he is due 
to give away about $2.5bn. He also pledged in 2006 to divert $3bn of profits 
from his airline to develop a low carbon fuel though he said last year the 
figure so farwas about $300m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/13/richard-branson-failed-climate-change-pledge>
. Branson’s Virgin Unite foundation says all its costs are funded by the 
Branson family and Virgin so that donations go straight to causes such as 
conservation and developing entrepreneurs.
 