
The Guardian has newsrooms in London, New York and Sydney from where we 
produce our three editions:the Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/uk>, 
Guardian US <https://www.theguardian.com/us> and Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/au>. 


Around the world, more than 120 million unique browsers visit the Guardian 
every month. And since the recentrelaunch of our website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/jan/28/welcome-to-the-new-guardian-website>
, our global readership has grown by another 10%.

In fact 40 million unique browsers visit us every month from outside the UK, 
US and Australia to find out about the stories that matter to them. Currently, 
though, all 40 million are presented with our UK edition when they visit 
theguardian.com.

With this large readership in mind, we are now embarking on a short beta trial 
of a new international edition of theguardian.com, edited specifically for our 
readers based in countries outside our three core markets.

For the next six weeks, before, during and after the UK general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015>, we will 
automatically direct up to 50% of our visitors from outside the UK, US and 
Australia to a specially editedinternational homepage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>, which will present a less 
UK-centric view of the news and provide more room to cover world affairs.

From speaking with many of our readers, and from observing how our three 
editions are being used every day, we know that many people from many different 
countries choose to come specifically to the Guardian’s UK edition for our 
reporting on, and analysis of, UK news and politics.

Of course, you will always be able to do so, no matter where you are, and you 
can switch back and forth between the test version of the international edition 
and our other editions for the UK, US and Australia. You can also opt out of 
the international edition test completely, if you wish.

Given that a large majority of readers and viewers enter the Guardian sites 
directly through article or video pages and not through the homepage, we might 
also experiment with a different set of less UK-centric follow-up reading and 
viewing recommendations and most-read rankings in our article and video pages.
 Switch between editions in the top-right corner of desktop screens… 
You will always know, though, which edition you are in, either by tapping on 
the edition switcher on mobile screens or by simply taking a look at the top 
right corner on desktop screens.
 …or by tapping the menu on mobile screens 
This is a beta trial. It is not a commitment to launching a global edition of 
the Guardian or a step towards moving our focus away from reporting the stories 
that matter in the UK. The test of an international edition does not mean that 
we would ever want to reduce our coverage of international affairs within the 
UK edition.

This open test is about understanding what our fast growing readership and 
viewership across the world wants from their experience of reading the Guardian 
and how we can best meet their needs. And who knows, there might also be 
readers from inside the UK over the next few weeks who might rather read a bit 
more about the world and a bit less about David Cameron or Nigel Farage.

And, to be frank, from looking at the global editions of many of our 
competitors around the world, we are also quite sceptical of the idea that 
there even is such a thing as a global news agenda or a global public sphere.

We do want to make absolutely sure, though, that we provide our loyal readers 
from outside the UK with attractive alternatives to our UK edition homepage 
which for the weeks ahead will have a strong focus on the UK election.

If you have questions about the this beta test, please get in touch via email 
(wolfgang.blau@theguardian.com), Twitter (@wblau <https://twitter.com/wblau>) 
or in the comment thread below this article.
 