
 The worst global bleaching event on record could simply be the new normal, 
according to one of the foremost experts on coral reefs and their response to 
warming oceans.

Mark Eakin, head of the Coral <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coral> 
Reef Watch program at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
has told the Guardian he was hopeful the current global bleaching event would 
end in 2017, but said it was possible it would just roll on, alternating 
between the northern and southern hemispheres as the seasons changed.

Coral bleaching in Okinawa – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/22/coral-bleaching-in-okinawa-in-pictures>
Some of the most recent reefs to be hit by the unprecedented event are those 
around the Japanese islands of Okinawa. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/22/coral-bleaching-in-okinawa-in-pictures>

Eakin said he had received preliminary reports that some reefs around the 
Japanese islands of Okinawa had 90% of their coral bleached, and about 10% of 
it had died so far.

“What I’d heard was that this is the worst since 1998,” Eakin said.

Striking new images reveal the impact unusually warm oceans are having on 
coral reefs around Okinawa in Japan have been shared exclusively with the 
Guardian.

Coral begins to bleach when comes into contact with water that is unusually 
warm. Unless that water returns to normal temperatures quickly, it begins to 
die.

Sometimes when coral is moderately stressed, it over-expresses some of its 
colour pigments, glowing in unusually rich colours, in what’s known as 
“fluorescing”. Each state – bleached, fluorescent and dead coral – was seen in 
striking detail around Okinawa.

“The fluorescing was spectacular, especially the corals that were glowing a 
brilliant shade of blue,” said Stephanie Roach the underwater photographer from 
XL Catlin Seaview Survey who took the images.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da17f4630c18aaebce9e4fd03602356e3835527%2F0_127_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20coral%20bleaching%20event%20might%20become%20new%20normal%2C%20expert%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20coral%20bleaching%20event%20might%20become%20new%20normal%2C%20expert%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da17f4630c18aaebce9e4fd03602356e3835527%2F0_127_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 This brightly coloured corals around are ‘fluorescing’, a sign that they are 
distressed. Photograph: XL Catlin Seaview Survey 
She said the bleaching was widespread in the shallow areas, generally under 
about two metres in depth. In that region almost all the branching coral, 
called acropora, was bleached, if not dead.


She said as she went below 4m, the bleaching was more sporadic.

As is commonly the case with severe bleaching, the rest of the ecosystem 
appeared to be suffering too, with Roach reporting that she saw very few fish, 
and those that she did see were mostly herbivores, which would be feeding on 
the algae beginning to grow over dead coral.

Richard Vevers from XL Catlin Seaview Survey said the bleaching appeared to be 
similar to whatthey witnessed in the Maldives in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/01/coral-bleaching-spreads-to-maldives-devastating-spectacular-reefs>
, except for the widespread and spectacular fluorescing.


“It is certainly unusual to witness this level of fluorescing, however we did 
see even more of it in New Caledonia,” Vevers said.

The global coral bleaching event began in 2014 as a splurge of warm water 
spread across the Pacific Ocean was pushed further through 2015 and early 2016 
by a strong El Niño weather pattern. It has continued during an unprecedented 
run of record warm weather.


The phenomenon of global coral bleaching was seen for the first time in recent 
decades, and the current event is the longest and most severe such event 
recorded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf4ef61e53d46dbdb44499977b0218be66e32261%2F0_0_2880_1930%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20coral%20bleaching%20event%20might%20become%20new%20normal%2C%20expert%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20coral%20bleaching%20event%20might%20become%20new%20normal%2C%20expert%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fglobal-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf4ef61e53d46dbdb44499977b0218be66e32261%2F0_0_2880_1930%2F2880.jpg>
 A bleached anenome photographed off Okinawa. Photograph: XL Catlin Seaview 
Survey 
Every major reef region has been hit by it, and some areas like Hawaii have 
been affected three years in a row.


Eakin said although there wasn’t a global coral bleaching event in 2013, every 
year featured bleaching somewhere in the world. That meant some of those 
regions had bleached four years in a row.


Eakin was speaking from Guam, where he was attending a US Coral Task Force 
meeting. He said some reefs around Guam had been hit for a fourth year in a row.

Eakin said the current forecasts suggested there would be bleaching next in 
Micronesia and the Marshall Islands and there was a good chance of bleaching in 
the Caribbean.


“It’s not finished yet but I’m hopeful at this point we are going to be seeing 
the end of it soon,” Eakin said.

The Great Barrier Reef: a catastrophe laid bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
But worryingly, Eakin said there was no guarantee. Forecasts as far out as 
2017 were not very reliable but were already suggesting some warming in the 
Pacific, which could affect corals there again.


“I expect to see some bleaching every year from now on,” Eakin said. “The 
questions is: Does it continue to look like a global event, or is it just 
places here and places there?”

“At some point, we’re probably going to hit that level [of global warming] 
where it doesn’t go away and it’s continuous,” Eakin said. “The climate models 
have been saying for well over a decade that we’re looking to some time around 
the 2020s where global bleaching becomes the norm.”

Eakin said he was still hopeful that the models were over-predicting the 
bleaching risk in the future but he was also worried they could be 
under-predicting.

“That’s always been one of the problems – the global climate models tend to 
under-predict things,” Eakin said.
 