
“Has anyone else ever celebrated a goal using a vehicle?” wonders Katherine 
Watson.“Or is Mariano Gorosito the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/sep/29/argentinian-footballer-celebrates-goal-at-wheel-of-ambulance-video>
?”

Gorosito’s slightly ill-advised stint as an ambulance driver after scoring for 
FC Luján in the Argentinian third tier may have been the first goal celebration 
to involve an emergency vehicle but he’s not the first to get behind the wheel 
after scoring.

In 2010 the then 19-year-old Antoine Griezmann nodded home Real Sociedad’s 
second goal against Deportivo and made a beeline for a nearby sponsors’ car. He 
popped into the driver’s seat, his team-mates crowded in alongside him and a 
few jumped in the back. A few toots of the horn followed and then out they 
hopped to resume the game.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2L0kM327Ptw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2L0kM327Ptw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2L0kM327Ptw&media=>
Any more for any more? Send them to the usual address 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>.

ROUND THE WORLD WITH WAYNE

“There has been a lot of talk about Wayne Rooney becoming England’s leading 
goal scorer,”noted the magnificently named George Tough last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/football-fans-openly-supporting-opposite-team>
.“A few of these have been against a small number of teams. But who of 
England’s scorers has netted against the most different teams?”

Malcolm Warburton, Richard Finch, Adam Stevens and Richard Baum all emailed in 
to point out that Rooney and Michael Owen are joint leaders in this regard. 
Rooney’s 50 goals have come against 26 different teams, as did Owen’s 40.

FANS SUPPORTING RIVALS (2)

Last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/football-fans-openly-supporting-opposite-team>
 we looked at the supporters who have cheered on the opposition and, as ever, 
several readers have been in touch to point out a few more examples.

“In May 2010 Lazio played Inter at home with Lazio still not being safe from 
the drop and Inter in the top spot feeling Roma breathing down their necks with 
only a few rounds to go,” writes Jörg Michner. “If Roma managed to overtake 
Inter and win the Scudetto it would obviously be a disaster of epic proportions 
for theLaziali. In the run-up to the match the Ultras told the Lazio squad in 
no uncertain terms they had to lose or face violent repercussions.

“From the very first kick the Laziali cheered on the Inter players and booed 
their own team the moment they entered the Inter half. Moves that even remotely 
resembled an attack were met with jeers and whistles. When Inter finally broke 
the deadlock theLaziali celebrated fiercely and held up a beautifully sarcastic 
banner <http://media-s3.blogosfere.it/calciomalato/images/ohnoo2.jpg>.

“After the goal the match descended into a training exercise with both teams 
knowing the race was run much to the delight of the Lazio faithful who are 
historically twinned, ie best buddies, with theInteristi anyway. Inter doubled 
their lead and went on to win the title and eventually the triple.The 
Guardian’s very own Paolo Bandini offers a few more details in his match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/may/03/lazio-roma-inter-serie-a>
.”

And, in a similar vein, here’s Pete McQue Jr: “In 1995 Blackburn and 
Manchester United were going for the Premier League title and it went down to 
the final day. Man Utd went to West Ham and Blackburn had to visit my beloved 
Liverpool at Anfield. If Blackburn lost and Man Utd won, we faced the prospect 
of handing the title to the Mancs.

“Gradually this idea spread that we should be supporting Blackburn. A lot of 
people took this seriously. On the final day a lot of people turned up wearing 
Blackburn shirts, including me, and this was actively encouraged among the 
fans. In the Kop there was a lot of blue and white, and it was not worn by 
Blackburn fans who had snuck in.

“The Liverpool players didn’t get the memo and from memory, Barnes and 
Redknapp scored to bring us a 2-1 victory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=haR3liBeDgI>. Fortunately West Ham kept Man 
Utd from taking advantage, and it ended up being the perfect day. Blackburn 
were champions, we’d beaten the champions and the Mancs had been frustrated by 
a result they never saw coming.”

And Robin Clarke points to this game at Brisbane Road in 1972 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/birmingham-city-30-great-games-180558>
, when Leyton Orient fans were none too disappointed to see their side lose to 
Birmingham and deny Millwall promotion from the second division.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

“Over a few beers last week a friend regaled me with a tale that included the 
rather random fact that John Hartson once stole a sheep but I have no means to 
check the veracity of the story,” wrote a bemused Phil Sedgewood in 2007. “Say 
it ain’t so.”

Sadly, Phil, it isn’t just defenders, scales and Eyal Berkovic who have been 
given a fright during the Welshman’s career but also our woolly four-legged 
friends. “I was at Luton and two of my Swansea mates, Jason Wright and Kevin 
Davis, came up for some fun,” Hartson told the Sunday People in an interview. 
“We got absolutely lashed and, at about three in the morning, we found the 
minibus that was to take us back to my place. On the way we stopped beside a 
field and stole a sheep that was minding her own business, threw her in the 
back of the van and then drove on home for a sleep.

“There was understandable pandemonium in the morning. I had a hangover and I’d 
completely forgotten about the sheep, which was roaming around the back garden 
in a state of some distress. We bundled her back in the van and dropped her off 
in the first field we found with sheep in it. Somehow we got away with it.”

For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>.

Can you help?

“Last week a Shanghai Shenhua fan threw an iPhone at Diego Tardelli 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vx-SEXuc5zQ&feature=youtu.be&t=2s> during a 
game,” writes Dean Carr. “Would that be the most expensive object ever launched 
at a player?”

“I have recently returned from a stint volunteering in a rural community in 
Nicaragua, Central America,” writes Alexander Marullo. “To pass time in the 
evenings I played a substantial amount of football with the locals. Despite the 
rather basic playing conditions (waterlogged pitches, rocks, stray cows etc) I 
got on pretty well due to the local standard not being especially high; 
baseball is of course more popular than football in a number of Latin American 
countries including Nicaragua. I was told the local teams such as Real Madriz 
of the Nicaraguan First Division often recruited from communities like the one 
in which I was based. While not being arrogant enough to believe I would be 
good enough to play in the local leagues it did get me thinking. Has any 
Englishman (or Brit) ever played professionally or semi-professionally in 
Central America or anywhere equally as obscure, the more obscure the better?”

“Here in Japan, 41-year-old defender Yukio Tsuchiya is still a regular for 
Ventforet Kofu in the J-League,” writes Alistair Bourne. “His squad number is … 
41. Is Tsuchiya the oldest professional player to match his shirt number with 
his age?”

“My friend and I are connoisseurs of what we call the hat-trick race,” begins 
Sam Waller. “This is when two or more players from either team have scored a 
brace of goals and remain on the pitch – the race of course being who will get 
a third goal and complete their hat-trick first. We thought we’d spotted a 
three-way hat-trick race when Jay Rodriguez, Sadio Mané and Shane Long each 
scored twice for Southampton against MK Dons. However upon closer inspection, 
as Mané was substituted before Long’s first goal, this was actually two two-way 
races (Mané v Rodriguez and Rodriquez v Long).

“There have been at least two genuine three-way races in the Premier League in 
recent years. When my beloved Newcastle lost 7-3 at Arsenal in 2012, Demba Ba, 
Olivier Giroud and Theo Walcott were all on a hat-trick and on the pitch at the 
same time. Walcott won the race by scoring his third in injury time. The feat 
was repeated last year when Liverpool won 6-3 at Cardiff, Luis Suárez winning 
the race with Martin Skrtel and Jordon Mutch thanks to a last minute goal. Has 
there ever been such an event, in any league, with four or more contenders?”

Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>
 