Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG6r7a17NBSI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG6r7a17NBSI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG6r7a17NBSI&media=>
 Ocean’s advert for Calvin Klein’s #mycalvins campaign. 
The importance of Frank Ocean’s style was underlined again this week when he 
appeared on theBoys Don’t Cry live stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/01/frank-ocean-live-stream-new-music-boys-dont-cry-safari-mobile>
 wearing a Jesus and Mary Chain T-shirt from the labelUndercover 
<http://www.undercoverism.com/>. It’s as political as it is sartorial. 
Musically and stylistically, Ocean subverts expectations and norms. He’s not an 
R&B singer and he doesn’t dress like Kanye West. As a person of colour, his 
anti-peacock image resets the subtext about how black celebrities and singers 
are expected to dress.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc23c4702ef74d7d84edad609dc4f9ced230dd7ce%2F0_265_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20it%20alone%3A%20why%20Frank%20Ocean's%20style%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20it%20alone%3A%20why%20Frank%20Ocean%27s%20style%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc23c4702ef74d7d84edad609dc4f9ced230dd7ce%2F0_265_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 The bandana makes an appearance at All Tomorrow’s Parties in 2012. Photograph: 
Ilya S Savenok/Getty Images 
Ocean’s look has become more refined, and his re-emergence after a quiet 
couple of years has been drenched in fashion references. His video for Calvin 
Klein’s #mycalvins campaign earlier this year felt like a mini music video. 
Barefoot in an oversized black suit and a white, buttoned-up shirt, his hair 
referenced the haircut of now – theMr Robot undercut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/13/mr-robot-undercut-2016-most-ubiquitous-hairdo>
 – while the found footage,mise-en-scène and lighting felt very Talking Heads (
David Byrne was recently a reference for Balenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jun/22/ikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment>
).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5110597780ae617b9c3a4c2a30654d3469b81e0%2F0_0_2171_3000%2F2171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20it%20alone%3A%20why%20Frank%20Ocean's%20style%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20it%20alone%3A%20why%20Frank%20Ocean%27s%20style%20matters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fgoing-alone-why-frank-ocean-style-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5110597780ae617b9c3a4c2a30654d3469b81e0%2F0_0_2171_3000%2F2171.jpg>
 Wearing Dior Homme on the red carpet at the Grammys in 2013. Photograph: Steve 
Granitz/WireImage 
Ocean’s appearance in the ad shouldn’t have been a surprise. Eagle-eyed Frank 
spotters will have noticed the visual references toRaf Simons 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BCpE40ogda9/?taken-by=boysdontcryan> (as well as 
Gosha Rubchinskiy 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BDXMkglAdeR/?taken-by=boysdontcryan>), the new 
chief creative officer of the label 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/02/raf-simons-confirmed-calvin-klein-chief-creative-officer>
. It’s probably the most fashion move of his career so far.

Ocean’s initial image was defined by a stick-of-rock bandana in white and red. 
He wore it when he was a member ofOdd Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/odd-future-wolf-gang-kill-them-all>, and it 
felt like a piece of juvenilia (a Karate Kid reference?), a bit of costuming 
that stood out awkwardly as his music matured out of the mixtape era, although 
it did meritits own Twitter account <https://twitter.com/frankobandana>.

Ocean seemed to have got the memo that menswear moves at a glacial pace, and 
his later looks were subtly stylish – so subtle that some might have called them
normcore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/dec/17/normcore-spoof-marketing-term-fashion-phenomenon>
, but they could be more accurately described as classically modernist with a 
pop-culture twist.

Ocean incorporated designer pieces into his look, but he did it his way. He 
wore black Givenchy sweaters, navy Dior Homme suits and maroon Maison Margiela 
trousers, but he accessorised them with sportswear brands such as Supreme, 
Common Project and Nike. When he embraced florals, on a pastel T-shirt at the 
Brits, it wasSupreme’s take on the cover of New Order’s Power Corruption and 
Lies 
<http://i0.wp.com/hypebeast.com/image/2013/02/supreme-2013-spring-summer-apparel-collection-18.jpg?w=1410>
. And when he wore couture, a custom-made Band of Outsiders canary-yellow suit 
(the shade of that season), he drew comparisons away from the catwalk and 
towardsRichie Tenenbaum 
<http://www.rushmoreacademy.com/academy/films/tenenbaums/familyalbum/richie.html>
.
 