
As Hollywood actor Michael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> takes his place at the fore 
of a St David’s Day march in Blaenau Gwent in support of the NHS, and his 
friend and fellow Welshman Matthew Rhys announces his new coaching job at the 
Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama, a clear, sonorous voice is calling out: 
don’t assume, it says, that Britain’s most successful leading men are all drawn 
from English public schools and the world of privilege.

“There has probably never been a better time to be Welsh, in terms of the 
appetite for performers in the profession,” said David Bond, head of actor 
training at the Royal College.

The two actors, both currently starring in hit transatlantic television shows, 
Masters of Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masters-of-sex> and 
The Americans <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-americans>, are at 
the head of a rich new seam of Welsh talent being mined by film and television.

Alongside them is Rhys Ifans, about to appear as Dylan Thomas in the film 
Dominion, Paul Rhys, the acclaimed actor who recently starred in The Assets 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/whats-on/actor-paul-rhys-defends-new-6713552> (a 
rival television spy show toThe Americans), and Owen Teale, an admired stage 
actor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/12/under-milk-wood-review-theatre-tour>
 who appears inGame of Thrones and Stella.

Only paces behind them are Ioan Gruffudd, star of Forever and Fantastic Four, 
Downton Abbey’s Tom Cullen, Iwan Rheon, who made his name in Misfits and now 
appears inGame Of Thrones, Merlin’s Alexander Vlahos, currently filming the new 
TV seriesVersailles in France, and the mid-Glamorgan coalminer’s son Aneurin 
Barnard, star ofCilla and Moonfleet.

“We held a showcase performance in London for our students on Thursday and 
some 200 agents came. There is a curiosity aboutWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> now and we certainly see ourselves as a 
major player,” Bond said, adding that word has spread to top casting directors 
in America.

“There is an expectation that we will deliver. The actors this country 
produces have a great work ethic and no interest in the nonsense and glitz of 
the business. They simply deal with all that if it comes along.”

Welsh acting talent takes centre-stage – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2015/mar/01/welsh-acting-talent-sheen-ifans-rhys-zeta-jones-in-pictures>
Eton-educated leading men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/21/eton-stage-screen-luminaries>
, such as Oscar-winner Eddie Redmayne, Tom Hiddlestone and Damian Lewis, or 
Harrow’s celebrated Benedict Cumberbatch, represent just one side of the 
current British domination of the market in leading men. A different kind of 
actor – one that may well come with a clear stamp of radical political 
engagement – is also available in Wales.

New stars in the making include Luke Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/luke-evans>, of the Fast and Furious 
franchise, Owain Yeoman, star of TV’sThe Mentalist, Mr Selfridge’s Trystan 
Gravelle, Lee Williams, who appeared inGrantchester and The Tudors, and Tom 
Rhys Harries, who is about to play the eponymous role ofCrow in the film of Tim 
Rhys’s play.

And it is not only the men who are in demand. Perhaps the most prominent Welsh 
actress since Catherine Zeta-Jones isRuth Jones, the writer and performer 
behind bothStella and the BBC hit Gavin and Stacey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jan/01/ruth-jones-wales-comedy-stella>. 
Also set for greater fame areBroadchurch’s Eve Myles, who made her name in 
Torchwood, Alexandra Roach, who stars in Testament of Youth, and Sophie Evans, 
who had the lead role of Dorothy in the West End production ofWizard of Oz and 
was seen last year inthe miners’ strike film Pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pride>.

“We are in a very good moment,” said John McGrath, the founding artistic 
director of National Theatre Wales in Cardiff. “The college and the national 
theatre are giving people a really good base for work in English and in Welsh. 
Actors and agents feel the work is here for them. It is no longer about hiding 
your Welshness, even when you work in other accents. It is a good and exciting 
place to be.”

The growth of the Welsh capital’s “thriving fringe theatre scene” has been 
crucial, McGrath believes. “People from the National Theatre and from the BBC 
can come to see the shows and there are playwrights creating the work, too. It 
all goes together to make for a feeling of confidence.” McGrath points out 
that, when Downton’s Cullen finished his training in Cardiff, instead of moving 
to London he stayed to put on shows in the city.

There is, however, also a healthy crop of young Welsh actors who have recently 
travelled to London to try to make it big in the West End.

Lloyd Everitt is playing Othello at the Globe, while Lewis Reeves is in My 
Night With Reg at the Apollo, where he plays alongside Old Etonian Julian 
Ovenden. The Broken Heart, also at the Globe, stars Mr Selfridge star and 
Welshwoman Amy Morgan, while upstream at the Southbank Cardiff-trained Anjana 
Vasan is appearing at the National Theatre inBehind the Beautiful Forevers. 
Appearingin the acclaimed YEN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/24/yen-five-star-review-anna-jordan>
 at Manchester’s Royal Exchange is Annes Elwy, described by theGuardian as 
“deeply moving” in her role.

This may be a heyday for the Welsh, but a career in acting is always a 
financial strain at first, points out Bond. “Of course, they struggle here in 
Cardiff, let alone in London. They share houses and live on cornflakes to get 
by, taking other work. Not many of our students are rich.”

What keeps them going, Bond believes, is a native love of performance that is 
born of the Eisteddfod tradition, coupled with a love of language. Most 
significant though, he thinks, is the commitment shown by famous actors to the 
next generation.

Matthew Rhys, who grew up in Cardiff, is a case in point. Last week, the New 
York-based actor revealed he is taking up a post as one of the Royal College’s 
new Jane Hodge International Chairs in Drama.

“To be asked by the college to travel home and impart what my travels have 
taught me is an enormous honour,” said the actor, who starred on British 
television two Christmases ago as Darcy in a BBC adaptation of PD James’s 
thrillerDeath Comes to Pemberley, a sequel to Pride and Prejudice. “Having been 
to the college recently to accept my fellowship, I’m looking forward to coming 
back to Wales and working with the students.”

The college’s academic scheme is designed to allow young students to work with 
leading professionals and is funded by the Jane Hodge Foundation, a 
grant-making charity established in 1962 by the late Cardiff banker Sir Julian 
Hodge, in memory of his mother.

Rhys’s friend Sheen already holds a similar post and takes the job seriously, 
says Bond: “When Michael [Sheen] comes down and holds a workshop for us, he is 
a rather good teacher who wants to work with the students, rather than just 
tell anecdotes.”

When Sheen joins marchers in Tredegar to celebrate the achievements of Aneurin 
Bevan, born in the town in 1897, he will also march in a long line of proud 
Welsh actors, from Richard Burton, toAnthony Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> and Jonathan Pryce.

McGrath sees Sheen’s attitude as characteristic: “It is part of Welsh culture 
to value your home. When Sheen came back here in 2011 to perform in thePassion 
Play at his hometown of Port Talbot, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2011/apr/26/michael-sheen-the-passion-port-talbot>
 it was because he wanted to be involved, but also because it was the kind of 
work he could not do anywhere else. There is no sense of wanting to escape 
where you are from, but instead there is the idea of coming back here whenever 
there is a good opportunity, or you can help.”

WALES’S HISTORY OF ACTING TALENT

Sarah Siddons (1755-1831)

Welsh-born stage tragedienne, most famous for her portrayal of Lady Macbeth.

Ray Milland (1907-86)

Hollywood actor and director best remembered for his Academy Award-winning 
portrayal of an alcoholic writer inThe Lost Weekend (1945) and as the 
murder-plotting husband in Hitchcock’sDial M for Murder (1954).

Richard Burton (1925-84) 

His Shakespearean acting career in the 1950s saw him dubbed “the natural 
successor to Olivier” byObserver critic Kenneth Tynan. Nominated seven times 
for an Academy Award, but never won.

Rachel Roberts (1927-80) 

She played the mistress in two key films of the 1960s – Saturday Night and 
Sunday Morning and This Sporting Life. Also played Mrs Appleyard in Peter 
Weir’s filmPicnic at Hanging Rock.

Siân Phillips (born 1933)

Born in West Glamorgan, she spoke Welsh in her childhood and learned English 
by listening to the radio. Best known for playing Livia in the television 
series based on Robert Graves’sI, Claudius.

Philip Madoc (1934-2012)

Best known for two very different television roles: as the politician in The 
Life and Times of David Lloyd George and as a U-boat captain in Dad’s Army.

Sir Anthony Hopkins (born 1937) 

Graduated from the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama in 1957 and was later 
spotted by Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre.

Roger Rees (born 1944)

Known in US for playing the TV characters Robin Colcord in the sitcom Cheers 
and Lord John Marbury inThe West Wing. He first won an Olivier and a Tony for 
his performance as the lead in RSC’s staging ofThe Life and Adventures of 
Nicholas Nickleby in the early 1980s.

Jonathan Pryce (born 1947)

Stage actor recently seen as Cardinal Wolsey in the BBC’s Wolf Hall who won 
awards as the Royal Court Theatre’s Hamlet in 1980. His screen breakthrough 
came in Terry Gilliam’s film Brazil.
 