
Awards season gathers steam on Sunday as Hollywood’s second most significant 
set of film prizes is handed out. The 74thGolden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> promise a new emphasis on 
youth and diversity, in stark contrast to recent years, which have seen all 
major movie awards bodies dogged by accusations of prejudice and bias.
Golden Globes v Oscars 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=946244df-0106-4ff3-affb-a9f10a5e61d6>
Yet, as far as the gongs themselves go, the Globes also seem certain to offer 
a night of no surprises – and certainly no indication of how the Oscars will 
shake down. Traditionally perceived as a barometer of Academy Awards glory, 
this year’s edition – because the Globes split their categories into drama and 
musical/comedy – looks likely to reward both Oscars frontrunners: coming-of-age 
taleMoonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
 and tune-packed romanceLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
.

Golden Globes 2017: La La Land leads pack with seven nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations>
Moonlight, already the winner of more than 120 awards, has won much praise for 
its backstory as well as narrative: a black director and an all-black cast 
telling the life of a gay man in an impoverished Miami community. House of 
Cards star Mahershala Ali is favourite to win the Golden Globe for best 
supporting actor for his role as a fatherly drug dealer; although co-starNaomie 
Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/film/naomie-harris>, best known for her 
role as Moneypenny in the Bond franchise, is likely to miss out on best 
supporting actress toViola Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/viola-davis> 
forFences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/22/fences-review-denzel-washington-viola-davis-august-wilson>
, an adaptation of the August Wilson play directed by its star,Denzel Washington
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/denzelwashington>. Those victories would 
mean two wins for actors of colour; the first time in five years a black star 
has won a Globe.

The Oscar nominations on 24 January look set to follow suit in terms of their 
ethnic spread, in part the result of a clutch of films – also includingHidden 
Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
 andThe Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-nat-turner-nate-parker>
 – offering actors of colour showcase roles, and in part a reaction to the
#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/academy-nominees-group-photo-oscarssowhite-white-hollywood>
 backlash. The Academy has made concerted efforts over the past 12 months to 
broaden its pool of about 7,000 voters, with around half of a new intake of 
members last summer being either non-white or female. Similar efforts, however, 
do not seem to have been made at the Globes, which are voted for by 90-odd 
members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight%20trailer%3A%20Barry%20Jenkins's%20Oscar-tipped%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%20trailer%3A%20Barry%20Jenkins%27s%20Oscar-tipped%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video&media=>
Moonlight trailer: Barry Jenkins’s Oscar-tipped drama – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/20/moonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video>
Success for La La Land would be a less immediately radical departure: a hymn 
to Hollywood in the mould of previous Oscar winnersArgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review> and The Artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/the-artist-film-review>, which 
starsRyan Gosling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> and Emma Stone
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> as toe-tapping, star-crossed 
wannabes in contemporary Los Angeles. Yet the youth of its director,Damien 
Chazelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/damien-chazelle>, who at 31 is 
already on his third feature, as well as that of Moonlight’s 37-year-old 
directorBarry Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/why-i-love-barry-jenkins-bim-adewunmi>
, is seen as a healthy indicator of movie industry renewal.

Meanwhile, veterans such as Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> and Clint Eastwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/clinteastwood> have found themselves snubbed 
as both their new movies,Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
 andSully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/sully-review-pious-hagiopic-that-even-tom-hanks-cant-save>
, failed to score a single nomination. The sole representative of old Hollywood 
comes in the unlikely form ofMel Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson>, whose grisly war drama Hacksaw 
Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/hacksaw-ridge-review-mel-gibson-finds-a-conscience-in-gruesome-war-story>
 is up for best director and best drama, as well as best actor forAndrew 
Garfield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield>.

Kenneth Lonergan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kenneth-lonergan>’s sombre 
Manchester By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
, which starsCasey Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/casey-affleck> as 
a janitor who becomes the guardian of his dead brother’s child, is also likely 
to do well. Affleck looks a strong bet for best actor (drama), while Lonergan 
could well carry off best director or screenwriter, or both.

Golden Globes 2017: who will win – and who should win – the film categories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/golden-globes-2017-moonlight-manchester-by-the-sea-ryan-gosling-amy-adams>
With a ceremony traditionally more raucous and informal than the Oscars, the 
Globes have announced an eclectic list of stars as presenters, while 
law-enforcement agencies are promising a“tremendous” 
<http://variety.com/2017/tv/awards/golden-globes-security-1201953700/> amount 
of security around the event.

This year’s host Jimmy Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jimmy-fallon> has already said he will 
include multiple jokes aimed at reality star turned president-elect Donald 
Trump, but also suggested they won’t be unduly mean-spirited. “If I hit 
somebody, it’s a very subtle hit, and everyone’s in on the joke,” he told the 
Hollywood Reporter. “I want to make sure everyone’s laughing and having a good 
time. And I’m hopefully going to book the people in this crowd the next week, 
so I’ll be edgy, but it’s all in good fun, and I know how far I can take it.”

The ex-Saturday Night Live comic and current late-night host had attracted fire
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/jimmy-fallon-donald-trump-hair-tonight-show>
 for inviting Trump on his show before the election and failing to quiz him on 
any of his more offensive remarks.

The Golden Globes awards ceremony will take place on 8 January, in Beverly 
Hills, California.
 