
Gonzalo Higuaín scored again as Napoli came from behind to beat Empoli 5-1 to 
restore their two-point lead at the top of Serie A. Juventushad earlier won 4-0 
at Chievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/juventus-win-12-serie-a-napoli-chievo>
 to move provisionally above Maurizio Sarri’s side but now fall back to second.

Why Gonzalo Higuaín now stands as an equal with any No9 in world football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/gonzalo-higuain-no9-napoli-argentina-lewandowski-ibrahimovic-suarez>
Higuaín scored his 22nd goal in 22 league matches this season after Leandro 
Paredes had givenEmpoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> a 
surprise lead. Lorenzo Insigne fired Napoli in front minutes later and an 
own-goal from the debutant Michele Camporese sealed the result before a late 
double from José Callejon.

Alvaro Morata scored twice against Chievo along with Paul Pogba and Alex 
Sandro, asJuventus secured a club record-equalling 12th straight win.

Fiorentina were held to a goalless draw at Genoa and their coach, Paulo Sousa, 
was sent off five minutes from time after stopping the ball before it had gone 
out of play.

Torino’s match against Hellas Verona also ended 0-0, as did Udinese’s against 
Lazio, which saw both teams finish the match with 10 men amid reports of a 
brawl in the tunnel.Bologna squandered a two-goal lead but nevertheless beat 
Sampdoria 3-2.

The pressure was on Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, who 
knew they needed to win to move back top. But it was Sarri’s former side that 
went in front in the 28th minute when a well-worked free kick by Paredes took a 
deflection to wrongfoot Pepe Reina.

Empoli’s lead lasted only five minutes, though, before Higuaín headed 
Insigne’s cross into the bottom right corner. Napoli completed the turnaround 
five minutes later as Insigne curled a stunning free-kick into the top left 
corner.

Napoli extended their advantage six minutes after the break when Camporese 
turned into his own net as he tried to prevent Higuaín from getting to 
Callejon’s cross. Higuaín went off in the 72nd minute to a standing ovation but 
Napoli added to their tally as Callejon twice fired in crosses from Dries 
Mertens.
 