
I started reading the Guardian in 1963 because I wanted to know what my 
parents were whispering about, and why Lady Chatterley’s Lover was hidden 
behind the gramophone records. In those innocent days, a 14-year-old like me 
had to look up the word “prostitute” in a dictionary. The Manchester Guardian,
as it then was <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1>, was 
delivered daily to our house, and the trick was to read it before my father 
finished the crossword and made it into firelighters. That was a narrow window 
unless it was “that pesky clergyman”. I had to supply the classical and 
biblical answers, but today I can’t answer any clues, even when my cousin,Puck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/puck>, is the setter. So I went for Lord 
Altrincham (John Grigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jan/02/guardianobituaries.humanities>) 
andLena Jeger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/mar/03/pressandpublishing.obituaries>’s 
columns on the back page, then skipped the sport to read my favourites,Mary 
Stott <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/18/guardianobituaries.gender> 
andKatharine Whitehorn <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katharine-whitehorn>
.

We liked the northern news, as I still do, with most of my family living in 
Leeds. When I worked in a theological college in India my parents had the
Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/subscribe-guardian-weekly> sent 
out and I circulated it to eight neighbouring families. My father also posted 
outPosy Simmonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/28/posy-simmonds-tamara-drewe-interview>
. In 1984 I had to rescue a colleague who was choking using the technique 
illustrated in the latest cartoon. Perhaps the Guardian saved her life.

I am a passionate allotmenteer and secretary of (the award-winning) Radstock 
in Bloom, so I always read the gardening section of Weekend magazine with great 
interest. The five houses I bought during my peregrination from one academic 
post to another were always actually great gardens which happened to have 
houses attached. I’m also always buying biographies recommended in your Review 
section, as I am trying to get a biography ofBishop Lesslie Newbigin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lesslie_Newbigin> finished, but I do not get 
enough time to read them (and there are piles of unfinished Guardians around 
the house, too).

The Guardian influenced me to become a republican, but not an atheist, and I 
think the coverage of Christianity has deteriorated,Giles Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gilesfraser> notwithstanding. I still read 
the paper backwards because I am now a Labour councillor and Wednesday’s 
coverage of housing and social issues is essential reading. I am also our 
group’s spokesperson on health issues.

I think my paternal grandfather, Cllr James Jackson of Kenilworth, started the 
family tradition more than 100 years ago. Now my son devours it, as a 
hard-pressed expat working on climate change at the University of Bremen, 
Germany. Long may the Guardian continue.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
 