
Not since the advance publicity for Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet 
Streetneglected to mention that Tim Burton’s movie was a musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/05/features.steverose> has a trailer 
obscured potentially off-putting information as successfully as the one for
Manchester by the Sea <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gsVoD0pTge0>. Anyone 
would mistake this awards favourite as a heartwarming tale of a taciturn 
janitor, played byCasey Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/casey-affleck>
, who bonds with the nephew left in his care. But that’s not the whole story – 
not by a long chalk.

The film’s harrowing secrets will be preserved here, although prospective 
viewers should be warned that it is written and directed byKenneth Lonergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kenneth-lonergan>, who has form in the area 
of putting cinemagoers through the wringer. His debut,You Can Count on Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/dec/13/dvdreviews.reviews>, begins with 
two children being orphaned after their parents die in a car crash. His second 
film,Margaret <>, traces the effects on a young woman of a gruesome bus 
accident in which she was complicit. If you knew you were a character in one of 
Lonergan’s movies, you would never go near a road. You might never leave the 
house, although that wouldn’t really help you in the case of his new film.

Manchester by the Sea is about tragedy, culpability and grief, the sort of 
subjects that are the kiss of death to Hollywood studios – at least until 
awards season, that is, when seriousness sells. This is the reason for the glut 
of adult-orientated prestige pictures between October and February, but it 
doesn’t explain why the unifying theme in this year’s crop is grief. It is a 
subject that tends to surface periodically in the preferences of Academy 
voters. Robert Redford’sOrdinary People 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZYHe8IAlto>, about a family struggling with 
the death of one of their sons, won best picture in 1981, while similarly 
themed contenders for that prize since have includedField of Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/mar/26/the-film-that-makes-me-cry-field-of-dreams>
,Ghost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/13/ghost-tv-series-demi-moore-swayze>
,In the Bedroom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jan/25/1>, Mystic River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1064275,00.html>
 andBabel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/19/drama.thriller>.

This year, the air of mourning is concentrated in three impressive movies. As 
well as Manchester by the Sea, there is Pablo Larraín’sJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, a portrait of John F Kennedy’s widow (played byNatalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman>) in the wake of her 
husband’s assassination, andA Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
, adapted byPatrick Ness <https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrick-ness> from 
his novel about 13-year-old Conor (Lewis MacDougall), whose mother is 
terminally ill. Despite being aimed at a young audience, A Monster Calls 
doesn’t soft-pedal the agony of grief. One of the film’s stars, Sigourney 
Weaver,recently told this newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/17/sigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster>
 that her initial response to the script was: “I don’t think I can be part of 
this, it’s too painful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cabdd8783a61cba8afa084b9882f310503c9c0d%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20grief%3A%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20new%20mood%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20grief%3A%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20new%20mood%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cabdd8783a61cba8afa084b9882f310503c9c0d%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 Claustrophobic intensity ... Natalie Portman in Jackie. Photograph: William 
Gray/Fox Searchlight/AP 
She wasn’t the only one who felt that way. “Most people responded really 
well,” says Ness. “But there were a few suggestions in early meetings about 
softening the story and making it a little easier. I really felt this was 
contrary to why the material worked. There was even someone who asked: ‘Does 
the mother have to die?’ My response was: ‘Well, yeah.’ Sadly, parents do die, 
and the kids they leave behind also read books and watch films, and they need 
to find themselves in those books and films. Grief is hard, and it feels 
irresponsible to say: ‘There, there. It’s OK.’ Sometimes it’s not OK.”

The focus of the film is the relationship between Conor and the yew tree 
(voiced byLiam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson>) that 
springs to life and reaches in through his bedroom window. Without the option 
of imaginative flourishes to explore unpalatable emotions, Manchester by the 
Sea and Jackie represent even greater challenges in the dramatisation of grief. 
As a solitary, debilitating state, grief goes against the grain of what cinema 
values most highly: it confounds momentum and thwarts all but the cruellest 
sort of closure. It is hard to make a film that is honest about the agonising 
slowness of grief, but which still moves forward in a compelling way. “That 
really is the nature of storytelling,” saysBruce Joel Rubin 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/07/ghost-pottery-scene-25th-anniversary>
, the screenwriter behind a trilogy of films about death and grieving: Ghost,
Jacob’s Ladder <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rJztRnDxdM8> and My Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8dAe3u0vWg>. “We probably wouldn’t have 
stories if they didn’t in some way give us hope. Many people have assumed 
that’s the purpose of storytelling, but I don’t think that’s true. There’s a 
Chekhovian view of the world, which is that things don’t change that much and 
that the real advances in life are harder and rarer.”

Rubin is an ardent admirer of Jackie and Manchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea>. “Manchester is one of 
the most painful films I’ve ever seen about the subject. It captures grief in 
more realistic terms than any normal Hollywood film. We have a tendency as 
Hollywood writers to create stories that uplift, so we take grief stories and 
turn them into stories that are somehow about transcending grief. In the 
process of doing it, we possibly make it look like an easier thing to achieve 
than it is in reality.

“Manchester takes you to the truth of grief, which is that the transformation 
from it is a slow, laborious and difficult project. And not everybody gets 
there. What Manchester andJackie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie> both 
show is that you have to find the place inside that can very simply and gently 
tell you: ‘Keep living.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5406a69a32367fbe31855cc027e341c073787b8%2F26_10_4952_2058%2F4952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20grief%3A%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20new%20mood%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20grief%3A%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20new%20mood%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgood-grief-cinemas-new-mood-of-despair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5406a69a32367fbe31855cc027e341c073787b8%2F26_10_4952_2058%2F4952.jpg>
 ‘Despite being aimed at a young audience, it doesn’t soft-pedal the agony of 
grief’ ... Lewis MacDougall in A Monster Calls. Photograph: Focus Features/AP 
The frankness in these pictures about the isolation of grief is every bit as 
exacting as in some of cinema’s finest examples – Krzysztof Kieślowski’sThree 
Colours Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/09/three-colours-blue-review>, say, 
or François Ozon’sUnder the Sand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/apr/20/culture.reviews1>. In Jackie, 
Larraín’s use of tight closeups, accompanied by the plunging chords ofMica Levi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/12/mica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes>
’s score, creates a claustrophobic intensity. Portman’s desolate face fills the 
cramped frame; her world has literally shrunk. With nowhere else to go, she 
must confront her anguish – and we have no choice but to confront it along with 
her. It is instructive to compare Jackie with the feelgood comedy-drama
Collateral Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/collateral-beauty-review-will-smith-helen-mirren-keira-knightley>
, which follows a grieving businessman (Will Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith>) from devastation to redemption 
with a haste that is positively indecent. The character’s grief takes two 
eye-catching forms: brooding (he scowls a lot) or wacky (he spends days 
building domino cities, only to knock them down on a whim). Scenes set at a 
support group for bereaved parents feel especially exploitative in the way they 
provide instant, undeserved transfusions of a poignancy that is far outside the 
film’s range.

Ghost, for which Rubin won the Oscar for original screenplay in 1991, was much 
smarter in its use of genre elements (love story, thriller, comedy) to temper 
the pain felt by its main character, Molly (Demi Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/demi-moore>), after the murder of her 
partner, Sam (Patrick Swayze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/15/patrick-swayze-obituary1>). “I’m 
not sure how much I understood the nature of grief at the time,” Rubin says 
now. “I did know that I was not, in the end, going to give Molly back what she 
wanted, which was Sam. She was going to have to lose him, and that process of 
losing the very thing that you want the most is probably the greatest form of 
suffering. I know I tried to create a very strong character who could survive 
the loss of her partner and that was reflected in the casting. Demi Moore 
exudes toughness. I knew I couldn’t have people walk out of the theatre at the 
end worried that Molly wasn’t going to be able to get through life.”

Film language is well equipped to convey the dislocated shifts in time that 
are characteristic of grieving. The dissolves and fades in Ghost reflect the 
blurring in that picture between life and death, while there is one especially 
piercing montage in Larraín’s film that cuts together images of Jackie 
pottering around the White House in the period immediately after her husband’s 
death; the repeated costume changes, which are the only proof that the shots 
have been harvested from different days, show how time can lose all definition 
during passages of intense emotional distress. It’s every bit as eloquent as 
the moment in Sam Raimi’s shlocky thrillerDarkman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L58rdhCfDIU> when a woman is transported in a 
single, seamless shot from the scene of her husband’s death to his graveside a 
week later.

It would be tempting to see the current emphasis on grief in cinema as a 
response to a turbulent year, only film-making doesn’t move that fast. It is 
more truthful, surely, to say that these are the movies we need right now to 
help us make sense of our times. Ness believes they reflect cultural changes 
that stretch back beyond the past 12 months. “The internet allows us to hear 
bad things more easily and more often,” he explains. “That is an interesting 
shift that we are maybe struggling a bit to deal with. Information has never 
been this abundant before. The question is: how much can we take as human 
beings and how do we cope with the increase? One of the ways is to tell stories 
about how to deal with it. I don’t think the world has changed as much as the 
internet has made it appear. It’s just that we know much faster, and in a more 
concentrated way, when things are wrong, and our storytelling is responding to 
that.”

This isn’t to say that movies about grief won’t always be a hard sell. Even a 
bantamweight approach to the subject such as Collateral Beauty is walking on 
eggshells, trying to reassure audiences that it isn’t one big downer. (Of 
course, itis one big downer, but not because it’s about grief – only because it 
doesn’t take grief seriously.) Marketing a movie about grief to a mainstream 
audience has long been tricky. Rubin remembers similar problems with My Life, 
the 1995 drama he wrote and directed starring Michael Keaton as a dying man 
making a video for his son. “My Life did not have an audience. It was 
advertised as a film about dying and people did not want to see that, which was 
incredibly painful for me.”

For all of Manchester by the Sea’s acclaim, Rubin thinks it faces an uphill 
struggle. “It’s a hard sell. I watched people coming out of the theatre 
afterwards, and I think some people were shaken up by it, but I overheard 
others saying in the lobby: ‘Oh, it was too slow.’ I got the impression they 
didn’t want to go there. They didn’t want to be touched that way.

“But I think we have to demystify this idea that there is always a 
happy-ever-after ending. And movies like Manchester and Jackie are important 
because they tell the truth – which is that there is nobody who can get you out 
of grief. You’re on your own. It’s just you.”

Collateral Beauty is out now. A Monster Calls opens in the UK on 1 January, 
Manchester by the Sea on 13 January and Jackie on 20 January
 