
Comment is free, but facts are sacred. That quote, spoken by legendary 
Guardian editorCP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust/2015/sep/14/a-hundred-years-an-essay-by-cp-scott>
, is at the core of my journalistic philosophy. It is the belief that stories 
and intelligent debate can help people better understand themselves and the 
world around them. The Guardian is one of those outlets that is home to 
storytelling based on quality, not quantity, and has helped me not just in my 
own work, but in the type of journalist I want to be in the future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fgood-to-meet-you-alex-veeneman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f154d5c35efc04ebddfbdb54134e9d1171c0497%2F119_220_1781_2226%2F1781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20to%20meet%20you%E2%80%A6%20Alex%20Veeneman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fgood-to-meet-you-alex-veeneman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20to%20meet%20you%E2%80%A6%20Alex%20Veeneman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fgood-to-meet-you-alex-veeneman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f154d5c35efc04ebddfbdb54134e9d1171c0497%2F119_220_1781_2226%2F1781.jpg>
 Good to meet you… Alex Veeneman 
I was born a premature infant in the northern suburbs of Chicago. In spite of 
my prematurity, I had a normal childhood. Originally, I wanted to be a teacher. 
However, there was a challenge that changed my life and led me to change my 
career course to journalism. A year and a half before I was to finish high 
school, I suffered a major illness, uncertain if I could attend university and 
further my education. One of the treatment’s side-effects was insomnia, and 
while my mom and sister slept, I sat in my room tuning the dial between 
stations on my radio. I stumbled upon the BBC World Service. It became a 
comfort to me in those isolated hours.

I fully recovered, and I knew that I wanted to be a journalist, something I 
pursued with my mom’s encouragement. I came across the Guardian website during 
university, and its coverage of theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> was a great background aid 
in developing a lecture I would give in my final year, focusing on the state of 
British journalism. Vivid storytelling and debate (though at times polarising) 
is at the paper’s core, and it keeps me coming back.

I graduated in 2014, and work virtually for an online publication based in 
London calledKettle Magazine <http://www.kettlemag.co.uk>, working with my UK 
colleagues to help British students tell their stories and have their say on 
current events. The Guardian is one of the sources I come back to in an age 
where a majority of America’s media outlets are pedantic about Britain and 
other topics. I hope to teach journalism at university in the future, and help 
the next generation of journalists to understand the importance of a good story.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
 