
The Daily Mail might have compiled the far left’s hitlist of Labour MPs. Seven 
of its apparent deselection targets are women: Angela Eagle, Jess Phillips, 
Stella Creasy, Louise Ellman, Anna Turley, Luciana Berger and Ruth Smeeth. Of 
these, Angela Eagle is an out lesbian and Louise Ellman, Ruth Smeeth andLuciana 
Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/luciana-berger> are Jewish. Most 
are young by the standards of politicians and nasty old men have always enjoyed 
humiliating young women with ideas of their own.

The Corbyn gun club does not only have women at the end of its firing range. A 
list of MPs Jeremy Corbyn claimed had been abusive towards him included manymen 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/09/jeremy-corbyn-ally-condemns-list-abusive-labour-mps>
. But when Labour activists talk of the men most likely to be deselected the 
list narrows to three: Neil Coyle, Wes Streeting and Peter Kyle. Wes Streeting 
and Peter Kyle are, since you mention it, gay.

Should you mention it? There is a case for arguing you should forget about 
identity politics. A division as old as the foundation of the “left” on the 
benches of the national assembly of revolutionary France now tearsLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> apart: the division between 
Girondins and Jacobins, reformists and revolutionaries, social democrats and 
communists. Gender and ethnicity seem irrelevant. Either you are for “Jeremy” – 
as his supporters insist on calling their Big Daddy – or against his 
revolution, whatever that might be.

Yet if you believe people who call themselves left wing, gender and ethnicity 
have never been more relevant. They celebrate diversity, count the number of 
women in senior positions and rage against racism and male privilege. Given 
their complicity with Corbyn, I do not think they will be able to rage against 
the patriarchy in future without having their hypocrisy thrown in their faces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgood-and-brave-labour-mps-should-be-defended%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f238e5554335657ad35f2a75ea8bbb5363b09d%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20and%20brave%20Labour%20MPs%20need%20to%20be%20defended%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgood-and-brave-labour-mps-should-be-defended%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20and%20brave%20Labour%20MPs%20need%20to%20be%20defended%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgood-and-brave-labour-mps-should-be-defended%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f238e5554335657ad35f2a75ea8bbb5363b09d%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Angela Eagle pulled out of the leadership race in July. She has been subjected 
to homophobic and misogynist attacks. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
Just look at them. Jess Phillips’s file of online abuse contains Corbyn 
supporters photoshopping her head on to the body of a half-naked woman with a 
spear going through her heart. They tell her she is an “ugly cow” and a “psycho 
bitch”. Phillips is as tough as they come. She worked for Women’s Aid and 
inevitably received abuse from “men’s rights” activists, who resented the 
protection she offered battered wives and girlfriends. The only difference 
between their insults and the insults of the Corbynistas, she tells me, is that 
the far left is “a bit less rapey”. When men’s rights activists went for 
Phillips in 2015, Jeremy Corbyn defended her. Now that his own supporters are 
following suit, the Pilate-like Corbyn washes his hands and piously intones 
that local parties must decide whether to deselect their MP  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/19/jeremy-corbyn-accused-of-leaving-colleagues-hung-out-to-dry-by-o/>
. He is just Labour’s leader. These are just his followers. It is none of his 
business.

After a Momentum activist denounced Ruth Smeeth, at the launch of Labour’s 
sick joke of an “inquiry” into left antisemitism, she had to call in the police 
to investigate antisemiticdeath threats 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/02/terror-police-probe-death-threat-and-antisemitic-and-homophobic/>
. Smeeth has fought the far right all her adult life. She never felt the need 
to hire a bodyguard, however, until she went to face the far left at this year’s
Labour conference 
<http://jewishnews.timesofisrael.com/ruth-smeeth-to-have-bodyguard-at-labour-conference/>
. Peter Kyle took the Tory seat of Hove in 2015. Momentum wants to deselect the 
one candidate who could hold the marginal. Kyle does not receive much open 
homophobia, just constant complaints that he’s “not one of us”, which may mean 
he is gay or may mean he refuses to accord the Pilate of the left the tribute 
that is his due.

Supporters of Angela Eagle allege her enemies referred to her as “Angie the 
Dyke” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/01/angela-eagle-was-target-of-homophobic-abuse-claim-labour-members>
at a local party meeting. A rebuttal leaflet circulating in her Wallasey 
constituency inadvertently explains why so many on the left cannot acknowledge 
not just homophobia, but misogyny and racism too. The dyke charge was “a 
politically motivated attack”, it said, with a variant of what Jews call the
“Livingstone formulation 
<https://engageonline.wordpress.com/2016/04/28/the-livingstone-formulation-david-hirsh/>
”. Allow me to explain. Just as it is commonplace in the rightwing press to say 
that Islamophobia and racism arealways the invention of log-rolling special 
interests, so the Livingstone left accuses Jews ofalways raising fake claims of 
antisemitism to silence criticism of Israel. As so often, what happens to the 
Jews one day happens to everyone else the next. Women and gays are now hearing 
what Jews have heard for years: your complaints are just a cover to advance 
your sinister interests.

The Labour conference made clear there is no point appealing to Corbyn’s sense 
of decency. Stella Creasy found he did not have one after she followed the 
success of her campaign to curb the sharks of the paydayloan racket  
<http://www.guardian-series.co.uk/news/wfnews/11341229.Payday_loan_restrictions_should_go_further___Stella_Creasy/>
 with an equally urgent campaign to helpchild refugees. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-urged-to-back-urgent-child-refugee-policy>
 She and Yvette Cooper asked Corbyn to support a motion at conference to 
advance the cause. Of course he wouldn’t. Admirers of George Galloway and 
Islamist movements have overrun Creasy’s local party. They call her a “girl 
guide” and treat her with a condescension they would never afford to a male 
politician. Naturally, Corbyn prefers them to a Labour MP who has done what he 
has never managed to do and provided practical help to working-class Britain.

I know from my experience of confronting left antisemitism that what Labour 
MPs will be looking for is a glimmer of comprehension among their opponents 
about what is at stake. If my past is a guide, they will not find it and a 
sliver of ice will enter their hearts.

Emily Thornberry, Diane Abbott and the rest of Corbyn’s prominent women 
supporters should be saying words to the effect of: “I back Corbyn. But I am 
also a feminist and an anti-racist. Everyone in public life gets abused, but we 
are now going beyond abuse to deselecting MPs. Even thoughJess Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jess-phillips> and Stella Creasy are my 
opponents, it would be intolerable for them to lose their seats to misogynist 
enemies, just as it would be intolerable for antisemites to drive out Ruth 
Smeeth and other Jewish MPs. These are victories that are not worth having; 
victories that are built on the defeat of our ideals.”

They won’t protest. Nor would anti-racist activists after Corbyn sacked 
Thangam Debbonaire 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/18/jeremy-corbyn-hired-and-fired-me-while-i-was-being-treated-for-c/>
 in such a contemptuous manner. Debbonaire’s colleague Chi Onwurah, one of the 
few other BME women MPs,said  
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/08/labour-mp-any-other-job-jeremy-corbyn-would-have-faced-industrial-tribunal>
 he might have been up “before an industrial tribunal for constructive 
dismissal”, aggravated by racial discrimination, if he were a normal employer.

From the Jacobins onwards, women’s rights and every other right have been 
subjugated to the cause of the revolution. On the rare occasions when 
revolution has come, it has, as a result of that subjugation, created societies 
that were worse than what went before.

• Comments will open later today
 