
I’m originally from the West Country, a little village outside Yeovil, but now 
living in south London having moved here three years ago. I’m 29 and have been 
teaching since I was 24, now working in a primary school in the heart of 
Westminster.

As far as hobbies and interests go, I sound like an identikit man in his 20s 
who has moved to London. I drink craft beer, likeStewart Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stewart-lee> and enjoy the films of Woody 
Allen. I don’t think I help sell a diverse image for Guardian readers! I’m also 
a massive political geek and live for Westminster gossip.

My proudest moment came when I was at the theatre watching a play called The 
Confessions of Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/05/the-confessions-of-gordon-brown-review>
. The audience were asked who the defence secretary was when Blair invaded 
Iraq. I correctly answered Geoff Hoon and was rewarded with a KitKat. Looking 
back at that, I’m not sure if that’s the proudest moment or the saddest.

I started reading the Guardian as an A-level politics student, during the 2005 
election campaign. It was always the paper of choice for my mum so I was 
certainly aware of the Guardian before then, as I’d see it around the house. 
I was attracted to the paper because it’s hard as a leftwing person to get your 
news from a reputable source, so I’ve always gravitated to the Guardian to keep 
me abreast of what’s going on in the world.

I like the amount covered in the paper, from politics to culture, issues of 
the day and opinion pieces. There’s nothing that annoys me about the paper, 
although I’ll sometimes read something and feel that it’s “peak Guardian” 
(anything to do with quinoa or how best to get your toddler to listen to 
avant-garde jazz). But other than that, it’s the paper for me.

The sections that interest me tend to be the political coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics>, and the opinion pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/commentisfree>. I am quite into my music, film 
and comedy too, so any interviews, reviews or features I’ll gravitate towards. 
I also follow the Guardian and some of its contributors on Twitter.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
 