
Sterling hit its highest level for 14 years yesterday, with City analysts 
predicting that it could rise further still.

A recent run of buoyant economic data, expectations of higher interest rates 
and a growing perception that manufacturing exporters are learning to live with 
the all-powerful pound have all contributed to the currency's strength.

Sentiment was reinforced by the publication yesterday of the M4 money supply 
data, and mortgage lending figures betrayed no signs of any reduction in the 
strength of consumer activity.

The pound's trade-weighted index, which measures sterling's value against the 
currencies of Britain's most important trading partners, hit 109.5 yesterday - 
its highest since January 1986.

The euro is now worth less than 61p - equivalent to a sterling-mark rate of 
DM3.20.

"There are good British reasons for why sterling has con tinued to strengthen. 
With few exceptions, all British economic releases have been stronger than 
expected," said Michael Metcalfe, a currency strategist at NatWest Global 
Markets in London.

"We had the recovering manufacturing figures early in the week and a 
forthcoming CBI survey is expected to show a solid recovery in the industrial 
sector," said Stuart Weatherby, senior economist at Panmure Gordon in London.

"Exports have suffered a bit, but overall they seem to be coping okay with the 
strength of the pound. I don't see why sterling can't strengthen further from 
here."

The pound is being seen by some traders as a safe haven in a nervous foreign 
exchange market. The euro remains firmly out of favour - hovering just above 
parity against the dollar while the markets' attention is focusing on the 
strength of the yen ahead of this weekend's meeting of the leading industrial 
economies in Tokyo.

The Japanese are increasingly uncomfortable with the high level of the yen 
which has appreciated by 40% over the last 18 months.

Tokyo is worried that the strength of the currency could choke off the 
economy's feeble attempt at recovery.

The Japanese are thought likely to ask the United States privately for help in 
capping the yen's appreciation, with Washington likely to use the opportunity 
to demand further moves to liberalise the Japanese economy.

"Japan wants a weaker yen and a home victory. They don't want to lose this 
because it is a home fixture for them," said Commerzbank economist Nick Parsons.

A weaker yen would take some of the pressure off the euro, currently the 
weakest of the world's big currencies.

While Europe's leading economies are benefiting from single currency's 14% 
slide since its launch at the beginning of last year, policymakers would be 
happy to see a comfort zone between its levels against the dollar and parity.

The G7 will need to do more than reiterate familiar concerns about the 
strength of the yen in its final communiqu√©, if it is to have an effect on the 
foreign exchanges.

But some analysts believe that they may be prepared to issue a strongly worded 
statement talking down the yen.

"I think there is a real chance of a surprise this weekend," said Mr Parsons.
 