
Google’s self-driving cars have graduated from the company’s “moonshot division
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/05/x-projects-alphabet-moonshot-ventures-change-world-robots>
”, X labs, to become a full-blown subsidiary of umbrella group Alphabet, called 
Waymo.

The new company, headed by X alumni John Krafcik, is charged with turning the 
self-driving car technology thatGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has been developing behind 
closed doors into a viable business for the future.

How that will actually happen, though, Waymo has apparently not yet decided. 
Mooted revenue streams include Uber-style driverless ride sharing, disrupting 
the trucking and logistics sector, fitting self-driving technology into public 
transit vehicles, improving the “last mile” of postal delivery or even simply 
licensing the software to car manufacturers who will sell cars to end users.

“Self-driving technology is awesome in all these categories,” said Krafcik at 
an event to announce the launch of Waymo. But one thing Waymo won’t be doing is 
building its own cars – a step back in ambition from the highest goals of the X 
labs team.

“We are a self-driving technology company,” Krafcik said. “We’ve been really 
clear that we’re not a car company, although there’s been some confusion on 
that point. We’re not in the business of making better cars. We’re in the 
business of making better drivers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7f3529742c1f495711e6f5240427bace5fe94d2%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20spins%20off%20self-driving%20car%20division%2C%20signalling%20new%20direction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20spins%20off%20self-driving%20car%20division%2C%20signalling%20new%20direction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7f3529742c1f495711e6f5240427bace5fe94d2%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The small, purpose-built ‘Koala cars’ that Google currently uses for testing 
its self-driving technology are unlikely to evolve into an actual product that 
consumers can buy. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
That means the small, purpose-built “Koala cars” that Google currently uses 
for testing its self-driving technology are unlikely to evolve into an actual 
product that consumers can buy. Instead, the best hope for someone who wants to 
get their hands on Google’s software looks to be Fiat Chrysler, who signed a 
deal with Google in May to put its self-driving tech in a small fleet of the 
company’s Pacifica minivans. If that deal expands into a full-blown 
partnership, Fiat Chrysler could be the first company selling Google tech to 
end users.

If not Fiat Chrysler, Waymo will have to pair with someone, because Google is 
fast becoming a victim of its own success. When the company first initiated its 
self-driving product at X Labs, it was almost alone inSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> in thinking that 
self-driving cars were a solvable problem. But as the years progressed, others 
joined the field, some directly inspired by Google’s success: Uber’s Travis 
Kalanick has spoken about how he was inspired to enter the self-driving car 
business by a ride in one of Google’s prototypes. He promptly hired a 
substantial portion of Carnegie-Mellon university’s ground-breaking robotics 
lab.

Conventional auto manufacturers have also entered the fray: as well as Tesla 
Motors, whoseAutopilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/11/tesla-self-driving-cars-autopilot-update>
 system is one of the most advanced driver-assist features on the market, older 
businesses like Ford, BMW and Nissan have all pushed their own automation 
systems onto the market.

Part of the reason for Google losing its lead in the market was the company’s 
insistence on only pursuing full automation. “The system we have built is aimed 
at full autonomy, and it is therefore much more complicated than a lot of these 
other systems,” X labs engineer Andrew Chathamtold the Guardian in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/google-x-self-driving-cars>
. “This is not the engineeringly efficient or cost-effective way to build 
something that just helps you stay in your lane.”

It is unclear whether Waymo will continue that all-or-nothing goal. Google 
proudly trumpeted a previously secret milestone it had achieved in the summer 
of 2015, when a blind man, Steve Mahan, had “driven”, unaccompanied, one of its 
Koala cars on the public roads of Austin, Texas. That trip was the world’s 
first fully driverless trip on public roads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522744c0a5f4cb9f389045b2d6bf315f459f3926%2F0_158_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20spins%20off%20self-driving%20car%20division%2C%20signalling%20new%20direction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20spins%20off%20self-driving%20car%20division%2C%20signalling%20new%20direction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwaymo-google-self-driving-car-division%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522744c0a5f4cb9f389045b2d6bf315f459f3926%2F0_158_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Steve Mahan, who is blind, stands by the Waymo driverless car during a Google 
event. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
But behind the scenes, reports suggest that Waymo might pull the trigger on 
the technology earlier than the company intended to when it was simply a 
research lab. On Monday,industry news site The Information reported 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/google-scaled-back-self-driving-car-ambitions>
 the groundbreaking partnership with Fiat Chrysler had represented one step 
towards that intermediary goal, to the concern of some of Google’s self-driving 
engineers.

Some of those engineers have left the company since the new direction was 
decided at the start of 2016. Chris Urmson, the former head of the division, 
quit this summer to start a new company, less than a year after Krafcik was 
hired.Anthony Levandowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/self-driving-car-anthony-levandowski-uber-otto-google>
, one of the industry’s pioneers, left in early 2016 to found aself-driving 
truck startup, Otto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/17/self-driving-trucks-otto-startup>
, which has since been acquired by Uber. Jiajun Zhu, a founder member of the 
team, and software engineering manager Dave Ferguson left in the summer to 
co-foundautonomous car company Nuro 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/9/15/12921542/google-self-driving-startup-nuro>. In 
total, 14 members of the team are known to have left in 2016 alone.

As a fully standalone unit, Waymo will have more power within the wider 
Alphabet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet> hierarchy to set its 
priorities and decide its own future. But that power also comes with 
responsibility: for the first time, Google’s self-driving cars will have a 
bottom line, and an expectation that, at some point, it will start paying its 
own way. Simply making the best technology isn’t the only requirement to making 
money in the car industry – Waymo also needs to make friends.
 