
Thomas McCarthy’s acclaimed journalistic thriller Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight> was the toast of Monday night’s 
Gotham independent film awards in New York, netting best picture and screenplay 
honors, on top of a jury award for its ensemble cast.

Spotlight wins big at Gotham awards, but surprise victors in acting categories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/01/spotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-awards-gotham-awards>
The picture’s success at the first major awards show of the season was largely 
expected. It’s been widely considered an awards frontrunner since it made a 
splash on the fall festival circuit, earning glowing reviews in Venice, 
Telluride and Toronto. What did surprise at the event, which rewards the best 
in independent film, was how acting veterans dwarfed the victory speeches from 
the night’s major winners – including best actor honoree Paul Dano (Love & 
Mercy) and Spotlight star Michael Keaton, who spoke on behalf of his film’s 
large cast.

From Helen Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren>, who 
addressed her sex life in accepting a career achievement award, to Rosie Perez, 
who went off script to criticise Donald Trump while introducing a category – 
here are the highlights from the evening.

Spotlight wins big at Gotham awards, but surprise victors in acting categories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/01/spotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-awards-gotham-awards>
Helen Mirren said playing the Queen didn’t ruin her sex life

Helen Mirren used her acceptance speech for a tribute award, given to her by 
Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro>, to prove that 
at 70 years old, she still has a very active libido.

The actor, accepting a tribute award (and a kiss) from De Niro, told the 
audience how her husband, director Taylor Hackford, first glimpsed her as Queen 
Elizabeth II in Stephen Frears’ 2006 drama,The Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-queen>.

“There was silence in the cinema and my husband let out this huge laugh, 
because he’s never seen me dressed as the Queen before. So I leaned over to him 
and said: ‘Darling, do you think you’ll ever fuck me again?’”

“Between you and me, he has,” she added, smirking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448993913413%2F35034cb9-ed0e-44bd-93d9-da9505ad9c6a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gotham%20awards%3A%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Rosie%20Perez%20provide%20gags%20alongside%20gongs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gotham%20awards%3A%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Rosie%20Perez%20provide%20gags%20alongside%20gongs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448993913413%2F35034cb9-ed0e-44bd-93d9-da9505ad9c6a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robert De Niro onstage at the Gotham independent film awards. Photograph: 
Variety/Rex Shutterstock 
Robert De Niro confessed to being turned on by the Queen

Robert De Niro also referenced the project, which won Mirren the Oscar for 
best actress in 2006, in introducing the actor to the stage at the cavernous 
Cipriani Wall Street.

“I didn’t grow up wanting to have sex with Queen Elizabeth,” De Niro joked. 
“First, I didn’t think it was proper fun to have. And then there was the Queen 
herself: regal and, well, queenly – but not in the way that would excite a 
young man’s fantasies.

“But that was before I saw her played by Helen Mirren.”

Rosie Perez urged people to not vote for Donald Trump

Actor Rosie Perez was tasked with presenting the audience award winner, which 
went to Sean Baker’s micro-budget transgender comedy Tangerine. Instead of 
sticking to the speech prepared for her, Perez improvised some portions to jab 
at Republican presidential hopeful Donald Trump.

“In America, the democratic process is incredibly important … especially when 
we have someone like Donald Trump running for president,” she said to hollers 
from the audience.

“It’s up to you the people to vote – and not for Donald Trump,” she further 
implored. “They didn’t tell me to say that. I just threw that in there.”

Helen Mirren followed suit – albeit more discreetly

Mirren used some of her speech to pay tribute to the many writers whose words 
she has “learned and interpreted and spoken”. Like Perez, she also couldn’t 
resist slipping in a sly dig at Trump.

“Writers have opened the door for me, the door through which I’ve had the 
great opportunity to walk through, and what beautiful and terrible things words 
are,” she said. “Conveyers of love and hatred and inspiration and stupidity, 
Donald Trump. Meanness and generosity, kindness and cruelty.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448993977803%2Fa16801bb-3cfa-41c5-83fe-3336acc64197-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gotham%20awards%3A%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Rosie%20Perez%20provide%20gags%20alongside%20gongs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gotham%20awards%3A%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Rosie%20Perez%20provide%20gags%20alongside%20gongs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgotham-awards-helen-mirren-rosie-perez-robert-de-niro-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448993977803%2Fa16801bb-3cfa-41c5-83fe-3336acc64197-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robert Redford onstage at the Gotham independent film awards. Photograph: 
Variety/Rex Shutterstock 
Robert Redford recalled the time he was called an asshole in public

Actor and founder of the Sundance film festival, Robert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford> was humble in accepting the 
last tribute award of the evening (in addition to Mirren, Carol director Todd 
Haynes was also rewarded with one).

“When success came, it felt good,” admitted Redford. “But I always treated 
success as something to be careful about it,” he added. “If you get too close, 
you run the risk of losing yourself.”

To prove his point, Redford recalled an incident years ago where the actor was 
crossing a street in Los Angeles when a “car with a bunch of teenagers” came 
roaring towards him.

“I see them in the car and they scream: ‘Robert Redford, Robert Redford!’ I’m 
thinking:Heyyy. [They screamed:] ‘You are such an asshole!’ From that point on 
I knew where my place was, and how humility was very important.”
 