
A family of beavers that has been living wild on an English river could yet be 
saved from a lifetime under lock and key in a zoo or wildlife park.

The environmental charity Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth> claimed the 
government, which is planning to trap the animals, has softened its stance 
towards the beavers, believed to be the first to live in the wild in England 
for centuries.

Until now the government has argued that the beavers are a non-native, 
invasive species that could be carrying a disease andshould be removed from 
their Devonshire home and tested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/30/first-england-beavers-in-centuries-captured>
. It has been at pains to insist it will not cull the beavers but will find a 
home in captivity for them.

FoE has launched legal proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/23/beavers-devon-wild-england-friends-of-earth>
 challenging the government’s plans, claiming that because Britain was part of 
the beavers’ natural range before they were hunted to extinction, they are 
protected under European law. Most local people who share the banks of the 
River Otter with the beaversappear to want them to be left alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/19/-sp-rewilding-large-species-britain-wolves-bears>
.

The charity said on Friday that the government had told it the plan now is to 
test the beavers for disease closer to their west country home rather than 300 
miles away in York as it had intended. FoE said this would make it easier for 
the animals to be re-released in Devon.

FoE also said the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) 
was giving sole responsibility for the potential re-release of the beavers to 
regulatorNatural England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/natural-england>.

It said this was significant because in 2009 Natural England published a report
 <http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/45003> that had 
extolled the benefits of releasing beavers back into the wild. The report said 
beavers could improve fish stocks and their dams could help prevent flooding by 
slowing down the flow of water from high ground.

The Devon Wildlife Trust has applied for a licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/16/battle-stop-capture-englands-first-wild-beavers>
 to release beavers into the wild in the county – which is currently being 
looked at by Natural England.

FoE claimed all this was “a significant shift from the government’s previous 
position which stated that the beavers could not be allowed to remain and 
should be removed.”

Alasdair Cameron, an FoE campaigner, said: “We’re delighted that the 
government appears to be listening to local people who want these beavers to 
swim freely in their rivers. These are positive steps in the right direction – 
but until this issue is resolved, we will continue to make the case for these 
beavers to remain free.

“Beavers are a protected, native species, and testing them and re-releasing 
them into the wild would absolutely be the sensible thing to do. Allowing 
beavers to remain in the wild in England would bring major benefits – such as 
boosting fish stocks, improving our waterways and bringing a bit more happiness 
to our countryside.”

A spokeswoman for Defra said: “Our priority has been to ensure humane 
treatment for the beavers while safeguarding human health, so we’ll be testing 
the beavers close to the River Otter which will be better for their welfare 
than moving them elsewhere.

“We have a licence to capture the beavers, which we need to do to test them 
humanely for the disease EM which has the potential to be very harmful to human 
health should it become established in the UK.

“Natural England is currently considering an application for the beavers to be 
returned to the River Otter and is expected to make a decision soon.”
 