
The government has blocked an attempt to have unpaid internships banned, but 
is to investigate the practice as part of the current review of modern working 
practices.

Draft legislation put forward by Conservative MP Alec Shelbrooke was designed 
to ensure that anyone working as an intern would be paid the minimum wage, 
which depends on the age of the worker.

Speaking in parliament he described internships as “the acceptable face of 
unpaid labour in modern Britain today”. He added, they “should have no place in 
a meritocratic country that aims to work for the many and not the privileged 
few”.

He added that his bill was designed to end “a new rise in the class society 
that means only those from a wealthy background can gain a privileged leg-up”.

However, the bill was talked out by Conservative colleagues. Instead, the 
business minister, Margot James, said that the government would askMatthew 
Taylor to include unpaid internships in his review of employment practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
. The former adviser to Tony Blair is investigating the impact of the UK’s 
growing gig economy on workers’ rights.

Speaking about Shelbrooke’s bill, James told MPs: “While it’s extremely 
well-intentioned, I do have concerns that it could have unintended consequences 
that might even undermine existing employment laws and protections,” she told 
MPs. She added that if interns met the legal definition of workers in 
employment law, they were already entitled to the minimum wage.

A ban on the use of unpaid internships was recommended two years ago by the 
government’s social mobility tsar, Alan Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/15/interns-paid-minimum-wage-alan-milburn-jobs>
, but firms have continued to be able to advertise positions that do not offer 
a wage.

The campaign group Intern Aware said two-thirds of businesses backed a 
four-week limit on unpaid placements, and just 12% opposed such a cap.

Ben Lyons, Intern Aware co-director, said: “It is positive that the review is 
going to be looking at this as it is a major issue, which is reducing social 
mobility and pricing young people out of professions. However, it is 
disappointing that the government talked out the bill.”

Lyons said Shelbrooke’s bill had been “a real opportunity” for the government 
to back up Theresa May’s pledges to make progress on social mobility. He added: 
“There’s a sizeable minority of internships which are unpaid – we are surprised 
that more action hasn’t been taken.”

Internships are controversial because they are perceived as biased towards the 
children of well-off professional parents who live in London. They are able to 
tap into their parents’ contacts to get valuable work experience and can also 
afford to take unpaid roles.

In her speech to the Tory party conference last month, the prime minister said 
she intended to tackle unfairness and ensure “ordinary working-class people” 
had “access to the opportunities that are too often the preserve of the 
privileged few”.

Shelbrooke highlighted how some MPs were using unpaid placements. “A quick 
scan of the [w4mp] website shows roughly 22 MPs advertising for unpaid interns 
outside of the politics and parliamentary study scheme,” he said. “It sends a 
message to businesses across the United Kingdom that exploiting … young workers 
is acceptable.”

A government spokesperson said: “The government is committed to building an 
economy that works for all, not just the privileged few. It’s important that 
young people have access to employment and work experience regardless of their 
background.” 
 