
The Turnbull government’s legislative agenda is in doubt after Barnaby Joyce 
rejected a deal to release 450 gigalitres of environmental water toSouth 
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, a stand 
which may jeopardise Nick Xenophon’s votes on other legislation.

The deputy prime minister wrote to the South Australian water minister Ian 
Hunter on Thursday night to tell him that it was not possible to deliver the 
450 gigalitres without hurting other people and local economies along the river.

In a heated Murray Darling Basin ministerial meeting on Thursday night, Hunter 
reportedly told Joyce 
<http://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/news/politics/ian-hunter-barnaby-joyce-on-receiving-end-of-sa-ministers-tirade/news-story/c49a1d7c2189965ee7c29b21b798daeb>
 to “fuck off” and called fellow Labor Victorian water minister Lisa Neville a 
“cunt” before going out for an ice cream.

Liberal party’s bomb thrower blows apart the Murray-Darling water myth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/liberal-partys-bomb-thrower-blows-apart-the-murray-darling-water-myth>
The breakdown of the meeting and subsequent letter signals that the federal 
government will not provide South Australia with the extra 450 gigalitres 
agreed to under the Rudd-Gillard Labor government.

“If it was genuinely possible to put an additional 450 gigalitres down the 
river without hurting people, then none of us would have a problem with it,” 
Joyce wrote.

“The reality is that it will.” 

Joyce wrote he believed the ministers were heading into a “protracted and 
unresolvable stalemate” given all the other competing interests combined with 
the legislative requirements.

He told South Australia there would be “deeply concerning outcomes” if further 
water was removed from the basin.

Joyce later told the media his letter was a simple statement of fact that the 
450 gigalitres could not be delivered by 2024 if there is a social and economic 
detriment.

But his message has been delivered just prior to the last sitting weeks of 
parliament.

Xenophon is one of the key crossbenchers in the senate and wields three votes. 
He told Guardian Australia that Joyce’s decision was a “very disturbing 
development” and refused to rule out withdrawing support for other legislation 
on the government’s agenda.

Those bills include the double dissolution triggers – the registered 
organisations bill and the Australian Building and Construction Commission bill 
– as well as superannuation reforms and the backpacker tax bill.

If the backpacker bill does not pass over the next fortnight, the agricultural 
sector will be left in limbo before the proposed 1 January start date which 
would see a default tax rate of 32.5% for all backpackers.

Furthermore, the government has yet to even release its $48bn corporate tax 
bill.

“Joyce has reneged on a deal based on the science which says that you cannot 
have a healthy agricultural sector without a healthy river system,” Xenophon 
said.

“Barnaby Joyce made undertakings for water. We need to have a cool look at the 
science. This is not being fair dinkum. If they are saying there are technical 
issues and then engineering issues, then deal with it rather than giving up.

“The health of Murray is critical to the environment and agricultural assets 
of Australia, particularly in South Australia.”

Murray-Darling water buybacks capped at 1,500 gigalitres as bill passes Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/murray-darling-water-buybacks-capped-at-1500-gigalitres-as-bill-passes-senate>
In 2009, Xenophon refused to support 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/cash-boosts-to-come-senate-passes-42b-stimulus-20090212-86ao.html>
 the Rudd government’s $42bn economic stimulus package during the global 
financial crisis without $1bn extra funding for the Murray Darling for water 
buybacks and environmental flows.

Xenophon is currently negotiating with the government on its industrial 
relations bills. While the registered organisations commission bill is expected 
to pass with amendments including protection of whistleblowers, the ABCC bill 
is more likely to stall.

But Xenophon is not the only crossbencher with sticking points on the bills. 
While Xenophon wants protections around “security of payment” for 
subcontractors, it is understood Victorian senator Derryn Hinch is preparing 
many pages of amendments to the ABCC bill which could see the bill postponed 
into the final week of parliament or beyond.

The changes would protect vulnerable contractors who are shortchanged in 
payment disputes on government construction work.

The Hinch amendments would guard against sham contracting and address the 
underpayment of workers on government contracts, including 457 workers.

It is believed Hinch is concerned that smaller contractors are being refused 
payment on construction projects for so-called workmanship issues, causing high 
rates of insolvency.

National MP Andrew Broad, who holds the electorate of Mallee which includes 
the river town of Mildura, said the Murray river was running beyond its banks 
because it was so full.

He said large water releases would not get through the Barmah Choke – a narrow 
section of the Murray 
<http://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/archived/mdbc-tlm-reports/2092_Barmah_Choke_factsheet.pdf>
– without flooding the area.

 