
The sense of disappointment bordering on despair about the autumn statement’s 
silence on social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/shameful-autumn-statement-social-care>
 is palpable throughout local government and the social care sector. The chorus 
of support for action was impressive and unprecedented, unifying manypoliticians
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/philip-hammond-social-care-funding-mistake-stephen-dorrell>
 of all parties, NHS leaders,royal medical colleges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/nhs-hospitals-suffer-from-chronic-bed-shortage-surgeons-say>
,the health select committee 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/health-committee/news-parliament-20151/letter-to-chancellor-nhs-finances-16-17/>
,independent thinktanks 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/publications/autumn-statement-joint-statement> 
andthe Care Quality Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
, as well as those who might be regarded asthe “usual suspects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/one-in-four-care-home-beds-at-risk-without-funding-increase-providers-say>
”.

Calm and careful reflection is now needed as to why such a formidable and 
authoritative range of opinion was so comprehensively disregarded. Simply 
re-stating the case for better funding is not enough. What would it take for 
the government to act? Where do we go from here? What do we need to do 
differently?

It is unlikely more or better evidence alone will generate the necessary 
public support and political will for change

One view is that we need to make a stronger evidence-based case for social 
care as an investment producing wider benefits to the economy, rather than a 
cost. This would be rooted in a different vision of care provision that 
promotes independence and community resilience instead of creating dependence 
on formal services. But is lack of evidence the real reason for government 
inaction?

The need for action was recognised as long ago as 1997, when Tony Blair 
established a royal commission. The case for adequate funding was taken up 
again a decade ago by the late Derek Wanless in meticulous and compelling 
detail – 344 pages and 16 supporting research papers. TheDilnot Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/11/dilnot-regrets-social-care-cap> in 
2011 added further analysis, as didthe Barker Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/sep/04/barker-report-injustices-long-term-care>
 three years later. These three reviews were led not by professional lobbyists 
or provider interests but a trio of hard-nosed bankers and economists. So the 
proposition that the Treasury stands ready with the chequebook if only we could 
provide even more, or different, evidence is fanciful. There are deeper 
underlying reasons why this government, like its predecessors, has failed to 
grasp the nettle.

Hammond facing growing Tory rebellion over social care crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/tory-mps-press-philip-hammond-over-nhs-and-social-care>
The most obvious is the historical legacy of means testing for social care, 
established in 1948, alongside a later policy shift away from long-term care 
provided free by the NHS. As society has grown richer, many people now have 
savings and assets that exceed the means test threshold of £23,250. This has 
allowed successive governments to stand by and watch as the costs of care fall 
increasingly on private individuals rather than the public purse. Over half of 
care home fees are now met by individuals, not the state. Persuading the 
Treasury to spend more when there is already a covert and convenient way of 
raising money through, in effect, a form of self-insurance, will always be a 
tough ask.Dilnot-inspired plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2013/mar/07/dilnot-care-cap-implemented-key-points>
 for a cap on very high costs were a foot in the door, but it was firmly shut 
again with thepostponement of those reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/17/lifetime-cap-care-costs-deferred-2020>
 until 2020 (and only ministers appear to think they will see the light of day).

Another explanation for inaction is that, unlike the NHS, social care is 
poorly understood by the general public and does not resonate as a significant 
electoral issue in MPs’ postbags and surgeries. A troubledNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> easily commands public attention 
through visual images of overflowing hospitals and queuing ambulances. But when 
the social care system is “full” few notice, the consequences scattered 
silently and invisibly across thousands of homes and families. It makes little 
noise on the radar of political and public concern.

Allied to this are 6 million other reasons that have allowed governments to 
get away with underfunding social care – unpaid carers, thenatural shock 
absorbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/18/unpaid-carers-gaps-nhs-social-care-act>
 who so far have cushioned the NHS and social care system from the full impact 
of inadequate services. For all the policy rhetoric about supporting carers, 
there is a tacit assumption that care should be undertaken by families – 
usually wives and daughters – and that, again unlike the NHS, it does not 
require highly skilled and well-resourced public provision.

The case for a social movement that generates bottom-up pressure for action 
looks set to gather momentum

So it is unlikely that more or better evidence alone will generate the 
necessary public support and political will for change. The case for a social 
movement that generates bottom-up pressure for action looks set to gather 
momentum. The social care sector will need to seize the opportunities offered 
by social media with considerably more enthusiasm than it has shown to date. It 
might also need to replace the nebulous and woolly term “social care” with a 
different vocabulary that unifies and resonates more clearly with thediverse 
range of individuals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/22/what-social-care-really-looks-like>
 of all ages and circumstances with care and support needs.

Creating the conditions in which a social movement can emerge and flourish 
will take time. Unless the government has a change of heart, more of us will 
have to get used to the idea that we are responsible for paying for our own 
care unless we are relatively poor and have very high needs. Unpalatable a 
prospect though that might be, the time has come for a sensible discussion 
about how we should be supported to do that through better advice and 
information, and the use of the tax, benefits and pension systems.

Labour pours scorn over autumn statement for ignoring sick and old
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/labour-pours-scorn-over-autumn-statement-for-ignoring-sick-and-old>
In the meantime pressures on health and social care will not go away. Unpaid 
carers can absorb only so many bumps in the road; prospects for the NHS with 
winter almost upon us are grim. The possibility oflarge-scale provider failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
 that imperil the care of hundreds or even thousands of people is an 
ever-present possibility. The government is taking big risks on all of these 
fronts as a direct consequence of its indifference. How big a price, in human 
as well as financial terms, it is prepared to pay remains to be seen.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 