
Britain’s 470 women’s pair called it the rock-star ending, not just to a 
perfect regatta but also to the perfect partnership. After crossing the line 
for gold in Guanabara Bay on Thursday in their last race together, Hannah Mills 
and Saskia Clark broke protocol and headed not for the marina but for the 
beach, where their loved ones were waiting with union flags.

The commentators on the Tannoy could not believe it: “They’re going to run 
aground!” The sailors didn’t care a jot, gesturing for everyone to join them in 
the water. The dads of their GB team‑mates, Alain Sign and Dylan 
Fletcher-Scott, who missed out on a medal in the men’s 49er final, finishing 
sixth overall, waded in to hold the boat while the new Olympic champions hugged 
their families and posed for soggy selfies with fans.

Giles Scott: London 2012 heartbreak pushed me to Rio gold glory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/giles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win>
“We rammed it up the beach!” Clark said later, grinning broadly. “We’ve not 
sailed into the beach before. We’ve not been rock star enough.” Until now. 
“It’s a once-in-a-lifetime moment,” Mills said.

The British pair went into the final with a 20-point lead over their nearest 
rivals, the New Zealand pair, meaning they had only to finish the race to take 
gold. Watching on the beach as they meandered their way round the five-point 
course it looked as if they were cruising, enjoying their victory, not giving a 
monkey’s that they crossed the line eighth in their final race. The reality was 
quite different, they insisted, once back on dry land.

“It wasn’t a foregone conclusion,” Clark said. “We could have lost a medal and 
we would have felt so stupid. We would be sitting here now without a gold 
medal. We had to be sensible and do all the boring routine things that we have 
been doing for the last 10 days and stay focused.”

There was still a lot to go wrong, Mills said. “If we had a breakage, we 
wouldn’t be able to finish the race. If a mast snaps or something breaks that 
we can’t fix and we can’t finish the race, we would have got 22 points and the 
Kiwis, if they’d have won the race, would have got two, and that would have 
been it.”

In sailing the team with the lowest points wins. “I’ve been so paranoid. I 
haven’t stopped checking the boat. Every little piece of the boat I have been 
checking religiously.” They also wanted to stay out of the way of the nations 
vying for the other medal places, Mills explained. In the end it was the Kiwis 
who sailed into the second spot with the French pair, Camille Lecointre and 
Hélène Defrance winning bronze.

It was a particularly satisfying gold for Mills and Clark, who came second to 
New Zealand’s Jo Aleh and Polly Powrie in London four years ago. This time it 
was the Kiwi pair standing on the second podium step listening to God Save The 
Queen blast out on the beach at Marina da Glória.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhannah-mills-saskia-clark-win-team-gb-21st-gold-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hannah%20Mills%20and%20Saskia%20Clark%20win%20Team%20GB's%2021st%20gold%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhannah-mills-saskia-clark-win-team-gb-21st-gold-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hannah%20Mills%20and%20Saskia%20Clark%20win%20Team%20GB%27s%2021st%20gold%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhannah-mills-saskia-clark-win-team-gb-21st-gold-video&media=>
Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark win Team GB’s 21st gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/18/hannah-mills-saskia-clark-win-team-gb-21st-gold-video>
Like most of the sailing events the 470 event is saddled with a very boring 
name – it is the length of the dinghy – and probably rather more exciting to 
take part in than to watch. But just as some people tune into the Tour de 
France primarily to admire the chateaux and vineyards, so is it perfectly 
possible to enjoy Olympic sailing without having a dickybird what is going on.

The regatta has been blessed with the most picturesque backdrop in Guanabara 
Bay. Dotted with more than 100 little islands, overlooked by the implausible 
confection that is Sugarloaf Mountain and surrounded by the skyscrapers that 
were supposed to herald Brazil’s arrival as a new world power, the only downer 
is the water quality.

All of the sailors were advised to keep their mouths shut if they capsized 
after a 16-month study commissioned by the Associated Press found the water was 
contaminated with raw human sewage teeming with dangerous viruses and bacteria. 
A bit of raw sewage was not going to put off the hardy British, however. After 
all they had survived a mugging at knife point during a previous training camp 
to Rio in which they were robbed of everything, from wallets to wet Lycra.

Asked if she had swallowed much water during the regatta, Mills, 28, said: “Oh 
yeah. And I’m still here. The locals go swimming in it all the time, so I’m 
sure its an immunity thing. It’s their city and we hope for the people of Rio 
that they manage to get on top of it.”

Winning gold marks the end to a relatively short but very sweet and successful 
partnership; the 36-year-old Clark is hanging up her boat shoes after a 20-year 
sailing career. She has already accepted a job with the Andrew SimpsonSailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> Foundation, a charity set up in 
memory of the gold medal-winning Olympian who died in a sailing accident in 
2013. Mills, 28, has yet to decide whether to quit while she is at the top or 
find a new partner.

The victory gave Team GB their second sailing gold after Giles Scott’s equally 
dominant victory in the Finn, and the third overall after Nick Dempsey secured 
windsurfing silver before the medal race. In the men’s 470 on Thursday Chris 
Grube and Luke Patience finished fifth. In the women’s 49er FX Britain’s 
Charlotte Dobson and Sophie Ainsworth were eighth.
 