
It was a soil bacteria course in New Zealand that convinced Reggie Davis to 
change his farming methods.

The fourth-generation Victorian dairy farmer had become increasingly concerned 
by the costs, chemicals and time involved in the use of nitrate fertilisers to 
maintain – what was considered to be – high-quality pasture for his dairy herd.

“I’ve always regarded myself as a progressive farmer, open to new ideas,” he 
says.

So when his dairy herd nutritionist mentioned that the US biological farming 
advocateDr Arden Andersen 
<http://www.farmingsecrets.com/experts/arden-andersen/> was running a soil 
management course in New Zealand, Davis decided to go. He asked around to see 
if any neighbours might be interested. Within weeks, 40 other dairy farmers 
from Victoria’s south-west had signed up for Andersen’s course.

Herdfunding: how the internet is raising money for farms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/19/crowdfunding-internet-raising-money-farm-finance>
That collegiate interest in investigating new farming methods is reflected in 
figures published by the Australian Dairy Industry Council in itsannual 
sustainability performance review 
<http://www.dairyaustralia.com.au/Industry-information/Sustainability/Industry-sustainability.aspx>
.

According to the 2015 report, 75% of Australia’s dairy farmers recycle water, 
60% have sustainable farm management plans and 45% have invested in 
biodiversity management and conservation planning.

Dairy farmers have also set a national target to reduce industry greenhouse 
emissions by 30% by 2020, and have already cut emissions by 15% – largely 
through energy audits of dairy machinery and farm equipment.

The report says dairy farmers want to create “a carbon-confident industry” and 
various software has been created to help to calculate and reduce farm 
emissions. These include thedairy climate toolkit 
<http://www.dairyclimatetoolkit.com.au/> and the dairy greenhouse abatement 
strategies calculator <http://www.piccc.org.au/resource/360>.

There are some industry leaders. Bega Cheese, one of Australia’s biggest dairy 
product manufacturers, launched a sustainability program in 2014, which led to 
a $50m investment in environmental initiatives. The company offers climate 
change adaptation advice for farmers, supporting programs to plant trees for 
shade and shelter.

Similarly Burra Foods, a dairy processor and exporter in Victoria’s south 
Gippsland region, has recovered 60m litres of water a year from the evaporating 
process used to produce powdered milk. It has also cut its town water 
consumption by 20% and expects to make a further 25% reduction by 2017.

There are dozens of similar stories across Australia’s dairy industry, which 
is the country’s third biggest rural industry after beef and wheat. It’s a 
$13.8bn industry that employs more than 39,000 people on farms and in 
manufacturing, and an additional 100,000 in related occupations such as dairy 
research and veterinary services. So if dairy takes a hard hit, regional 
economies will certainly feel it.

The current dairy crisis is taking its toll. In April the processing giants 
Murray Goulburn and Fonterra announcedcuts to farmgate prices paid to dairy 
farmers for milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/25/barnaby-joyce-announces-dairy-assistance-package-after-cuts-to-milk-price>
. Murray Goulburn announced the cuts would be retrospective, which meant famers 
will be forced to pay back about $200m over the next three years. For most 
farmers, that will average $300,000.

Both the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the Australian 
Securities and Investments Commission are investigating Murray Goulburn but 
many farmers face financial ruin or the possibility of years of debt. It seems 
a particularly cruel blow for an industry in which the majority of farmers have 
been prepared to commit to sustainable farming practices.

UK farmers to test hi-tech beans that could prevent food waste
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/15/uk-farmers-to-test-hi-tech-beans-that-could-prevent-food-waste>
Reggie Davis is a good example. One of the reasons he decided to take a closer 
look at biological farming methods was to avoid using chemical sprays to 
control pasture pests. He’d noticed the lush growth produced by nitrate 
fertilisers attracted insects such as red-legged earth mite.

These are a devastating pest, and controlling an infestation is costly. As 
well as the price of sprays, and possibly hiring a professional spray crew, 
farmers may have to buy supplementary fodder for their cows while the affected 
pasture is treated. The CSIRO estimates the mites, which were introduced from 
South Africa in the early 1900s, cost Australia’s farmers more than $500m a 
year in lost production.

The Davis family run 600 Friesian cows on their 570-hectare property near 
Camperdown in south-westVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>. They’re one of five 
farming families in the region who have formed a group called the Green 
Pastures Movement to practice and promote sustainable farming.

The famers worked with a local company, Camperdown Compost, to set up a system 
of compost rows to turn straw, sawdust and cow manure into natural farm 
fertiliser. It’s a big operation that requires a heavy-duty mechanical compost 
turner, towed by a tractor, to periodically turn the compost windrows.

The Davis farm produces about 2,000 tonnes of compost each year, and this is 
applied to pasture in autumn at a rate of about one tonne to the acre (or half 
a hectare). “We’ve seen a lot of positive changes with our soil health and our 
cows,” Davis says. “And people tell us that our milk tastes better.”

Transforming the bush: robots, drones and cows that milk themselves | Paul 
Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/04/transforming-the-bush-robots-drones-and-cows-that-milk-themselves>
In November 2013, the group of farmers launched their own milk brand, Green 
Pastures, and negotiated a deal with Coles supermarkets to stock it.

The group produces 22m litres of milk annually for the commercial market, and 
only 1.5m is used for its premium price brand.

 “If we could get more sales, that figure would go up, but it’s a hard slog 
getting the milk on to the shelves,” says Davis.

He says the impact of farmgate milk price cuts has been “devastating, just 
terrible” for farmers across his region, and has resulted in “hundreds of cows 
being killed as people are forced to destock”.

“So the choice that people make when they are buying milk really does matter,” 
he says.
 