
The huge annual losses of ice from the Greenland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greenland> cap are even worse than thought, 
according to new research which also shows that the melt is not a short-term 
blip but a long-term trend.

The melting Greenland ice sheet is already a major contributor to rising sea 
level and if it was eventually lost entirely, the oceans would rise by six 
metres around the world, flooding many of the world’s largest cities.

The new study reveals a more accurate estimate of the ice loss by taking 
better account of the gradual rise of the entire Greenland landmass. When the 
ice cap was at its peak 20,000 years ago, its great weight depressed the hot, 
viscous rocks in the underlying mantle. As ice has been shed since, the island 
has slowly rebounded upwards.

Previous satellite estimates of modern ice losses tried to take this into 
account, but precise new GPS data showed much of Greenland is rising far more 
rapidly than thought, up to 12mm a year. This means 19 cubic kilometres more 
ice is falling into the sea each year, an increase of about 8% onearlier figures
 <http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/reportcard/greenland_ice_sheet.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgreenlands-huge-annual-ice-loss-is-even-worse-than-thought%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F798cb000d80a380bb773b5c008fb95a769a44a29%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greenland's%20huge%20annual%20ice%20loss%20is%20even%20worse%20than%20thought&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgreenlands-huge-annual-ice-loss-is-even-worse-than-thought%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greenland%27s%20huge%20annual%20ice%20loss%20is%20even%20worse%20than%20thought&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgreenlands-huge-annual-ice-loss-is-even-worse-than-thought%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F798cb000d80a380bb773b5c008fb95a769a44a29%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 The southern tip of Greenland seen from space. Photograph: ISS/NASA 
The faster rebound is thought to be the result of hotter, more elastic mantle 
rocks under eastern Greenland, a remnant from 40m years ago when the island 
passed over the hot spot that now powers Iceland’s volcanoes.

The new work was also able to reconstruct the ice loss from Greenland over 
millennia and found that the same parts of Greenland - the north-west and 
south-east - were where most ice is being lost both in the past and today.

This means the rapid ice loss recorded by satellite measurements over the last 
20 years is not likely to be a blip, but part of a long-term trend being 
exacerbated by climate change. Global warming is driving major melting on the 
surface of Greenland’s glaciers and is speeding up their travel into the sea.

“The fact that we are seeing such a similarity of past and present behaviour 
suggests we could lose ice in these regions for decades into the future,” said 
Prof Jonathan Bamber, at the University of Bristol, UK, and one of the 
international team of scientists who carried out the new study, published in
Science Advances <http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/9/e1600931>.

Bamber said the presence of a long-term trend does not mean global warming is 
not a crucial factor: “One thing we can be certain of is that a warmer 
atmosphere and a warmer ocean is only going to accelerate this trend.”

“The headlines of climate change and melting polar ice are not going to 
change,” said Dr Christopher Harig, at the University of Arizona, who was not 
involved in the study. “The new research happening now really speaks to the 
question: ‘How fast or how much ice can or will melt by the end of the 
century?’ As we understand more the complexity of the ice sheets, these 
estimates have tended to go up. In my mind, the time for urgency about climate 
change [action] really arrived years ago, and it’s past time our policy 
reflected that urgency.”

Dr Pippa Whitehouse, at the University of Durham and also not involved in the 
new research, said: “This study highlights the powerful insight that GPS 
measurements can give into past and present ice loss. Using such measurements, 
this study demonstrates that some of the highest rates of ice loss across 
Greenland - both in the past and at present - are found in areas where the ice 
sheet flows directly into the ocean, making it dangerously susceptible to 
future warming in both the atmosphere and the ocean.”
Melt water on surface of Greenland ice sheet June 10, 2014 and June 15, 2016. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/17eb9ccb01a6c1fb7be0fe1ff9d880ba0e860f43/0_0_2064_1376/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/17eb9ccb01a6c1fb7be0fe1ff9d880ba0e860f43/0_0_2064_1376/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/5857632d3199ae2f53ad52af8abb1b60bec11eaf/0_0_3093_2062/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/5857632d3199ae2f53ad52af8abb1b60bec11eaf/0_0_3093_2062/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Melt water on the surface of Greenland ice sheet 10 June, 2014 and 15 June, 
2016. Every spring or early summer, the surface of the sheet transforms from a 
vast white landscape of snow and ice to one dotted with blue meltwater streams, 
rivers, and lakes. In 2016, the transition started early and fast. Credits: 
OLI/Landsat 8 and ALI/Earth Observing-1/Nasa 
The team behind the new research said better estimates of continental rebound 
rates could be even more significant in estimates of ice loss from the world’s 
biggest ice cap, in Antarctica, but that sparse data from the remote continent 
made analysis difficult.

In April, very high temperatures led to a record-breaking early onset of 
glacier melting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/13/greenland-sees-record-smashing-early-ice-sheet-melt-climate-change>
 in Greenland, while another satellite study in Augustreaffirmed the rapid loss 
of ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/25/global-warming-is-melting-the-greenland-ice-sheet-fast>
.
 