
After more than half a decade of gruelling, austerity-driven recession, Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has forecast economic growth in 
2017, in what would be its first annual rebound in seven years.

Europe’s most indebted country will see growth of 2.7% next year partly as a 
result of an upsurge in tourism, according to the draft budget that Athens’s 
leftist-led coalition will table in parliament on Monday.

Greece's old reliable: tourism boom helps soothe battered economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/greece-old-reliable-tourism-boom-sooth-battered-economy-brexit-eu>
“We are at a turning point at which we can say, with certainty, that we are 
leaving the recession behind us,” the national economy minister, Giorgos 
Stathakis, said last week.

The blueprint, which officials hope will form the basis of talks when lenders 
begin a second review of the economy later this month, is expected to highlight 
better-than-expected tax revenues and renewed interest in investments under the 
country’s privatisation programme.

Insiders said Greece would easily meet its bailout goal of achieving a surplus 
– excluding debt-servicing costs – of 0.5% GDP this year. Its draft budget is 
projecting a 1.75% surplus for next year in line with last summer’s €86bn 
(£74bn) rescue programme.

But private-sector economists derided the optimism as yet another attempt by a 
Greek government to project a narrative of success.

Greece’s economy, said Theodore Pelagidis, a senior fellow at the 
Washington-based Brookings Institution, “is trapped in an unfortunate 
no-reforms, no-growth, lack-of-demand equilibrium.” Outside official circles, 
most are persuaded that next year’s growth will not surpass 0.6%.

Alexis Tsipras claims creditors are making Greek crisis worse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/11/alexis-tsipras-greece-criticises-creditors-thessaloniki>
Similar scepticism has been expressed by international lenders who have poured 
more than €300bn into Greece since its near economic collapse in late 2009.

The International Monetary Fund, which believes true economic recovery is only 
possible when the country’s staggering debt pile is forgiven, says while Athens 
has accomplished impressive fiscal consolidation, slashing primary and current 
account deficits, growth remains elusive. Since the onset of the crisis, Greece 
has been thrown into a depression-era decline with the loss of a quarter of its 
national output and unemployment peaking at 28%.

In a mission statement citing the findings of an official staff visit last 
month, the organisation said it expected joblessness – now down to 23% – to 
stay in the double digits until the middle of the century.

“Looking forward, growth prospects remain weak and subject to high downside 
risks,” it said.

The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, whose own popularity has 
plummeted with the embrace of belt-tightening in return for last summer’s 
lifeline, has based his political fortunes on attaining debt relief by year’s 
end. His government has been in a race against the clock to legislate 
long-overdue reforms that will pave the way to the next review and debate on 
debt restructuring. The inclusion of Greece in the European Central Bank’s 
quantitative easing stimulus programme, will, he says, play a pivotal role in 
allowing Greece to re-enter capital markets. The leftist has predicted QE 
beginning in November.

However, with Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> buffeted 
by political uncertainty and Berlin – the biggest provider of bailout funds – 
unlikely to yield ahead of general elections next year, Tsipras’s hopes have 
also been rejected as a pipe dream.
 