
The Green party may try to “escort” candidate Jill Stein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein> into the presidential debates 
in an attempt to get her onstage, a campaign adviser announced on Wednesday.

It is undemocratic to exclude me and Gary Johnson from presidential debates | 
Jill Stein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/jill-stein-presidential-debates-undemocratic-gary-johnson>
Kevin Zeese told the Guardian that Stein, her vice-presidential candidate 
Ajamu Baraka and 100 of her supporters were willing to risk arrest at the 
debates, the first of which will be held at New York’s Hofstra University on 
Monday.

“About 300 people have already signed up to protest, 100 are willing to risk 
arrest,” Zeese said.

“We hope Jill and Ajamu will not get arrested as we want them to respond in 
live time to the debate but when you are on the frontlines, things are not 
always in our control.”

The Commission on Presidential Debates announced on Friday that the 
third-party candidates Stein and Libertarian Gary Johnsonhad failed to qualify 
for the first debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/gary-johnson-and-jill-stein-not-allowed-in-first-televised-debate>
.

To earn a spot on the debate stage, the commission requires each candidate 
meet a 15% support threshold, determined by an average of five pre-selected 
national polls, and qualify for the ballot in enough states that it would be 
mathematically possible to receive the 270 electoral votes needed to win the 
presidency.

The commission calculated that Stein had 3.2% support in an average of the 
five selected polls. Johnson also failed to make the cut, with a polling 
average of 8.4%.

The last third-party candidate to be admitted to the televised presidential 
debates was the independent presidential hopeful Ross Perot in 1992. Stein and 
Johnson could still qualify for the second or third presidential debates in 
October if they are able to increase their support in the coming weeks.

Stein’s campaign is organizing a protest outside Hofstra University, where the 
debate between the Democratic nominee,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, and the Republican 
nominee, Donald Trump, will take place on 26 September. The invitation on 
Stein’s website also offers participants the opportunity to enroll in a 
one-day, non-violent civil resistance training ahead of Monday’s protest.

“We expect the protest to be people approaching the barricade, having a 
confrontation with the police, Jill stepping back and calling for a people’s 
debate ‘right here and right now’,” Zeese said.

He said people willing to risk arrest will then attempt to cross the police 
barrier “if possible”.

The debate over the debate escalated in recent weeks as it became clear that 
the two alternative candidates would likely not have a podium on the debate 
stage, despite therecord-low favorability 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/08/31/a-record-number-of-americans-now-dislike-hillary-clinton/>
 ratings of the major party nominees.


'I approve this message': Jill Stein faces charges for North Dakota protest 
graffiti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/jill-stein-graffiti-charges-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protest>
In an op-ed for the Guardian earlier this month, Stein called it 
“undemocratic” to exclude her and Johnson from the debates.

“We can’t have democracy without a free exchange of ideas and an informed 
public. The presidential debates, watched by roughly 70 million people, are the 
most important way for voters to get information,” Steinwrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/jill-stein-presidential-debates-undemocratic-gary-johnson>
.

This weekend, Johnson expressed disappointment with the decision, but 
maintained a positive outlook.

“The clock still ticks,” Johnson told CNN’s Reliable Sources on Sunday. 
“Getting to 15% and being in the second debate and third debate, my partner, 
fiancee, best friend, Kate, she said, Gary, this is just your luck, you don’t 
have to hassle with the first debate and you’re still going to get elected 
president.”

 * This article was amended on 21 September 2016. A previous version 
misspelled senior adviser Kevin Zeese’s last name.  