
The resources minister, Matt Canavan, says the abuse of Australia’s legal 
system by green groups seeking to delay mining projects warrants a 
“fundamental” review of environmental law.

Canavan on Wednesday used a Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Media Club luncheon 
speech to take aim at activists who harbour an anti-development ideology.

He said a leaked document from a NSW green group in 2011 laid bare their 
“disrupt and delay” strategy, calling for significant investment in legal 
challenges.

“We have to be very clear that this is an abuse of our legal system,” Canavan 
said.

Greg Hunt's approval of Adani's Queensland mine upheld by federal court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/greg-hunts-approval-of-adanis-queensland-mine-upheld-by-federal-court>
“Our legal system is there to provide legitimate avenues for people of that 
view that government decisions, that industry decisions are harming them or are 
not taking into account proper environmental needs.”

Canavan said recent court decisions had dismissed conservationists’ concerns 
about negative impacts on the environment or projects not stacking up 
economically.

“We still believe fundamentally as a government that our environmental laws 
need reform,” he said.

It was only last week that Queensland’s highest court dismissed a 
conservationist group’s latest appeal against Hancock Coal’s proposed Alpha 
coalmine.

Coast and Country has been fighting the Gina Rinehart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gina-rinehart> and GVK mine in court 
since 2013 and may consider a high court challenge against last week’s ruling.

Adani’s Carmichael coalmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carmichael-coalmine> has also faced a 
long string of legal challenges from green groups, while a legal challenge to 
New Hope’s Acland expansion is winding up after seven months in the land court.

Canavan argued that if governments did not open up resources-rich areas, other 
competitors would supply products to developing countries.
 