 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435159431932%2F7dc8e0ac-8698-4f35-99a9-2ebfb82ad77e-1681x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20is%20the%20new%20black%3A%20the%20unstoppable%20rise%20of%20the%20healthy-eating%20guru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20is%20the%20new%20black%3A%20the%20unstoppable%20rise%20of%20the%20healthy-eating%20guru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435159431932%2F7dc8e0ac-8698-4f35-99a9-2ebfb82ad77e-1681x2040.jpeg>
 Wellness blogging is now big business, with publishers, television and 
advertisers keen to get a slice of the action. Photograph: Perou for the 
Guardian 
Nestled among stuffy interior decorating and antique shops, Daylesford 
farmshop and cafe <http://daylesford.com/pimlico/> in Pimlico is, judging by 
the queue on a weekday mid-afternoon, very much the chic place to meet for a 
fresh vegetable juice (£6) or a superfood salad (£14). A decade ago, you’d have 
struggled to find a place such as this in London; now, there seems to be one 
opening every other day. But,as one review warns 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/restaurants/daylesford-organic>, everyone at 
Daylesford “is likely to be thinner, blonder and richer than you”, and I can 
testify that this much is true. It is part of a chain owned by Carole Bamford, 
a womandescribed on her website 
<http://daylesford.com/carole-bamford-founder-daylesford-bamford/> as “a 
visionary in organic farming and healthy food retailing”. She is also the wife 
ofAnthony Bamford <http://www.jcb.co.uk/About/Lord-Bamford.aspx>, director of 
the JCB construction empire, although here in the farm shop the emphasis is 
very much on organic spelt bread rather than hydraulic excavators.

I have come to Daylesford to have a green juice with Calgary Avansino 
<http://calgaryavansino.com/>, whose chosen career would have seemed similarly 
far-fetched a decade ago. I first met Avansino years ago when she worked at 
Vogue as editorAlexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman>’s assistant. At the time, 
she struck me as polite, pretty and a tiny bit scary, like everyone who works 
for Vogue. Today, she beams with the kind of good health you’d expect of 
someone who blogs about how to makechia seed pudding 
<http://calgaryavansino.com/recipes/almond-chia-seed-pudding-2/>. Writing last 
year about “healthy fixes for the Christmas feast 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/style/living/Wellbeing/article1496331.ece>
”, she urged readers to offer guests “an avocado and cacao mousse” instead of 
mince pies. “Your friends and your body will thank you,” she promised, strongly 
suggesting she has never met any of my friends. Her book on wellbeing,Keep It 
Real <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keep-It-Real-well-family/dp/1473619211>, will be 
published next year.

Despite having had her third child four months ago at the age of 40, Avansino 
is very slim. This is not really a surprise: in a recent blog,she detailed her 
typical weekly diet 
<http://www.getthegloss.com/article/my-week-in-food-calgary-avansino>, which 
included lunches of avocado on broccoli bread (“My new favourite thing!”) and 
green smoothies for breakfast. She frequently advises against gluten and 
describes herself as “not crazy about wheat”. She also writes about how to feed 
kids healthily. For instance, “Don’t think you have to start your kids eating 
with bananas – start with a courgette or sweet potato, which is much better 
than a high glycemic banana.”

“I’ve never had any training, and I’m not a chef,” Avansino says when I ask 
about her nutritional qualifications. “I’ve just always eaten like this, and it 
comes from a very honest and easy place.”

When Avansino moved to London from the US with her husband 14 years ago, 
people thought her “a total weirdo” for eating quinoa. Today, she says, 
everyone else is catching on: “I read this great article recently about how 
where you get your juice now is more important than what label you wear, 
because it’s sort of like discreet one-upmanship. I think it’s all positive.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435234579468%2F1dd048b9-0207-4fd2-8c81-3a83a0998e70-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20is%20the%20new%20black%3A%20the%20unstoppable%20rise%20of%20the%20healthy-eating%20guru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20is%20the%20new%20black%3A%20the%20unstoppable%20rise%20of%20the%20healthy-eating%20guru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fnew-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435234579468%2F1dd048b9-0207-4fd2-8c81-3a83a0998e70-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Calgary Avansino: ‘I’ve never had any training, and I’m not a chef. I’ve just 
always eaten like this, and it comes from a very honest and easy place.’ 
Photograph: Calgary Avansino/Instagram 
As anyone who has endured a million Instagram photos of avocado on gluten-free 
bread (“#avotoast <https://instagram.com/explore/tags/avotoast/>!!!”) knows, 
Avansino is right: ostentatiously ascetic good health is now a major fashion 
trend. “Wellness”,as style.com recently put it 
<http://www.style.com/culture/living/2014/health-wellness-luxury-status-symbol?mbid=nl_011915_Dail>
, using the zeitgeisty term for the pursuit of health, is “the new luxury 
status symbol… If five years ago it wasa Céline bag 
<https://www.celine.com/en/collections/fall/handbags>, today’s ultimate status 
symbol might just bea SoulCycle hoodie 
<https://www.soul-cycle.com/shop/womens/tops/> and a green juice.” While such 
breathless prose might make you want to throwa spiralizer 
<http://www.hemsleyandhemsley.com/spiralizer-our-recommended-spiralizer-for-our-favourite-courgette-dishes-and-more/>
 through a window (for the uninitiated, that’s a machine that turns vegetables 
into vague substitutes for spaghetti, thus sparing you those dreaded carbs), it 
is true that the pursuit of “wellness” hits that crucial point on the Venn 
diagram between aspiration, self-love and slimness. It’s the ultimate modern 
sweet spot, especially because you don’t even have to admit that you’re trying 
to lose weight (so boring, so unfashionable). You are simply pursuing 
“wellness”.

Within the last decade, being a wellness blogger – someone who writes on 
nutrition and counsels others on how to change their diet – has overtaken 
fashion stylist and yoga teacher as the fashionable job option for young women. 
WhenGwyneth Paltrow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gwynethpaltrow>, whose 
nutritional qualification is nothing more than a lifetime of eating, launched
goop.com <http://goop.com/> in 2008, promoting such untempting sounding 
propositions as the “21-day elimination diet”, she was roundly mocked. But she 
is having the last laugh. Other female celebrities –Jessica Alba 
<https://www.honest.com> and Blake Lively <https://www.preserve.us>, for 
instance – have since launched their own wellness websites, and it was recently 
announced that Paltrow is creating a range of organic gluten-free ready meals 
featuring options such as kale ravioli. Even Pippa Middleton isreportedly 
training to be a nutritionist 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3075185/Blend-like-Auntie-Pippa-Kate-s-little-sister-inspiralized-nutritionist-new-healthy-eating-craze-role-whip-meals-baby-Charlotte.html>
, surely the ultimate sign that the trend has hit the mainstream.

Instead of qualifications in boring things such as nutrition and science, the 
wellness guru has a blog and anInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> account. From these, she 
advises thousands, even millions, of followers in her friendly, informal tone 
to avoid the likes of tropical fruits (too high in sugar) and stock up instead 
on cold-pressed green juices. She makes dark references to the many ways in 
which today’s food industry is making us all sick. She also includes many, many 
photos of herself to confirm the efficacy of her recommendations.

The wellness blogger is, crucially, photogenic and young, which is why 
“wellness” looks so much more desirable than it did a decade ago, when it was
Gillian McKeith <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gillian-mckeith>, 
say, telling us all to eat more fibre. Eat like me, look like me, is the 
message. Typical photo poses include sitting on a beach lounger in a bikini 
while drinking from a coconut, or reclining in a rustic kitchen in skinny 
jeans, a cute porcelain bowl of vegetables in one hand. There are differences, 
however: some bloggers endorse juice fasts, whereas others scorn juice and 
compare its sugar content to Coca-Cola; some promote fasting, others advise 
against. Such subjective disagreements are perhaps inevitable among a 
profession in which no training is required.

It’s easy to mock this phenomenon, but it is big business now. Wellness gurus 
accrue lucrative endorsements from healthfood brands, exercise equipment makers 
and spas, which they promote on their blogs. Publishers cannot give them book 
deals fast enough, and bestseller lists in the UK, Australia and US are filled 
with volumes on wellness, which mix recipes with vague nutritional advice and, 
of course, many, many photos.
 A recipe by Calgary Avansino, posted on Instagram to promote her #keepitreal 
campaign. Photograph: Calgary Avansino/Instagram 
It’s perhaps not surprising that these books have found such a large audience: 
most people do eat too much crap and would like to be healthier, or at least 
thinner. If it takes a bunch of 25-year-olds with access to social media to 
make eating fruit (non-tropical) seem cool, this can only be a positive thing, 
surely? The emphasis on the alleged nefariousness of wheat and gluten feels 
more trendy than true, but if some people unnecessarily cut out bread and eat 
more vegetables, well, that doesn’t sound like the worst trade-off in the world.

But food bloggers and nutritionists, unlike dietitians, are not regulated, and 
a few problems have emerged in this wellness gold rush. Until earlier this 
year, Belle Gibson was a very successful blogger in Australia. Her claims that 
she had cured herself of various cancers through eating fruit and vegetables 
brought her enormous attention. She is estimated to have made more than $1m 
from her app,The Whole Pantry <http://thewholepantryapp.com>, and the book of 
the same name <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/whole-pantry.html>, which was 
published by Penguin. Apple was planning to include her app on its Apple Watch. 
She boasted that she had encouraged “countless others” who suffered from cancer 
to reject conventional medical treatment and opt instead to treat themselves 
naturally.

In April, it was revealed that Gibson’s story was bogus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/22/none-of-its-true-wellness-blogger-belle-gibson-admits-she-never-had-cancer>
: she never had cancer. She gave a tearful interview to Women’s Weekly magazine 
in which the journalist drily reported, “She says she is passionate about 
avoiding gluten, dairy and coffee, but doesn’t really understand how cancer 
works.” Penguin said it had published the book “in good faith” and had never 
sought to verify Gibson’s claims.

Over in the US, wellness blogger Vani Hari <http://foodbabe.com/>, aka the 
Food Babe, is one of the most popular writers on nutrition and has successfully 
lobbied food brands such as Kraft to remove various chemicals from their 
products (scientists have argued that such campaigns were unnecessary). A 
former financial consultant, with no nutritional or science training, Hari’s 
blog now reaches well over a million followers and features posts with the kind 
of attention-grabbing headlines bloggers are so good at, such as“3 Things 
Doctors Say You Should Do… But Shouldn’t!” 
<http://foodbabe.com/2015/06/02/3-things-doctors-say-you-should-do-but-shouldnt/>
 and“Are You Eating This Ingredient Banned All Over the World?” 
<http://foodbabe.com/2013/09/23/are-you-eating-this-ingredient-banned-all-over-the-world/>
 Hari has been widelycondemned by scientists 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2015/02/food_babe_book_and_blog_claims_beaver_ass_coal_tar_and_yoga_mat_in_your.html>
 and dietitians, who say that she “exploits the scientific ignorance of her 
followers”. She has also been described as “the Jenny McCarthy of food” (the 
actor McCarthy, similarly unversed in science,encouraged Americans not to 
vaccinate their children 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/jenny-mccarthys-dangerous-views>, 
warning it would cause autism). Harihas responded by quoting Gandhi 
<http://foodbabe.com/2014/12/06/food-babe-critics/> – “First they ignore you, 
then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win” – and suggesting her 
critics are in the pay of big pharma and food corporations, thus making a 
virtue of her outsider status and lack of nutritional training.

The pursuit of ‘wellness’ hits that crucial point on the Venn diagram between 
aspiration, self-love and slimness

I grew up in New York and have spent time in Los Angeles. Along with Sydney, 
these are probably the epicentres for kooky, healthy eating trends, and I have 
watched many come and go. Although trendy British cafes serve gluten-free 
muffins and soya latte these days, I assumed that most Brits were too sardonic 
to go too far down this path.

I was wrong. Over the past year, wacky nutritional advice has been 
increasingly creeping into the national press, all in the name of “wellness”. 
One regular (and self-confessedly wholly unqualified) nutritional newspaper 
columnist frequently insists that gluten-free options are inherently healthier, 
which, according to the British Dietetic Association, is simply untrue for the 
vast majority of people. In April this year, an uncritical profile of the 
Australian wellness blogger and “photogenic fruitarian”Freelee the Banana Girl 
<http://thebananagirl.com/about.php> reported that “Freelee pioneered the Raw 
Till 4 regime, whereby she eats nothing but uncooked fruit until 4pm — 
sometimes dozens of bananas a day — allowing herself some grains, a little fat 
from nuts and seeds and a huge plate of steamed green or starchy vegetables in 
the evening”. Freelee credits this regime, we were solemnly informed, “with 
curing her eating disorder”.

Then there are the British wellness bloggers, who are increasingly hard to 
avoid:Ella Woodward <http://deliciouslyella.com/>, Tess Ward 
<http://tessward.com/>, Madeleine Shaw <http://madeleineshaw.com/>, the Hemsley 
sisters <http://www.hemsleyandhemsley.com/about/> and Calgary Avansino. It 
isn’t hard to see the appeal for their many fans: the prettier, posher and 
thinner they are, the more success they enjoy. When Ella Woodward published her 
bookDeliciously Ella <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/deliciously-ella.html> 
earlier this year, her publishers reprinted it six times before it was even 
released, to keep up with demand; it became the fastest-selling debut cookbook 
of all time. (Twenty-four-year-old Woodward is the daughter ofShaun Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shaunwoodward>, the former Northern 
Ireland secretary, andCamilla Sainsbury 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/Magazine/article1544338.ece> of the 
supermarket family.)

Another British wellness book, Get The Glow 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/get-the-glow.html>, by 25-year-old 
“nutritional health coach” Madeleine Shaw (147,000 followers on Instagram 
<https://instagram.com/madeleine_shaw_/>), became a number one bestseller last 
month. I asked her editor, Anna Valentine at Orion, how she accounts for such 
rapid success. “This is a crowded area of the market, and each book has to 
shout to be heard,” she says. “A strong platform and engaged audience is 
crucial to help cut through the noise.”

“In the long term, I’d like to see Madeleine as a female Jamie Oliver,” adds 
Shaw’s manager, Alice Russell. Russell has arranged sponsorship deals for Shaw 
from companies including Brita water filters and Savse smoothies. “We look at 
what’s a good fit for Madeleine. We’ve turned down a lot of money in the past 
from companies, so she can be built in the right way.”
 ‘We’re all nice and smiley and approachable,’ says Madeleine Shaw, who has 
her own YouTube channel and more than 147,000 Instagram followers. Photograph: 
Madeleine Shaw/Instagram 
Shaw herself is more than aware of where the appeal lies. “Some of the girls, 
like the Hemsleys and Ella, are very pretty, but I think it’s that we’re all so 
nice and smiley and approachable,” says Shaw, who is all of those things. Like 
many books by wellness bloggers, Get The Glow mixes perfectly sensible if 
hardly novel advice (eat less sugar) with less well-founded claims (wheat, Shaw 
writes, “is like sandpaper for the gut”). The recipes, too, are an even split 
between the healthy but tempting (Thai beef salad) and the healthy but not 
(pizza with a crust made of mashed cauliflower bound together with egg white).

Shaw and I meet in the newly opened South Kensington Club 
<http://www.southkensingtonclub.com> (all the new nutritionists seem to be 
based in south-west London: my week of interviewing them involves trekking 
around the golden triangle of Sloane Square, South Kensington and Notting 
Hill), and she talks engagingly about how she, like nearly all British wellness 
bloggers, became interested in healthy eating after suffering from digestive 
problems. She describes herself as “a modern-day hunter-gatherer. I think we 
got it right at the beginning and things have become more processed, and I 
think that’s causing problems for so many people,” she says with the uptick 
accent so popular now in certain areas of Britain.

Yet people are living a lot longer than they were 500 years ago, I say.

“I totally get your point,” Shaw concedes, “and I think it’s because our 
medicines have developed and we’re not running around with sticks and getting 
eaten by animals and stuff like that. But we’re not as connected with our 
bodies as we used to be – we eat out of boredom or, like, convenience, or, 
like, to stay awake to get stuff done. So it’s about getting in touch with your 
food to see where it’s from.”

She advises against wheat very strongly, but people did eat wheat 500 years 
ago, didn’t they?

“I think it’s because of the way it’s done now,” she says. “If it was wheat 
that was grown a long time ago, it was really nutritious, it had long roots, it 
had some goodness. But now it’s more of a dwarf crop and it doesn’t have the 
same nutrition.” Shaw thinks everyone should give up wheat, “just to see how 
they feel”. She is currently doing a three-year course at the London-based
College of Naturopathic Medicine <http://www.naturopathy-uk.com/>.

Very few wellness bloggers have traditional nutritional qualifications, such 
as university degrees. At most, some have taken the year-long, $5,995 online 
course from the New York-basedInstitute for Integrative Nutrition 
<http://www.integrativenutrition.com/> (IIN), which, while licensed by the New 
York state education department, only qualifies students to describe themselves 
as an “integrative nutrition health coach”. They can use this qualification all 
around the world. (Pippa Middleton is said to be taking the IIN course as I 
write.)
 ‘We’re not as connected with our bodies as we used to be,’ Shaw says, ‘so 
it’s about getting in touch with your food to see where it’s from.’ Photograph: 
Madeleine Shaw/Instagram 
The IIN was founded by Joshua Rosenthal 
<https://www.facebook.com/NutritionSchoolFounder>, whose nutritional background 
is, spokesperson Justine Thorner explains, “a master of science degree in 
education and 30 years of experience in health, wellness, wholefoods, personal 
coaching and teaching”. (In other words, he learned to be a teacher in 
nutrition by teaching about nutrition.) He still teaches 50% of the programme, 
alongside visiting teachers – “the best in the world,” according to Rosenthal – 
who include such zeitgeisty figures asHuffington Post editor-in-chief Arianna 
Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ariannahuffington> and Dr 
Mehmet Oz. Oz, an American heart surgeon with his own TV show, has been
regularly criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/17/dr-oz-columbia-doctors-quack-treatments>
 by fellow doctors, who recently described him as “routinely [showing] disdain 
for science and for evidence-based medicine”. As for Oz’s coverage of 
weight-loss supplements, SenatorClaire McCaskill told him in a senate hearing 
last year, “You are melding news and entertainment in a way that harms consumers
 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/06/claire-mccaskill-dr-oz-weight-loss-supplement-107952.html>
.”

I ask Thorner if the IIN has any concerns about the controversy surrounding 
its visiting teacher. “Dr Oz’s lecture focuses around simple tips for health 
and happiness,” she says. “Criticism surrounding other aspects of his work 
unrelated to IIN will not impact our relationship with him.” To be fair to the 
IIN, New York’s Columbia University still employs Oz, too, much to the dismay 
of some of his colleagues. “A health coach does not diagnose, treat or take 
responsibility for bringing about wellness changes in a client’s life,” Thorner 
says. “Rather, he or she guides and supports the development of and progress 
towards personal wellness goals. The UK is one of the top countries that we 
have students from.”

When I ask Anna Valentine at Orion if she is concerned about commissioning a 
book about healthy eating from someone without traditional nutritional 
qualifications, she replies, “Madeleine [Shaw] is a trained nutritional health 
coach from the Institute of Integrative Nutrition. She learned to cook and 
gained lots of practical experience in healthfood cafes and restaurants. She 
was also employed to cook for a professional rugby team.”

The publishers of these wellness books may not demand real nutritional 
expertise, but sometimes the gaps in the bloggers’ knowledge show. Inone recent 
exchange on her blog <http://deliciouslyella.com/date-and-pecan-loaf/>, which 
gets 2.5m hits a month, Woodward was asked by a commenter why she doesn’t use 
millet in her recipes: “I don’t use millet as it contains gluten and all my 
recipes are gluten-free. Hope you love the recipes! X,” she explained in her 
characteristically chatty style.

Her loyal followers pointed out that millet does not, in fact, contain gluten. 
Woodward, undaunted, simply moved the goalposts: “I prefer to stay away from 
millet as I personally find it difficult to digest. Have a nice day! X,” she 
replied.

It isn’t true that nutrition advice changes all the time. But people want to 
hear stuff that is different, sexy and new
Paul McArdle, British Dietetic Association 
To be fair, few wellness bloggers claim to be experts. “I always say I haven’t 
had training, and I never get into the science because that’s not my strength,” 
Avansino tells me. Even so, Paul McArdle of theBritish Dietetic Association 
<https://www.bda.uk.com/> takes a fairly dim view of this kind of thing. 
“Personal experience in making a dietary change in your own life is not a 
qualification to advise others about nutrition,” he says. “The word 
nutritionist has no legal meaning – anyone can call themselves a nutritionist, 
and if you are a member of the public, you have no protection from rogue 
advice. People say that health advice changes all the time, but that isn’t true 
– we’ve been saying the same things for years. But people want to hear stuff 
that is different, sexy and new.”

One of these different, sexy and new things is the move against wheat and 
gluten. “We have noticed a rise in people claiming they have an intolerance to 
wheat and gluten, but the figures are in actuality very, very low,” McArdle 
says.

I ask about Shaw’s contention that the root of the problem is in the way wheat 
is farmed these days. He gives this short shrift: “There is some evidence that 
there are strains of wheat that cause a reaction in those who have a 
sensitivity, and older-fashioned strains of wheat can be better for those who 
have a sensitivity. But the numbers are still very low.”

Is it not sensible to advise those with digestive troubles to cut down on 
wheat, then? McArdle gives an exasperated sigh: “A nutritionist should not 
advise someone with digestive problems to cut out wheat – they don’t have 
medical training and there may be other issues. People often don’t realise that 
what I call ‘nutrition lite’ people aren’t qualified to diagnose anything. So 
they’ll take advice from them and not see professionals.”

Tess Ward and I meet in a restaurant in Notting Hill. With her cute blond bob 
and an accent that could cut glass, she is so pretty that our waiter nearly 
trips over his own feet. She is also very thin. “I am thinner than I normally 
am, because I just discovered I’ve got a food allergy,” she tells me. “I am 
trying my darnedest right now to put on weight with protein shakes!” She grins.
 ‘I think of myself more as a chef than a blogger,’ says Tess Ward who, like 
many of her contemporaries, studied at the US-based Institute for Integrative 
Nutrition. Photograph: Tess Ward/Instagram 
Ward’s followers (26,400 on Instagram <https://instagram.com/tesswardchef/>) 
make frequent envious comments about her physical appearance. Does she think 
her looks play a part in her appeal? “I find that a difficult question to 
answer. I never mediate my [Instagram] images. It’s more, ‘Oh, I’m wearing nice 
shoes and here’s a juice on the floor.’ Because then maybe someone will think, 
‘Oh, yes, maybe I’ll have a juice.’ ”

Her new book, The Naked Diet <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/naked-diet.html>
, focuses, she says, “on stripping ingredients back to their bare essentials, 
but in no way is it about dieting”. Unusually for a wellness blogger, Ward has 
had professional training in cookery, studying atLe Cordon Bleu 
<http://www.lcblondon.com>. But, like Shaw, her nutritional training came from 
the IIN and, also like Shaw, she was inspired to study there after suffering 
from digestive problems that were never fully diagnosed.

“I personally can’t digest wheat,” Ward tells me. “I wouldn’t recommend 
everyone cut it out, but there’s loads of research saying spelt is good for 
people with IBS and fighting bowel cancer.” (When I ask McArdle about Ward’s 
claim, he says, “You can find studies to support any theory you want, but most 
are not robust enough to count as medical research.”)

The IIN claims that more than 68,000 people have completed its year-long 
online course in being a health coach. Intrigued, I enrol on the introductory 
session, also online, opting to join a Sunday evening class (there are only 100 
students per class, and many are already booked up).
 Ward’s sea bass ceviche with avocado and pomegranate, from her new book, The 
Naked Diet. ‘In no way is it about dieting,’ she says. Photograph: Tess 
Ward/Instagram 
Sharon, the tutor, speaks to us directly in the pre-recorded seminar, 
illustrating the IIN’s friendly, wide-eyed, all-inclusive attitude to nutrition 
with photos and video clips. The year-long syllabus includes talks on all 
manner of eating plans, such as the Atkins diet, and cleanses, no matter how 
medically dubious: “One of the fundamental teachings of the school is a concept 
Joshua [Rosenthal] coined as bio-individuality, meaning one person’s food is 
another person’s poison,” spokesperson Thorner explains. “Given this unique 
standpoint, we do not value any one diet over another.” There is a repeated 
emphasis on the importance of all-over health, and how graduates will have “the 
confidence to go out there and convert people”. Alongside this wholesome, 
holistic approach are repeated reminders of how much an IIN graduate can earn: 
“We’ll show you how to be a six-figure health coach even with a full-time job,” 
is one of Sharon’s opening remarks, and this kind of thing is repeated 
frequently. Most people who come into the programme, she says, “have no 
training in nutrition”. Nonetheless, “halfway through the course you will have 
the confidence to take on clients. Many students make back their tuition [fees] 
before graduation.”

So could I start taking on clients and charging them after just six months, I 
ask Thorner.

“We recommend our students be upfront with their clients about where they are 
in their programme and charge a lower rate while in school, for example around 
$95 a month,” she says. “After graduation, our coaches can feel confident in 
charging a higher rate, such as $195 a month.”

I don’t sign up for the rest of the course, but the IIN does its best to 
convince me otherwise, sending daily emails. A typical one comes with the 
subject line “Are you already a Health Coach without knowing it?” There is a 
link to a video in which Sharon explains that there is “a huge demand for a new 
kind of professional - a health coach [because] traditional doctors don’t 
necessarily have the time or resources to help their patients build healthy 
habits and change their lifestyle”.

There is no denying that how we eat is important, and the rise of 
nutritionists is testament to public awareness of that, even if a large part of 
their appeal is the whispered promise of thinness. And a lot of what these 
bloggers advocate – less sugar, more vegetables – is perfectly sensible. But it 
is often served up with a hefty side dish of misinformation and encouragement 
of food phobias. After all, being obsessive about healthy eating isn’t actually 
all that healthy.

I suspect that, in a small way, these women know this, and realise that public 
enthusiasm for them will eventually wane, as it does with all fashion trends. 
Several bloggers who declined to be interviewed for this piece did so because 
they “don’t want to be seen as part of that group”, and several of those who 
did speak to me made the same point. “I really think of myself as more of a 
chef and food writer than a blogger or nutritionist,” Tess Ward says, twice. 
She then shows me her Instagram page, proving that she doesn’t follow “many of 
them”, favouring instead chefs such as Skye Gyngell and Angela Hartnett. She 
looks up from her phone suddenly, as if a thought has just occurred to her: 
“You know, you should talk to some chefs. They really know amazing things about 
food.”

 * Main image, styling by Andie Redman. Hair and makeup by Camilla Hewitt at 
Frank Agency using Mac Cosmetics and Bumble and bumble.
 