
The last greyhound track in London is facing extinction after the mayor, Sadiq 
Khan, agreed the site should be used for a new stadium for the football clubAFC 
Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>.

Plans for the Plough Lane development outline a 20,000-seat stadium, 602 homes 
and a leisure centre, which would be “of great benefit to Londoners and the 
wider community for generations to come”.

'Let 'em run!' Greyhound racing – an audiovisual essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2016/jul/18/let-em-run-greyhound-racing-an-audiovisual-essay>
It would bring the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/league-one-2016-17-season-preview-sheffield-united-ched-evans>
 side back to Merton in south-west London from its current capacity ground in 
Kingston-upon-Thames, which has a capacity of about 5,000. The club has been 
there after being established in the ninth tier of English football in 2002.

But the move would erase the last arena for greyhound racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2016/jul/18/let-em-run-greyhound-racing-an-audiovisual-essay>
 in the capital and quicken the decline of an already ailing sport, campaigners 
say.

Tracks in Wembley, West Ham, Clapton and Hackney have all disappeared and when 
Walthamstow shut in 2008, Wimbledon was the only place left for race-goers.

The growing pressure from AFC Wimbledon for a bigger stadium comes as they 
climb the ranks of English football, havingbeen promoted six times in 13 seasons
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
.

The original Wimbledon FC was founded in 1889 and played at Plough Lane from 
1912 to 1991, famouslywinning the FA Cup final against Liverpool in 1988 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/15/dave-beasant-wimbledon-liverpool>
.

Fans set up the new club after Wimbledon FC, who had been ground-sharing for 
years with Crystal Palace, were told in 2002 they would have to move 80 miles 
north to Milton Keynes and rebrand asMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/23/mk-dons-relegated-league-one-brentford-championship-match-report>
, following a requirement to have all-seater stadiums.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fgreyhound-racing-dog-track-sadiq-khan-afc-wimbledon-stadium-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0608990d3f74cb173a6d67af104f753481f30e86%2F148_604_3265_1959%2F3265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greyhound%20racing%20in%20peril%20as%20Khan%20backs%20AFC%20Wimbledon%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fgreyhound-racing-dog-track-sadiq-khan-afc-wimbledon-stadium-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greyhound%20racing%20in%20peril%20as%20Khan%20backs%20AFC%20Wimbledon%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fgreyhound-racing-dog-track-sadiq-khan-afc-wimbledon-stadium-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0608990d3f74cb173a6d67af104f753481f30e86%2F148_604_3265_1959%2F3265.jpg>
 Kingsmeadow stadium in Kingston-upon-Thames, AFC Wimbledon’s current ground. 
Photograph: Scunthorpe FC/Rex/Shutterstock 
Khan’s intervention overturns a decision by his predecessor Boris Johnson who 
had granted the track a reprieve following Merton council’s decision to press 
ahead with the Galliard Homes development in December 2015.

After greyhound racing came to Britain in 1926, audiences peaked at about 50 
million in 1945. By 1960, it was estimated at 16 million, in 1993 4 million, 
dropping to 2 million in 2013, according to reports.

The sport’s public image was tarnished in 2006 following newspaper stories 
about the mass euthanasia of dogs deemed too old or lame to race. The exposé 
caused outrage and led to procedures being established for the better care of 
former race dogs, but racing has not recovered from the bad publicity. Reports 
show the number of tickets sold in Britain annually dropped by 58% between 2000 
and 2012.

Khan said: “I have taken the time to consult local residents, businesses and 
other interested parties. Having weighed up all of the evidence available to me 
I’m confident the stadium and the leisure facility proposed alongside it will 
be of great benefit to Londoners and the wider community for generations to 
come.

“As such, I have decided to return the application to the local council to 
determine itself.”

Stephen Alambritis, the leader of Merton council, said: “I am absolutely 
thrilled with the mayor’s decision to hand the decision back to us and we look 
forward to the homecoming of this much-loved and well-deserving team. Merton 
wants to seeAFC Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> 
back on Wimbledon turf.

“The club has been very patient throughout the process and now the dream of 
players and fans alike, many of whom are local, is set to become reality.”

Merton council planning committee meets on 15 September. 

A council spokeswoman said: “It will be a meeting to progress on to the next 
stage. It will formally uphold the application and the scheme will go ahead.”
 