
Now the fun begins! And by “fun” I mean that period after an election when 
everyone can blame the losing candidate’s loss on whatever their favourite 
hobby horse may be. For someit might be neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/neoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot>
, for othersliberal feminists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/hillary-clinton-liberal-feminists>
. Personally, my eyes are still turned towards a Republican party that built 
the foundations for Donald Trump’s racist platform; high-earning voters who 
decided his racism and misogyny were not as important as lower taxes; and 
lower-earning voters who felt that caring about industry was a good excuse to 
vote for a bigot who, only a few years ago, said the automobile industryshould 
have been left “to go bankrupt”. 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/08/donald-trump-auto-bailout-mike-pence>
 But hey, I guess it’s all a matter of perspective.

Still, the fun can’t last for ever because we have important work to do, which 
in my case means learning to say the words “President Trump” without feeling 
like my heart is trying to heave itself out of my mouth. There is not enough 
alcohol in the world for this, so I’m turning to the five stages of grief. Will 
this help me come to an acceptance of – excuse me while I punch myself in the 
face – President Trump? Let’s find out.

Denial As much as I keep saying things like, “I cannot believe the man 
endorsed by the KKK is now president-elect”, the truth is I worked my way 
through the denial phase pretty damn quick. Certainly more quickly than Trump’s 
supporters, anyway. Cheerleaderssuch as Piers Morgan 
<https://twitter.com/piersmorgan/status/797181581374980096> are fond of 
snorting out condescending claims like, “Oh, he’s a pragmatist! He’ll be very 
different as president”, unbothered that their best defence of their guy is 
that he’s a race-baiting liar. Given that Trump’s first moves were to announce 
he will reviewRoe v Wade <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade> and to
appoint white nationalist Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
 as his chief strategist, it will be interesting to see how long Morgan and his 
craven compadres can stay in this denial stage.

But they’re not the only ones to be stuck here. Anyone who describes Bannon as 
“controversial” or “a rightwing provocateur” as opposed to “racist” and “an 
antisemite” is helping to normalise racism. Anyone who says voting for Trump 
was “a vote against the elites” is even deeper in the denial phase, given that 
he ran on a platform promising to make life worse for minorities and women. And 
for all those on the left who think they maintained the moral high ground by 
not supporting Hillary Clinton, I hope you have a bomb shelter up there for 
when Trump rips upthe Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
, guys.

Mariah Carey wants $50m from her ex – and it only makes me love her more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/mariah-carey-50m-ex-love-her-more-hadley-freeman>
Anger If you hadn’t guessed, I’m a little stuck on this phase. “Come on, 
Freeman,” I say to myself every morning. “President Obama said we should 
remember that we’re all on one team. Clinton said in her concession speech 
that, ‘We owe [Trump] an open mind and a chance to lead.’ So get a grip. And 
stop ranting to yourself, you’re getting weird looks.” “Look,” I shout at 
myself, while everyone in the vicinity crosses to the other side of the street, 
“I know Clinton and Obama are trying to save America from disappearing up its 
arsehole in rage, but no. I am not on the same team as a man who banged on 
about Obama’s birth certificate because he couldn’t seem to believe black 
people are Americans. Racism and climate change denialism won. I should be 
angry. And so should you.” “I am.” “OK, good.”

Bargaining “Donald – a quiet word. We both know you never wanted this. Sure, 
you wanted to win – but govern? No. You’ve asked if you can stay in Trump Tower 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/trump-president.html>, like an 
eight-year-old scared of sleepovers. Obama is having to set aside extra time to 
teach you how to be president. You just wanted popularity, not responsibility. 
I get it. So how about we all pretend this never happened and you just go away, 
OK? Donald? Donald?”

Depression I think I got this one nailed. A feminist candidate was defeated by 
a reality TV puppet who retweets antisemitic memes: my heart genuinely feels 
broken. But mainly, I’m just furious. Try harder, Freeman! Be depressed, then 
you’ll be on the road to acceptance… Nope, still angry.

Acceptance Unlike Trump, I can accept when my chosen candidate doesn’t win. 
Also unlike him, I know that anger should be productive, not toxic, and that 
there is a difference between accepting the legitimacy of office and 
acquiescing to a candidate. So I’m upping my annual donations to Planned 
Parenthood, ProPublica and the Natural Resources Defense Council and joining 
the ACLU. Those are positives, right? Hey, maybe I’ve reached a state of 
acceptance about Trump’s presidency. And yet this acceptance feels a lot less 
zen and a lot more rage-filled than I expected. Dammit!
 