
Aswad Thomas's last-gasp own goal denied non-league Grimsby an FA Cup 
third-round replay atHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>, who came back late to beat 
the Mariners 3-2.

The hosts, looking to make the fourth round for the first time since 1998, 
were 2-1 up with just five minutes to go at Blundell Park after Ross Hannah and 
Craig Disley struck â€“ sandwiched by Oliver Norwood's goal.

The former Grimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> striker 
Martin Paterson then equalised on 85 minutes before Thomas's late intervention 
spared the Terriers' blushes.

The visitors stormed out of the blocks and peppered the home goal in the 
opening stages. First, Paterson forced goalkeeper James McKeown into action 
with an excellent header following a cross from the right. Then Danny Ward's 
strike from 25 yards brought another smart save from the home keeper.

Norwood and Paul Dixon tested McKeown again with further efforts, before 
Jonathan Hogg's shot was blocked by home skipper Disley. Paterson hooked 
another volley goalwards in the 13th minute to keep the young goalkeeper on his 
toes as the early domination continued for Mark Robins' men.

However, the Mariners served notice of their threat when winger Joe Colbeck 
surged along the right flank and fired a cross in which evaded everyone.

Grimsby went close again in the 19th minute when Thomas's strike was deflected 
wide for a corner. And the Conference side were in front six minutes later when 
Colbeck again beat his marker and put in a low centre for Hannah to tap home 
from five yards.

Huddersfield responded and Ward's strike was superbly blocked by Paul Bignot 
before Adam Hammill tested McKeown again from 25 yards.

Grimsby defender Chris Doig repeated the trick to keep out Ward's stinging 
effort as the hosts held on to their advantage at the break.

It took just six minutes for the Terriers to hit back, however, as Norwood 
lined up a free-kick from 25 yards and hit a stunning, curling effort past 
McKeown.

But on 62 minutes Grimsby striker Andy Cook saw his shot half-blocked and the 
ball bounced up for Disley to head home from 10 yards to restore their lead.

Hammill fired wide from distance as Huddersfield's frustrations mounted, 
before Thomas should have twice made sure of the result.

First, the Grimsby left-back headed on target in the 75th minute, forcing Alex 
Smithies into a spectacular save. Then, moments later, the same man headed wide 
at the near post from another set-piece.

But in the 85th minute the visitors were level when Duane Holmes' strike was 
parried away by McKeown and Paterson was able to side-foot home from 10 yards 
and level the scores again. However, in the final minute of normal time, a low 
cross from the left by Holmes was bundled into his own net by the unfortunate 
Thomas.
 