
From the fell where we stood, knee-deep in purple heather, the old limestone 
quarry in the valley seemed just another scar on the landscape, a great bite of 
mineral wealth torn from the hillside leaving a bare cliff face, rushy pools 
and broken rock.

 It was only when we got close, really close, that it revealed another legacy, 
one that lasts for just a few weeks in late summer.

 Over the decades the stone spoil heaps have acquired a veneer of leached, 
gritty soil, topped with turf that’s starved of nutrients and grazed to a 
height of an inch or two by rabbits. It’s a doll’s house lawn, a tapestry of 
fescues, eyebright, self-heal, tormentil and even a late-blooming dog violet. 
The fragrance of crushed wild thyme rises from under your feet.

 The late August floral performance here is staged by the amethyst trumpets of 
autumn gentians,Gentianella amarella 
<http://www.brc.ac.uk/plantatlas/index.php?q=node/1582>. This year these little 
biennials, which spend their first growing season as a leaf rosette pressed 
close to the ground, were flowering in their thousands. Their inflorescences 
are a few inches taller than the grazed turf but the rabbits seem to ignore 
them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fquarry-home-turf-heather-bees-tormentil-gentians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78574b5c3f8a75ea690aa2aeaa723e9c72cc9f27%2F0_0_2335_1453%2F2335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gritty%20quarry%20soil%20is%20home%20turf%20for%20heather%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fquarry-home-turf-heather-bees-tormentil-gentians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gritty%20quarry%20soil%20is%20home%20turf%20for%20heather%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fquarry-home-turf-heather-bees-tormentil-gentians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78574b5c3f8a75ea690aa2aeaa723e9c72cc9f27%2F0_0_2335_1453%2F2335.jpg>
 A male and femaleColletes succinctus, a form of mining bee. Photograph: Phil 
Gates 
 We heard the quarry’s other seasonal speciality long before we saw them. A 
steep slope, where sheep tracks had created terraces of deeper soil, seemed to 
be humming and shimmering. We found ourselves surrounded by heather bees,
Colletes succinctus <http://www.bwars.com/bee/colletidae/colletes-succinctus>, 
hovering just above ground.

 The dry, compacted soil provides a perfect nesting site for these mining 
bees, which surface for just a few weeks every year, while the heather blooms. 
Each individual’s tunnelling generates its own small spoil heap of soil. There 
must have been several hundred closely spaced nests in this colony. There was 
urgency in their restless activities of digging, mating and feeding.

Male bees, patrolling the slope, clasped mates in mid-air, fell to earth 
locked together and tumbled down the slope. Each female lays an egg at the end 
of the tunnel, then shuttles to and fro to the heather on the fell-top for 
pollen provisions. By mid September the bees’ tunnels will be sealed, rain will 
wash away their spoil heaps and all trace of them will disappear. Their few 
weeks in the sun will be over.









 