
New car sales in the UK continued to rise last month as growing demand from 
businesses made up for falling demand from private buyers.

A total of 184,101 vehicles were registered in November, a rise of 2.9% from a 
year earlier,according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders 
<https://www.smmt.co.uk/2016/12/november-growth-delivers-2-5m-ytd-record-for-uk-new-car-market/>
. So far this year, more than 2.5m new cars were registered – a record for the 
11-month period.

A 5.1% increase in fleet car registrations fuelled growth as sales to private 
buyers fell 1.2%, repeating a trend that took hold eight months ago. Demand for 
hybrid and electric cars rose 25% to 6,663 giving them a record 3.6% of the 
market.

Car sales have been powered by the growing economy and an abundance of cheap 
finance deals. However, economists have warned that falling sales to private 
purchasers show consumers are less willing to make big purchases amid economic 
uncertainty.

Mike Hawes, SMMT’s chief executive, said buyers were attracted by cars that 
are safer, more efficient and enjoyable to drive. Hawes said: “The latest 
advanced technology and cutting-edge designs are continuing to attract buyers 
into showrooms. It’s encouraging to see that alternatively fuelled vehicles, 
although still a small proportion of the market, have seen strong growth.”

Many companies are likely to have made decisions about buying fleet cars 
before the vote for Brexit, which means it could take time before the impact of 
the referendum can be assessed.Consumer confidence weakened markedly last month 
as households put off plans to buy big items 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/consumer-and-business-confidence-tumbles-in-november-surveys-find>
 amid rising inflation and concerns about the economy once Brexit is triggered 
next year.


Howard Archer, chief European and UK economist at IHS Markit, said: “The car 
sector will obviously be hoping that business confidence and activity prove 
resilient in 2017 despite likely mounting uncertainties over Brexit. It looks 
inevitable that the fundamentals for consumers will progressively and markedly 
weaken over the coming months.”
 