
Self-harm among young people, particularly girls, has rocketed in the last 
decade. The number of girls admitted to hospital after cutting themselves has 
quadrupled, incidents of poisoning have risen by more than 40%, and demand for 
university counselling services has mushroomed. Behind these figures are young 
people and families struggling to cope with toxic levels of mental distress.


In part these numbers reflect a greater awareness of mental health and 
willingness to seek help but more is going on than that. These figures are also 
evidence that the today’s generation of young people are facing unprecedented 
levels of social pressure leading to serious psychological distress. Our 
response, as a society, has not, as yet, been anywhere near sufficient to 
answer this cry for help.

At the Tavistock and Portman specialist mental health trust 
<https://tavistockandportman.nhs.uk/>, we have been engaged for nearly 100 
years in understanding the causes of psychological distress among young people 
and, in particular, the impact of childhood experience, relationships and 
trauma, on mental health. It is why we feel strongly that it was the right 
thing to do to let the cameras in and help tell the story of young people, 
their families and clinicians working with them.

Channel 4’s documentary Kids on the Edge 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/kids-on-the-edge>, screened over the last 
month, is the result. For us it has captured, with great sensitivity, the 
challenges faced by young people and their families, and which our services are 
working through on a daily basis. Some of what is shown is shocking but not in 
a sensationalist way. Only by better understanding, both intellectually and 
emotionally, the level of distress that can drive a young person to self-harm 
or to think of taking their own life can we begin to move forward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgrowing-crisis-in-children-and-young-peoples-mental-health-demands-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6cbed3831421622dda476baa23618fde08d19a6%2F0_65_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Growing%20crisis%20in%20children%20and%20young%20people's%20mental%20health%20demands%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgrowing-crisis-in-children-and-young-peoples-mental-health-demands-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Growing%20crisis%20in%20children%20and%20young%20people%27s%20mental%20health%20demands%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgrowing-crisis-in-children-and-young-peoples-mental-health-demands-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6cbed3831421622dda476baa23618fde08d19a6%2F0_65_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Ash, featured in Channel 4’s documentary Kids on the Edge. Photograph: Jude 
Edginton/Channel 4 
There is a growing crisis in children and young people’s mental health. It 
demands a response, it requires urgent action. We would highlight three 
priorities.

First, demand for help is outstripping supply. A target has been set that 
70,000 more young people are able to access help by 2020. That is welcome. 
However, the treatment gap is enormous. It is estimated that only 25-35% of 
young people who need help for mental health difficulties receive it. If this 
was true for cancer there would be a public outrage. Furthermore many services 
are seeing year-on-year increases in demand of more than 10%, often combined 
with a rise in case complexity. If the goal is to get good quality and timely 
help to the young people who need it, the new money promised by the government 
for children’s mental health must reach the frontline. So far the story on this 
has been mixed.

Second, dealing with emotional and mental distress is part of the day-to-day 
business of teachers, social workers and other professionals. This workforce 
need the right skills, recognition and support to help build resilience in 
children and keep them engaged with education.

Sam is a convicted paedophile … and a teenage girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/08/convicted-paedophile-teenage-girl-child-abuse-psychiatrist>
This is more than just mindfulness, helpful though that might be. Some of 
these challenges were brought into focus by the programme in our school, 
Gloucester House, which supports some of the most troubled children who have 
been excluded from other parts of the educational system.

As a society we must acknowledge the negative impact growing social pressures 
and targets are having on our children and young people, and the part our 
education system plays in turning up that pressure. A child’s wellbeing should 
never be sacrificed in the pursuit of educational achievement.

The third issue, graphically illustrated in the final programme, is the 
difficulty of supporting a young person in transition between adolescent and 
adult services. An arbitrary age cut-off can do untold harm. Mental healthcare 
relies on strong therapeutic relationships between service users and 
clinicians. Care should be organised around an individual’s circumstances not 
the arbitrary diktats of service boundaries and funding.

There is, in our view, no area of work in the NHS more valuable and rewarding 
than investing in the health and wellbeing of young people. They are our future 
and when we get things right there is a lifetime of benefit to be gained for 
individuals and society.

We have opened our doors at the Tavistock and Portman because we wanted to 
create a platform for the young people and families using the services and the 
clinicians who work with them. There is a growing public demand for children 
and young people’s mental health to be awarded the priority and the investment 
it needs. This government has made important commitments, but for kids on the 
edge turning sympathy into action cannot come too quickly.

Paul Jenkins is chief executive of the Tavistock and Portman NHS trust 
<https://tavistockandportman.nhs.uk/>. Paul Burstow chairs the Tavistock and 
Portman NHS trust and previously served as minister for mental health.

 * Kids on the Edge, Troubled Girls is on Channel 4 at 10pm on Wednesday 30 
November 
Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.


This article was amended on 30 November 2016. It originally stated that a 
target has been set that 30,000 more young people are able to access help by 
2020. The figure is 70,000.
 