
The manufacturing sector is on the road to recovery with output expanding at 
its fastest pace for almost five years in the third quarter of the year, 
government figures revealed yesterday.

Output rose by 0.2% in September, according to the Office for National 
Statistics, bringing the total expansion between July and September to 1%.

Overall industrial production was down 0.2% on the month, after the warmest 
September since 1949 depressed demand for energy, but over the quarter has 
risen by 1.2%.

The unexpectedly robust performance could boost initial estimates of overall 
economic growth in the third quarter of the year, City analysts said yesterday.

"The overall strength of industrial production during Q3 has the potential to 
raise the rate of growth of GDP by a further 0.1% to 1% quarter on quarter," 
said Ciaran Barr, senior UK economist at Deutsche Bank.

Yesterday's figures confirmed that the gap between the fortunes of the service 
sector and manufacturing, which has been a characteristic of the economy for 
the last four years, has finally closed.

"For the second quarter in a row, manufacturing output growth has matched that 
in the service sector," said John O'Sullivan, UK economist at Greenwich NatWest 
markets. "Though there is variation in performance within the manufacturing 
sector, we may have to retire the cliché about the UK's two-speed economy."

While manufacturing is on the up, high-street sales are slowing, according to 
separate figures, released by the Confederation of British Industry.

The CBI's monthly distributive trades survey found 43% of retailers reporting 
a rise in sales in October while 27% reported a fall. The positive balance of 
16% was down on the much stronger figures of 33% in August and 41% in September.

"It is too early to say that [retail] sales actually have collapsed," said 
Michael Hume, UK economist at Lehman Brothers. "But it does suggest that the 
Bank's quarter point hike in September has hit hard. And that should comfort 
the Bank."

Household goods stores outperformed other retailers as the runaway property 
market boosted demand for carpets and furniture. The balance of furniture 
stores reporting increased sales stood at +69, after languishing at -53 in May.

At the survey's release, the CBI called for the Bank to leave rates on hold 
until the new year. Alastair Eperon, chairman of the CBI's distributive trades 
survey panel, said: "We believe that [Thursday's] rise in interest rates should 
be sufficient to counter the limited inflation pressures in the UK at present. 
Interest rates can now be safely left on hold into 2000."

 Higher interest rates sent bankruptcies soaring to a five-year high in the 
third quarter of the year, according to figures released yesterday by the 
Department for Trade and Industry.

Nearly 7,500 people were declared bankrupt between July and September, an 18% 
rise on the same period a year ago, and the highest number since the third 
quarter of 1994.

The number of company insolvencies fell slightly between the second and third 
quarters of 1999. Just under 3,500 went out of business between July and 
September, a 4.1% increase over the same period in 1998.
 