
The International Monetary Fund has downgraded its growth forecast for the 
British economy for the second time in six months in a move which puts its 
assessment sharply at odds with that of the chancellor, Gordon Brown.

Despite a series of UK interest rate cuts, the IMF believes UK growth will be 
just 0.7% this year - the lowest among the Group of Seven countries with the 
exception of Japan - and well below the 1-1.5% forecast made by Mr Brown in the 
budget last month.

The IMF suggests Britain's slower than expected growth will increase pressure 
on the Bank of England to lower interest rates further in the months ahead from 
the present 5.25%.

The fund's decision to tone down its forecast for Britain from 0.9% in 
December to 0.7% now follows what it described as a weaker than expected final 
quarter of 1998 which it expects to carry through to the first half of this 
year.

It was noted that the IMF forecast was in line with those of the UK private 
sector just released by the treasury in London. Nevertheless, despite their 
downward projection for British output, fund officials said: 'The worst of the 
slowdown in the UK is over.'

The IMF compliments the authorities in Britain for effectively forestalling 
overheating, but suggested there was still further room for interest rate cuts 
beyond the reductions from their 7.5% peak. 'There is room for further 
reductions in interest rates in the coming months,' the IMF's World Economic 
Outlook report says.

The fund's chief economist, Dr Michael Mussa, noted that although the Bank of 
England's interest rate-setting monetary policy committee operates on the basis 
of an inflation target, it also gives weight to the real economy in its 
deliberations, which would allow it to engineer further reductions.

In 1998 the British economy expanded at a healthy 2.1% before a combination of 
rising interest rates, a strong pound and tight fiscal policy put a crimp in 
the expansion leading to the current forecast of minimal growth this year.

However, with interest rates coming down and the IMF expecting that sterling 
will start to weaken against the euro in the months ahead - giving new hope to 
exporters - output could quickly be restored to 2.1% next year.

There is still some residual concern within the fund that labour market 
conditions could undermine some of the progress made in stabilising the British 
economy.

It notes that, with unemployment at an 18-year low, there are risks in the 
labour market. These will be increased by the Labour government's introduction 
of the minimum wage, which 'could exert some limited upward pressure on wages 
and prices'.

Another area of worry is the sharp upward surge in Britain's current account, 
which has come about as a result of the strong pound. The IMF forecasts that 
the current account of the balance of payments could surge to a $16bn (Â£9.9bn) 
deficit this year rising further to $20bn in 2000 as the aftermath of the 
strong pound works its way through the system.

Dr Mussa indicated that there was little the UK could do about this since it 
targets inflation and interest rates, not the exchange rate.

The fund's toughest remarks are reserved for the European labour markets. It 
believes the whole euro project could be undermined by unemployment, which it 
describes as a 'major chronic problem' which needs serious structural reforms 
to address it.

'Labour market reforms have yet to tackle the roots of structural 
unemployment,' particularly in the three biggest economies, Germany, France and 
Italy, it says.

It notes that, with the absence of the possibility of exchange rate adjustment 
among countries, Euroland needs to make its reform efforts 'more urgent'.
 