
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has won three 
British Journalism Awards – more than any other news organisation – including 
investigation of the year for its stories that exposed how the former prime 
minister David Cameron benefited from an offshore fund set up in a tax haven by 
his father.

Guardian journalists accepted the award jointly with a team from BBC Panorama 
for their reporting on a huge leak of emails from law firm Mossack Fonseca, 
billed as thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, which exposed how 
Cameron and other world leaders, including Vladimir Putin, the Russian 
president, Petro Poroshenko, the Ukrainian president, and the prime minister of 
Iceland, Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson, kept details of their wealth private 
from tax officials and the public.

Announcing the prize, which was sponsored by Transparency International, the 
judges said: “The Guardian revealed secret billion-dollar deals linked to 
Vladimir Putin and David Cameron’s links to a secret offshore fund. This was 
another vast investigation by the Guardian which shone a light in some of the 
darkest corners of international finance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad386d95f83e43a879a094a037941e04a59adb14%2F0_55_3721_2232%2F3721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad386d95f83e43a879a094a037941e04a59adb14%2F0_55_3721_2232%2F3721.jpg>
 The front page that exposed how David Cameron benefited from an offshore fund 
set up in a tax haven by his father. Photograph: Guardian 
The business, finance and economics journalism prize went to Simon Goodley, 
the Guardian’s business reporter, for hisexposés of the retail chain Sports 
Direct’s underpayment of workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
, which the judges described as “great public interest journalism”.

“Simon Goodley’s undercover investigation into life at Sports Direct’s 
Derbyshire warehouse was business journalism which got results, prompting the 
company to ensure staff were paid at least the minimum wage and make other 
concessions,” they said in their citation.

The third prize for Guardian journalists was for digital innovation, awarded 
for the groundbreaking6x9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/apr/27/6x9-a-virtual-experience-of-solitary-confinement>
 – a virtual reality experience of solitary confinement. “Crusading journalism 
at its 21st-century best, and very powerful storytelling indeed,” the judges 
said.

“The use of virtual reality was a genuine innovation and was accompanied by 
video, podcasts, personal narratives and long-form journalism to beautifully 
convey this story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15fc280cb0361afeec80619a9bb3eb4ea86d5d9%2F0_0_2560_1440%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15fc280cb0361afeec80619a9bb3eb4ea86d5d9%2F0_0_2560_1440%2F2560.jpg>
 Undercover footage was filmed inside the Sports Direct warehouse. 
Other Guardian journalists shortlisted for awards included the news reporter 
Jamie Grierson for scoop of the year; the chief sports correspondent, Owen 
Gibson, for sports journalism; and the Paris correspondent, Angelique 
Chrisafis, for foreign affairs journalism. Daniel Boffey, policy editor at the 
Observer, the Guardian’s sister paper, was shortlisted for the politics 
journalism prize, while Emma Graham-Harrison was shortlisted for foreign 
affairs journalism for her work for the Observer.

The annual awards ceremony, organised by Press Gazette, an industry magazine 
for journalists, took place at Stationers’ Hall in London on Tuesday night. 
Dominic Ponsford, the magazine’s editor, said: “As an industry we face a 
constant fight for survival – attacked by everyone from Google and Facebook 
(taking our ads) to the police who have been jailing our sources and spying on 
our phone records.

“The work on display helps explain why what we do is important and why it 
should be cherished and encouraged. This event aims to bang the drum for the 
best of what we do as the British industry which holds everyone else to 
account.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75d2d820f4cd383af80e4ec3c41f12f70c3ed328%2F0_0_1732_1172%2F1732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20scoops%20three%20prizes%20at%20British%20Journalism%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fguardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75d2d820f4cd383af80e4ec3c41f12f70c3ed328%2F0_0_1732_1172%2F1732.jpg>
 The award-winning 6x9 Guardian virtual reality project Photograph: Guardian 
The BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, was named journalist of the 
year, the event’s top prize. “Kuenssberg deserves this prize for the sheer 
volume and scope of reporting on some of the biggest changes ever in British 
politics when she was just into the job of BBC political editor,” judges said. 
“In a tumultuous year she rose to the challenge and made the story of Brexit 
her own.”

Other prizewinners included:

 * Charles Moore, the Daily Telegraph political columnist, took scoop of the 
year for his story revealing that the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, 
is the illegitimate son of Sir Winston Churchill’s private secretary, Anthony 
Montague Browne. 
 * Louise Callaghan, of the Sunday Times, was named new journalist of the year 
for three “compelling” stories from Istanbul, Lesbos and Turkey that shone 
light on turmoil in the Middle East.

 * Waad al-Khatib, who is trapped in the Syrian city of Aleppo, was handed the 
foreign affairs journalism prize for her “sensitive, visceral” reports for 
Channel 4 News on life under siege.

 * The Syrian citizen media outfit Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently was 
handed the Marie Colvin award for its fearless reporting from the city, which 
became a de facto capital of Islamic State. One judge said: “Given what those 
people have done and the price they have paid, it would be odd to put anyone 
ahead of them.”
 