
The relationship between a newspaper and its readers is based on confidence in 
its publications.

We understand that this confidence is built on trust, journalistic freedom and 
liberal values.

 From the very first edition of the Manchester Guardian, published on 5 May 
1821, our journalism has been funded in part by advertising.

While the nature and form of advertising may have changed, a mix of the 
revenue from our physical and digital products and services combines with print 
and digital advertising to underpin investment in high quality journalism.

Advertisements that appear in our print and online publications are expected 
to accord to clear standards.

These are set out in detail in our terms and conditions 
<http://advertising.theguardian.com/terms-and-conditions/>. Key elements are 
summarised below. These standards reflect our commitment to responsible 
advertising, legal and regulatory obligations and to ensuring we maintain our 
readers’ trust.

Our editorial is not influenced by commercial pressures.

Our journalists are free to, and often do, challenge the activities of 
companies and organisations that advertise and sponsor content that appears in 
Guardian News & Media (GNM) publications.


The GNM Editorial Code 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2011/08/08/EditorialGuidelinesAug2011.pdf>
 - which forms part of the induction of every journalist who works for the 
organisation - states that:


Staff should not be influenced by commercial considerations — including the 
interests of advertisers — in the preparation of material for the paper.


Transparency


We are transparent about how our advertising is provided across GNM’s print 
and digital publications, and provide extensive information about the standards 
and commercial terms on our website 
<http://advertising.theguardian.com/specifications-and-ad-delivery/>. We also 
clearly label paid for content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/sep/23/paid-for-content>.

Our conditions

Advertising in our print and online publications must meet various legal 
requirements set out in law and by the advertising industry’s self regulatory 
body, the Advertising Standards Association. The UK Code of Non-broadcast 
Advertising, Sales Promotion and Direct Marketing (the CAP Code) is extensive, 
and isavailable on the ASA website 
<http://cap.org.uk/Advertising-Codes/Non-Broadcast.aspx>. In addition, GNM’s 
own terms and conditions specify our requirements for advertising that appears 
in our publications. In particular, advertising should:

 * Be legal, decent, honest and truthful. 
 * Not break any law, regulation or code including the CAP Code. 
 * Not be libellous or obscene or infringe the rights of any person (including 
a person’s privacy and intellectual property rights) 
 * Be accurate, complete, and not misleading. 
 * Not be prejudicial to the image or reputation of GNM or its publications. 
We make no guarantee that adverts will be accepted by GNM, and we may reject 
adverts at our discretion. Our website sets out our style requirements, 
commercial rates, terms and conditions for our advertising products and other 
information which is helpful for both readers and advertisers. Essential 
information for anyone looking to advertise in print or online, to sponsor 
events, place classified advertising or inserts, or place a recruitment advert 
can be foundhere <http://advertising.theguardian.com/contacts/?tag=essentials>.

Complaints

If you have a complaint about advertising that appears in the Guardian or the 
Observer then you can:

 * Send an email to our advertising team at 
advertising.complaints@theguardian.com 
<mailto:advertising.complaints@theguardian.com>, setting out your complaint. 
 * Access the ASA <http://asa.org.uk/Consumers/How-to-complain.aspx>’s process 
to complain about advertising featured in newspapers, online and on broadcast 
platforms. 
 * You can also get in touch with the readers’ editor here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/sep/12/-sp-how-to-make-a-complaint-about-guardian-or-observer-content>
. The readers’ editor generally covers editorial content rather than 
advertising features but may look at paid for content in exceptional 
circumstances.  