
Donations to the Guardian and Observer charity appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 in aid of refugee children have passed the £1.5m mark, with five days of the 
campaign still to go.

The money will go to three charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 working with young refugees and migrants based in the UK, other European 
countries, Syria and Lebanon:Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, 
Safe Passage <http://safepassage.org.uk/> and the Children’s Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/donate/help-child-refugees-fleeing-war-and-violence>
.

Between them the charities provide a range of support, from supplying 
emergency aid to refugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 to enabling unaccompanied refugee children tofind legal sanctuary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/01/eritrean-refugee-tragedy-guardian-observer-appeal-safe-passage-charity>
 with relatives in the UK and providing essential support to help youngsters
adapt to life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/charity-rebuilding-lives-refugee-childrens-society-guardian-observer-charity-appeal>
 in Britain.

More than 15,000 readers have donated over the past three and a half weeks, 
making it the second biggest charity appeal in the papers’ history. The appeal 
closes at 5pm on Sunday 8 January.

The 2015 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/readers-generosity-charity-appeal-success-thank-you>
, in support of six refugee charities, raised £2.6m. The previous highest 
amount raised was £1.4m in 2004 in the wake of the tsunami disaster.

Matthew Reed, chief executive of the Children’s Society, said: “The generosity 
of the Guardian and Observer readers has been overwhelming. £1.5m is an 
incredible amount and we are extremely grateful for every single penny donated. 
The money raised will make a huge difference to the lives of the child and 
young refugees we work with, helping them to rebuild their lives here in the 
UK.”

Dani Lawrence of Help Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> 
said: “As the country goes back to work at the start of the new year, the news 
of the incredible generosity of Guardian and Observer readers towards refugee 
children gives us hope for a much more compassionate 2017 and will help to 
provide respite from the remaining winter months.”


Neil Jameson, executive director of Citizens UK, which oversees Safe Passage, 
said: “We are so honoured that readers of the Guardian and Observer have been 
moved to donate. So thrilled to have been chosen as one of charities to benefit 
from the appeal. So grateful to the many Guardian and Observer journalists who 
have supported the appeal through the articles they have written,the telethon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/guardian-observer-christmas-telethon-raises-50000-child-refugees>
 and all the work that has gone on behind the scenes.

“Thank you to everyone who has helped us to help child refugees.”

 * Support our three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
.  