
Donations to the Guardian and Observer charity appeal in aid of refugee 
children have passed the £1m mark, less than two weeks after launch.

The money will support three charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 working with young refugees and migrants based in Europe and the UK, Syria and 
Lebanon: Help Refugees, Safe Passage and the Children’s Society.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
More than 10,000 readers have so far donated to the 2016 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-2016>
, including hundreds who pledged nearly £50,000 over the phone to Guardian and 
Observer journalists at theannual charity telethon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/guardian-observer-christmas-telethon-raises-50000-child-refugees>
 on Saturday.

Josie Naughton, a co-founder of Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, said: “We would like to thank 
Guardian and Observer readers for their unwavering commitment to helping child 
refugees. The overwhelming generosity of the public reflects the compassion and 
empathy that is at the heart of British society.”


Matthew Reed, the chief executive of the Children’s Society, said: “We’re 
thrilled that the Guardian and Observer appeal has hit the £1m mark. It was a 
real privilege to have the chance to take calls from readers during Saturday’s 
telethon, and I was struck by their incredible determination to help young 
refugees and to give whatever they could to support the appeal.

“Thank you to everyone who has generously donated so far – your support is 
vital to help us give children and young people fleeing war, persecution and 
violence a brighter future in the UK.”

Neil Jameson, the executive director of Citizens UK, the parent charity of 
Safe Passage, said: “We have been overwhelmed by the generosity of the Guardian 
and Observer readers, and moved by the messages of support we are receiving.

“The donations we receive will help us continue to reach unaccompanied 
children in Europe, providing safe routes to sanctuary to those who are most 
vulnerable and at risk. They will also ensure that ourRefugees Welcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/17/thousands-march-in-refugees-welcome-rally-in-london>
 groups are able to provide a supportive community for new arrivals.”

Last year’s appeal, in support of six refugee charities, raised more than £2.6m
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/readers-generosity-charity-appeal-success-thank-you>
.

The 2016 appeal will run until 9 January.

 * Support child refugees by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
.
 