
It's one year today since Guardian Australia launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/insideguardian/2013/may/26/welcome-to-guardian-australia>
. Since then, we've broken news, made an impact in parliament and elsewhere, 
built a community and had an enormous amount of fun.

To mark the occasion, editor-in-chief Katharine Viner answered questions live 
hereand on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/theguardianaustralia/posts/672050066163416>. 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11915913> jclucas  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11915913> 27 May 2014 4:07am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182534> 
Hi Katherine, congratulations on the success of Guardian Australia.

I'm curious about the numbers: how many visit the site and what increases 
you've seen over time, and what the ratio of readers to commenters is for an 
average article.

Surely the new government has been a great spur for people to visit the site. 
Are you glad in a strange kind of way that such a conservative government got 
in ?

And what are your plans for the future of the site?

According to Nielsen, we had 1.8m visitors to the site last month - that was a 
new record. Our internal stats suggest that we've almost doubled traffic in a 
year, and more than quadrupled the numbers of comments - Australian Guardian 
readers are much more active and lively than the global average.

As for the new government: Australia has a large progressive audience whoever 
is in power, and they are clearly enjoying our political coverage.

The future is onwards and upwards!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11817401> Rachel Worsley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11817401> 27 May 2014 4:11am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182588> 
Hi Katharine, congrats on the 1st birthday of Guardian Australia. We hope 
there will be many more!

Will there be an internship program for journalism students offered by 
Guardian Australia sometime in the next few years? If not, what can journalism 
students aspiring to work for the Guardian do to enhance their chances of 
getting a position with the team, whether in Sydney, Melbourne or across 
Australia if you choose to expand?

Hope so!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12767506> Dan Nolan  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12767506> 27 May 2014 4:13am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182615> 
I'm glad you've enjoyed Australia, based on your comments, but I have one 
question. What was one thing about Australia, maybe an event or a person or 
even just an environmental element that you saw and your only response was 
'thats wild'?

That's wild: 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/06/queensland-mp-stands-down-sexting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/06/queensland-mp-stands-down-sexting>
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11920460> a_i_d_a_n  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11920460> 27 May 2014 4:15am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182638> 
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has made a real 
difference in the media landscape here in Aus, thanks. In the past the strong 
editorial line of the Murdoch papers has tended to lead the direction and 
coverage of politics. The serious push-back you have received from them is the 
highest possible compliment.

I would like to know, how close is Guardian Aus to self-sufficiency? Do you 
still rely on outside funding from Graeme Wood? If so, is there a goal for that 
no longer being required?

Those details are confidential, but we have been far more commercially 
successful in our first year than we expected, so it's looking good.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11961384> Daisy06  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11961384> 27 May 2014 4:16am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182651> 
Hi Katharine. All I can say is thank you and TGA for providing an alternative 
voice to that of NewsLtd..... a voice of reason and an opportunity for people 
of all political persuasions. to have their voices heard ....in a mostly 
respectful manner.
Thanks and good luck with the next chapter in your life.

Cheers!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272941> SunnyPsych  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272941> 27 May 2014 4:16am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182653> 
Hi Katharine,

Firstly, congrats on a fantastic (and well timed) entry into the Aussie 
market. You've picked up some great talent along the way and are starting to 
shape up as a real alternative to the (mostly) junk stuff served up by the 
locals.

How many Aussie-side journos do you expect to have on your books in 12 months 
time?
Also, do you accept much freelance work?

Thanks!

We currently have around 25 journalists, and have plans to expand. Yes of 
course freelance work!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12465007> MalcMcG  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12465007> 27 May 2014 4:17am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182669> 
With UK's Daily Mail also poised to target the Oz market, and the 
preponderance of Independent competition to News Ltd via the net, is there any 
single issue that's encouraged UK newspapers to challenge the Murdoch 
dominance, or is it simply "because we can" ?.

It's the least diverse newspaper market in the world, dominated by two main 
players, and the web has dramatically lowered barriers to entry. Australia has 
a very highly educated and very wealthy audience, who want more stuff to read 
online. Oh and there's an economy that looks pretty strong if the view is from 
Europe!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10673019> Guardian contributor
Luke Mansillo  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10673019> 27 May 
2014 4:27am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182821> 
Ms Viner, soon you'll take up Janine Gibson's job at Guardian US, and Emily 
Wilson will take up the Guardian Australia reins 
<http://mumbrella.com.au/katharine-viner-edit-us-guardian-emily-wilson-take-reins-oz-operation-211850>
.
Reflecting on your last year here, what would be your greatest regret for the 
Australian operations?
And what are you looking forward to the most in the US operations?

I wish more Coalition politicians had written for us - the Guardian is all 
about providing an array of voices and that's been harder to make happen in 
Australia than it was in the UK... so far.

I also regret not having visited New Zealand. Feel guilty about that
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12420642> hurlnato  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12420642> 27 May 2014 4:28am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182836> 
Hi. Fabulous work and well done to the whole team. A real breath of fresh air. 
Now MBM and OBO. Firstly, love it. Secondly, you have used both English and 
Australian journalists. Do you think the mix is working?

Also, any plans for any more joint UK and Aus activities in the future? What 
about a book store and shop like the UK?

Almost all of our reporters and commentators are Australian, while most of our 
editors are from the Guardian - an essential combination, in my view, to ensure 
that the site feels totally Australian and totally Guardian. I think that will 
change - and is already changing, with the recruitment as editors of Australian 
journalists Adam Brereton and Monica Tan. But we'd always want a mix.

A bookshop is an interesting idea! I'll mention it to my commercial colleagues.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4398986> goopie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4398986> 27 May 2014 4:31am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182871> 
I thought you moved on to Edit the US site? If not, its great that you are 
still producing the best news for Australian readers.

Moving very soon! Will really miss Aus.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272995> Adam1964  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272995> 27 May 2014 4:49am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183114> 
Gr8 that you are one year old. Do you have any plans to create an app for 
iPhones? The BBC News app is second to none, however it is geared towards a 
British audience.

We have an iphone app already: 
https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/the-guardian/id409128287?mt=8 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/the-guardian/id409128287?mt=8>

... and we have a new one coming soon....
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12433669> shabanbajramovic  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12433669> 27 May 2014 4:44am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183039> 
Well done the guardian. Yay for a progressive voice!!! It would be good if the 
whole of Australia reads you. Are you planing to access people that do not go 
online for news?

Sadly we've no plans to launch a newspaper, but Guardian Weekly is great: 
http://www.theguardian.com/weekly/subscribe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weekly/subscribe>
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272956> jacob1093  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13272956> 27 May 2014 4:20am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36182716> 
Hi Katharine. 

Many other mainstream media outlets in Australia are notorious for leaning 
further and further to the right in recent years, whereas The Guardian, by 
reputation, is centre-left.

With so much of the Australian media endorsing conservative politics, do you 
think this places an extra pressure on The Guardian to represent the other side 
of the political argument?

If so, how have you dealt with that challenge in the past twelve months?

Thank you,
Jacob.

The Guardian's position has always been to promote an array of voices, to help 
the reader work out their own position and make up their own minds. There's a 
wonderful essay on this from 1921: Comment is free, but facts are sacred, by CP 
Scott:http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2002/nov/29/1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2002/nov/29/1>.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4274192> figg999  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4274192> 27 May 2014 5:04am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183345> 
Any chance of going old school and doing a Saturday print edition like UK's

I doubt that very much
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12921367> Oyarsa  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12921367> 27 May 2014 4:46am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183070>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Hi Katherine,

I don't have a question, I just wanted to say thank you for the excellent 
coverage this year. As a young Australian (25), the Guardian has enabled me to 
become more active and informed in the politic sphere. It's been an important 
development.

Thank you to all of you.

Kip

Well this comment has absolutely made my day. Thank you!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12207689> FortKnocks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12207689> 27 May 2014 5:00am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183285> 
The most important question obviously is did you end up adopting an AFL team?

I did! I chose Richmond. Because I don't mind extended 
agony/disappointment/pain
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1956980> MalReeseWalker  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1956980> 27 May 2014 4:51am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183153> 
Congratulations s Katherine on your first anniversary, it’s been a fascinating 
year and the Guardian has brought an analysis to Australia that was notable by 
its absence 13 months ago.
Would you ever consider a daily or weekend hardcopy version even if it was 
limited to a distribution around the major cities? I’m aware that is against 
the direction of travel with digital media, but could an additional presence on 
the high street further promote the interests of the newspaper?

I fear not... the economics just don't add up.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/693943> Guardian staff 
KatharineViner  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/693943> 27 May 
2014 5:18am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36183536> 
I'm signing off now everyone - thanks for your terrific questions and for all 
your engagement throughout this first year. Guardian Australia readers coming 
back to the site so often, commenting, contributing, giving us stories, tips, 
suggestions and criticism, has made all the difference. Bravo to you!
 