
A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 G - style guide illustrations Photograph: Jakob Hinrichs 
G8
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States 
and the newest member, Russia

Gaddafi, Muammar
former Libyan leader rather than president (he held no government office and 
was generally known in Libya as “leader of the revolution”); Gaddafi on second 
mention

gaff
hook or spar, also slang for house; blow the gaff give away a secret

gaffe
blunder

gaffer tape

Galápagos

Gallagher
Oasis brothers (Noel and Liam)

Gallaher
cigarette company

Gambia, the
not Gambia

gambit
an opening strategy that involves some sacrifice or concession; so to talk of 
an opening gambit is tautologous - an opening ploy might be better

Game Boy

gamechanger, gamechanging

gameplan, gameshow

Gandhi
not Ghandi

gang-rape

García Lorca, Federico
(1898-1936) Spanish writer

García Márquez, Gabriel
Colombian novelist

Garda Síochána
Irish police force; garda (plural gardaí) police officer

garotte
not garrotte or garrote

garryowen
up-and-under (rugby union)

Garryowen
Irish rugby club that gave the garryowen its name

gases
plural of gas, but the verb is gasses

gatecrash

Gategate
The hapless quintet who broke into Democratic headquarters at the Watergate 
building in Washington DC in 1972 can have had no idea of the forces they were 
unleashing – forces that in due course led to the resignation of President 
Richard Nixon, and began a proud tradition of inane journalism that shows no 
sign of diminishing 40 years later.

Examples range from the mildly droll – Gatecrashergate, Henry Gatesgate (also 
known as Stupidgate) – to the utterly feeble (Sexy Photo Gate).

Among numerous other instances are Bertiegate, Betsygate, Billygate, 
Camillagate (not to be confused with Dianagate, also known as Squidgygate), 
Cheriegate, Closetgate, Contragate, Fajitagate, Flakegate, at least two 
Grannygates, Hobnobgate, Irangate, Iraqgate, Irisgate (it is compulsory for 
stories about this to be headlined “And here’s to you, Mrs Robinson... “), 
Katrinagate, Koreagate, Monicagate, at least two cases of Nannygate, 
Nipplegate, Smeargate, various Strippergates, Toiletgate, three different 
outbreaks of Troopergate, and Whitewatergate.

Sporting gates include Beachballgate, Bloodgate, Buttongate, Chicanegate, 
Crashgate, Handgate/Henrygate/Thierrygate, Liargate, Pizzagate, Tevezgate and, 
of course, Tigergate.

Occasionally, as with Climategate or Plebgate, such an ephithet may be useful 
as a way to pull together a lot of material on the same subject, but most gates 
are lazy and more likely to put readers off than engage them

Gatt
general agreement on tariffs and trade

Gaudí, Antoni
(1852-1926) Catalan architect

Gauguin, Paul
(1848-1903) French painter

gay
should be used as an adjective rather than a noun: a gay man, gay people, gay 
men and lesbians not “gays and lesbians”

‘gay marriage’
equal marriage, same-sex marriage, or simply marriage are preferable

Gaza Strip

Gb
gigabits; GB gigabytes

G’day
Australian greeting

Geldof, Bob
has an honorary KBE but, as an Irish citizen, is not eligible to use the style 
Sir so please don’t call him “Sir Bob Geldof”

gender issues
Our use of language reflects our values, as well as changes in society. 
Phrases such as career girl or career woman, for example, are outdated (more 
women have careers than men) and patronising (there is no male equivalent).

So we use actor or comedian for women as well as men, not actress or 
comedienne (but waiter and waitress are acceptable – at least for the moment); 
firefighter, not fireman; PC, not WPC (police forces have abandoned the 
distinction), postal workers, not postmen, etc.

Avoid terms such as businessmen, housewives, male nurse, woman driver, woman 
(lady!) doctor, etc, which reinforce outdated stereotypes. If you need to use 
an adjective, it is female and not “woman” in such phrases as female bishops, 
female MPs, female president.

Do not gratuitously describe a woman as a “mother-of-three”: family details 
and marital status are only relevant in stories about families or marriage.

Use humankind or humanity rather than mankind, a word that, as one of our 
readers points out, “alienates half the population from their own history”.

Never say “his” to cover men and women: use his or her, or a different 
construction; in sentences such as “a teacher who beats his/her pupils is not 
fit to do the job”, there is usually a way round the problem – in this case, 
“teachers who beat their pupils ... “

Men (rarely women – funny, that) who occasionally question our policy and 
accuse us of “political correctness” may care to reflect on the fact that 
Fowler’s used to list such “established feminine titles” as adventuress, 
authoress, editress, executrix, giantess, huntress, inspectress, Jewess, 
poetess, procuress, quakeress, songstress, tailoress, wardress; it also 
proposed new ones such as danceress and doctress (“everyone knows the 
inconvenience of being uncertain whether a doctor is a man or a woman”)

gender reassignment
rather than “sex change”

general
General David Petraeus at first mention, then Petraeus

general election

General Medical Council
(GMC), doctors’ disciplinary body

General Strike
of 1926

General Synod
but synod after first mention

Geneva conventions
(not convention); four treaties, last revised and ratified in 1949, which with 
three more recently adopted protocols set out international standards for the 
humanitarian treatment of prisoners of war and civilians caught up in war.

The Refugee convention of 1951, though signed in Geneva, is not part of the 
Geneva conventions. It is the key legal document in defining who is a refugee, 
their rights and the legal obligations of states

geoengineering

geography
distinct areas are capped up: Black Country, East Anglia, Lake District, 
Midlands, Peak District, Potteries, West Country, etc; but areas defined by 
compass points are lc: the north, the south-east, the south-west, etc

geordie
noun and adjective; refers to people from Tyneside, and their accent

geriatrics
branch of medicine dealing with elderly people, not an amusing way to describe 
them in an attempt to make yourself sound cool

german measles
but rubella is preferable

gerund
Nothing to be frightened of. Think of it as a verb used as a noun: I like 
running, smoking is bad for your health, etc. You are supposed to use a 
possessive: I was worried by his smoking, rather than I was worried by him 
smoking. In practice, many people – yes, even journalists – don’t bother

ghetto
plural ghettoes

ghoti
alternative spelling of the word “fish” (gh as in trough, o as in women, ti as 
in nation) sometimes attributed to George Bernard Shaw, although there is no 
evidence that he ever said or wrote it

giant
We know that BP and Vodafone are big companies, so don’t need to be told that 
they are “the oil giant” or “the telecoms giant”

giantkiller, giantkilling
no hyphen

Gibraltar
overseas territory or dependency, not a British colony; its inhabitants are 
Gibraltarians

gif
stands for graphics interchange format. When CompuServe introduced it in 1987, 
it was pronounced with a soft G as in giraffe, although it is also widely 
pronounced with a hard G as in goat

gift
not a verb (unless, perhaps, directly quoting a football manager or player: 
“We gifted Barnsley their fifth goal”)

gin and tonic
plural gin and tonics; abbreviation G&T, plural G&Ts

girl
female under 18

girlfriend

girlie
noun (only when quoting someone); girly adjective (eg girly clothes); girlish 
behaviour

giro
banking; gyro navigation aid

Giscard d’Estaing, Valéry
former French president, Giscard on second mention

Giuliani, Rudolph
or Rudy (not Rudi) former New York mayor

Giuseppe
regularly misspelt as Guiseppe; this is sloppy

GLA
Greater London authority, not “Greater London assembly”. 

The GLA comprises the mayor, who runs it, and the London assembly, which holds 
the mayor to account

glamour
but glamorous

Glasgow kiss
a head-butt

glasnost

GlaxoSmithKline
GSK on second mention and in headlines

globish
a form of simple English used by non-native English speakers

GM crops, GM food
normally no need to write genetically modified in full; avoid the term 
“Frankenstein food”

GMT
Greenwich mean time: the ship ran aground at 8am local time (0700 GMT)

goalline, goalpost

goat’s cheese

gobbledegook
not gobbledygook

gobsmacked
is best used only if directly quoting someone

God
but he, him etc rather than He, Him

godchild, godfather, godmother, godparents, godson, goddaughter

God particle, Higgs boson, Large Hadron Collider

going forward
unappealing jargon when employed as an alternative to “in the future”

goldmine


Goldsmiths, University of London
comma but no apostrophe and no “college”

golf holes
are given as numbers: 1st, 2nd, 18th, etc

gong
strikes the wrong tone in reporting about awards and medals (for example we 
had people winning “gongs” at the RIBA architecture awards); can be effective 
used disparagingly (“the more gongs the prime minister doles out to donors and 
party hacks, the more he stands accused of cronyism”)

González Durántez, Miriam
González Durántez after first mention; do not call her Miriam Clegg or Mrs 
Clegg

Good Friday agreement

goodness, for goodness sake

goodnight

goody bag, goody-goody, oh goody!
but goodies

Google
takes initial cap, even when used as a verb (“I Googled myself”); named after 
googol, the number 1 followed by 100 zeros

Gorbachev, Mikhail

Gorky’s Zygotic Mynci
“the most ridiculous crap name we could think of”, according to the band

Gormley, Antony

go-slow
noun; go slow verb

Goths
(uc) Germanic tribe that invaded the Roman empire

goths
(lc) Sisters of Mercy fans who invaded the Shepherd’s Bush Empire

government
lc in all contexts and all countries; resist the awful trend to say such 
things as “Lord Browne fended off accusations of being too close to government” 
– it should be the government.

Like other collective nouns, government can be singular or plural, depending 
on context: “the government is on the rocks”, but “when the government say 
‘we’re all in this together’ they mean the Old Etonian Association”

government departments
See departments of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d#departments> 

governor general
(plural is governor generals; see attorney general)

graffiti
are plural; the singular is graffito

grammar
“It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men about thee that usually talk 
of a noun and a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure 
to hear”
(William Shakespeare, Henry VI Part 2)

Ambrose Bierce defined grammar as “a system of pitfalls thoughtfully prepared 
for the feet of the self-made man”. He had a point. Generations of 
schoolchildren were taught grammar as an arbitrary set of dos and don’ts laid 
down by people who knew, or thought they knew, best.

Nowadays, grammar might be more helpfully defined as the set of rules followed 
by speakers of a language: for example, why in English we say “I went out” and 
not “I out went”. Using correct grammar is a way to communicate effectively, 
not to feel superior to other people because you know what a conjunction is.

Don’t feel too downhearted if you were taught grammar badly, or not at all; as 
the linguist Steven Pinker says: “A preschooler’s tacit knowledge of grammar is 
more sophisticated than the thickest style manual”

Grammer, Kelsey
actor fondly remembered as Dr Frasier Crane

grandad
but granddaughter

grandee
has become a cliche applied to almost any long-serving politician (though not, 
so far, to John Prescott); it sounds vaguely, and inappropriately, deferential

grandparent
Mention this status only when relevant: leave “battling grannies” and similar 
examples of ageism and sexism to the tabloids; in particular we should avoid 
such patronising drivel as “How this 55-year-old granny came to earn $25m a 
year” (on the front page of the paper) – just in case anyone still didn’t get 
the message, the front of G2 said: “She’s five foot two, she’s a grandmother 
and she earns $25m a year”.

Our policy on this matter prompted the Spectator columnist Rod Liddle to ask: 
“Why Has The Word ‘Grandmother’ Been Banned By The Guardian?” It hasn’t

grand prix
plural grands prix; cap up individual races, eg British Grand Prix

grand slam
(lc) a term originating in contract bridge, now used in various sports, 
notably golf and tennis – in both of which it refers to winning all four major 
tournaments in the same year – and rugby union, where it involves beating all 
five opponents in the Six Nations championship

grassroots
one word

gravadlax

great-aunt, great-grandfather, great-great-grandmother, etc

Great Britain
England, Wales and Scotland; if you want to include Northern Ireland, use 
Britain or the UK

Great Leap Forward
Mao Zedong’s ill-fated attempt to modernise Chinese agriculture and industry 
from 1958-61

Great Train Robbers, Great Train Robbery
of 1963

Great War
with initial caps if quoting someone, but first world war or 1914-18 war is 
normally preferable

Greek placenames
We normally use generally accepted anglicised names: 
Andros, Cephalonia, Corfu (not Kerkira), Ithaca, Kos, Paxos, Rhodes, Santorini 
(not Thira), Symi (with a Y); but note Lefkada (not Lefkas), Peloponnese (not 
Peloponnessus), Thessaloniki (not Salonika)

green
a green activist, the green movement, but uc when referring to so-named 
political parties, eg the Green party

green belt
designated areas around cities subject to strict planning controls, not open 
countryside in general

greenfield site
one that has not been built on before, in contrast to a brownfield site

greengrocer’s apostrophe
See apostrophes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a#apostrophes> 

greenhouse effect
Energy from the Earth’s surface is trapped in the lower atmosphere by gases 
that prevent it leaking into space, a natural phenomenon that makes life 
possible, whose enhancement by natural or artificial means may make life 
impossible. Not the result of the hole in the ozone layer, whose thinning in 
the upper atmosphere is due to CFCs;the connection is that CFCs are also 
greenhouse gases

Green Investment Bank


green paper

grill
on an oven

grille 
on a car or a gate


grisly
gruesome

grizzly
bear

Grossman, Loyd
TV presenter and chef with his own brand of pasta sauces, singer with Jet 
Bronx and the Forbidden (reunited in 2009 as the New Forbidden)

groundbreaking

groundwater, rainwater; flood water, flood waters, drinking water

Ground Zero
initial caps for the former site of the World Trade Centre in New York; lc 
when referring to the exact location of explosions, eg ground zero at Hiroshima 
in 1945

grow
flowers may grow but companies don’t “grow profits” and governments don’t 
“grow economies”; horrors such as “grow the business” should only be used when 
quoting someone

grownup, grown up
You become a grownup when you have grown up

Grub Street

G-spot

Guantánamo Bay

guerrilla

Guevara, Che
(1928-67) Argentine-born revolutionary

Guggenheim Museum
cap M if you use the word, although it is not normally necessary. Frank Lloyd 
Wright designed the Guggenheim in New York, Frank Gehry the one in Bilbao (and 
another proposed for Abu Dhabi). We have sometimes confused the two

Guides
not “Girl Guides”; the organisation is Girlguiding

Guildhall
(City of London), not “the Guildhall”

Guinea
formerly French Guinea, a republic in north-west Africa that became 
independent in 1958; do not confuse with Equatorial Guinea, French Guiana, 
Guinea-Bissau, or Guyana

Guinea-Bissau
formerly Portuguese Guinea, independent since 1974, lying on the coast to the 
north-west of Guinea

guinea pig

guineas
Younger readers may not be aware that a guinea was worth £1 1s (£1.05) unless 
they buy or sell racehorses (the buyer still pays the auction house in guineas, 
and the auction house then gives the vendor the same number of pounds, thus 
netting the auctioneer their 5% commission)

Guinness World Records
formerly the Guinness Book of Records

Gulf, the
not the Persian or Arabian Gulf

Gulf war
the first Gulf war is now known as the Iran-Iraq war (1980-88); 1991 was the 
Gulf war: 2003 was the Iraq war

gull
not “seagull”

gun battle
not gunbattle or firefight

Guns N’ Roses
may be abbreviated to GNR after first mention

Gurkha

GUS
the former Great Universal Stores split into the credit rating agency Experian 
and Home Retail Group in 2006

guttural
not gutteral

Guyana
formerly British Guiana, a nation in South America that gained its 
independence in 1966; not to be confused with French Guiana or the three 
African states of Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, and Guinea-Bissau; its inhabitants 
are Guyanese (noun and adjective), not Guyanan

gymnasium
plural gymnasiums

Gypsies
are recognised as an ethnic group under the Race Relations Act, as are Irish 
Travellers, hence capped up

A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 