
Once again, the generosity of Guardian and Observer readers has left us 
humbled and inspired. We do not yet have a final figure but we do know your 
donations to our 2016 charity appeal in support of refugee children amount to 
over £1.6m: an incredible response.

We launched our campaign a month ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
 to raise money forthree fantastic charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 – Help Refugees, Safe Passage, and the Children’s Society. Our objective was 
two-fold: to provide practical, humanitarian assistance to refugees; and to 
make a stand for compassion, tolerance and justice in the face of weariness and 
hostility towards those displaced by war and oppression.

You answered the call magnificently: more than 16,000 of you donated to the 
appeal.You told us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/five-gold-rings-what-we-learned-by-answering-your-telethon-calls>
 you gave because you were horrified by events in Syria, or moved by themisery 
of the refugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 in Greece, or because you felt ashamed by the UK government’s timidity in the 
face of a global humanitarian crisis.


The appeal came at the end of a tumultuous and in many ways demoralising year, 
from the divisions laid bare by the Brexit referendum to the election of Donald 
Trump, and some of you told us thatgiving to the appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 was a way to make a stand for kindness, empathy and human rights at a time 
when these values seemed to be in retreat.

Some of you told us that you and your families’ experience of fleeing violence 
and persecution over the past nine decades – and your gratitude at finding 
safety and stability in the UK – compelled you to donate. For you, giving was a 
very personal act of belief in Britain as a place of sanctuary and freedom.

Your donations will help transform the futures of thousands of unaccompanied 
refugee children, both those currently in limbo in often squalid camps in 
Europe, and those settled here in the UK, as they attempt torebuild their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/charity-rebuilding-lives-refugee-childrens-society-guardian-observer-charity-appeal>
. Once again, we say thank you: for your generosity, for your kindness, for 
your solidarity.

 * The Guardian and Observer charity appeal 2016 closes at midnight on Sunday 
8 January. Support our three chosen charities bydonating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
.  