
“I don’t want this to sound bad but you have to be different, a bit special; 
half-mad. I talk to a lot of people, ex-team-mates especially – Roberto Di 
Matteo, Dan Petrescu, Gianfranco Zola – and there’s always someone with us who 
says: ‘Don’t do it! Don’t coach! What do you need it for? Go to the beach, play 
golf.’ As a manager, you’re so exposed: every decision, every gesture, every 
face, every little detail. Everything is so …”

Gus Poyet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gus-poyet> blows out his 
cheeks and not for the last time: “Tremendo!,” he says. “It’s not easy, it’s 
really not. Either you have total control of your emotions, or at least know 
how to manage them, or you can’t do it. It’s endless. The changing emotions in 
a game, the next day, the day after, and on and on. Look at the heart attacks 
happening.”

Poyet has looked and listened. “Martin Ling, who had an anxiety attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/martin-ling-resigns-swindon-town-manager-health-reasons>
, a breakdown, gave us this incredible talk. He said: ‘I was like you are’: 
there was no warning, nothing but one day, it just happened. He stopped the 
car, called an ambulance, couldn’t breathe. He was out of football for a long 
time, suffering. He said to us: ‘It’s so easy to describe … and so hard to 
stop.’

Gus Poyet proud of Sunderland achievements but disappointed by sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/20/gus-poyet-sunderland-proud-sack>
“A player trains all week to reach the high point for the game and then,” 
Poyet continues, raising his hand and letting it fall. “Whereas we go up, up, 
up … and we don’t come down. There’s no drop off, no recovery. After the game: 
go to the moon. That’s fundamental. I’d love to think that for one day, 
football’s finished, doesn’t exist. But I can’t.” The sensible thing would be 
to get out? “Totally, totally but I can’t help it. I like it.”

You can tell. There is a reason they nicknamed Poyet “Radio”: always on, 
always talking, especially when it comes to football. From Leicester to 
Guardiola to Simeone and Wise; from River Plate – “the Uruguayan one” – to 
Grenoble, Zaragoza, Brighton and Chelsea. Spurs, too: “Dele Alli is going to a 
big player for a very long time”, he says and “Mauricio Pochettino has done 
something unique: the great thing about Tottenham is that they’ll have seven or 
eight players at the perfect age in a few years – still young, but experienced. 
If he can keep that group, wow, it’ll be spectacular.”

As Poyet talks the enthusiasm overflows; so does his speech, quicker and 
quicker, hands moving as fast, time flying; pulling faces, making gestures, 
laughing, telling stories, taking a thousand tangents, explaining. Wishing he 
could explain more, too, imagining himself on the pitch, pre‑game, microphone 
in hand: “Ladies and gentlemen of the crowd: today’s tactical decision …” He 
recalls apologising to his Brighton players: “I cocked it up completely.” He 
laughs but you can tell it hurt, too.

Sure, Poyet admits, there is a lot of crap in football – infamously, there was 
even thatone in the Crystal Palace dressing room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/18/gus-poyet-fuming-excrement-crystal-palace>
 – but there is a lot that is good too and the game has a hold on him. There is 
a sadness when he admits many players do not even like football: 
“‘Barcelona-Bayern was on last night and you didn’t watch it?’ How can you play 
a pass if you didn’t even watch that? In Uruguay, every game we play is the 
last: tomorrow, there’s no more football. It’s over. Today’s the last game ever 
so you give everything.” Maybe that’s it; although English words occasionally 
punctuate his speech, the Uruguayan accent is strong and so is the personality. 
There is something about the way he throws himself into it, a love of the 
struggle. And, as it turns out, there’s always a tomorrow.

Poyet’s career began in France where the chance to join Nice was taken from 
him so he stayed to play for Grenoble: “horribly,” he says. But there was also 
the Copa América; the cup wins, and the Cup Winners’ Cup wins too, with Real 
Zaragoza and with Chelsea. He was captain the day Chelsea became the first club 
to field a team of foreigners and remembers the media, the tunnel, someone 
warning “we’d better win” and hurriedly handing the armband back to the next 
game. He has been sacked as many times as he has been employed as a coach but 
keeps coming back. Why?Because.

So here he is, in Seville: Gus Poyet, manager of Real Betis, preparing for the 
visit of the European Champions on Saturday. In his office the whiteboard is 
dotted with tiny magnets: one for each team. This week’s magnet:Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fgus-poyet-sunderland-real-betis-real-madrid-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb08cbf20cc72f7609dda77d5b2c8896dde87e74f%2F8_100_3801_2280%2F3801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gus%20Poyet%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20something%20inside%20Sunderland%2C%20at%20its%20very%20core%2C%20that%20needs%20changing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fgus-poyet-sunderland-real-betis-real-madrid-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gus%20Poyet%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20something%20inside%20Sunderland%2C%20at%20its%20very%20core%2C%20that%20needs%20changing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fgus-poyet-sunderland-real-betis-real-madrid-tottenham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb08cbf20cc72f7609dda77d5b2c8896dde87e74f%2F8_100_3801_2280%2F3801.jpg>
 Gus Poyet celebrates Sunderland’s last-minute winner against Newcastle in 
December 2014 Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Poyet has taken a long route here. Having begun his coaching career alongside 
Wise with Swindon and then Leeds before becoming Juande Ramos’s assistant at 
Spurs, he arrived in Spain via jobs at Brighton, Sunderland and AEK Athens. In 
Greece, he lasted four months. At Brighton, he won the League One title and got 
into the Championship play-offs. At Sunderland, he somehow completeda survival 
he calls “miraculous” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/20/gus-poyet-sunderland-proud-sack>
and “incredible”, dragging them out of “intensive care”. It made no difference; 
all three clubs sacked him.

“There’s something inside Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, something at its very core,” 
he says. “It’s hard to explain but there’s a way of life, something deep down, 
that makes it difficult to fulfil its potential. Niall Quinn criticised me for 
saying so but later talked about ‘gremlins’; then Paulo Di Canio talked about 
that moment when you get your head above the parapet and … bang! There’s 
something there, something I couldn’t find. If I knew what it was I’d say but I 
don’t. But it’s there and needs to be changed at the root.

“I played at Sunderland with Chelsea. We lost 4-1 and I left thinking: ‘That 
was spectacular.’ The passion was explosive. They had Quinn and Kevin Phillips 
and it was a good moment. Peter Reid was there: an absolute phenomenon but a 
year later, the same fans were shouting at him from behind the bench. You can’t 
say that with Quinn and Phillips he’s a good coach and without them he’s not 
but he went.”

Others go, too; the best player’s destiny is to depart. “A player has a good 
season, and [someone takes him]. It makes no difference if they give you £20m 
for him – £20m doesn’t replace him and doesn’t solve anything. The year I 
arrived they told me Mignolet, Henderson and Rose had been the best; [soon,] 
Mignolet wasn’t there, Henderson wasn’t there and Rose had returned to Spurs. 
By January the players giving me exactly what I needed were Keane, Alonso and 
Borini. All on loan, and they all went.

“So then I go. Dick Advocaat comes in and the blame lies with the last coach 
and his signings. So you sign new players for the new manager. And then that 
manager goes and the blame lies with him and his players. So the new manager 
signs new players. And in comes Sam Allardyce. And then he goes and now David 
Moyes is there and he has what’s been left him by previous coaches and you 
can’t go on like that. You just can’t. It’s impossible. Because when you start 
from zero every year – every year – you stay at zero.

Luis Suárez scores hat-trick in Barcelona’s 6-2 rout of Real Betis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/barcelona-real-betis-la-liga-match-report>
“You have to hire a coach and say: ‘Whatever happens, this is my coach for 
five years. No. Matter. What. And we’ll put a team together under his orders.’ 
And with time, if you chose well, you have a chance. But it’s five months 
Allardyce, five months Martin O’Neill, five months Poyet. If it’s Moyes it’s 
Moyes whatever happens. And you have to say: ‘We’re going to ensure Moyes has 
the right tools.’ You need 10 months to get started, to build but when they 
don’t give you 10 months …”

No one will, he knows. That’s football. At Betis, Poyet has Rubén Castro, the 
scorer of 51 league goals over the last two seasons and four this; he talks 
highly of Joaquín, “a player I liked before, and even more now”, someone who 
doesn’t just play football but “reallyunderstands it”; and of the Chelsea 
loanee Charly Mousonda, he says: “He has everything to be a special player.”

Mousonda, like his Betis team, is a work in progress. “He just lacks that 
ability to make the right decisions: that’s what really defines a player. If 
Charly can make the right decisions at the end of the move …” Poyet puffs his 
cheeks out again. “He does everything at 150 mph and it can be difficult to 
slow down and go,tac.”

Poyet’s fondness for Real’s Luka Modric is clear. He is the footballer with 
the most quality he has worked with but injury means there will be no reunion, 
leaving only Gareth Bale. “It’ll be nice to see him,” Poyet says. “He was a 
left-back then: Juande Ramos wanted to play him further forward but, inside, 
Gareth still saw himself as a full-back: he wanted space to run into and 
starting further forward he wouldn’t get it. It was hard to change his mind. 
But then came the season when he went to another level. Now that’s where he is 
– he feels important, this is his moment, he’s developed a style that includes 
the responsibility to attack and he doesn’t have to defend as much. Going to 
Madrid has taken him to another level.”

Desert fire: the world cup rebels of Kurdistan – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/oct/14/desert-fire-the-world-cup-rebels-of-kurdistan-video>
As Poyet is talking about Bale, his assistant sticks his head around the door. 
In a cockney accent, he asks: “What time do you want us in tomorrow?” He’s from 
Andalucía, then? “Shepherd’s Bush,” Poyet laughs. Another reminder of the 
impact England has had on a man who when he talks about home means London. The 
assistant’s name is Anthony Philip David Terry Frank Donald Stanley Gerry 
Gordon Stephen James Oatway. “Yeah, and they call him Charlie!” Poyet bursts 
out laughing.

Charlie Oatway, who finished his playing career at Havant and Waterlooville, 
is named after the QPR team who won promotion in 1973. If Poyet was to do the 
same, his son would be called Andoni Alberto Fernando Xavi Jesús Santi Mohammed 
Gustavo Francisco Miguel Juan Poyet. Luckily for Diego Poyet, his father’s 
memories of his Zaragoza’s Cup-Winner’s Cup winning team and of Nayim lobbing 
David Seaman from 40 yards, were not written across a birth certificate.

Recently released by West Ham, an England Under-17 international who switched 
to Uruguay at under-20 level, Diego, like his father, is a midfielder: just the 
kind Real Madrid could do with, in fact.

They will be without the injured Casemiro and Poyet admits that makes them 
“another team”. “People said Zinedine Zidane was good four months ago and now 
he’s bad. No, four months ago he found the solution: Casemiro. Now, he doesn’t 
have that solution. He hasn’t got another player like him, either.”

So much the better. Yet it is not as if Real do not concern him. There is work 
to do still in Seville . The answer for Charlie is a little after nine: 
preparation continues right up until that moment just before kick-off, when 
Betis’s manager will deliver one last message. Enjoy it, perhaps? “Forget that. 
I wrote ‘enjoy it’ on the board at theCamp Nou and we swallowed six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/barcelona-real-betis-la-liga-match-report>
 … so, ‘enjoy it?’ No! Never again,” he says, laughing. Somehow you know he 
will. Gus Poyet just cannot help it.
 