
This article is part of the Guardian’s Euro 2016 Experts’ Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/euro-2016-guardian-experts-network>
, a cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the countries 
who have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from three 
countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 10 June.

Turkey are not short on larger than life characters but the story of Hakan 
Calhanoglu (pronounced Chal-han-or-luh) stands apart from the rest. He was
caught up in an altercation that almost split the national side apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/16/turkey-gokhan-tore-omer-toprak-hakan-calhanoglu>
, nearly missed the tournament after being accused of taking a bung and is 
widely regarded as one of the best free-kick takers in world football.

Turkey Euro 2016 team guide: tactics, key players and expert predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/turkey-euro-2016-team-guide> 
The footballing annals are full of rising stars tipped as being the next 
Maradona, Pelé or Cruyff who never quite lived up to their billing. Being 
compared to one of the greats as a young player is often a curse in disguise. 
Things were a little different with Calhanoglu, now 22. The free-kick maestro 
decided to self-impose pressure by laying claim to being Turkey’s version of a 
player who had chosen Germany ahead of the country of his heritage.

“It’s thanks to the Germans that I became a footballer,” he told the Milliyet 
newspaper in 2012 regarding his decision to play for the Crescent Stars. “But 
playing for the Turkish national team is an honour. I want to be Turkey’s Mesut 
Özil.” Like Özil he was born in Germany into a family of Turkish origin. Unlike 
Özil he decided to play forTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> 
despite having the talent to representDie Mannschaft.

Calhanoglu was snapped up by Karlsruhe aged 15 and rose through the youth 
ranks before being promoted to the senior side towards the end of the 2011-12 
season. The Mannheim-born youngster made a series of impressive performances 
but was unable to prevent Karlsruhe dropping into the third tier.

It was around this time that he started attracting interest from Turkey, in 
particular Trabzonspor – his family originate from Bayburt in the Trabzon 
district. The Black Sea-based side claim that Calhanoglu and his agent took a 
payment of €100,000 each from the club when he was 17 to sign a professional 
contract and that if he signed for another club he would have to pay €1m. The 
player and agent deny the claims but the Super Lig side filed a complaint to 
Fifa in 2013 that Calhanoglu had broken the terms of their agreement as he 
never ended up signing for Trabzonspor. It is a row that rumbles on.

Karlshruhe’s president, Ingo Wellenreuther, denied any negotiations over 
Calhanoglu’s transfer ever took place. “Fifa has stated that the contracts of 
Karlsruhe and Hakan Calhanoglu were all legal,” Wellenreuther said. “There were 
no negotiations between Karlsruhe and Trabzonspor for a transfer because at no 
time was there an approach from Trabzonspor.”

His current club, Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen>, meanwhile, released a 
statement confirming that they are currently in a legal dispute with Fifa 
regarding Trabzonspor’s accusations. Calhanoglu denies doing anything wrong and 
there were fears that he would miss Euro 2016 but Fifa ruled that he will be 
able to play while the investigation continues.

Hamburg ended up signing Calhanoglu for €2.5m in 2012 and he started to make a 
name for himself, scoring several outrageous free-kicks. Calhanoglu had already 
established himself as a set-piece specialist, scoring seven goals directly 
from free-kicks the previous season.It was his spectacular 50-yard effort in 
the 3-0 victory over Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n5GGY8ITqbI> in 2014, however, that put his 
talent on the map - and it is still doing the rounds on Twitter and Facebook. 
Bayer Leverkusen snapped him up for €14.5m in 2014 and he has gone on to score 
11 direct free-kick goals in the Bundesliga alone.

At 22 he has become a key figure in the Turkey side; he takes just about all 
the corners and free-kicks but he has a lot more to his game. Calhanoglu has a 
passing range capable of causing most defences problems and a dangerous shot 
from open play. Yet his international career almost ended prematurely.

His team-mate Gokhan Tore came close to ripping the Turkey team apart when a 
love story almost ended in a Shakespearian tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/16/turkey-gokhan-tore-omer-toprak-hakan-calhanoglu>
. In May 2013, after Turkey’s loss against Holland in their final 2014 World 
Cup qualifier, Bayer’s Omer Toprak, a friend and Calhanoglu were at the 
national team hotel before their flight back to Germany the following morning.
Hakan Calhanoglu 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Hakan%20%C3%87alhano%C4%9Flu&team=Turkey&isSimple=true>
What happened next is staggering. Tore had allegedly been stewing over 
Toprak’s friend making advances towards his girlfriend. He was determined to 
get even – even if his team-mates were in the way. Accompanied by a sidekick 
whose identity remains unknown, Tore is alleged to have gained access to Toprak 
and Calhanoglu’s hotel room after the pair had returned there. “Then the real 
story began,” Calhanoglu explained in an interview with the German TV channel 
ZDF.

“Gokhan’s friend walked over to Omer, pulled out a gun from his jacket and 
told him he would be shot if he didn’t lay flat on the floor. I was lying in a 
corner. He then came up to me and said: ‘Don’t move or I will shoot you.’ I was 
curled up in the corner of the room, I couldn’t move, I was scared for my life.”

The story was covered up until last October’s Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> qualification match against 
Czech Republic, when Fatih Terim decided to recall Tore after a year’s absence 
from the team. Terim simply could not afford to ignore him any longer. Turkey 
were languishing just above last place in Group A, heading for an early exit.

The Crescent Stars desperately needed their best players and Terim decided to 
take a gamble. Terim also invited Calhanoglu and Toprak, but Bayer Leverkusen 
declared their players ineligible due to injury. This was interpreted in Turkey 
as a convenient way for the club to keep two of their most valuable players at 
a distance from Tore.

Terim’s roll of the dice did eventually pay off. Turkey booked a place in Euro 
2016 against all the odds by winning their last three games, against the Czech 
Republic, against the favourites, Holland, and against the leaders, Iceland,
with a last-gasp winner in the final match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/oct/13/turkey-v-iceland-and-holland-on-the-brink-euro-2016-qualifiers-clockwatch-live>
.

There were however, casualties from the Tore-Calhanoglu-Toprak debacle. Toprak 
and Tore will not be travelling to France; both could be sorely missed. 
Calhanoglu remains the last man standing in the current setup from the incident 
and goes into the tournament in high spirits, becoming the first Turkish player 
to score against England in a recent friendly game at the Etihad.

Calhanoglu played some of his best football this season in the Champions 
League scoring twice and providing five assists. The Bayer playmaker is not one 
to shy away from a big occasion and will be relishing the chance to prove 
himself in France this summer.

The secrets behind the other squad members
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhakan-calhanoglu-euro-2016-turkish-mesut-ozil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd646cb2c5659d6b2527d7af2f099b18966a911d2%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hakan%20Calhanoglu%3A%20the%20free-kick%20specialist%20who%20wants%20to%20be%20%E2%80%98the%20Turkish%20Mesut%20%C3%96zil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhakan-calhanoglu-euro-2016-turkish-mesut-ozil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hakan%20Calhanoglu%3A%20the%20free-kick%20specialist%20who%20wants%20to%20be%20%E2%80%98the%20Turkish%20Mesut%20%C3%96zil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhakan-calhanoglu-euro-2016-turkish-mesut-ozil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd646cb2c5659d6b2527d7af2f099b18966a911d2%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Turkey’s players – including Hakan Calhanoglu, bottom right – celebrate after 
beating Iceland with a last-gasp goal to secure a 1-0 win and a place at Euro 
2016. Photograph: Umit Bektas / Reuters/Reuters 
Arda Turan

Not many players can say they have a street named after them, especially still 
during their playing career, but the 29-year-old Turan does. There is now a 
street called Arda Turan in the Bayrampasa district of Istanbul where he grew 
up. The Barcelona midfielder remains popular in the working-class area on the 
European side of the city and supports a number of charities and foundations in 
his old neighbourhood.

Born abroad

Eleven of the provisional 31-man squad were not actually born in Turkey. Eight 
were born in Germany, which is home to the largest Turkish community in Europe, 
with an estimated population of between three and four million. Some of the 
biggest stars in the team, including Calhanoglu, Yunus Malli and Nuri Sahin, 
were born there. As were Özil, Emre Can and the injured Ilkay Gundogan, who 
could have also represented Turkey but opted for the country of their birth.

Mehmet Topal

The 30-year-old midfielder is nicknamed Spiderman on account of the good use 
to which he puts his long legs to win the ball, but perhaps his new moniker 
should be Superman. Few players have been unfortunate enough to have faced two 
attempts on their life. Even fewer have been fortunate enough to survive both. 
Last April Topal was travelling inthe Fenerbahce team bus that was attacked by 
gunmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/04/fenerbahce-team-bus-attacked> 
on its way to Trabzon airport following their 5-1 win at Caykur Rizespor. 
Somehow only the driver of the bus, Ufuk Kiran, was injured and had he not hit 
the brakes as quickly as he did the entire squad and staff on board would have 
veered off a cliff on to the rocks below. To make matters worse last summer his 
car was shot at while he drove home after training. The windows of his Mercedes 
G63 were strong enough to stop the bullet going further and thus saved his life.

Fatih Terim

Turkey’s manager – in his third spell in the job – has not one but two 
stadiums named after him. The first is the Adana Fatih Terim Stadium. The 
Emperor, as he is alternatively known, is the son of a Turkish Cypriot who 
emigrated to Adana, in south central Turkey, where he grew up. The second venue 
is the recently constructed Basaksehir Fatih Terim Stadium, despite the club, 
Istanbul Basaksehir, having no direct link to the manager.

Emre Sarigul writes for turkish-football.com.  
<http://www.turkish-football.com/>

Follow him on Twitter here. <https://twitter.com/Turkish_Futbol>

Click here for a tactical analysis of Turkey. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/turkey-euro-2016-team-guide>
 