
More than half of millennial fathers want to be demoted into a less stressful 
job in order to be better fathers, according to a report released on Monday.


As experts warn of a “fatherhood penalty” for men who want to be more involved 
in the upbringing of their children, 53% of millennial fathers told researchers 
they wanted to move to a less stressful job, while 48% would take a pay cut to 
achieve a better work-life balance.

One-fifth of fathers said their employer was unsympathetic about childcare, 
expecting no disruption to work, while 44% had lied to their employer about 
family-related responsibilities that “get in the way” of work.

The 2017 Modern Families Index, published on Monday, found that while nearly 
half of working fathers (47%) want to downshift to a less stressful job because 
they cannot balance the demands of work and family life, and just over a third 
would be willing to take a pay cut to achieve a better work-life balance, those 
figures increase for younger fathers – indicating a seismic change in workforce 
mentality.

Among the 2,750 parents across the UK who contributed to the Modern Families 
Index, men were twice as likely as women to think that flexible working would 
have a negative impact on their career.

Experts warn that if companies do not change working practices to suit both 
men and women, they risk losing out on the best talent of future generations.

The women and equalities select committee has launched an inquiry into the 
treatment of fathers in the workplace, amid fears that they are more likely to 
face discrimination if they ask for part-time or flexible working than mothers.

“The Modern Families Index shines a much-needed light on the experiences of 
British fathers in the workplace,” said Maria Miller MP, chair of the select 
committee. “Many fathers want to take a more active role in caring for their 
children and our committee’s inquiry into the gender pay gap last year found 
that sharing caring responsibilities equally between mothers and fathers is the 
key to reducing the gender pay gap.”

The government’s flagship policy of shared parental leave was likely to have 
little impact, with the government predicting it would be taken up by only 2-8% 
of fathers, she said.

Sarah Jackson, chief executive of the charity Working Families, said employers 
had to make sure employees could find a work-life balance to prevent a 
fatherhood penalty and tackle the motherhood penalty. “Making roles flexible by 
default, and a healthy dose of realism when it comes to what can be done in the 
hours available, are absolutely vital,” Jackson said. “A game-changing first 
step would be government creating a new, properly paid, extended period of 
paternity leave – sending a clear signal that government recognises the 
aspirations of modern fathers and is serious about tackling the motherhood 
penalty that blights the working lives of so many women.”

According to flexible working jobsite Timewise, more than half of the UK’s 
working population now works flexibly, but only one in 10 jobs advertised match 
the flexibility they need.


“With more men and women than ever before choosing not to conform to the 
Monday to Friday, nine to five way of working, it’s time for more employers to 
change how they recruit and open up quality roles to flexible working from day 
one,” said Emma Stewart, joint chief executive of Timewise. “If not they risk 
losing out on the best talent of future generations, and that’s not good for 
business or families.”


The impact of the motherhood penalty is well documented. While a recent study 
from the Resolution Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/gender-pay-gap-down-to-5-among-uk-workers-in-their-20s-study-finds>
 revealed thatwomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in their 
20s have seen the pay gap halve to 5%, a sharp rise in the pay gap after the 
age of 30 puts millennial women on course to face a deficit of almost 30% by 
the timethey are in their mid-40s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/gender-pay-gap-women-over-40-in-management>
 unless there is further government intervention.

According to the Fairness in Families Index 2016 
<http://www.fatherhoodinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/FINALFatherhood-Institute-Capstone-FiFI-2016.pdf>
 from theFatherhood Institute <http://www.fatherhoodinstitute.org/>, men in the 
UK make up only 25.8% of the part-time workforce, and spend 24 minutes caring 
for children for every hour done by women.
 