
Hamburg have apologised to Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> after a fan invaded the 
pitch during their German Cup tie and slapped Franck Ribéry with a scarf.

The incident happened during injury time of Bayern’s 3-1 win at Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, with the fan, chased by 
security staff, hitting Ribéry with the scarf before making offensive gestures 
– provoking an angry response from other players.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLyLzvpREVUo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLyLzvpREVUo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLyLzvpREVUo&media=>
Ribéry himself took it calmly, telling German television: “Fortunately, 
nothing much happened. It was a difficult situation though – I didn’t see him 
coming. But this is football, things like this can happen. I’m just glad we 
played well.”

Hamburg later tweeted: “Dear FC Bayern, dear Franck Ribéry. We apologise for 
the scene shortly before the end. This is not HSV!”
Hamburger SV (@HSV) 
Lieber @FCBayern <https://twitter.com/FCBayern>, lieber Franck #Ribery 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ribery?src=hash>. Wir entschuldigen uns für die 
Szene kurz vor dem Ende. Das ist nicht der#HSV 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/HSV?src=hash>! #HSVFCB 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/HSVFCB?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/HSV/status/527578917759373312> October 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/HSV/status/527578917759373312> 
Mehmet Scholl, the former Bayern and Germany midfielder, who was working for 
broadcaster ARD, paid tribute to Ribéry for showing restraint, given the 
Frenchman’s temperament. “The fan picked on the wrong person. It really could 
have ended differently for him.”

Hamburg’s Lewis Holtby, on loan from Tottenham, said afterwards: “This is not 
on at all. It’s a pity that the game has been overshadowed by this behaviour.”

Ribéry scored the third goal for Pep Guardiola’s team in the 55th minute, 
after Robert Lewandowski and David Alaba scored in the first half. 
Pièrre-Michel Lasogga scored a late consolation goal for Hamburg.
 