
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> Academical players 
wore France strips in their 1-1 Premiership draw with Aberdeen as a tribute to 
the Paris attack victims.

With both clubs’ regular red and white kits clashing and a number of kit 
combinations clashing, Hamilton took advantage of the need for a different 
solution wore an all-whiteFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> 
away kit to show “sympathy and solidarity with the people of France” by wearing 
an all-white French away strip.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-wear-france-strip-tribute-paris-kit-clash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F524d89e189ab5d55daf0b2f734aec64731317478%2F4_4_923_1241%2F923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamilton%20wear%20France%20strip%20in%20tribute%20to%20Paris%20attack%20victims%20after%20kit%20clash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-wear-france-strip-tribute-paris-kit-clash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamilton%20wear%20France%20strip%20in%20tribute%20to%20Paris%20attack%20victims%20after%20kit%20clash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-wear-france-strip-tribute-paris-kit-clash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F524d89e189ab5d55daf0b2f734aec64731317478%2F4_4_923_1241%2F923.jpg>
 The shirt Hamilton wore in their 1-1 Premiership draw against Aberdeen as a 
tribute to the Paris attack victims. Photograph: Hamilton Academical F.C/PA 
The tribute was especially poignant for Hamilton’s French striker Christian 
Nade, whose 18-year-old sister hid under the table of a restaurant inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> after gunmen opened fire in the 
neighbouring cafe during the attacks on 13 November.

The Lanarkshire club could not source France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> home strips at short notice but 
managed to get 20 away strips and got them kitted out with their badge and 
sponsors in time for Sunday’s game at New Douglas Park, along with the Scottish 
Saltire and French Tricolore flags.

Which teams have had to wear their opponents' kit? | The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/oct/05/knowledge-teams-wearing-opponents-kit>
Their plan is now to send one top to each Ligue 1 club in France for them to 
auction off for their chosen charities.

The Hamilton goalscorer Dougie Imrie said: “I only knew when I came into the 
dressing room and saw the strip. It was a great gesture from the club to show 
their support to Paris and the French people.”

The Hamilton manager, Martin Canning, kept Nade on the bench throughout the 
game after the former Troyes and Le Havre striker looked emotional during the 
pre-match minute’s silence.

Canning, whose assistant is Frenchman Guillaume Beuzelin, said: “I spoke to 
Christian through the week and he was fine. His sister was involved in it but 
mentally he felt fine. It just so happened that Christian didn’t get on but his 
attitude through the week has been spot-on.”
 