
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has 
attempted to reassure bankers and big employers that Theresa May’s government 
is not adopting a new anti-business stance.

Speaking in New York where he was meeting representatives of Wall Street banks 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/chancellor-to-tell-wall-street-that-city-will-still-be-financial-centre-after-brexit>
, the chancellor insisted the government’s proposal to force firms to publish 
how many foreign workers they employed was not aimed at the financial services 
sector. He also emphasised that the government’s pro-business credentials 
remained intact.

Amber Rudd defends proposal to make firms reveal foreign staff numbers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/amber-rudd-defends-proposal-to-make-firms-reveal-foreign-staff-numbers>
Hammond told Bloomberg TV: “The problem is not highly skilled and highly paid 
bankers, brain surgeons, software engineers. You will not find, if you walk 
around towns in Britain and ask people how they feel about migration, that they 
a have problem with people with high skills and high earnings coming to the UK 
... they recognise that those people are a positive contribution to the UK 
economy. The issue we have to deal with is people with low skills competing for 
entry-level jobs.”

He added: “We have to recognise that part of the mood in the UK that drove the 
referendum decision is a mood about the pressure on wages at the lowest end, 
the entry-level jobs in the economy, from large-scale migration, largely from 
eastern Europe. We have to address that issue, that’s the clear mandate we have 
received from the British people.”

Hammond said Britain could now do more business with the US because the 
country felt closer to the US than to Europe. “I think most people in Britain 
feel probably halfway across the Atlantic ... rather than just 20 miles off the 
coast of Europe.”

Since the Conservative party conference speech by the home secretary, Amber 
Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 – after which it was made clear a consultation paper would include an option 
to require firms to disclose the proportion of non-UK workers they employed – 
large and small businesses have expressed concernabout the “divisive and  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/government-faces-backlash-from-business-leaders-over-foreign-workers>
damaging” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/government-faces-backlash-from-business-leaders-over-foreign-workers>
 impact the proposal could have.

City employers are also concerned about the signals any such move might send 
at a time when they are also urging Hammond to find a way to maintain access to 
the EU after Brexit.

City of London could be cut off from Europe, says ECB official
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/city-of-london-could-be-cut-off-from-europe-says-ecb-official>
Mark Boleat, chair of the policy and resources committee at the City of London 
Corporation – the local authority for the traditional heart of the financial 
centre, said: “The British government keeps saying Britain is open for business 
but it needs to be open for talent.”

The latest census data, from 2011, show that more than 20% of workers in the 
City of Londonare from outside the UK, and policymakers are concerned about the 
possible impact.

Boleat said that in the coming weeks the corporation would publish ideas on a 
new visa for London, which could grant permission for overseas workers to be 
employed in the capital.

The mood in the City has soured this week after May said she would trigger 
article 50 of the Lisbon treaty by the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, the start of the formal exit from the EU. That statement has helped drive the 
sterling to 31-year lows against the dollar. Rudd’s remarks have made sentiment 
in the usually pro-Tory City worse.

According to a report by Oliver Wyman, for the lobby group CityUK 
<http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/global/en/2016/oct/Brexit_POV.PDF>
, the UK’s financial services industry, of which the City is a large part, 
generates £205bn in revenue and employs 1.1 million people across the UK. The 
report warned that a hard Brexit, leaving the UK without access to the 
remaining 27 EU member states, could put 35,000 jobs at risk.

Referring to Rudd’s remarks, Paul Donovan, global chief economist at UBS 
Wealth Management, said: “In the world of economics this is known as signalling 
effect: it might be quite difficult to persuade foreign investors to invest in 
a country whose government could be accused of branding foreigners as 
second-class or inferior participants in the economy.”

Hammond acknowledged in the Bloomberg interview that a crackdown on 
immigration could hold back economic growth. But he said growth should not be 
based on low-paid, low-skilled, migrant labour. “What we’ve seen in the last 
few years is an economy that is growing, but GDP per capita has hardly grown at 
all. We need to see our economic expansion coming from an improvement in 
productivity, not simply from bringing ever larger numbers of low skilled 
people into the economy.”

In his charm offensive with Wall Street firms he is thought to have taken a 
constructive approach to concerns about how access to the EU might be 
maintained in the run-up to Brexit. He is expected to hold more meetings in 
Washington on Friday on the sidelines of annual meeting of theInternational 
Monetary Fund <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf>, which is attended by 
senior bankers from around the globe.

Large US banks have warned since the Brexit vote that they could now be forced 
to cut jobs in the City. Jamie Dimon, chief executive of JP Morgan – which 
employs 16,000 in the UK, said the company would have to move thousands of 
employees to other branches in the eurozone. Goldman Sachs has saidit could 
restructure its UK arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/goldman-sachs-british-bank-brexit>
.

Hammond acknowledged that the financial services sector would be difficult to 
accommodate under an agreement that might suit manufacturers through the World 
Trade Organisation.

He said: “I can reassure people in the financial services sector, in all parts 
of it, that we are listening to what they’re saying and we’re understanding the 
very nuanced positions that different subsectors have about their needs.

“The government is a pro-business government, strongly supportive of open 
markets, free markets, open economies, free trade. But we have a problem – and 
it’s not just a British problem, it’s a developed world problem – in keeping 
our populations engaged and supportive of our market capitalism, our economic 
model.”
 