
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, the 
chancellor, is coming under mounting pressure from Tory MPs to bring forward 
help for the NHS and social care services, amid dire warnings that council 
budget cuts are causing unsustainable problems.

A string of Conservatives have begun to express dismay that Hammond did not 
address the issue in his autumn statement. Their voices add to thesenior 
doctors, council leaders from all parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
,two Tory former health secretaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/philip-hammond-social-care-funding-mistake-stephen-dorrell>
 and theLabour frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/labour-pours-scorn-over-autumn-statement-for-ignoring-sick-and-old>
, who are warning that increasingly hospitals are unable to discharge elderly 
patients as struggling social care services are not able to make appropriate 
arrangements.

Among those raising concerns about a crisis are Dr Andrew Murrison, a Tory 
former minister, who said on Monday that Hammond’s decision to miss out mention 
of healthcare in the autumn statement was “strange”.

Social care crisis? What crisis? – cartoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/nov/29/social-care-crisis-what-crisis-cartoon>
“Ministers should be in no doubt of the impending financial crisis or of the 
demands likely to come from people like me to deal with the shortfall in cash 
going into our NHS. If this requires tax rises, so be it,” he said in a 
statement, suggesting it should be accompanied by anend to the triple-lock on 
pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/06/triple-lock-pension-should-scrapped-mps-generational-inequalities>
 to ease the burden on working people.

Kit Malthouse, a Tory MP for North West Hampshire, warned that pressure was 
building on Hammond to ease the difficulties facing councils and theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.


“MPs across the House are raising this as an issue,” he told the BBC’s 
Westminster Hour. “The frustration for me, having worked in local government, 
was that health and social care, putting the two together and getting them to 
coordinate, has been the holy grail for such a long time and yet still, in 
large parts of the country, they haven’t got their act together.”

Another to raise concerns is Sir Hugo Swire, a Conservative former minister 
and East Devon MP, who wrote to Hammond before the autumn statement asking for 
more resources for social care.

“As it stands at the moment, with council budgets for social care falling 
behind demand by £5bn nationally, I am concerned that the loss of hospital beds 
will not be compensated by the social care system, resulting in an overall and 
unacceptable loss of healthcare provision,” he said in his letter to the 
chancellor.

“In my opinion, the only answer to this complex issue is an increase in the 
social care budget which would not only be good for patients but, ultimately, 
reduce the pressure on the NHS budget.”

The Treasury points to an extra £3.5bn of social care funding for councils by 
2020 and ability to charge a 2% precept. A HM Treasury spokesperson said: “The 
government has committed to increaseNHS funding by £10bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/theresa-mays-claim-on-health-funding-not-true-say-mps>
 above inflation by 2020/21, going beyond what the NHS requested. In addition, 
we have given local councils £3.5bn extra funding by 2020 for social care. Many 
councils are already providing high-quality social care services within 
existing budgets.”

However, critics say this barely covers the extra salary cost of the higher 
minimum wage and Tory MPs are privately warning that the government could face 
unrest similar to thetax credit rebellion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-u-turn-scrap-tax-credit-cuts-autumn-statement>
 if more cash is not brought forward to deal with immediate shortcomings in 
provision.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chancellor%20wrong%20on%20social%20care%20funding%2C%20says%20former%20health%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chancellor%20wrong%20on%20social%20care%20funding%2C%20says%20former%20health%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video&media=>
Chancellor wrong on social care funding, says former health secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/nov/27/chancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video>
It is understood other Tory MPs who represent areas with high proportions of 
older voters have registered their alarm with the chancellor, especially as 
councils with few working-age residents are unlikely to be helped by the 
devolution of business rates.

In the House of Commons on Monday, Peter Bone, a Conservative rightwinger and 
MP for Wellingborough, called for cross-party talks to solve the problems with 
social care provision.

“Social care should not be a party political matter, and there are concerns on 
both sides of the House,” he said. “Would it not be a good idea if the 
government worked with the opposition to see whether we could agree on a way 
forward so that social care progresses satisfactorily?”

Martin Vickers, Tory MP for Cleethorpes, said he did not agree with those 
criticising Hammond but would like to see the problems urgently addressed.

“The Departments of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and 
Local Government and all those involved do recognise the problems. I’ve spoken 
to ministers. Yes I’m concerned and yes I’m making the point to ministers at 
every opportunity. But am I part of a revolt? Not at this stage.

“The government’s official position is they have given the councils a 2% 
precept on council tax and to some extent that is cumulative but council 
leaders will repeatedly tell you that is not bridging the gap. So clearly there 
have got to be further negotiations.

“The joined-up working that we hear so much about is part of the package but 
that takes time to come together and the pressures are there now. So it may 
well be at some time there has to be an emergency top-up.”

Dr Dan Poulter, a Tory MP who has previously called for a new tax to help the 
NHS and social care, said the issue was causing a mounting unease on the 
Conservative benches, as they begin to get complaints from their local councils 
and constituents.

“Over the past six months there has been a growing feeling among Conservative 
colleagues that the health and care system is running into severe difficulties 
and that more money and a big intervention from government is becoming 
increasingly pressing and necessary,” he said.

Andrew Lansley chides chancellor over lack of NHS and social care funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/andrew-lansley-chides-chancellor-lack-of-nhs-and-social-care-funding>
 “As the reality of an ageing population being cared for by a social care 
system that has seen a reduction in funding over the past five or six years 
begins to bite there is going to be an urgent need for the government to take 
action and not just look at providing a one- or two-year bung of extra money 
but providing a long-term funding solution for maintaining a health and care 
system that is free at the point of need.”

Previous warnings about the problems facing NHS and social care funding have 
been sounded by Sarah Wollaston, the Conservative chair of the health 
committee. She said there was now an urgent need for immediate cross-party 
talks on NHS funding and the difficulties for people in accessing social care.

“I’m very very concerned not only about what I’m seeing on the ground in my 
own constituency but what I’m hearing in my capacity as health committee 
chair,” she said. “If there are more MPs finally prepared to say this 
absolutely has to be dealt with I am very pleased.

“Personally I think we need a cross-party agreement just like we did with 
pensions. This is going to be a problem for whoever is in government. It is 
time to just get away from this as a political squabble.”
 