
Nothing could highlight the UK’s present blighted state over Brexit and the 
demise of respect for public service professionals more than the apoplectic 
attack on the head of the civil service, Sir Jeremy Heywood.

Heywood’s crime, for some, was stating that the service was objective and 
factual in the run-up to the EU referendum. In hisblog earlier this week 
<https://quarterly.blog.gov.uk/2016/11/01/brexit-rising-to-the-challenge/>, 
written for the 400,000 civil servants who work for him, Heywood said that 
during the official referendum campaign, “we were scrupulous in making sure 
that all documents issued were factually correct and objective”.

Fear of UK civil service paralysis over EU negotiations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/fear-of-uk-civil-service-paralysis-over-eu-negotiations>
This has brought the wrath of Eurosceptic MPs and commentators down on his 
head. “The civil service must deliver Brexit and Sir Jeremy Heywood should 
remember his place” roared theTelegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/11/03/the-civil-service-must-deliver-brexit-and-sir-jeremy-heywood-sho/>
. As if there were much danger of Heywood forgetting his place which has, like 
that of his former co-head of the civil service, Lord Kerslake, been often to 
endure the fire of MPs and ministers who seem to dislike intensely the neutral 
role of the civil service and do what they can to undermine it.

Bernard Jenkin, chair of the Commons public administration and constitutional 
affairs committee, was thwarted three years ago when he called for a 
parliamentary commission into the civil service, but has now set up yetanother 
inquiry 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/civil-service-performance-management-inherently-adversarial-%E2%80%93-pacac-chair-bernard>
into how the civil service works, which will hand out more brickbats than roses.

In a speech at the Institute for Government  
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/14837/bernard-jenkin-speaks-on-change-in-the-civil-service/>
thinktank in October, Jenkin said that despite major civil service reform 
initiatives launched by both Labour and the coalition government, longstanding 
weaknesses in the organisation remained. He criticised politicians and senior 
officials in Number 10 and the Cabinet Office seeking to “rain down new 
policies and initiatives on government departments without the context of 
operational experience”.

Jenkin and Heywood don’t always see eye to eye over civil service reform – 
Jenkinhas attacked 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/civil-service-performance-management-inherently-adversarial-%E2%80%93-pacac-chair-bernard>
 the reform programme launched in 2012 by Heywood under previous Cabinet Office 
minister Francis Maude – but Jenkin made a good point in his speech when he 
said the role of departmental permanent secretaries as the principal policy 
advisers in departments had been “eclipsed” through outsourcing and the rise of 
policy experts in the centre of government.

His point was mirrored this week at the launch of a new report by thinktank 
Localis <http://www.localis.org.uk/research/a-new-public-service-ethos/> on the 
public service ethos. A panel of experts, including Jo Miller, the chief 
executive of Doncaster Council, and former health minister Dan Poulter, 
discussed how the idea of special public service values has been felt by public 
staff to be eroded by privatisation. (Disclaimer: I was also on the panel.)

Miller said the boundaries between sectors in public services are increasingly 
blurred, and said any distinction that tried to label public services as good 
and the private sector as bad was “mind-numbingly useless” – but said whoever 
runs public services should pay and treat their staff well.

Want to get on in the civil service? Brexit is now the only game in town
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/28/brexit-civil-service-tough-negotiations-careers>
The report itself states “with confidence” that a commonly-understood idea 
remains, among the senior managers it surveyed, of what constitutes a public 
service ethos, and that accountability, community responsibility, customer 
service and integrity were the most consistently identified characteristics 
associated with public sector work.

There’s no reason that those values couldn’t be part of public services 
delivered by private firms, and yet the report shows that public sector workers 
believe private sector involvement has affected the quality of services and the 
core values that make up the public service ethos. “Social justice, 
accountability, integrity and community responsibility have all declined as a 
result of private sector involvement,” it notes.

Millions of public sector workers still believe there are important public 
service values that must be defended. One of those public servants, this week, 
is Heywood.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 