
In one of those surreal option crises that are always opening up for 
festivalgoers at Cannes — where FOMO anxiety always rules — journalists were 
last night forced to choose between going to the hugely admired and utterly 
gruelling Hungarian death-camp drama Son of Saul, or going to the annualHarvey 
Weinstein <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> party at the 
Majestic hotel on the Croisette, attended by Jake Gyllenhaal, Alicia Vikander 
and Sienna Miller.

I took the Weinstein party, mentally noting a later screening of Son of Saul, 
and showed up unfashionably early at the Majestic, where we were greeted, as 
ever, by a bank of extremely tall and rather beautiful young women with copies 
of the guest-list data on their laptops. “You’re early,” said one to me. “The 
party does not start for 15 minutes.” “Ten minutes,” interjected another. “Why 
are you always correcting me?” the first said to her colleague sharply, while I 
withdrew, to contemplate the large video-hoardings of the upcoming Hunger Games 
movie — promotional events for which are policed as strictly as anything in the 
film itself.
 Rooney Mara and Cate Blanchett in Carol, directed by Todd Haynes. Photograph: 
Wilson Webb 
Finally, I returned, where, as ever, there were rows of seats facing a screen 
and canapes and champagne being served. This is what I have been airily calling 
the “Harvey Weinstein party” but as someone noted rather witheringly to me — 
this is far from being the Harvey Weinstein party. The real Harvey Weinstein 
party happens elsewhere, for A-listers, high-rollers, heavy hitters, on some 
unimaginably flash yacht the size of one of the Scilly Isles. Not the likes of 
us. This is a little something for the humble members of the press and media, 
rather like the Christmas morning drinks party that used to be held on 
Downton-style country houses for the peasantry on the estate. There were so 
many of us peasants in the Majestic that you could almost hear lowing. Looking 
around, I wondered: “Who’s gathering the harvest?”

Harvey bounded up on to the stage, dressed casually in untucked white shirt, 
black trousers and familiar relaxed grooming and coiffure. He announced that he 
was invited to attend the Tom Ford party earlier and was offered an appropriate 
makeover. Then he gestured to himself: “Welcome to the Weinstein Company.”

Jake Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal>, Sienna 
Miller and Alicia Vikander joined Harvey onstage (an almost eerie concatention 
of physical beauty) and after offering lavish praise to the British producers 
he was working with, Stephen Woolley and Elizabeth Karlsen, Harvey then 
introduced the new slate. This, as ever, is basically a showreel of trailers 
for films which are variously fated to sink or swim, and we the audience had to 
guess from where they had been positioned in the running order what Harvey’s 
own secret opinion was.

We started with Adam Jones, starring Bradley Cooper as a chef: sexy, 
tempestuous and volcanically perfectionist in the approved manner. He has set 
up a restaurant in the Langham hotel (opposite Broadcasting House, as it 
happens); he loves enforcing that slightly fascistic habit of getting the 
entire workforce to shout “Yes, chef!” to him in the kitchen and is always 
sweeping plates off gleaming aluminium work-surfaces with an almighty crash. 
Adam appears to confront a creepy baddie played by Daniel Brühl and get off 
with Miller, who seems here to be stuck with another of those all-but-wordless 
wife-girlfriend roles she’s getting at the moment. Will Harvey get Miller a 
lead or not?

The second movie up was the one that Harvey really is behind: Southpaw, 
directed by Antoine Fuqua, starring Gyllenhaal, physically bulked up and ripped 
beyond all recognition as the tough boxer on a mission to exorcise demons in 
the ring. Harvey claimed that the film had actually been accepted in the Cannes 
official competition, but he had withdrawn it, to allow Jake to be on the jury 
without fear of a conflict of interest. Anyway, it looks exciting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fharvey-weinstein-ive-been-married-to-quentin-tarantino-for-22-years-the-best-marriage-of-my-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431630026093%2F352105d0-3f52-4d2e-aec2-1f0eb365cdc4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harvey%20Weinstein%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20been%20married%20to%20Quentin%20Tarantino%20for%2022%20years%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20best%20marriage%20of%20my%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fharvey-weinstein-ive-been-married-to-quentin-tarantino-for-22-years-the-best-marriage-of-my-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harvey%20Weinstein%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20been%20married%20to%20Quentin%20Tarantino%20for%2022%20years%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20best%20marriage%20of%20my%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fharvey-weinstein-ive-been-married-to-quentin-tarantino-for-22-years-the-best-marriage-of-my-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431630026093%2F352105d0-3f52-4d2e-aec2-1f0eb365cdc4-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Little Prince film still. Photograph: PR 
Then it was Carol, directed by Todd Haynes, the intense woman-centric love 
story starring Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara, based on the novel by Patricia 
Highsmith. The trailer was emphasising handsome period detail, with loads of 
meticulous 50s locations and interiors: restaurants, taxis, city streets — 
there was no Blue-Is-the-Warmest-Colour-type sex. All was indirect and implied. 
It certainly did nothing to dampen the interest in this film, soon to show here 
in the festival.

Fourth on the list was No Escape, starring Owen Wilson as a regular American 
guy who takes his family for a new start running a little diner in south-east 
Asia and gets caught up in a violent coup. It looks a little so-so to me, and 
serious stuff isn’t Wilson’s forte. But I liked him in that entirely serious 
thriller Behind Enemy Lines with Gene Hackman, so you never know.

Then there was a computer animation with dual French and English voice casts: 
The Little Prince, a reinvention, or imagining, or rebooting of the Antoine De 
Saint-Exupéry classic. Animations are even harder to assess on this basis than 
live action films.

Macbeth followed this: Justin Kurzel’s keenly anticipated version of the 
Shakespeare classic with the inordinately sexy dream-team pairing of Michael 
Fassbender and Marion Cotillard in the leads.

After that, a classy-looking period adaptation: Tulip Fever, directed by 
Justin Chadwick, adapted by Tom Stoppard from the Deborah Moggach novel, 
featuring Wikander and a lot of actors wearing ruffs, mobcaps and other faintly 
silly costumes: a bit like Girl With a Pearl Earring. The most extraordinary 
line comes from a severe-looking Judi Dench: “Never forget God: he forgets 
nothing.” We almost expected a cutaway to Ian McKellen.

Hands of Stone, starring — of all people — Robert De Niro as an old boxing 
trainer, is the second boxing movie on the list. It will bring back memories of 
his awful geriatric Grudge Match with Sly Stallone. I suspect this is going to 
be royally upstaged by Southpaw.

Then it was Lion, starring Dev Patel, based on the true story of the Indian 
guy adopted as a foundling by a prosperous family, who then uses fragments of 
recovered memory and Google Maps to track down his real family.

But the real star turn was Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>, a tough, snowy-looking 
western, including Tarantino’s repertory regulars Tim Roth, Samuel L Jackson 
and Michael Madsen as a bunch of bounty hunters marooned during a blizzard in 
post-civil-war Wyoming — and suspecting among themselves that something strange 
is going on. Some Reservoir-Dogs-ish betrayal, perhaps? Harvey announced: “I’ve 
been married to Quentin Tarantino for 22 years: the best marriage of my life.”

And after that, Harvey swept out. Southpaw and The Hateful Eight look like the 
strongest bets of this year’s vintage.
 