
Academic disgrace and sporting glory are unfamiliar terms at Harvard. But on 
Friday, the university found itself experiencing both. Just as the Crimson were 
celebrating a surprise victory 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/mar/22/harvard-crimson-new-mexico-lobos-bracket>
 over New Mexico in the NCAA basketball tournament, news came that the school 
had been stripped of four national quiz tournament titles.

National Academic Quiz Tournaments (NAQT) announced that a member of Harvard's 
quiz bowl team, which competes in intercollegiate trivia competition, had 
improperly accessed questions used in its tournaments from 2009 to 2011.

The Harvard student, Andrew Watkins, had access to the NAQT administrative 
website as a writer of questions to be used in primary, middle and high school 
competitions. He is alleged to have seen the first 40 characters of questions 
presented to Harvard in tournaments they won several years in a row.

Harvard is not the only team to be accused of cheating, but it is the only 
team to have championships revoked.

"NAQT has uncovered evidence that four of its writers frequently accessed 
pages on NAQT's administrative website that contained clearly marked, 
substantive information about questions on which they were intending to – and 
subsequently did – compete," NAQT said in astatement 
<http://www.naqt.com/articles/security-review-update.html>. 

Watkins was the president of the quiz team that dominated intercollegiate 
play, beating some teams by as many as500 points 
<http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2011/4/11/team-quiz-questions-really/> in 
earlier NAQT tournaments. Now, however, those exemplary performances are moot, 
as the NAQT stripped Harvard of the 2009, 2010 and 2011 championships, which 
will now be given to different universities.

Watkins issued a statement, apologizing to the NAQT and his teammates while 
eluding to unstable mental health as a reason for his actions.

"My immaturity damaged my much-prized relationship with NAQT and cast undue 
doubt on three remarkable accomplishments by three Harvard teams. It will 
surprise no one that my mental health as an undergraduate was always on the 
wrong side of 'unstable' but that does not excuse my actions, nor does it 
ameliorate the damage done."

The scandal further tarnishes Harvard's reputation as one of the foremost 
academic institutions in the world, and adds to a list of several other 
academic andadministrative 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2013/mar/11/harvard-partial-apology-secret-email-search>
 controversies that have arisen in the past year.

In September 2012, two co-captains on Harvard's basketball team resigned from 
the team after they were alleged to have cheated with 280 other students on a 
take-home final exam. Kyle Casey and Brandyn Curry were two of the Crimson's 
best players.
 