
When social workers discuss the challenges they face in their jobs, they might 
mention increasing caseloads, colossal amounts of paperwork, or how undervalued 
they feel, but one issue is sure to make many see red:hotdesking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/06/social-work-hotdesking-stress-munro>
.

Hotdesking involves multiple workers using a single workstation during 
different time periods. Many professionals feel, however, that social work and 
hotdesking do not go hand in hand, and councils are reportedly beginning to 
move away from it. With theHackney model’s pod system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/08/reclaiming-social-work-hackney-breakaway-success>
 seemingly being more widely adopted, has hotdesking had its day?


Slough children’s services trust <http://www.scstrust.co.uk/>, a 
not-for-profit independent company that took over children’s services from 
Slough borough council, soon realised that hotdesking was a contentious issue 
among many of its new staff.


Eric de Mello, head of operations at the trust, says it had to act. “We 
haven’t completely moved away from hotdesking,” he says. “We’re just in our 
first year of operation after taking over services from the council, but we 
have heard what social workers have to say. We have been allocated nine [desk] 
spaces for every 13 people and our social workers were struggling. Newly 
qualified social workers were telling us that they found it quite difficult not 
knowing where to go for advice.”

Hotdesking ‘increases social worker burnout risk’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/29/hotdesking-increases-social-worker-burnout-risk>
Initially the trust made sure newly qualified social workers were in line of 
sight of their managers, but then decided to move to a hub system based on the 
Hackney model and similar set-ups around the country. Space restrictions mean 
it is still not possible for everyone to have their own desk all the time, de 
Mello says, but the trust has been able to make better use of space and ensure 
teams are able to stick together as much as they can.


Prof Eileen Munro has been outspoken about the harm hotdesking is doing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/29/hotdesking-increases-social-worker-burnout-risk>
 to social work and hopes more councils will follow suit. Munro, whose landmark 
review of child protection practices was published five years ago, has argued 
that hotdesking leaves social workers feeling isolated, hindering their work.


She understands that saving money is a top priority but practitioners’ needs 
differ from those of the office workers authorities also employ. “Councils need 
to think about how the office is organised,” she says. “Is it organised so that 
social workers can have sensitive conversations without disturbing others and 
without being overheard? Are there periods when most people in a team are in 
and can easily meet?”


They need somewhere safe to return to and hotdesking doesn’t help with that.
Laura Biggart 
She adds: “It’s not just about how social workers should have their own desk. 
It’s about the office being somewhere people like to go and where they can find 
colleagues who are supportive. It’s about the role social workers play being 
valued.”


These conclusions are echoed in research by Laura Biggart, a senior academic 
at the University of East Anglia, who led a research project intoemotional 
intelligence and burnout in child and family social work 
<https://www.uea.ac.uk/documents/5802799/13173245/UEA+EI+SWK+Research+Briefing+June+2016+FINAL.pdf/196909c2-69fe-44bc-9ee7-cafa62eafac4>
. As part of the study, Biggart and her colleagues spoke to social workers and 
managers about work environments and found the topic of hotdesking came up time 
and again.


Aside from the practical issues it caused, leading some to resort to working 
from their cars, many social workers discussed the emotional impact of 
hotdesking. “Hotdesking creates unpredictability and uncertainty, so inevitably 
it adds to the anxiety social workers feel,” Biggart says. “It also lowers 
morale because they see it as not being worthwhile enough to have a desk. They 
see managers who make these decisions keeping their desks whereas social 
workers lose theirs.”


She explains why it is such a big issue for social workers in particular: “If 
you got shouted at in the street and insulted, most people would want to go 
home because it’s a safe space, and people will be there to show sympathy and 
support. Your workspace is a bit like that and social workers are being yelled 
at or dealing with very upsetting things every day. They need somewhere safe to 
return to and hotdesking doesn’t help with that.”


For one social worker, however, hotdesking isn’t all bad. Sophie Olivia, who 
works in child protection at Cheshire East council, which has moved away from 
the system, says despite the difficulties there were upsides to hotdesking. 
“Positively, it enabled colleagues to get to know everybody on the team and we 
felt [like] a united service,” she says.

How can social workers embrace hotdesking?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/29/social-work-hotdesking-tips>
Around three years ago, Cheshire East also adopted the Hackney model’s pod 
system. Olivia’s team of approximately 50 staff is now split into five pods, 
each with approximately seven social workers of differing grades, from newly 
qualified workers to senior practitioners, overseen by a team manager.


Olivia is in favour of the pod system and believes it is a more efficient way 
of doing social work. “I think management oversight is better and, inevitably, 
by working in small teams other social workers become aware of the cases that 
social workers are holding on their pod,” she says. “This means that when a 
social worker is having to prioritise another case or there is staff sickness, 
for example, other social workers already have a good understanding of the case 
and can then offer support to the family. This prevents crises for families and 
also promotes the worker-client relationship.”

For de Mello, acting on the concerns of the social workers in his trust was a 
no-brainer. “We had to listen to what they had to say because the trust takes 
the view that our most precious and important resource is our staff.”


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 