
The Wallabies have returned home after a heavy defeat to England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 in front of a capacity crowd at Twickenham. Taking a beating from England is 
never easy for any Australian sports fan, but the result was softened by the 
fact that the match reports hovered slightly above the weekend’s lawn bowl 
results. Rugby union is largely out of sight and out of mind here.

If you don’t live in Australia, it is hard to believe that rugby union 
features so low on the sporting agenda. The Wallaby jersey has been worn by 
some of the game’s greatest players and the country’s contribution to the sport 
has been enormous historically, but the game is losing relevance for 
Australians. The country’s stadiums are barely filled and the crowds are muted.

Wallabies end 2016 on a low note but positives emerge from European tour | 
John Davidson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/wallabies-european-tour-review-some-positives>
This year the Australian Rugby Union released figures that tell part of the 
story. There had been a 7.6% reduction in players in club rugby. Essentially, 
7,000 players have decided that they don’t want to continue in the game. In 
positive news, female participation has increased in the sevens game, boosted 
by Australia’s Olympic gold medal in Rio. However, many clubs are suffering 
from a lack of funding from the ARU and are fighting to attract players who are 
struggling to combine work with a game that isn’t being supported financially.

Australian children are not taking up the game the way they did in the past. 
Research commissioned on the top 20 sports for Australian children showed that 
rugby union featured18th for children aged 14 and over 
<http://www.roymorgan.com/findings/6123-australian-sports-participation-rates-among-children-and-adults-december-2014-201503182151>
 in terms of participation – behind volleyball, horseriding, netball, tennis 
and football. Sports such asfootball and basketball are gaining popularity 
<http://www.footballaustralia.com.au/article/football-named-australias-biggest-club-based-participation-sport/1s28qyiwu0elg1nqnja4gl31e2>
 among youngsters, while Australian Rules – which has used youth programmes 
such as AusKick to introduce the game to children at an early age – remains far 
in front.

In October a group of Wallaby luminaries gathered to discuss the diminishing 
popularity of their sport. Whether it was at the elite level, or most 
pertinently at grassroots for young children, apathy had set in. Led by former 
captain Nick Farr-Jones, they wrotea public letter to Australian Rugby Union 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-19/nick-farr-jones-warns-of-revolt-in-club-rugby-union/7947490>
, declaring: “There are grave concerns with the rugby community that the 
continuing failure of the Australian Rugby Union to acknowledge and support the 
grassroots of the game will accelerate an already alarming decline in both 
participation and support of the game in Australia.”

The letter was typically Australian: straight to the point and demanding 
answers. Farr-Jones and his friends had simply had enough of watching their 
beloved game suffer across the country. Historically, rugby union has been a 
private school game, played seriously in two states, Queensland and New South 
Wales. The game competes for sporting affections with the universally popular 
Australian Football, cricket and, in the aforementioned states, rugby league.
Rugby union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-union> has become 
increasingly irrelevant in a country with a small population blessed with 
sporting choice.

It is possible to see rugby league, AFL and cricket Test matches on 
terrestrial television but, for reasons best known to themselves, the 
administrators elected to televise Super 15 and test rugby on paid television. 
While they can use some of the TV money to fund salaries and keep the standard 
of play high, few Australian children know who any of the players are. It is 
rare to see a child in Sydney or Brisbane wearing a Wallabies jersey; their 
international team doesn’t resonate.

New Zealanders unite behind the All Blacks but in Australia the incredible 
achievement ofreaching the World Cup final last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 was met largely with apathy, apart from a beautifully lit Wallaby mosaic on 
the Sydney Opera House. Afterthe team lost to Ireland a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, I had to comb the sports pages to find even a small match report from Dublin.

Will the game grow from its small two state private school roots? There are 
ample opportunities across New South Wales and Queensland to go out into 
working class communities and extend the reach of the club game. The two states 
have mooted the possibility of replicating rugby league’s popular State of 
Origin game in union, but this would struggle to succeed with top level 
Wallabies not being allowed to compete. Outside of the private school sporting 
competition, state schools don’t enjoy the same sporting organisation, so, if 
the game is to grow, it will be done so within the club environment. Money 
needs to be spent urgently to build a support base in traditional league 
communities and unearth talented young players.

In the Super 15 competition there have been new franchises in Australian 
football heartlands such as Perth and Melbourne. While support for these new 
teams has been bolstered by strong emigrant populations from the UK and South 
Africa, the Western Force particularly remain in financial strife. The Perth 
club has recently offered 5,000 one-off $1,000 ownership certificates in an 
attempt to increase their coffers.

The Wallabies have wonderfully talented and charismatic players, such as David 
Pocock, Michael Hooper or Israel Folau, but to the majority of their 
compatriots they remain irrelevant. They are cheered if they beat the All 
Blacks, but are ignored for most of the rest of the year. To their credit, the 
Wallabies are trying to engage the public whenever they can. Public training 
sessions are regularly held at beachside grounds such as Coogee Oval. The 
players are available to sign autographs and pose for pictures, but the 
majority of the public choose to stay on the beach and enjoy the sun.

From Fiji to Sweden: how a Scottish cricket coach taught the world to play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/dec/06/scotland-cricketer-coach-fiji-austria-sweden-rwanda>
The Wallabies recent results don’t do them any favours, but the problem of 
keeping Australian rugby union relevant goes far deeper than for spectators and 
casual fans. Alongside the traditional powerhouses of AFL, NRL and cricket, 
football is gaining fans across Australia. The A-League’s popularity grows 
steadily every year, with relatively new clubs such asWestern Sydney Wanderers 
acquiring fanatic support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/apr/14/western-sydney-wanderers-asian-champions-two-years-a-league>
. Football is consistently achieving better spectator numbers in Australia than 
rugby union.


Rugby union will always be able to count on its loyal supporters in Australia, 
but that fanbase will grow ever smaller unless Farr-Jones and his friends are 
heard. The Australian Rugby Union will be licking their wounds from their 
beating at the hands of England after a bruising tour of Europe, but the 
challenge will be far starker next year: how to resuscitate an ailing and 
increasingly irrelevant Wallaby shirt in Australia.

• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 