
Want to hear a sad story? You could read this article of mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/jun/29/bramble-cay-melomys-australia-extinction-climate-change-great-barrier-reef>
 about the first mammal lost to climate change. Orthis one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/jun/08/vaquita-captive-breeding-ex-situ-panda-porpoise-extinction>
 about how there are only 60 vaquita left on the planet. Orhere’s my piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/jul/23/forest-elephants-evidence-science-species-ivory-crisis>
 on how forest elephants are being decimated even as scientists debate if they 
are worthy of being called a distinct species. As an environmental journalist, 
I sometimes feel it’s my job to simply document the decline of life on planet 
Earth. The word ‘depressing’ doesn’t even begin to describe it.

For many of us – myself included some days – the desperate state of our 
environment leaves us numb with sadness and, frankly, lost in hopelessness. We 
don’t act, because we don’t know what to do; we don’t act, because there’s only 
so much negativity we can swallow before we throw up our hands and go back to 
playing Pokemon Go. Without any dose of hope, we feel ourselves succumbing to 
despair.

Optimism summit

There may be a cure coming, however. As I write this, there is a small but 
growing movement within conservation to bring back a little optimism, a little 
hope, a little wonder into what has become a decidedly bleak calling. This 
week, the Zoological Society of London and Oxford University announced a
Conservation Optimism Summit <https://www.conservationoptimism.org/> for 2017 
in London, culminating in a big Earth Day public celebration focused on the 
world’s youth.

For the first time, the summit <https://www.facebook.com/conservationoptimism> 
will see conservationists from around the world gather to discuss how to change 
the culture of despair in conservation and share upbeat stories about what’s 
working from the Philippines to Belize to the hedgeros of the UK.

The concern that conservation, and environmentalism for that matter, has 
become drowned in a culture of negativity has been simmering for awhile now. A
paper <http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/60/8/626.short> in 2010 
identified a “culture of hopelessness” in conservation biology, which the 
authors feared would make it harder for conservation to succeed. Theyargued 
eloquently 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2014/08/why-conservationists-need-a-little-hope-saving-themselves-from-becoming-the-most-depressing-scientists-on-the-planet/>
 that a glass-half-empty outlook would make it difficult to attract young 
peopleto conservation careers. They also warned that the constant 
drip-drip-drip of despair would only succeed in bringing in people who already 
have a negative view of the world, creating a feedback loop of despairism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b256d21efa2d179dbae10c262af2e533f632224%2F0_155_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20hope%20become%20the%20most%20endangered%20species%20in%20conservation%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20hope%20become%20the%20most%20endangered%20species%20in%20conservation%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b256d21efa2d179dbae10c262af2e533f632224%2F0_155_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 The Kihansi spray toad was saved by conservationists. Here, a newly-born 
Kihansi spray toad clings to the back of an adult female at the Bronx Zoo in 
New York in2010. In an effort to save the rare toad from extinction, New York’s 
Bronx Zoo and the Toledo Zoo in Ohio have sent 100 Kihansi spray toads to 
Tanzania. The toad was last seen in the wild in 2004. Photograph: Julie Larsen 
Maher/AP 
The call for more optimism in conservation is underpinned by psychology: it 
turns out if something sounds hopeless, or too big to turn around, most people 
will just shrug their shoulders and go on with their lives. Apathy is often the 
result of gloomy messaging. This has beenextensively studied 
<https://theconversation.com/doom-and-gloom-wont-do-it-heres-how-to-sell-the-climate-change-message-31999>
 in regards to climate change, but next year’s summit will be the first time 
it’s addressed for conservation in such a formal and public setting. If 
conservationists aren’t able to turn around the narrative, they fear they will 
continue to lose public interest, support, and, in the long run, the battle to 
preserve life on Earth.


Understandable gloom-and-doom 


But it will be a delicate dance to inject optimism without undercutting the 
fact that biodiversity and bioabundance around the world are in deep trouble.

We already know that conservation works. In fact it works really well. We just 
need a lot more of it.
Jeremy Hance 
It’s not an exaggeration to say we’ve mucked up our world. The climate is 
rapidly warming while our oceans are being emptied and acidified. We are still 
cutting down forests as if they have no value beyond chopsticks and office 
paper, while many of the world’s habitats have simply been silenced by 
over-hunting, indiscriminate trapping, and relentless killing. Meanwhile, there 
are 7-plus billion Homo sapiens – and we all require food, clothing and 
shelter, not to mention cars, air conditioners and smart phones. All this means 
we are facing the prospect of amass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/oct/20/the-four-horsemen-of-the-sixth-mass-extinction>
 not seen since the comet that took out the dinosaurs.

But there are other stories in conservation. Without the passion of 
generations of conservationists, we would very likely live in a world today 
without bison, rhinos, big cats or whales. There would be few, if any, bald 
eagles left. There would be zero California condors. Elephants might only be in 
zoos. There would never have been any Prezwalski’s horses or Kihansi spray 
toads to re-release back into the wild.

Without hard-working conservationists, we would live in a world lacking 
national parks and other protected areas. Imagine that: how many more species 
would be extinct? How many more wildernesses would have been razed? The fact 
that around 15% of our land has been set aside as protected or indigenous areas 
is something worthy of unbridled celebration.


The long game


Part of what makes optimism in conservation so challenging is the global trend 
of decline in wildlife, but it’s also that success stories are often decades, 
if not generations, in the making.


The people who first started caring for the last dozen European Bison could 
only have faith that their efforts could one day lead to a population of some 
3,000 free-roaming individuals in nine countries. The Greenpeace activists who 
passionately fought for the end of whaling could only dream of humpback whales 
rebounding to a population 80,000-strong.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c9a85f67498257cf850c12fa4a00ae7eac7938%2F0_138_5121_3071%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20hope%20become%20the%20most%20endangered%20species%20in%20conservation%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20hope%20become%20the%20most%20endangered%20species%20in%20conservation%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fradical-conservation%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fconservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c9a85f67498257cf850c12fa4a00ae7eac7938%2F0_138_5121_3071%2F5121.jpg>
 If activists hadn’t succeeded in ending whaling, many species would likely be 
extinct today. A humpback whale breaches. Photograph: Jeff Hunter/Getty Images 
Species can bounce back, even sometimes from stunningly small populations. But 
it has to be given a chance and it takes time. Lots of time. Something human 
beings, so focused on the short-term, have a hard time grasping.

We already know that conservation works. In fact it works really well. We just 
need a lot more of it – and we need faith in the long term instead of listening 
only to naysayers who say ‘we’re all screwed.’

And what about my role in this?

Journalists like myself are hardly blameless for the largely negative 
portrayal of conservation today. On the one hand, we know that bad news often 
gets more attention – i.e., eyeballs – than happy stories. And journalism today 
is measured by clicks.


But even more so, journalists are trained to point out what’s wrong in world. 
That’s our job: to uncover things that aren’t working and put them in front of 
the public. Journalists are not trained to fix problems – believe me – but to 
communicate them to those who could do something about them.


Conservationists turn tiny New Zealand island into bold wildlife experiment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/apr/21/rotoroa-new-zealand-birds-wildlife-rewilding>
But covering environmental stories, especially those with global impact, only 
exacerbates our journalistic penchant for focusing on the dire. The stakes of 
issues like climate change and ocean acidification are so high that it’s almost 
impossible to write about them without sounding apocalyptic. Moreover, let’s be 
honest, environmental issues rarely show up on your Facebook or Twitter 
trending feeds, which means environmental journalists struggle to find ways to 
get people to notice. If I could drop celebrity names into every headline, I 
would:Vaquita almost extinct, proclaim Beyonce, Brad Pitt and Darth Vader.

In lieu of such desperation, I have to constantly ask myself: okay how do I 
get the public to notice this issue? And believe me I’ve tried many strategies: 
from oh-my-god-this-is-bad, to look-how-cute-this-animal-is, to 
isn’t-nature-freaking-awesome?, to seriously-wake-up-people!


But here’s my pledge to you: over the next 12 months I promise to amp up my 
coverage of what’s working in conservation, to find some little-reported 
stories of comeback species. This doesn’t mean I’ll ignore the bad stories by 
any means, but I’ll try to achieve a better balance on this blog.

After all, conservation is ultimately an act of hope. It’s a belief that 
actions taken today will bear fruit long in the future and that people, one 
day, will grow a little wiser. It’s the faith that billions of humans could, 
one day, cohabitate a planet with multitudes of wild tigers, flocks of 
orange-bellied parrots and herds of forest elephants. But we won’t get there 
without hope.


• This article was amended on 6 October 2016 to correct the location of the 
2017Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> 
Optimism Summit.
 