
I’d been working as a copywriter for a year before I fell pregnant. I loved 
getting the tube into London’s Farringdon each morning, taking part in creative 
meetings and conjuring puns all day – but I also felt ready to have a baby.

So when, at 40 weeks pregnant, my contract automatically terminated I felt 
both liberated and a little bit scared.

Fortunately, I’d been able to put aside a large proportion of my monthly pay 
and work right up until week 40 of my pregnancy, giving me a nice pot of 
savings to supplement mymaternity allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/maternity-allowance>. 

But going off to have a baby with no security blanket of a job to return to 
was an uncomfortable start to motherhood. It suddenly dawned on me that I’d 
forgone my career to have a baby.

I’m fervently for the new paternity laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/04/shared-parental-leave-new-era-gender-equality-workplace>
 – they’re a step forward in gender equality – but what might be more 
beneficial to freelancing women is new legislation ensuring that contracted 
workers are covered during pregnancy and following maternity leave. As it was, 
having a baby left me jobless and with no obvious career path. I felt pregnancy 
had in some ways diminished my worth in the workplace.

This gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-economy>
 that so many of us are a part of – either willingly, as we enjoy the freedom, 
or out of necessity, because the only work on offer is part time, contracted or 
freelance – is doing women no favours. Not only does it mean that
pregnant women have no legal rights to maternity leave and pay, but it also 
makes some women question whether, with such unstable finances, they will be 
able to have children at all.

Life inside the new gig economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/29/life-inside-the-new-gig-economy-workers-stories>
Francesca Ross, 26, a kindergarten worker, babysitter and cook, told the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/29/life-inside-the-new-gig-economy-workers-stories>
 about a four-year rolling contract she loved that ended abruptly last year, 
leaving her with no work. None of her jobs now offers holiday or sick pay, and 
while she’d love to be able to “secure a job that grants me the possibility of 
becoming a mother”,the rise in zero hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/uk-workers-on-zero-hours-contracts-rises-above-800000>
 (which disproportionately affect women) means this is unlikely.

For me, however, embarking on motherhood felt a lot bigger and scarier than 
the workplace, and this took my mind off my employment situation, briefly. The 
early days with Joni were lovely; she was born at the start of an 
uncharacteristically hot London summer and we spent our days walking, lying in 
parks and meeting other parents with babies.

But then my friends on maternity leave started dropping off as they returned 
to work – around the nine-month mark – and I began to panic. Aside from a few 
articles written when Joni was a sleepy newborn, I hadn’t worked since her 
birth. My savings were dwindling and I felt there was a work-shaped gap in my 
life.

Having often fantasised about setting up an online magazine, I decided this 
was the time, so I launchedThe Early Hour <http://theearlyhour.com/>, an online 
culture and lifestyle magazine with articles and interviews published daily at 
5am for early risers.

Friends and family were supportive but perhaps weren’t sure that I could pull 
it off. After all, looking after a baby full time and creating a fresh piece of 
content daily, uploading it, taking charge of social media, doing my own PR is 
a lot of work. But I got Joni into a good napping routine and worked manically 
while she slept; I also worked evenings and weekends.


A few months in I found myself struggling. I knew I could keep up with the 
content requirements, the readers were increasing and feedback was largely 
positive. But I hadn’t written a business plan or even given much thought as to 
how it would sustain me financially, beyond vague plans to add banner ads and 
sponsored posts.

I needed business advice, and because I’d been officially unemployed for more 
than six months I was accepted on to the Prince’s Trust enterprise course. And 
so, last December, I joined 10 other budding entrepreneurs for a four-day 
course that not only taught basic accounting and marketing, but led me to Tracy 
Hastain, my mentor.

Mentoring, along with what I learned on the course, has empowered me and given 
me the courage to see that what I’m doing as a real business, not a silly 
little idea. Since The Early Hour’s launch six months ago, it has been viewed 
nearly 100,000 times and is gaining new readers daily.

I equate much of its success to the confidence and drive motherhood has 
instilled in me. This is certainly not where I imagined I’d be two years ago, 
when I left that corporate copywriting job and stepped into my new role as a 
mother. But worryingly low self-esteem, as I pondered my next career move – and 
wondered if I’d dropped off the bottom rung of my career ladder – soon fell 
away to reveal a stronger, more empowered me.

Perhaps I thought motherhood would make me weak and passive; would strip my 
feminist beliefs. On the contrary, it has further filled me with fury and 
passion. Motherhood has made me efficient, productive and committed; I’ve 
learned how to squeeze work into tiny pockets of time when Joni doesn’t need 
me. That’s not often, as toddlers require near-constant attention, so it’s a 
nonstop juggle between work and life.

To another freelancing woman thinking about having a baby, I’d say: do it. 
Whatever happens, if you want to return to work you’ll find a way.

Annie Ridout is a freelance journalist and founder of The Early Hour 
<http://theearlyhour.com>


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 