
Heathrow airport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/heathrow-airport> is 
braced for protests and disruption on Saturday as climate campaigners join 
locals in a march on the airport, with one group planning direct action that 
could delay or cancel flights.


The airport said it was monitoring the situation closely. Operations at 
Heathrow were halted last July when a group of 13 protesterschained themselves 
together on a runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/13/heathrow-disruption-climate-change-activists-claim-chained-runway>
, andthe subsequent decision to approve a third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
 has swelled the ranks of activists. More than 100 people are believed to have 
pledged to take direct action this weekend.

Demonstrations against the airport’s expansion plans, approved by the 
government last month, will start with a rally in Richmond, south-west London, 
on Saturday morning addressed byZac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/zac-goldsmith-super-rich-charmer-now-flying-solo-heathrow>
, who resigned as the local Conservative MP in protest. Residents of 
surrounding villages and campaigners are expected to later join a peaceful 
march on the airport’s perimeter.

But the airport will be more concerned by the unspecified action, for which 
protesters expect to be arrested. Instead of reaching the runway, a possible 
tactic could be to block the tunnels and approach roads to Heathrow, stopping 
airline and airport staff as well as passengers from reaching the airport.

A spokeswoman for the airport said: “Heathrow supports the right to peaceful 
protest within the law, but the safety and security of our passengers, aircraft 
and colleagues together with the smooth running of the operation is paramount.”

The protest has been called by the campaign group RisingUp!, which said it 
would coordinate blockades in protest at the proposed development of the third 
runway, which it called “a red line for the climate”.

The campaigners say expansion at Heathrow will cause the UK to break its own 
national laws to reduce emissions and undermine international climate 
commitments.

One of the organisers of the accompanying protest is Neil Keveren, 55, a 
resident of the village of Harmondsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/19/harmondsworth-villagers-civil-obedience-battle-against-third-runway-heathrow>
, which will be largely bulldozed for the third runway. Keveren, who has an 
injuction preventing him joining further direct action after he blocked a 
tunnel leading to the airport, said: “The only reason people take direct action 
is to create a platform to speak.

“We had prime ministers elected on no-ifs-no-buts promises, and now even 
Theresa May, with the cabinet she chose, it’s not democracy is it? People have 
an expectation that their politicians will do what they have promised 
historically.”

Keveren, who was born in the adjoining village of Sipson, said longstanding 
residents would not voluntarily leave their houses if construction was ever to 
go ahead, adding: “I don’t think that May or the electorate have any stomach to 
see elderly people forcibly removed from their homes of a lifetime.”


Alex Sharpe, 27, a fellow campaigner who has been living in Sipson as part of 
the long-term Transition Heathrow protest project, said: “The government’s 
decision to go ahead is absolutely disastrous and flies in the face of all 
science on climate change. It’s a gross injustice both locally and globally, 
whether it’s the hundreds of homes locally or the 300,000 people a year dying 
through the effects of climate change.”

The government has approved in principle Heathrow’s proposed £17.6bn third 
runway, although there will be further consultation and a parliamentary vote on 
a national policy statement on aviation before the airport can seek planning 
permission. The extended airport would see an extra 240,000 flights a year.

Meanwhile, four local councils and Greenpeace have taken the first step in 
theirlegal challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/10/theresa-may-local-council-to-spend-50000-fight-heathrow-runway-maidenhead>
 to the decision. Hillingdon, Richmond, Wandsworth, and Windsor and Maidenhead 
councils, backed by the environmental group, have written to the transport 
secretary giving notice of judicial review proceedings. Earlier this week the 
London mayor, Sadiq Khan, indicated he was backing the move and could join in 
legal action to stop the third runway.
 