
On the verge of the pantomime season boxing is again a laughing stock, like a 
tottering, rouge‑cheeked dame with a glass of sherry in one hand and a string 
of broken promises in the other.

Disillusion drowns out the laughter. Nowhere is it more obvious than in the 
fact the division that in not-so-distant memory gave us Muhammad Ali, Joe 
Frazier, George Foreman, Ken Norton and Larry Holmes now cannot settle on 
anyone more convincing than the young Anthony Joshua, the injured Deontay 
Wilder, the oldWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> or the absent Tyson Fury.

Anthony Joshua will defend title in December even if Klitschko pulls out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/anthony-joshua-defend-title-december-klitschko-boxing>
Boxrec.com, the go-to digital bible, tells us that among 77 world champions 
recognised across all the weights by the suits who pretend they are in charge 
of the most frustrating sport outside following West Ham, the number claiming 
to rule the heavyweights is … well, indeterminate.

So – deep breath - while Sleeping Beauty gets ready to charm the Sunderland 
Empire this December, Bernd Bönte’s team are counting the seats in some venue 
in Germany where Wlad the Inveigler might entertain the ever-smiling Aussie 
Lucas Browne on behalf of the WBA – which, ho hum, would cost the Ukrainian his 
WBO ranking; Joseph Parker prepares for Andy Ruiz (the very same) to satisfy 
the WBO – which will cost the New Zealander his mandatory shot at the IBF champ
Joshua, who is in the gym getting ready 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/anthony-joshua-defend-title-december-klitschko-boxing>
 for … well, anyone; and David Haye tunes up to challenge the winner of 
Parker-Ruiz with a workout against a selected chump. Wilder, who rarely fights 
beyond a bus ride from his home town in Tuscaloosa, Alabama? The WBC isn’t 
saying yet.

Then there is Luis Ortiz, the dangerous Cuban veteran who makes his debut for 
Matchroom in Monte Carlo on 12 November against the Philadelphian trial horse 
Malik Scott. Providing he wins (he will), a month later in Manchester, the 
unbeaten Ortiz will have his fourth fight for the WBA’s interim title. Ruiz had 
his first interim bout in September, 2014. He surely is a patient man.

As well as the main trinkets there are the InterContinental Car Park title, 
the My Noisy Neighbours Down The Road Emeritus belt or the Super-Stupid 
All-Comers Interim Silver Spoon. The thing is, youcan make it up; nobody would 
notice the difference. It’s a mess from top to bottom and there will be no 
resolution until Monday afternoon at the earliest, according to Matchroom.

In what was once the sport’s unchallenged powerhouse, even super-enthusiast 
Dan Rafael has lost patience. “I love boxing as much as anyone and devoted most 
of my professional career to it,” the big manfrom ESPN wrote the other day 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/boxing/story/_/id/17849562/disappointing-year-made-difficult-boxing-fan-2016>
, “but it is hard to be a boxing fan right now.”

Try paying at the gate, Dan. It only takes a short break away from the fight 
game as a paid observer to understand the fan’s anger. Stay too close and you 
get sucked in to taking the business seriously.

On any given day last week the WBA could have sanctioned a fight between 
Joshua, who is not on its rankings list but is the legitimate and unbeaten IBF 
champion, and Klitschko, whom it guards like a pet poodle wearing a diamond 
neck bracelet even though he has not fought since he lost to Fury nearly a year 
ago, and turns 41 in March.

It did manage one minor miracle: uniting Frank Warren and Eddie Hearn in 
disgust. Warren allies himself mainly to WBO titles but he was on the money 
when he said Klitschko is taking everyone for a ride, and the WBA is happy to 
let him do it. Hearn, Joshua’s promoter, says he is nonplussed by the WBA’s 
dithering and on Monday announced a fight between Joshua and Klitschko will not 
go ahead on 10 December as planned because the Ukrainian has suffered a “minor 
injury”, and that it is instead more likely to take place next spring. Hearn 
had been sure he had a deal for this year and Sky, who provide the platform and 
much of the money, are growing as impatient as the fans.

Klitschko clearly does not want anything to do with Joshua, who would knock 
him out, probably within six rounds, whatever the sales talk that this is an 
even-money contest. Klitschko, the best heavyweight in the world for nearly a 
decade, wants to go out with a soft touch, preferably the deathly slow if 
powerful Browne, who was put through boxing’s grinder afterbeating Ruslan 
Chagaev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/australias-lucas-browne-wins-heavyweight-boxing-world-title>
 in Chechnya last year to win the WBA’s title.

Liam Williams: It’s unusual for one terrible incident to happen in your 
career. But twice?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/liam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing>
A Sydney newspaper later put a clock on the fight and found the time-keeper 
added 15 seconds to the sixth round (in which Browne was decked) and took 44 
seconds off the end of the seventh, as the challenger stormed back. That was 
hardly the end of it. Browne, a genial man, swears blind theclenbuterol they 
found in his system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/shattered-lucas-browne-vows-to-clear-his-name-after-failing-drugs-test>
 afterwards got there without his knowledge, and the minor dosage suggests he 
could be right. Besides, why would a heavyweight take a weight-reducing drug? 
His brief in an unresolved legal challenge says it has cost the fighter 
millions.

None of this is going to change unless the WBA, WBO, WBC, IBF and (heaven help 
us) IBO vote themselves out of existence and surrender their authority to a 
universally recognised authority under the auspices of, say, the IOC.

And guess what? Lurking in the shadows with just such a plan is the Aiba boss, 
Dr Wu Ching-kuo. He was the remote, amateur kingmaker who presided over the 
rolling comedy sketch otherwise knownas the Rio Olympics boxing tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/aiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing>
.

There were not as many outright dodgy decisions as were being represented at 
the time, but there was a lot of incompetence, not to mention shameless 
reluctance by Wu and his association to acknowledge it until the weight of 
international opprobrium overwhelmed them.

Wu’s blueprint is to turn Aiba into that all-powerful world body. He has 
already had an encouraging response from … the WBA. So, good luck with that 
one, doc.

Taking boxing seriously is harder than it has been since the heyday of the 
mob. Once there was blatant corruption. Now there is full-blown, Donald 
Trump-level, laughing-in-your-face cheek.

It is enough to make one yearn for the anarchy generated by Don King (born 20 
August 1931) and his octogenarian chum Bob Arum (born 8 December 1931). Uncle 
Bob is enjoying his late-career surge ahead of The Donald, who still has his 
badged-up denim jacket, George Bush Sr’s cell phone number and contender 
Bermane Stiverne, but the thrill is gone. Now, it is just dull and dumb.

Maybe Fury quit boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tyson-fury-vacated-wbo-wba-world-heavyweight-titles-treatment>
 at the right time. The WBA has just announced he will be first in line to 
fight for his old title as soon as he is well enough, but probably thinking 
more about the significant sanction fee awaiting it for his comeback than the 
more profound challenge facing the semi-retired fighter: beating a drugs habit 
and depression.
 