
The Oscar-winning actor Helen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> said that she was a 
“believer” in Israel and that she rejected efforts to boycott the country.

Mirren showered Israeli artists with praise and said she opposed efforts by 
pro-Palestinian groups to boycott them and the decision of some international 
artists to shunIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

“I think that art is an incredibly important way of communication,” she said 
at a press event in Jerusalem on Wednesday. “The artists of the country are the 
people you need to communicate with and make a relationship with and learn from 
and build upon. So I absolutely don’t believe in the boycott, and here I am.”

Mirren was in Israel to host the Genesis prize, an award known as the “Jewish 
Nobel”. The $1m awardwas given to Israeli-American violinist Itzhak Perlman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/14/renowned-violinist-itzhak-perlman-wins-2016-genesis-prize>
 for his accomplishments as a musician, teacher and advocate for the disabled.

Mirren, who is not Jewish, has visited Israel several times and has been a 
vocal critic of pro-Palestinian activists who have called for a cultural 
boycott of Israel. The Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement (BDS) has 
enlisted the support of Pink Floyd frontman Roger Waters and has persuadedElvis 
Costello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/18/elvis-costello-cancels-israel-concerts>
, Lauryn Hill and other performers to call off concerts in Israel.

Mirren, 70, is one of the few actors to have won the so-called Triple Crown, 
having collected an Oscar, a Tony and four Emmy awards. She received her 
Academy award for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in the 2006 film The 
Queen.

She has played the role of a former Mossad agent in The Debt, a remake of an 
Israeli film of the same name. And in Woman in Gold she played an elderly 
Jewish refugee who fought the Austrian government for a decade to reclaim a 
Gustav Klimt painting stolen from her family by the Nazis.

She said her strong connection to Israel dates back to 1967, when she 
volunteered on akibbutz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/23/israel-kibbutz-movement-comeback>
, or collective farm, with her Jewish boyfriend at the time. She fondly 
recalled picking grapes and doing kitchen duty.

“I am a believer in Israel ... I think this is an extraordinary country filled 
with very, very extraordinary people,” she said. “It’s just a lucky ... 
accident in my life that I have had this privilege.”

Mirren shied away from further political questions, but she said she had 
already voted by proxy in favour of Britain remaining in the European Union.
 