
Helen Mirren will tackle ghouls and gun violence in Winchester, a thriller 
based on the true story of the heiress to the Winchester weapons fortune, who 
fast-tracked the construction of a mansion because she believed it would hold 
off the spirits of the victims of the family business,according to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/08/helen-mirren-firearms-heiress-jsne-winchester-cbs-films-winchester-1201800338/>
.

Directed by Predestination’s Michael and Peter Spierig, the film will detail 
how, shortly after the death of her husband and baby daughter, Sarah Winchester 
enlisted carpenters to work 24/7 on expanding her San Jose home in California. 
Winchester was allegedly told by a spirit medium that extending the mansion was 
necessary to prevent her own death, but she continued building off-and-on for 
38 years before she died of heart failure at 83.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fhelen-mirren-gun-heiress-winchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1422e272df7f836babb9abfa814dcdc90198638f%2F0_203_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Mirren%20to%20star%20as%20gun%20heiress%20in%20supernatural%20drama%20Winchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fhelen-mirren-gun-heiress-winchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Mirren%20to%20star%20as%20gun%20heiress%20in%20supernatural%20drama%20Winchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fhelen-mirren-gun-heiress-winchester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1422e272df7f836babb9abfa814dcdc90198638f%2F0_203_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 Bang for her buck ... Winchester Mystery House, San Jose, California 
Photograph: Alamy 
The film will centre on the arrival of Eric Price, a San Francisco 
psychiatrist who is dubious about the claims that “the Winchester mystery house 
<http://www.winchestermysteryhouse.com/thehouse.cfm>” is haunted. After he 
arrives he is confronted with a host of ghosts and the true cost of gun 
violence. It is not known who will play Price.

The construction of the mystery house, which is now a tourist attraction, was 
funded by Winchester’s 50% stake in the gun manufacturer bearing her family 
name, which netted her about $22,000 (£17,000) a day in today’s money. There 
are close to 160 rooms, including 40 bedrooms, two ballrooms and three 
elevators.

The house was badly damaged in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/nov/20/san-francisco-earthquake-photography>
. It got its “mystery house” tag from a newspaper article about a 1924 visit by
Harry Houdini <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/harry-houdini>, who was 
reportedly attempting to communicate with the mansion’s otherworldly 
inhabitants.
 