
Helen Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> has defended 
the Oscars against “unfair” accusations the world’s most famous film ceremony 
has become a closed, all-white club.

Halle Berry: Oscars race row is 'heartbreaking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/halle-berry-oscars-diversity-race-row-is-heartbreaking>
Speaking to Channel 4 News, Mirren denied the failure to nominate a single 
actor of colour for any acting awards for the second year running was a failure 
of relevance on the part of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

“I think it’s unfair to attack the Academy,” she told presenter Jon Snow. “It 
just so happened this year it went that way.”

Hackney-born Idris Elba was widely expected to receive a nod in the best 
supporting actor category for his performance in Netflix child-soldier drama 
Beasts of No Nation.Elba was garlanded by the Screen Actors Guild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2016/jan/30/sag-awards-2016-spotlight-straight-outta-compton-leonardo-dicaprio-up-for-awards-live?page=with:block-56ad73f8e4b0daa4e9c63b45>
 at the weekend and has also received a Golden Globe nomination, but Mirren, 
who won thebest actress Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/27/film.oscars2007> in 2007 for her 
turn as Elizabeth II in Stephen Frears’s The Queen, said too few Academy 
members had seenCary Fukunaga <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cary-fukunaga>
’s acclaimed war drama.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYYGwfvbWQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYYGwfvbWQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoYYGwfvbWQs&media=>
“He [Idris] wasn’t nominated because not enough people saw, or wanted to see, 
a film about child soldiers in Somalia or the Congo or somewhere like that,” 
said the 70-year-old, who was promoting her role as Hollywood gossip columnist 
Hedda Hopper in new film Trumbo. “They just couldn’t face watching that movie 
and so not enough people saw that movie. It wasn’t in the cinema for long 
enough.”

Oscars 2016: expect five minute diversity speech as Quincy Jones confirmed as 
presenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/02/oscars-announce-quincy-jones-kerry-washington-awards-presenters-diversity-row>
Mirren added: “The thing is all of these things count, people don’t really 
realise how much these things matter. And because of all of that he wasn’t 
nominated – which he absolutely should have been. And if he’d been nominated we 
wouldn’t be having this discussion, but we should be having this discussion.

“The conversation is incredibly important,” she continued. “It forced the 
conversation.”

Mirren said the wider issue was not which actors were being rewarded with 
Oscars recognition, but how to improve diversity in Hollywood so that more 
people from black and ethnic minority backgrounds were given opportunities 
within the film industry.

“I’m saying that the issue we need to be looking at is what happens before the 
film gets to the Oscars,” she said. “What kind of films are made, and the way 
in which they’re cast, and the scripts … So it’s those things that are much 
more influential ultimately than who stands there with an Oscar.”

Ava DuVernay backs 'DuVernay test' to monitor racial diversity in Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/01/ava-duvernay-test-racial-diversity-hollywood-selma-director-oscars>
In related news, an organisation called the Multi-Ethnic Media Coalition has 
announced plans to target Hollywood over diversity 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-multi-ethnic-media-coalition-initiative-20160203-story.html>
. The campaigning body, which speaks on behalf of the National Hispanic Media 
Coalition, the Asian Pacific American Media Coalition and American Indians in 
Film and Television, said it hoped to persuade producers to encourage 
participation from professionals of colour in the wake of the #Oscarssowhite 
storm, having mounted a similar campaign aimed at TV executives.

“Individuals from all of our communities have been denied meaningful 
opportunities for their work to be considered for Academy awards,” said Alex 
Nogales, president and CEO of the National Hispanic Media Coalition. “Studios 
need to know that representation matters – for recognition of hard work and 
talent, for combating negative stereotypes in our public discourse and for the 
next generation of our future leaders in the film industry.”

Sonny Skyhawk 
<http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2013/08/13/sonny-skyhawk-three-decades-fighting-power-hollywood-150858>
, founder of American Indians in Film and Television, said the group hoped to 
repeat the success of its diversity campaign in television.

“Each year, [the TV networks] provided data on the minorities they’ve hired as 
writers, producers, directors and actors, and we’ve discussed how accurately 
their series are reflecting reality,” he told the Los Angeles Times. “The great 
improvements you’ve seen on the small screen have been due in large part to our 
efforts. Now, we’re setting our sights on meeting with the top six movie 
studios and asking them to do the same on the big screen.”
 