
There are many reasons to recommend Hell or High Water (StudioCanal, 15) at 
this or any time of year, but in the dank, shivery no-man’s-land of early 
January, the sheer, sticky heat of David Mackenzie’s western-infused heist 
thriller makes it a positive shot in the arm. The still, steaming mugginess of 
a west Texas afternoon veritably wafts off the screen; cars skid and characters 
lope across the burnt landscape at a kind of urgent half-speed, which does 
nothing to diminish the copper-wire tension and conductivity of Taylor 
Sheridan’s nifty script.

Scotsman Mackenzie, having truly found form with his rough-and-tumble prison 
dramaStarred Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/02/dvds-downloads-starred-up-labor-day>
, now taps into a vein of terse, elemental, morally mousetrapped American 
storytelling practised by everyone from Steinbeck to the Coen brothers. There’s 
nothing twisty or unfamiliar in this curt, classical tale of two brothers – one 
bad, one a shade better – systematically raiding banks across the state to save 
the family farm, however effectively it rattles along on its own sense of 
danger.But execution is all here, from the hungry, rumbling performances of 
Jeff Bridges, Ben Foster and a never better Chris Pine to the literate regional 
sting of Sheridan’s dialogue and the gliding, no-nonsense shooting of that 
cornbread locale. Sometimes it’s good to know exactly what you’re getting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ea3fa2efd89890e212e8372f2c868ccd188eb4%2F0_0_2669_1602%2F2669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones!%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones%21%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ea3fa2efd89890e212e8372f2c868ccd188eb4%2F0_0_2669_1602%2F2669.jpg>
 Emma Suárez in the ‘gloriously scored melodrama’ of Julieta. 
And then, of course, it more often isn’t, which brings us to Pedro Almodóvar’s 
Julieta (Pathé, 15), an entirely lovely surprise in disguise. It has all the 
outward trappings, the poster-paint colouring and the open, fragrant feminine 
sympathies that we eagerly expect from Spain’s most singular modern auteur. But 
unpeel its exquisite tissue-paper wrapping and this split-level character study 
is an Almodóvar film that moves and feels like no other.

Yes, there’s something of the gutsy, deep-seated melancholy of 2002’s Talk to 
Her here, and it’s certainly his greatest work since that career high. But 
there’s a pensive reserve inherited from the quiet, finely muscled short 
stories of Alice Munro, the director’s unexpected selection of literary source. 
Yet Munro and Almodóvar share a mutual, athletic flexibility with narrative 
space and time. The director’s most ingenious conceit is to stage its nonlinear 
portrait of a life unravelled by guilt as a kind of thespian duet.

Pedro Almodóvar: ‘Nobody sings. There’s no humour. I just wanted restraint’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/07/pedro-almodovar-observer-interview>
Adriana Ugarte and Emma Suárez’s respectively spiky and sorrowful performances 
as younger and older incarnations of the eponymous Julieta are placed in 
loving, alternating dialogue with each other, each Julieta, somehow, a 
corrective and a cautionary tale to the other. Almodóvar’s chosen key can only 
go so low, however: this is still lush, sangria-shaded, gloriously scored 
melodrama. It’s the fine, fluttering pauses and reversals that catch you off 
guard.

Also back on song, albeit not wholly in tune, is Spike Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spikelee>, who finally feels intellectually 
and stylistically replenished inChi-Raq (Signature, 15), a grinding, bristling, 
unwieldy locomotive of a film that has a torrent of things to say, sing and 
even shout about. Resourcefully relocating Aristophanes’sLysistrata to the 
ragged ganglands of Chicago, the film could feel academic in its articulation 
of modern American racial friction and urban class warfare through its 
classical prism. Yet it expresses itself entirely, even exhaustingly, from the 
gut throughout. If it all palls a bit toward the close, it’s not because the 
film runs out of steam. If anything, its steam runs out of script.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1a31107756fb7596a82ab54bd79c64737d6e9e%2F0_75_2649_1589%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones!%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones%21%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1a31107756fb7596a82ab54bd79c64737d6e9e%2F0_75_2649_1589%2F2649.jpg>
 Marpessa Dawn, centre, as Eurydice in the ‘throbbing, glittering’ Black 
Orpheus. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Lopert Pictures 
Chi-Raq has an ideal, and ideally timed, double-bill partner in the week’s 
best rerelease: the Criterion Collection’s gorgeous clean-up of Marcel Camus’s 
1959 Palme d’Or winnerBlack Orpheus (Criterion, 12), a throbbing, glittering 
reworking of Orpheus and Eurydice set to the bossa nova beat of 
then-contemporary Rio de Janeiro in carnival heat. UnlikeChi-Raq, the film’s 
cultural conflicts and resonances work without rhetoric, reliant entirely on 
sensual excess to transport the viewer’s sensibilities. Its immersive, 
spinning-top swirl has barely dated a day.

Belgian realist Joachim Lafosse’s sternly compassionate view of the human 
condition is at its most clear-eyed inAfter Love (Curzon Artificial Eye, 12), a 
scenes-from-a-marriage breakdown in which well-worn relationship crisis points 
regain a bracing, shocking snap from the simple, practical frankness of the 
writing and performances. Bérénice Bejo, in particular, redeems a patchy run of 
recent work with her piercing, tacitly raging turn as a woman battling her 
husband on every conceivable point of contention. I wishEquity (Sony, 15) 
seethed a little more. Meera Menon’s conscientious financial-crisis thriller 
boasts a killer hook – placing women in the big boardroom chairs for a pointed 
feminist riposte to aspate of boorish Wall Street dramas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/dec/14/the-big-short-wall-street-crimes-hollywood>
 – and a flinty lead in Anna Gunn, but there’s a glazed, tentative hollowness 
to its depiction of an already glib environment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dd1010dfdff480441fd2f8280f212ab1365153%2F0_78_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones!%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3B%20Julieta%3B%20Chi-Raq%3B%20Black%20Orpheus%3B%20Miss%20Sharon%20Jones%21%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhell-or-high-water-julieta-chi-raq-dvd-review-pedro-almodovar-spike-lee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dd1010dfdff480441fd2f8280f212ab1365153%2F0_78_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘An indelible final impression’: Miss Sharon Jones! 
Finally, extending Netflix’s notable January run of new additions, veteran 
documentarian Barbara Kopple’sMiss Sharon Jones! is a lovely, nick-of-time 
screen valentine to the vibrant, brass-lunged andnewly late 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/20/sharon-jones-obituary> soul 
dynamo, one of the saddest and most premature losses from 2016’s grim 
plundering of the musical firmament. As Kopple directly addresses Jones’s 
long-term illness, there’s a rain cloud of regret already hanging over this 
intimate tribute, but those vital, jumping performance sequences blast it away. 
Backed by her brilliant band, the Dap-Kings, she rocks the microphone like one 
who knows she has a limited time to make an indelible final impression. All of 
last year’s major casualties deserved a farewell such as this.
 