
When Karim’s father sent him, aged 17, from Kabul to find safety in Europe, he 
hoped to get work in his uncle’s supermarket in Germany. This month he was 
selling drugs on the streets of Athens to make money for food. He considers 
himself relatively lucky, since other teenagers from Afghanistan have turned to 
prostitution in the nearby park to earn money to survive, but he concedes that 
this is not what his father, an academic, had in mind for him.

“I escaped Afghanistan for a good future. This was unexpected,” he said, 
pacing around a corner of Victoria Square, a seedy part of central Athens, at 
about midnight in early December. When he speaks to his parents he doesn’t tell 
them about the difficulties he faces. “All the time I think about going back.”

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Official shelters in Athens are full and the city is overflowing with refugee 
children, many of whom have fled war zones without their parents and are now 
sleeping in squats, struggling to look after themselves and turning to 
desperate measures to survive. The government says there are 1,200 children on 
waiting lists for places in formal camps or shelters, but local charities 
believe there are many more whose names are on no lists, sleeping in one of the 
14 vast squats that have opened up in recent months in deserted schools and 
empty office blocks in the city centre.

The squats have no beds, no hot water and no regular food provision. They are 
entirely inappropriate places for children to be living, often violent and 
brutalising. But hundreds are sleeping on mattresses or blankets on concrete 
floors, grateful not to be in the streets. On some nights children are turned 
away from the squats because they too are full.


Karim’s situation is not particularly extreme. The charity Help Refugees 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, which the Guardian is supporting this year 
in itsannual appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
, is helping hundreds of refugee children in the city with similarly disturbing 
experiences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1cc7f0806ec0ae9bdb664de826e10c934d3b09%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c1cc7f0806ec0ae9bdb664de826e10c934d3b09%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Sahar is playing with scissors and paper at the Orange house in Exarcheia. 
Photograph: Panagiotis Moschandreou for the Guardian 
Hassan’s parents dispatched him from his home in Damascus last September, when 
he was 14, to join family in Europe. Until late November he was living in an 
abandoned secondary school with 400 other refugees, waiting for legal advice 
about how to get to his cousin in Germany.

Noticing Hassan’s growing desperation, a people smuggler told him he would put 
him in a car and drive him to Berlin if he agreed to sleep with him. “Some 
people agree because they are very desperate. When he saw me in the street a 
few days later, he said: ‘If you don’t go with me, I will kill you.’ He thinks 
he’s God,” Hassan said. Later, he said, he was attacked by an older man in the 
squat for reasons that remained unclear to him.

Ali, 17, was sent from Afghanistan to safety after his two older brothers were 
killed by the Taliban, but he got stuck in an unofficial camp near the port in 
Athens with no money. An older man offered him work on a farm an hour outside 
the capital; he found himself forced to harvest onions for weeks without pay. 
When he went to the police to report that he had been forced into slave labour, 
he was arrested and imprisoned for having no papers.

Help Refugees helped to find both Hassan and Ali shelter; the organisation has 
also funded emergency accommodation for many other child refugees who have 
found living in the squats too frightening.

Central Athens is dotted with teenage children who have had equally scarring 
experiences. Children desperately need to be taken out of the squats, but there 
is a stark disconnect between their needs and the support available from the 
state or from the large, established refugee charities. More than 500 more 
unaccompanied minors arrived in the country in the two months to October, 
according to a migration ministry official. The Greek authorities are clearly 
overwhelmed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd00f5e4a318e0cfd7fd73e3ed2fa69f7ad1adbf5%2F0_230_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd00f5e4a318e0cfd7fd73e3ed2fa69f7ad1adbf5%2F0_230_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Inside a squat in the Exarcheia district in central Athens, where refugees 
sleep 50 to a room and a one-ring camp stove is used to feed 200 people. 
Visiting the squats is a dispiriting experience. In a three-storey, men-only 
squat in the Exarcheia district of central Athens, there are two open-plan 
rooms where refugees sleep in rows under thin blankets, around 50 to a room, 
tightly packed together, their few belongings by their heads, their shoes by 
their feet. There is rubbish on the stairways and the kitchen has a one-ring 
camping stove to feed about 200 people.

'Prisoners of Europe': the everyday humiliation of refugees stuck in Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
In a nearby abandoned secondary school known as the fifth school squat, 
families have subdivided classrooms with sheets slung from ropes attached to 
the ceilings, creating tiny curtained-off areas where they try to recreate a 
home life. The climbing frame in the playground has been requisitioned for use 
as a clothes rack; radiators throughout the corridors are layered with 
children’s tights and underwear, drying.

A network of Help Refugees volunteers make regular checks on Victoria Square 
and the nearby Pedion Areos park, where unaccompanied minors have been 
sleeping, trying to identify teenagers like Karim who need help to escape the 
negative influence of older men. They visit the squats to help get refugee 
children to legal appointments so they can claim asylum in Greece and elsewhere.

Peggy Whitfield, a British volunteer who has worked for Help Refugees for the 
past 10 months, has often taken children into her own small flat when there is 
nowhere else for them to go. “Bigger organisations have to go through so many 
layers of bureaucracy and don’t want to annoy the government by distributing in 
so-called illegal sites like squats and unofficial camps. Smaller groups like 
Help Refugees are not scared to get involved; they have a very direct, 
practical way of dealing with problems,” she said. The charity has paid the 
bread bills in the illegal squats and is funding new boilers so there will be 
hot water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae8e665c4d6a80a1e8a412afefc04bb11fb7f4c%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae8e665c4d6a80a1e8a412afefc04bb11fb7f4c%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 The Khora centre serves 350 midday meals and provides refugees a safe 
environment. Photograph: Panagiotis Moschandreou for the Guardian 
In the past year it has also helped to set up and fund two centres for 
refugees in central Athens. The Orange House accommodates up to 26 women and 
children, getting them away from the squats into safe shelter. During the day, 
volunteers provide a creche, welcoming dozens of small children who live in the 
squats; they also run English, Greek and German classes. Ali, who has picked up 
almost fluent English on his journey, is teaching it to other refugees in the 
Orange House, as well as attending school himself.

A few streets away, a seven-storey building opened two months ago to provide a 
range of much-needed services for refugees, from dentistry, language classes 
and psychological and legal assistance to breakfast and lunches.

When the centre opened, volunteers were serving around 100 midday meals. That 
number had increased to 350 in early December, and the need is growing more 
acute by the day. The centre is incredibly impressive – well run by both 
volunteers and refugees to create a warm and safe environment for people to 
shelter during the day, offering vital information about asylum services as 
well as food and laundry facilities. There is a pop-up shop where refugees can 
go to choose clothes, and meals are served at tables. The organisation wanted 
to get away from the dehumanising process of making refugees queue for aid.

Volunteers offer advice about how to get children into local schools. For 
those for whom this is not an option – there are reports of teachers in Greek 
schools bullying refugee children – there are classes for school-aged children 
at the centre. It is the only centre of its kind in the city, and is much 
appreciated by refugees who spent most of their time in the cramped squats 
until it opened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c3138cc5f3301cbf234c8017133f53dd506220%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20a%20lifeline%20for%20teenagers%20living%20in%20seedy%20Athens%20squats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fhelp-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c3138cc5f3301cbf234c8017133f53dd506220%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 The Orange House provides shelter for up 26 women and children. Photograph: 
Panagiotis Moschandreou for the Guardian 
Hassan has been given an appointment with an official Greek refugee adviser on 
4 April to discuss his request to join family in Germany, but he feels this is 
too long to wait. His frustration is intense.

“The worst thing is I am in Greece for nothing. I am wasting my life here, not 
going to school – waiting for nothing. At home I felt I was alive. I did what I 
wanted. I studied. I lived my life. I played football.” He tries not to talk to 
other Syrians now because everyone is experiencing the same anxiety. “Everybody 
is close to being crazy now because they have waited so long to move on. It is 
hard to talk to them. They are all talking about the same problems.”

The support of volunteers such as Whitfield, who is trying get him legal 
assistance more swiftly, has helped to lift his morale. When Whitfield asked 
Hassan what he would like to do with his life once he had a stable home, he 
laughed and said: “Become a professional footballer.” Failing that, he said, he 
would settle for being a movie star or an airline pilot.

The charity cannot do much about the political stalemate, which means that 
more than 63,000 refugees are stuck in Greece, unable to continue their journey 
to join family in western Europe since borders to the north have been sealed. 
But Help Refugees is able to support thousands in Greece, providing emergency 
aid in camps, keeping people warm, supporting infant feeding programmes, 
helping them get legal advice, making sure they are well-fed and clothed, and 
moving the most vulnerable into safe accommodation while they wait to find out 
where they will end up.

Names of refugee children have been changed.

• Support the three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
.
 