
Matilda the Musical has won 13 awards including best musical at the Helpmanns, 
Australia’s leading theatre awards.

The musical adaptation of the children’s novel by Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> had its Australian debut in 
Sydney last year following runs in London’s West End and Broadway, and won in 
all the categories it was nominated for.

Matilda the Musical review – still a revoltingly subversive success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/20/matilda-the-musical-review-still-a-revoltingly-subversive-success>
The musical was created by British writer Dennis Kelly and Australian comedian 
and composerTim Minchin <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tim-minchin>. 
Minchin was awarded best original score, and other categories won by the 
musical included best direction, choreography, sound, design and music 
direction.

Accepting the award, Minchin said: “The production here is amazing. This 
industry is second to none in the world in all sides of the curtain.”

Best female actor in a musical was awarded as a shared prize to the eight 
young actors from Sydney and Melbourne who played Matilda. James Millar, 
playing the terrifying headteacher Miss Trunchbull won the best actor award, 
while Daniel Frederiksen (Matilda’s father Mr Wormwood) and Elise McCann (Miss 
Honey) were also awarded prizes for their supporting parts.

In their 16th year, the Helpmann awards celebrate and recognise Australia’s 
performance industry. They were held at the Sydney Lyric theatre on Monday 
night, with Sarah Blasko and the cast from Singin’ in the Rain performing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fhelpmann-awards-tim-minchins-matilda-the-musical-scoops-record-13-prizes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8343624dcbc44095b02001838b500f16c844239%2F0_104_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helpmann%20awards%3A%20Tim%20Minchin's%20Matilda%20the%20Musical%20scoops%20record%2013%20prizes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fhelpmann-awards-tim-minchins-matilda-the-musical-scoops-record-13-prizes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helpmann%20awards%3A%20Tim%20Minchin%27s%20Matilda%20the%20Musical%20scoops%20record%2013%20prizes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fhelpmann-awards-tim-minchins-matilda-the-musical-scoops-record-13-prizes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8343624dcbc44095b02001838b500f16c844239%2F0_104_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Bangarra’s artistic director, Stephen Page, and Hunter Page Lochard with the 
JC Williamson award for an outstanding contribution, which Page won. 
Photograph: Brendon Thorne/Getty Images 
Bangarra Dance Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> won three 
awards for their performance Sheoak, while Bangarra’s artistic director, 
Stephen Page, was honoured with an outstanding contribution award.


“We have to lead the way for other brothers and sisters and hope for the 
future there will be major performing arts in all those other arts and mediums 
for indigenous peoples,” Page said.

“A lot of mob before me laid down that good solid ground for us to walk on 
that right pathway but I appreciate the recognition from Live Performance 
Australia the council, the committee.”

'It's no Samson and Delilah': Stephen Page on the film adaptation of Spear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/its-no-samson-and-delilah-stephen-page-on-the-film-adaptation-of-spear>
Minchin paid tribute to Page’s late brother, the composer David Page, who died 
unexpectedly in April, saying: “I want to honour David Page who was an 
incredible man, an incredible composer, sound designer, actor, singer and 
breaker down of boundaries and hurdles and I just want to acknowledge the loss 
to the Page family and Bangarra.”

The Bleeding Tree (Griffin Theatre Company) won best play. The actor Paula 
Arundell beat four-time winner Cate Blanchett for best female actor in a play. 
Mark Leonard Winter won best male actor for Birdland (Melbourne Theatre 
Company).

Best new Australian work went to Queensland Theatre Company for its production 
of Ladies in Black.
 