
In May 2016, the thoracic surgeon Henry Heimlich, who has died aged 96, 
attracted international attention when he saved the life of a woman sitting 
next to him at dinner in his retirement home.Patty Ris 
<http://www.cincinnati.com/videos/news/2016/05/26/85012780/> was choking on a 
piece of hamburger lodged in her windpipe; using a bear hug to apply abdominal 
thrusts, in what is known as the Heimlich manoeuvre, he dislodged the 
obstruction. “God put me in the seat next to him,” the 87-year-old Ris said and 
headlines claimed it was the first time the retired surgeon had actually used 
the procedure he invented in 1974. Although it emerged that Heimlich had 
previously used his technique successfully in 2003, the story remained a 
reminder of the many lives that were owed to his creativity.

In 1972 Heimlich was struck by an article about America’s epidemic of death by 
choking. It was often called “beefsteak disease”, since among adults it usually 
involved swallowing large bites of meat that had not been thoroughly chewed, 
but the risk to children ingesting foreign objects was just as severe. Heimlich 
recognised that the standard technique of pounding the back often served to 
shift the object more firmly down the windpipe.

His team at the Jewish hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio>, where he was head of surgery, 
worked for two years using tubes and balloons inserted down the throats of 
anaesthetised dogs, before coming up with the thrusts to force air from the 
lungs, and push obstructions back towards the mouth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhenry-heimlich-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae8c5a5bc994203ee98c808a2c9308af3b0d4d85%2F161_197_4521_5652%2F4521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Henry%20Heimlich%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhenry-heimlich-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Henry%20Heimlich%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhenry-heimlich-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae8c5a5bc994203ee98c808a2c9308af3b0d4d85%2F161_197_4521_5652%2F4521.jpg>
 Henry Heimlich demonstrates his procedure on Ed Koch, the mayor of New York, 
in 1981. Photograph: The New York Post/Getty Images 
Heimlich originally met with resistance from the medical establishment, so he 
sent his results out to newspapers. When a restaurant owner in Bellevue, 
Washington used the technique to rescue a choking customer, publicity 
snowballed, and eventually the procedure received the approval of theAmerican 
Medical Association <https://www.ama-assn.org/>, in an article in their journal 
which coined the name Heimlich manoeuvre. With high publicity and celebrity 
endorsement, it was adopted by the American Red Cross and American Heart 
Association, originally as a second-choice after back-slapping, and then as the 
primary response to choking.

Heimlich was born in Wilmington, Delaware. His parents, Mary (nee Epstein) and 
Philip, a prison social worker, were both the children of Jewish immigrants, 
and Henry grew up in theNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
suburb of New Rochelle. He graduated from Cornell University, where he was the 
drum major of the marching band, in 1941, and from Cornell’s medical school in 
1943.

As a navy doctor in the second world war, he served with Chinese guerrillas 
behind Japanese lines in the Gobi desert. After the war he was a resident at 
several hospitals in New York, where in 1951 he married Jane Murray, whose 
father, Arthur, was a leading dance instructor, an entrepreneur with a national 
chain of studios.

Heimlich was already an innovator before he moved to Cincinnati. In the 
mid-1950s he developed a technique for rebuilding the oesophagus of patients 
unable to swallow, by using tissue from the stomach. This was already being 
done in Romania, where Heimlich visited its inventor, Dan Gavriliu; today the 
“reversed gastric tube” operation is standard. In the 60s, he used his 
experience in China with chest wounds to develop a flutter valve, whose 
mechanism he borrowed from a toy noisemaker, which would drain blood and air 
from the chest cavity, allowing the lungs to reinflate. It was used with great 
success in the Vietnam war, and the Heimlich valve became standard in thoracic 
surgery.

After the success of the Heimlich manoeuvre, he became a professor at Xavier 
University, Cincinnati, and set up the Heimlich Institute in the city. But he 
became increasingly mired in numerous controversies, particularly against his 
advocacy of malariotherapy, the infecting of patients with malaria in order to 
build up resistance to other infections, including HIV, the virus that causes 
Aids. He suffered a personal falling out with his son Peter, who for decades 
campaigned against his father, calling him a fraud and condemning his use of 
Aids victims in China in his malariotherapy experiments, and risking lives in 
other experiments seeking a cure for Lyme disease.

The medical establishment also rejected his advocacy of the Heimlich manoeuvre 
on drowning victims, and eventually in 2006, guidelines were again revised to 
return what was now referred to as “abdominal thrusts” with no mention of 
Heimlich, to a second-resort in choking cases, after back slapping. In 2003, 
one of his research colleagues at the Jewish hospital, Edward Patrick, asked 
that he be credited as co-developer of the Heimlich manoeuvre, though he never 
took legal action against Heimlich.

In 1980 Heimlich received an Emmy award for a television series aimed at 
children, Dr Henry’s Emergency Lessons for People, and published Dr Heimlich’s 
Home Guide to Emergency Medical Situations. He won the Lasker award, America’s 
top medical citation, in 1984. His memoir,Heimlich’s Maneuvers: My Seventy 
Years of Lifesaving Innovation 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Heimlichs-Maneuvers-Seventy-Lifesaving-Innovation/dp/1616148497>
, was published in 2014. Over the years the Heimlich manoeuvre has been 
credited with saving tens of thousands of lives. “All I need,” he once said, 
“is just for the people whose lives have been saved by the Heimlich manoeuvre 
to remember my name.”

Jane predeceased him in 2012; he is survived by two sons and two daughters.

• Henry Judah Heimlich, thoracic surgeon, born 3 February 1920; died 17 
December 2016
 