
“No one wants to sue. If you are lied about though sometimes you have to make 
a stand.”So tweeted Gary Lineker 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/816774404155777025> last week in 
defence of section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, which the government is 
contemplating bringing into force. The law would stipulate thatnewspapers would 
normally pay the costs of legal action against them 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2013/22/section/40>, regardless of the 
lawsuit’s merit, if that publisher hadn’t signed up to an “approved regulator”.

Section 40 will curb media abuses and protect the press from litigious 
oligarchs | Hugh Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/section-40-media-abuses-press-regulation-justice>
I work as part of the investigations team at the Guardian, and before we name 
individuals or companies in an article, we write to them to set out the facts 
as we understand them, and invite them to comment or correct us. When it came to
our investigation into HSBC Private Bank Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/hsbc-files>, we contacted around 130 
people, and a review of the correspondence we received as a result suggests Mr 
Lineker may not be correct.

“You should be in no doubt that, should your article be defamatory of our 
client or publish any of his private details in breach of the rights identified 
in our earlier letter, he will sue,” one lawyer wrote. “We have instructed 
leading counsel in this matter to act on our client’s behalf,” threatened 
another.

The idea of a regulator that's funded by the sort of people who are the 
subject of investigations should be alarming

Both individuals represented above were reported on, and we have yet to 
receive the writs, which probably has something to do with the accuracy of the 
reporting. This could cease to matter under section 40. Its advocates say it 
will put a stop to press abuses. Perhaps they are right, but it will likely 
sound a death knell for public interest investigations too.

A key objective of the Panama Papers reporting series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> was to illustrate the 
range of individuals attracted to the offshore world, from the philanthropic to 
the criminal. This entailed naming a large number of people; about 70 
individuals responded to requests for comment. Costs in a libel suit vary 
enormously, but by way of example, the Guardian’s expenses in defending science 
writer Ben Goldacre against a single defamation claimran to £500,000 
<http://www.badscience.net/2008/09/matthias-rath-pulls-out-forced-to-pay-the-guardians-costs-i-think-this-means-i-win/>
.

Putting these numbers together, it is inconceivable that any publisher would 
embark upon an investigation such as the Panama Papers, let alone publish 
anything, in the knowledge that British law would require them to settle a 
£35,000,000 tsunami of retaliatory defamation suits. Unscrupulous libel 
lawyers, guaranteed a payday at the press’s expense, would have every reason to 
encourage their clients to sue, perhaps prolonging the process so as to rack up 
exorbitant fees. There appears to be no protection under the legislation 
against aggrieved individuals coordinating a campaign of lawsuits.


Local papers are vital to our democracy. Now section 40 threatens their future 
| Sam Meadows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/local-papers-democracy-section-40-hillsborough>
Section 40 proponents say there’s a simple solution to the above: agree to be 
regulated by Impress, the “independent” regulatorapproved under the 
government’s post-Leveson royal charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/25/impress-press-regulator-newspaper-publishers-max-moseley>
, and submit to Impress’s arbitration scheme in the event of a dispute, as an 
alternative to legal action through the courts.

The details of that scheme 
<http://impress-press.php5.hostingweb.co.uk/downloads/file/impress-ciarb-arbitration-scheme(2).pdf>
 are as follows: publishers would be forced to participate if ordered by 
Impress. Whether publication was justified would be determined by a single 
individual from that well-known bastion of free speech and media ethics, the 
Chartered Institute of Arbitrators. Proceedings could be secret, as could the 
details of any final awards against the publisher. Resolution would take three 
months, or six months if a hearing were required. The claimant, even if 
entirely malicious, would be immune from costs. Publishers would pay £3,500 to 
the arbitrator, up to £3,000 of the claimant’s costs, the publisher’s own 
costs, and then the value of any award against them should they lose. The 
arbitrator’s decision would be binding, with appeals impossible except in 
limited circumstances. Apparently this is supposed to be preferable to 
litigation.

Another problem is Impress itself. Independent though it may be of funding 
from the publishers it would oversee, it instead gets its cash from private 
benefactors (Max Mosley, whose grievances against the press don’t need 
repeating here, presently finances the organisation to the tune of £3.8m via 
two charities). This state of affairs apparently results from deficiencies in 
the drafting of the royal charter underpinning it, which suggested the industry 
should pay for its own regulation butdidn’t rule out alternatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/25/impress-press-regulator-newspaper-publishers-max-moseley>
. The idea of a press regulator funded by oligarchs and the wealthy – ie the 
sort of people who tend to be the subject of investigations – should be 
alarming to everyone.

It is not only the Guardian that would be threatened by such a law. Several 
MPs issued threats against the Daily Telegraph in response to their 
investigation into MPs’ expenses. Private Eye, which has spent decades 
publishing investigations and defending them in court for its trouble, has
warned it too would be affected 
<https://twitter.com/PrivateEyeNews?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

None of this is to say that the press’s preferred regulator, Ipso, is perfect, 
and section 40 advocates are doubtless unpersuaded by our ownreaders’ editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/sep/23/guardian-readers-editor> system. 
But a law that forces publishers to pay punishment levies for accurate 
reporting unless they submit to opaque arbitration financed by the wealthy, is 
a solution that will benefit neither journalists nor readers.

 