
UK households should brace themselves for a combination of rising inflation, 
low pay and increased debt that will squeeze living standards next year and 
push more people into financial difficulty, experts have warned.

Higher inflation, weak wage growth and rising levels of consumer debt are 
expected to weigh on households next year as the economy adjusts to the 
post-referendum environment.

Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline, said: “The spectre of significantly higher inflation is a 
real concern. Many households have still not recovered from the last big 
squeeze on incomes in the aftermath of the financial crisis. The risk is that 
this new pressure on household budgets could tip many more people into 
financial difficulty.

“As a society we need to prepare for what could be a significant increase in 
problem debt in the years ahead.”

Economists at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research are 
predicting inflation will rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/brexit-vote-disposable-incomes-gdp-niesr>
 from a current rate of 1% to almost 4% in 2017, asthe sharp fall in the value 
of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/pound-completes-worst-four-day-performance-since-brexit-vote>
 since the Brexit vote makes imports more expensive.

Wage growth on the other hand is expected to be weaker, as firms seek to 
control costs amid slowing economic growth and heightened uncertainty.

There are also signs that household debt is returning to highs not seen since 
the financial crisis. The British Bankers’ Association has said that consumer 
credit is growing at the fastest rate in almost a decade, as record low 
interest rates fuel demand for personal loans and credit cards.

Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said the rise in borrowing 
could lead to difficulties. “More people are turning to credit … While this 
borrowing might be manageable now, a sudden change in circumstances could lead 
to debt problems.”

Peter Tutton, head of policy at debt charity StepChange, said many people were 
only just getting over the last period of falling real wages, when inflation 
outpaced pay growth following the 2008 financial crisis.

He said: “A further squeeze on household incomes, made worse by the freeze on 
benefit uprating, will leave even more households struggling. With over seven 
million people already using credit to pay for everyday essentials, there is a 
real danger of more falling into severe problem debt.”

Benefit cap will hit 116,000 of poorest families, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
Attention is now turning to Philip Hammond’s maiden autumn statement on 23 
November.The chancellor has already signalled that he will ease the pace of 
austerity set in motion by his predecessor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/philip-hammond-to-set-out-his-stall-for-balanced-budget-at-tory-conference>
.

Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “Our research found that 
the last wage squeeze left more families struggling to make ends meet without 
turning to borrowing, with over 3 million households facing problem debt. 
Rising consumer credit figures raise concerns that we’ll see more families 
borrowing to get by.

“The chancellor should address these fears in the autumn statement, and take 
action to boost jobs and wages. That means new investment in infrastructure 
such as roads, rail, green energy and homes, and increases in the national 
minimum wage.”
 