
Pesticides used on oilseed rape crops, whose bright yellow flowers have become 
an increasingly common sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/apr/19/ruralaffairs.lifeandhealth> across 
the British countryside, are harming native populations of wild bees, 
scientists have conclusively proved.

Species that feed most on the flowers of the now-profitable cash crop 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-18249840> used for vegetable oils and 
animal fodder are down by as much as 30%, according to the wide-ranging study 
published in the journal Nature.





The crop - once grown only sparingly to rest soils between grain harvests - 
must be intensively managed for farmers to attain the high yields they need to 
maximise profits, and that means high use of pesticides.

In the case of oilseed rape, many of these are of the neonicotinoid variety 
that is under close scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
by the European Union for its links with declines in bee populations.

Ministers reject second request to use banned bee-harming pesticides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/07/minitsers-reject-second-request-to-use-banned-bee-harming-pesticides>
The scientists said the 30% decline in the most susceptible species examined 
was attributable to neonicotinoid use, though some of the other declines 
noticed in the 62 bee species covered by the research could also be affected by 
separate factors such as climate change. Overall, they found that 
neonicotinoids were responsible for a 10% reduction in the distribution of bee 
species that forage on oilseed rape.

They found that the benefits of feeding from oilseed rape, with its abundant 
flowers, were more than outweighed by the harm it caused the bees. Among the 
species of wild bee most affected were the buff-tailed bumble bee (Bombus 
terrestris), the spined mason bee (Osmia spinulosa) and the furrow bee (
Lasioglossum fulvicorne).

Oilseed rape is likely to be particularly damaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/21/oilseed-pesticide-linked-to-uk-honeybee-deaths-study-finds>
, according to the researchers, because the active compounds of the 
neonicotinoid pesticides are not just applied to the surface but expressed in 
the plant’s tissues, meaning that bees can ingest the chemicals in the nectar 
and pollen of affected crops. The pattern of bee decline compared with oilseed 
rape planting showed that the crop was “a principle mechanism of neonicotinoid 
exposure among wild bee communities”, the researchers said.

The findings come from field data in England spanning 17 years and represent 
one of the most comprehensive and conclusive pieces of research amid recent 
rising concerns over the effects of neonicotinoids and other pesticides on 
pollinators.

Green campaigners hailed the research and called for strict restrictions on 
the use of such pesticides, to stem the decline in bee populations. The EU 
issued a temporaryban on certain neonicotinoid  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
pesticides in 2013, but this has already beensuccessfully challenged by the 
UK’s farming organisation, the National Farmers Union (NFU), 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/23/uk-suspends-ban-pesticides-linked-serious-harm-bees>
leading to a partial revocation last year specifically to allow the spraying of 
oilseed rape.

The future of such EU rules is under question in the UK, as ministers consider 
rewriting current regulations to follow Britain’s exit from the bloc, and the 
NFU has called for farmers to be allowed to use neonicotinoids again.

Brexit would be bad for bees, say campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/15/bees-would-suffer-from-brexit-say-campaigners>
Matt Shardlow, chief executive of the charity Buglife, told the Guardian: 
“With this dramatic evidence, it looks like case closed on neonics and bees. We 
must now be reassured that UK and EU regulators will ensure that all future 
pesticides are bee safe and that the severe harm neonics are causing to 
freshwater ecosystems is also resolved.”

Paul de Zylva, campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “This is the 
strongest ever evidence of harm to bees from neonicotinoid pesticides in 
British fields. [It] adds a huge new peak to theexisting mountain of evidence 
showing the risk these chemicals pose to our bees. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
”

He urged ministers to take note. “If the government genuinely wants to 
safeguard Britain’s bees, it must keep the ban on neonicotinoid pesticides 
regardless of what happens with Brexit, and tighten the way pesticides are 
tested and licensed for use.”

The study, from scientists at the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, will be 
considered as part of the EU’s continuing assessment of bee health and 
pesticide use.The European Food Safety Authority will report in early 2017 on 
what actions should be taken to protect pollinators and consumers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/07/eu-scientists-begin-review-ban-pesticides-linked-bee-declines>

The research used data provided by Fera Science Ltd and the Bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees>, Wasps and Ants Recording 
Scheme, and examined changes in the occurrence of 62 wild bee species with 
oilseed rape cropping patterns in England for the years 1994 to 2011, the time 
period spanning the introduction of the widespread use of neonicotinoid 
pesticides.
 