
During the later decades of her life, Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> became better known for her 
persona than her actual achievements, although she would probably argue that 
the shaping of this persona was an achievement in itself, and she would be 
right. The broken but not bowed survivor, the rehab graduate with black wit, 
the former Hollywood wild child who tells it like it is: those were the roles 
Fisher played, perfectly, to the day she died. I saw her perform live only 
once, when she monologued her life story, titled Wishful Drinking, on the New 
York stage – in the former Studio 54, appropriately enough, as quite a few of 
her life stories happened on that dance floor.

Star writer: Carrie Fisher shines brightest in her books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/21/star-writer-carrie-fisher-shines-brightest-in-her-books>
But I’d also happened to have met her five years earlier, through a mutual 
friend who took me to Fisher’s house in Los Angeles. Although her show had 
plenty of attention-grabbing fodder – from Fisher’s parents’ absurdly famous 
divorce, to her suddenStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> 
celebrity when her face was on every kid’s lunchbox, to her well-documented (by 
her) addictions and mental illnesses – what struck me most was how Fisher on 
stage was pretty much identical to how Fisher was at home. That cynical 
self-deprecation, that black humour that could turn even the story about waking 
up next to a dead man into a knowing epigram: they were as much a part of her 
stage show as they were her chat on a Tuesday night in the kitchen.

She was the person anyone would want to be sat next to at a wedding, because 
you know she would give you all the gossip about who the bride had slept with 
before and whether the groom was secretly gay. She was certainly the dream 
interviewee: to promote her return to Star Wars in The Force Awakens, she 
rocked up to Good Morning America, a popular US breakfast TV show, andbrought 
along her dog, Gary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/06/star-wars-interview-carrie-fisher-dog-princess-leia-abc-gma-video>
, whose opinion she sought in answer to various questions. Was she wacky? She 
was often described as such, and if wacky means, as I suspect it does, a woman 
who doesn’t give a stuff about the rules of the game, then, yes, she was 
probably wacky. In that same interview, when the journalist mentioned that 
Fisherlost weight to get back on screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/01/carrie-fisher-weight-loss-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
, Fisher replied, with a wry smile, “Yes, and I think that’s a stupid 
conversation.” And guess what? She was right.

Carrie Fisher on Harrison Ford: ‘I love him. I'll always feel something for 
him’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/20/carrie-fisher-harrison-ford-affair-star-wars-memoir-interview-simon-hattenstone>
There’s no doubt that the persona Fisher carved for herself – etched out to 
perfection in Postcards from the Edge, her terrific semi-autobiographical novel 
about her drug addiction and relationship with her mother, Debbie Reynolds – 
was created partly as armour. She spoke often about her lifelong insecurities 
and in The Princess Diarist, her most recent book, in which she revealed that 
she and Harrison Ford had had an affair during the making of Star Wars, she 
writes at length about feeling like an impostor both on set and off it. And yet 
she was a talented actor, and it is a real shame that she didn’t make more 
movies. She was note-perfect inWhen Harry Met Sally as Marie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y4Eo2_YMZtE>, Meg Ryan’s neurotic single 
friend, and adds a necessary dash of sass to counterbalance Sally’s gentler 
flavour. But her persona became, perhaps deliberately, almost too well known, 
and whenever she appeared in a cameo – in Sex and the City, in The Big Bang 
Theory, even to a certain extent in the new Star Wars films – the joke was 
always: “Oh, there’s Carrie Fisher.” Instead, as a gifted writer, she worked 
increasingly behind the scenes, doing script doctoring and writing memoirs.


Read any book about celebrities in New York in the 1970s and you’ll come 
across Fisher, ingesting more drugs than the whole of the Saturday Night Live 
cast put together. That Fisher ended up as sane and self-aware as she was, 
despite her addictions, despite her ridiculous Hollywood upbringing, is a 
testament to her, as she knew. An interesting comparison can be made between 
her and Liza Minnelli, who had similar lives. But whereas Minnelli idealises 
her past and her parents, Fisher preferred to look both squarely in the eye and 
say it as she saw it. It made living harder for her, I suspect, but a lot more 
fascinating for those of us gazing up at her, just listening.
 