
Concentrix, the firm accused of incorrectly withdrawing tax credits from 
hundreds of claimants, is to have its work brought back in-house to HM Revenue 
and Customs, staff have been told.

Work now being done by the US company will be taken on by HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> immediately, said the Public and 
Commercial Services union (PCS).

Last month HMRC said it would not sign a new contract with the company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/concentric-poverty-debt-child-tax-credits>
, whose present contract was due to end in May next year.

Concentrix, which was at the centre of a parliamentary debate this week, had 
handled tax credit claims, having won a multimillion-pound contract to save the 
UK government money by preventing incorrect or fraudulent claims.

MPs heard from one claimant, Sarah Broome, a 40-year-old single mother from 
West Molesey, Surrey, who claimed she was forced to go six weeks “out of 
pocket” due to a decision by the company to end her payments.

'Reign of terror' tax credit company loses HMRC contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/13/reign-of-terror-tax-credit-company-loses-hmrc-contract>
OnThursday, Rebecca Long-Bailey, shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said 
the HMRC move was a victory for those families who had been unfairly targeted 
by Concentrix.

She said: “I am pleased to hear that Concentrix employees will not be losing 
their jobs as a result of their company’s and this government’s failures, and 
will simply be transferred to HMRC. However, this government still has a lot of 
questions to answer about how this mess came about in the first place and why 
they were so slow to take action. Labour will be holding a debate in parliament 
next week calling for an immediate investigation into the government’s handling 
of the contract and for urgent action to compensate families who have unjustly 
had their tax credits stripped away.”


A Concentrix spokesman said: “As the work previously carried out by Concentrix 
moves back to HMRC, this means that, under the protection of employment 
regulations, Concentrix staff carrying out the work for HMRC will automatically 
transfer to HMRC. We have begun discussions with the staff about this transfer. 
This will provide permanent employment, offering job security to them well 
beyond the scheduled expiry of the contract in May 2017. We do not expect any 
forced redundancies as a result of this transfer.”


Meet Sally, trapped in Concentrix’s circle of poverty, debt and fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/concentric-poverty-debt-child-tax-credits>
A HMRC spokesman added: “Concentrix has begun discussions with their staff 
about this transfer. Those people moving to HMRC will be supported through 
further training, building on the improvements already delivered to the service 
we provide to our tax credits customers.”

Mark Serwotka, general secretary of the PCS union, said: “We’re delighted HMRC 
has agreed with us this work is best carried out in-house and, crucially, has 
accepted our argument to protect the jobs of Concentrix staff by transferring 
them into the department. We will be pushing for these workers to be employed 
on the same terms as their HMRC colleagues. Sadly, this could all have been 
avoided. The fiasco is further evidence it is a false economy to hive off 
important public services.”

A staff bulletin said discussions were continuing, adding that Belfast-based 
staff would automatically transfer to HMRC. It read: “This will provide 
permanent employment to Concentrix people who we require to deliver our 
priorities, offering job security to them well beyond the scheduled expiry of 
the contract in May 2017. We are currently working to agree transfer dates, but 
it will be in the next few weeks.”
 