
Hopes of saving more victims of the El Asnam earthquake were fading last 
night. Only 14 people were brought out alive yesterday when Algerian Government 
officials said they expected the final toll to go beyond 20,000 dead. [The 
final death toll was later reported as under 10,000.]

Rescue workers used bulldozers and heavy equipment while doctors amputated 
limbs to get bodies from underneath fallen buildings.

In the town centre, and two inner suburbs, the worst hit areas, whole blocks 
are heaps of rubble. A model workers' block of flats built for 3,000 after the 
last earthquake here in 1954 was built with all elegance on four stories above 
a row of shops. Now it has caved in, burying a large number of it inhabitants.

An impressive amount of heavy lifting and clearing equipment has been moved in 
from Algiers and other towns, but it is not nearly enough. Flat roofs of 
reinforced concrete have held together as they crashed down and became tombs, 
making a solid barrier against rescue work.

This happened at the big block of flats. It also happened at the central 
four-storey hotel where the roof pulverised all 1,509 rooms, with scores of 
tourists, including foreigners.

At the hotel, only one heavy crane was operating, only one pneumatic drill, 
only one bulldozer and only on oxyacetylene burner.

At the flats, rescuers efforts quicken whenever a succession of warm smells 
and objects signifies life, schoolbooks, bedding, toys. A high proportion of 
children died on Friday because many of their parents were at prayer.

El Asnam had tripled its population since the last quake in 1954, with the 
result that a lesser upheaval caused much more concentrated damage. In the town 
centre and suburbs more than 150,000 people lived. Another 50,000 lived in the 
rural areas, where hardly a village is intact. Everywhere soldiers and 
volunteers work in the dust, in silence broken only by crane motors and the 
wall of ambulance sirens. Nine thousand people have been taken to hospitals in 
the area and in Algiers.

At the makeshift central medical area which replaces the hospital, France and 
Italy worked with Algerians and were numerous enough, with enough drugs to cope 
with new arrivals. But in the villages and outer suburbs more doctors and 
medicines were needed.

An official at the prefecture said the most urgent need was tents because the 
cold nights were starting in earnest. The official said that the tents would be 
needed for at least three months because reconstruction would await new plans 
to avoid a third disaster. The cabinet has been sitting most of the day to draw 
up these plans.

Some 50 per cent of the buildings in the central town have been destroyed - 
including many that seem superficially to have survived but will have to be 
pulled down.

The moment when life came to a stop after 1 p.m. on Friday was still visible 
everywhere. At the central caf√Ä which survived with only a shakeup and badly 
cracked walls, the Coca Cola bottles still stand at the bar half drunk.

"We were having a big family celebration in our flat and just after noon I 
went to the mosque to pray" said a 71 year old woman, Oudane Djazia. "When it 
happened I rushed back but the flats had gone. The only one of my sons, one of 
four I have left, who remembered the last time and without thinking seized two 
of his children by the hair and yanked them out."

She lost another son in the 1954 quake.

UPI adds: Three aftershocks that followed on Saturday and two smaller ones 
yesterday sent more refugees fleeing to the relative safety of the countryside, 
despite attempts by officials to halt their movement over roads, already 
clogged by convoys of emergency supplies and ambulances. Officials said that 
about 60,000 people from the ravaged city and other communities damaged to 
varying degrees in the 85 mile circle of the earthquake's greatest force around 
El Asnam, were now in hastily built tent cities or camping out. Sources close 
to the Government put the number of people affected by the disaster at at least 
200,000.

Specially trained dogs from French and Swiss Alpine areas were sniffing at the 
piles of rubble and alerting their handlers at any trace of human life.
 