
A Church of England hospital chaplain has lost his claim that he was 
discriminated against when his licence to work was withdrawn after he married 
his same-sex partner, in a case that gay rights campaigners hoped would force 
the church to change its stance.


Jeremy Pemberton was appealing against an earlier ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/gay-clergyman-jeremy-pemberton-to-appeal-after-losing-discrimination-claim>
 that backed the church’s legal right to enforce its position that gay clergy 
are forbidden from marrying their partners.

The employment appeal tribunal judge Jennifer Eady said in her ruling that the 
state could not impose same-sex marriage on the church.

According to the ruling, Pemberton “was aware his marriage would be seen in 
conflict with the teachings of the church (even if he did not accept the 
characterisation of those teachings as doctrine) and he would thus be viewed as 
not in ‘good standing’, as would be understood within the Church of England”.

It added that parliament had permitted a specific exemption to the church on 
discrimination claims of this nature.


In a statement after Wednesday’s decision, Pemberton said his case – brought 
against the bishop of Southwell and Nottingham, Richard Inwood – had raised 
“novel and complex issues of law”, and he may take it to the court of appeal.

He added: “The result is, obviously, not the one my husband and I had hoped 
for. I appreciate that this case was a source of hope for many people and I am 
grateful that the judge has recognised its significance and indicated that its 
importance warrants permission to appeal to the court of appeal.

 “I am now going to take some time to consider the lengthy judgment with my 
husband, and we will decide on the best way forward, having taken advice from 
my lawyers.”

A spokesperson for the diocese of Southwell and Nottingham said: “Churches 
across the diocese continue to offer a generous welcome to people from all 
backgrounds and we remain fully engaged in the church’s exploration of 
questions relating to human sexuality.

“The Church of England supports gay men and women who serve as clergy in its 
parishes, dioceses and institutions. It has no truck with homophobia and 
supports clergy who are in civil partnerships, as set out in thehouse of bishops
 
<https://churchofengland.org/about-us/structure/general-synod/about-general-synod/house-of-bishops.aspx>
’ guidelines in 2006.”

Fourteen gay Anglican priests urge bishops to take lead on inclusion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/conservative-anglicans-appointment-of-gay-bishop-a-major-error>
Pemberton was the first C of E clergy member to enter into a same-sex marriage 
when he married his partner, Laurence Cunnington, in April 2014 in defiance of 
a church ban on same-sex weddings for clergy. Priests are permitted to enter 
into civil partnerships but are required to remain celibate.

The case, under the 2010 Equality Act, was seen as significant as an 
examination of the validity of C of E doctrine, a test of equality legislation 
in relation to that doctrine, and because it raised the issue of whether the 
church could legitimately veto appointments by other bodies – in this instance, 
the NHS.

After Pemberton’s wedding, Inwood revoked his permission to officiate, which 
prevented the chaplain from taking up a job at King’s Mill hospital in 
Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, even though he was to be employed by the NHS.

In November 2015 Inwood argued that, according to C of E doctrine, marriage 
could only be between a man and a woman. The tribunal ruling said there was “no 
doubt whatsoever that the present doctrine of the church is clear”.

The Nottingham tribunal ruled that “the claimant would never have been in this 
position had he not defied the doctrine of the church. The claimant knowingly 
entered into that marriage and knew what the potential consequences could be 
for him …

“In getting married to his partner, he was flying in the face of the clear 
restating of doctrine in relation to same-sex marriage.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fhospital-chaplain-loses-same-sex-wedding-discrimination-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce6428fe257aecd8a27075a661a7d268dbc468%2F0_32_3499_2099%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospital%20chaplain%20loses%20same-sex%20wedding%20discrimination%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fhospital-chaplain-loses-same-sex-wedding-discrimination-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospital%20chaplain%20loses%20same-sex%20wedding%20discrimination%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fhospital-chaplain-loses-same-sex-wedding-discrimination-appeal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce6428fe257aecd8a27075a661a7d268dbc468%2F0_32_3499_2099%2F3499.jpg>
 The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, has apologised to LGBT members of 
the Church of England for the hurt caused to them. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters
The church has been riven by the issue of sexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/leading-vicar-warns-church-of-england-could-split-over-homosexuality>
 for at least two decades. A two-year consultation of clergy, congregations and 
members of the general synod – the church’s ruling body – was completed in the 
summer. Next week the house of bishops will consider next steps before the next 
meeting of the synod in February.


Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, has sought to hold together the 
global Anglican communion on this issue in a conflict between the liberal US 
church, which has backed same-sex marriage, and conservatives – principally 
from African countries – who are deeply opposed.


Welby apologised in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/justin-welby-says-sorry-to-lgbti-community-for-hurt-caused-by-church>
 to lesbian, gay and transgender members of the church for the hurt caused to 
them. He is believed to have shifted his personal stance on the issue since 
becoming C of E leader almost four years ago.

Since losing his licence to officiate, Pemberton has found work as a civil 
celebrant, conducting weddings, funerals and naming ceremonies.


Pemberton’s appeal was heard at the employment appeals tribunal in September, 
with judgment handed down on Wednesday.



 