
A hospice charity signed a deal with a direct marketing agency that could have 
resulted in hospices receiving less than 2% of £5.4m raised from the public, 
according to a Charity Commissionreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/579601/hospice_aid_uk.pdf>
.

Hospice Aid UK agreed a seven-year deal with Piccadilly-based marketers Euro 
DM that resulted in the public being “misled” over how much money would be 
given to hospices. Since the Charity Commission stepped in, the agency has 
agreed to pay back £325,000.

The case is likely to raise concerns about the fundraising strategies used by 
some charities,some of which result in high management costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/23/charity-fundraising-regulation-review-stuart-etherington>
.

Hospice Aid UK was set up to raise money and then pass it on to hospices 
across the country. However, the Charity Commission began looking at the 
charity after it only passed on 1.9% of its income to hospices in 2012. In that 
year, the charity raised £132,023, but only made grants worth £2,557.

In the same year, Hospice Aid UK entered into the contract with Euro DM, which 
uses specialist direct marketing to target potential donors. Euro DM, which 
operates out of both London and Washington DC, boasts about its tactics on its 
website.


It lists a five-step programme, which starts with attracting “large members 
[sic] of new donors, using the latest direct marketing methods and techniques”. 
The donors’ loyalty is then consolidated “with proven relationship-building 
communications”. It then introduces donors to “regular and Gift Aid giving”. 
High-value donors are placed on “special development programmes”.

The final step is to identify “genuine legacy gift prospects and draw them 
towards this vital way of giving through a combination of education and 
promotion contracts.”

The donations have not so far reached the projected income. In 2014, Hospice 
Aid UK raised £537,211 and passed on 5.3% in grants. Last year, it raised 
£647,270 and passed on 4.7%. While the Institute of Fundraising says thatit is 
not possible 
<http://www.institute-of-fundraising.org.uk/guidance/research/fundratios/> to 
give a general benchmark for return on investment “because there are so many 
factors that will vary year on year and organisation to organisation”, the 
Charity Commission said that the public was entitled to expect “a significantly 
higher proportion of donations” to reach Hospice Aid UK.

According to the report, the charity’s former trustees failed to take suitable 
legal advice before entering into the contract with the fundraising agency.


The contract then gave the charity “no practical means by which to terminate 
the agreement, which given it was for a duration of 7 years and it was intended 
to generate the principal source of income for the charity, was of particular 
concern”. The Charity Commission has now referred the case to theFundraising 
Regulator <https://www.fundraisingregulator.org.uk/>.

Hospice Aid UK said that its problems raising money effectively had begun 
after a second charity, the much larger Hospice UK, raised concerns about it 
about eight years ago, creating “reputational damage”.

The British division of Euro DM is managed by Kim Way. Way said that the 
negative publicity around Hospice Aid UK had reduced its fundraising potential. 
“The solicitors who drafted our basic contract had extensive experience working 
with charities and we would hope they avoided provisions that would make it 
appear unfavourable to a charity,” she said. “They were particularly insistent 
on including a provision for termination should specific goals not be met.”


Way added that each contract was based on the needs and circumstances of the 
client and that Euro DM was confused that the Charity Commission had focused on 
their work.

Michelle Russell, the director of investigations, monitoring and enforcement 
at the Charity Commission, said that the case was a clear reminder to all 
charities of the importance of their legal responsibilities when fundraising. 
“This is a case where we believe poor financial oversight and a failure to 
adequately control costs and overheads was an instrumental factor in the 
deteriorating financial position and where a fundraising arrangement was not 
only not in the charity’s best interests, [but meant] that the public believed 
more money was going to charitable causes than was the case.”

In a statement, Hospice Aid UK said that the contract with the fundraising 
agency “still has several years to run after which a judgment can be made.”

There have been several recent controversies over fundraising strategies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/06/major-charities-back-tough-fundraising-rules-to-protect-vulnerable-donors>
 used by charities, including selling of donors’ personal data to scamming 
companies and obtaining donations from vulnerable people using undue pressure.
 