
For the second time in five days the sun shone on Liverpool's attempt to win a 
cup final, this time breaking through in the early evening after cloud and 
drizzle had shrouded Westphalia all afternoon. Coming 16 years after the Heysel 
tragedy cast a deep shadow over one of Europe's leading clubs, this match could 
be seen as carrying more than usual significance.

Just as a Gary McAllister free-kick had unlocked Liverpool's drive to victory 
in Cardiff on Saturday, so the Scottish midfielder took advantage of a similar 
opportunity to provide the cross from which Markus Babbel opened the scoring. 
The German, who played in the Bayern Munich side which beat Bordeaux to win 
this tournament in 1996, can hardly have expected to be given a free header at 
the far post so early from an orthodox dead-ball kick.

Liverpool's fans, outnumbering the Basque supporters by perhaps five to one, 
set up the sort of noise that recalled their days of glory in the European Cup. 
Quite quickly, too, they made it clear they did not care much for Jordi Cruyff, 
perhaps because he once played for Manchester United, perhaps also because he 
left English football with nothing good to say about the experience.

By contrast, how readily they showed their feelings of affection for another 
immigrant, Gérard Houllier. On Saturday, hours after the final whistle had 
sealed their FA Cup triumph, groups of fans were singing his praises outside 
the parish church of St John the Baptist and beneath the bronze statue of 
Aneurin Bevan. In mid-afternoon yesterday, in the parkland surrounding Borussia 
Dortmund's fine modern stadium, a gaggle struck up a new and striking anthem: 
"Gérard ... Gérard Houllier ... Shankly ... Shankly in disguise."

Only time, and quite a lot of it, will tell whether Houllier has the capacity 
to erect the kind of edifice that Shankly built at Anfield and which outlived 
his tenure all the way to the Heysel. But the fact that the possibility is 
crossing the minds of the club's fans is an extraordinary tribute to the 
effectiveness of the work he has done, in the face of considerable scepticism 
from those who did not see a French schoolteacher as the ideal custodian of the 
heritage of Shankly, Paisley and Dalglish.

When Steven Gerrard smashed one of his specials past Martin Herrera to double 
the lead after 16 minutes, it looked as though Liverpool might be in for a 
cruise. But, as we saw when Arsenal conceded the equaliser on Saturday, such 
are the strange psychodynamics of football thatAlaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> were almost immediately allowed 
back into the match.

Ivan Alonso's goal was the signal for a flurry of attacks which, compounded by 
some atrociously indisciplined Liverpool defending, saw Sander Westerveld 
making three important saves between the 33rd and 36th minutes.

But, as Moreno took the score from 3-1 to 3-3 within five minutes of the start 
of the second half, it became even more apparent that Houllier has a great deal 
of work to do before his Liverpool side can be spoken of in the same terms as 
their great predecessors. This lot lack the sort of meanness in defence that 
characterised the teams over which Tommy Smith and Alan Hansen presided, 
although Cosmin Contra had to be given full credit for the brilliance with 
which he taunted and turned Jamie Carragher on the way to sending in the cross 
for the first of Moreno's goals.

Nor do Liverpool's attackers always work hard enough to make their chances 
count, as Emile Heskey showed with a weak cross-shot after Dietmar Hamann had 
broken up an attack in the opening seconds of the second period and launched 
his team-mate down the inside-left channel with a wonderful ball. A more 
convincing effort would have made it 4-1. Instead Liverpool found themselves 
again at the mercy of the fluctuating tides of emotion and fortune in a match 
destined to fall to the team with the stronger nerve.

For this Liverpool side, it appears that nothing can come without suffering. 
And for Robbie Fowler in particular it must seem that pain and perhaps 
humiliation are his permanent lot. His goal, coming after 72 minutes of an 
hectically dramatic match, appeared to have won the match until Cruyff rose 
above the jeering to flick home Pablo's viciously inswinging corner.

 You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 