
The Labour party in Wales has continued its remarkable record as the UK’s most 
successful electoral machine. By winning29 out of the 60 available assembly 
seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/uk-elections-at-a-glance-the-key-points>
,Welsh Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/02/wales-assembly-election-labour-carwyn-jones-ukip-voters>
 extended its victorious run to 37 out of the last 38 national contests in 
Wales. In doing so, barring wholly unforeseen circumstances, the party leader, 
Carwyn Jones, has now ensured that his party will be able to celebrate a 
century of dominance over the Welsh political landscape.

It is hard, if not impossible, to think of parallels in any other democratic 
nation. Whatever the overheated rhetoric about one-party dominance in 
contemporary Scotland, when compared to WelshLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> the SNP are no more than gauche 
arrivistes.

Napoleon famously sought out “lucky generals”. During his election night 
analysis the veteran BBCWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> political 
editor Vaughan Roderick reminded viewers that some of his assembly colleagues 
regard Jones as the quintessential lucky political general. Certainly some of 
his election night success is best attributed to good fortune. He inherited a 
semi-proportional assembly electoral system that masks a core of partisan 
pro-Labour self-interest under a carapace of pluralism. The operation of this 
system meant that a drop in Labour’s constituency level support from 42% in 
2011 to 35% in 2016, and in regional list support from 36.9% to 29%, resulted 
in the loss of only a single seat.

Even the rise of Ukip in Wales has had positive side for Jones and Welsh Labour

Jones was also blessed by the bizarre behaviour of the Welsh Conservative’s 
leader,Andrew RT Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/welsh-tories-income-tax-cancer-drug-fund-wales-assembly-elections-manifesto>
. His unexpected decision to declare for Brexit at the start of the campaign 
seems to have served no political purpose and instead generated ire in Downing 
Street and contributed to a palpable awkwardness throughout the campaign.

Davies’s refusal to offer himself up as a candidate in his home Vale of 
Glamorgan constituency – a key Labour-Conservative marginal – also smacked of a 
lack of judgment and even a lack of seriousness. The contrast between Davies 
and other opposition leaders, such as Kirsty Williams and Leanne Wood – or Ruth 
Davidson and Willie Rennie in Scotland, for that matter – could not have been 
more stark. While the latter put themselves on the line in key constituencies, 
Davies hid himself away on a regional list, almost certainly ensuring that 
Labour kept hold of the Vale of Glamorgan in the process. It is likely that 
Davies’s party will demand an early reckoning.

Even the rise of Ukip in Wales has had positive side for Jones and Welsh 
Labour. Although its support seems to be largely drawn from disaffected former 
Labour supporters, the vagaries of the devolved election system means that Ukip 
takes seats from other opposition parties.

Local elections 2016: our writers on the night’s winners and losers | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/local-elections-2016-winners-losers-labour-conservatives-snp>
The only serious blow to Welsh Labour’s election night equilibrium came in 
Rhondda, a totemic heartland seat housing a formidable Labour constituency 
operation that nonetheless fell to Plaid leader Leanne Wood’s determined 
assault. That result will have stung Labour to the core. Yet even this may yet 
be tempered by the realisation that life in the assembly will be easier to 
manage due to the departure of the previous incumbent, Leighton Andrews. A 
former senior minister in theWelsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>, Andrews was 
without doubt one of the most talented Labour assembly members, but he also has 
an acerbic side that can rile even party colleagues let alone his opponents. 
Intra- and inter-party relations may well be soothed by this removal from the 
Senedd in Cardiff Bay.

Of course, there was more than luck and good fortune to Labour’s excellent 
night in Wales. Hard work, clever targeting, crisp messaging and political nous 
also played their part. This will be Jones’s last election as Welsh Labour 
leader, and his party may yet discover how much they will miss the ineffable 
qualities of a lucky general.
 