
The news in clues

On Friday, a solver of the Times puzzle 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/b6649b05551555540159400b5c3d0229/print_solution/3>
 would have been forgiven for flicking to the front page and checking the 
masthead. A themed puzzle? In the Thunderer? So it seemed, right from clue one 
...

1ac Like beefcake — and fish is just fine! (5-4)
[ adjective describing muscular males (‘beefcake’), and a kind of fish ]

... with HUNKY DORY appearing a year after the death of the musician who broke 
through with an album of that name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jan/25/crossword-roundup-cryptic-world-says-bye-to-david-bowie-tributes>
. One clue does not make a theme, but other entries confirmed it, and 
eagle-eyed solvers found themselves asking, as they looked at the top-right 
entries LIFER and SALT MARSH: is there...? is there LIFE on MARS? There is.

Retrospection was also, quite rightly, in a pair of incredible end-of-year 
puzzles. If you’d rather never about 2016 again: (a) you never know, we might 
soon be looking back on last year as a more carefree time and (b) they’re 
honestly among the year’s finest crosswords:Eimi’s Independent 
<http://puzzles.independent.co.uk/games/cryptic-crossword-independent/?puzzleDate=20161231#!201701>
 andMicawber’s Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=31131>. 

And if, like me, you’ve been wondering: how have American cryptic setters 
responded to the Trumpification of the nation (other than worrying that there 
won’t be any free presses with which to print their puzzles), here’s one 
answer. The Nation’sJoshua Kosman and Henri Picciotto 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/envoi/>, whose puzzles have become accessible
 <https://www.thenation.com/crossword/> by non-subscribers since we last met 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/19/crossword-blog-cryptics-america>
, produced a furious, ingenious and often riotous call-to-arms [puzzle 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/puzzle-no-3418/> | solution 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/puzzle-no-3419/>].

My favourite clues are this grim evocation ...

10ac Company carrying alcohol, tobacco, and firearms — and regressive party 
providingwhat the poor may have to eat in Trump’s America (3,4)
[ abbrev. for ‘company’ surrounding (‘carrying’) US abbrev. for ‘alcohol, 
tobacco, and firearms’, then backwards (‘regressive’) synonym for ‘party’ ]
[ CO surrounding ATF, then backwards DO ]

... of CAT FOOD and, this exhortation ...

7d Serene wisdom reveals what Nation subscribers might want to do in advance 
of a Trump presidency (5)
[ hidden inside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 (or ‘revealed’ by) SERENEWISDOM ]

... to RENEW subscriptions to independent journalism, which holds as strongly 
over here (to the tune ofa mere monthly fiver 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter>). 

Latter patter

In a typically challenging Guardian Genius puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/dec/05/genius-crossword-no-162> 
from Enigmatist (Meet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
), I appreciated the tip of the hat tosolvers’ blog Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/about-2/>, and even more so the simplicity of 
this double definition ...

12d Jack Jones of Bow or the Fox of Falkirk? (3)

... since, as the now-published annotated solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2017/jan/02/annotated-solutions-for-genius-162>
 describes, TOD is a Scottish word for “fox” as well as a piece of Cockney 
slang interchangeable with “Jack Jones”.

“Jack Jones” is perhaps not the best rhyme for “alone”, but it has persisted 
and mutated into the 1990s student slang adjective “jacks”. And perhaps the 
connection to solitude is not just the near-rhyme of “Jones” and “alone”, at 
least in this ditty:

TOD’s makes for a more satisfying rhyme, from the turn-of-the-century American 
jockey Tod Sloan, as does the subject of our next challenge. There doesn’t 
appear to have been an actual Pat Malone, either in music-hall melody or on 
Newmarket nags, but the name is another way of saying the same thing, usually 
in truncated form. So, reader: how would you clue ON ONE’S PAT?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for POWWOW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/dec/19/crossword-roundup-angels-gifts-and-pathological-sausages>
. We had appealingacrostics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
 galore, including GeoScanner’s timely “Head Post Office workers walk out, 
wrecking talks”, WoodSmoke’s plausible “Politicians of world war one with heads 
together” and accompanied by a fiendishly concealed definition in 
Alberyalbery’s “Conference pear or walnut with orange-coloured watermelon 
starters”. And Chrisbeee kept things local with “Original people of ‘Wild West’ 
occasionally would meet up”.

Other devices I especially enjoyed included Robi23’s “Dog beginning to pine 
for start of brief congress” and DameSweeneyEggblast’s “Even in Epsom we woo, 
we get together”.

The runners-up are Catarella’s poignant “Charles takes a wife, then another 
with love (and intercourse)” and Lizard’s evocative “Three wives gathering 
round by post office for a confab”; the winner is Jamesfarrier’s economical and 
erudite “Magic: The Gathering”. Kludos to James; please leave this fortnight’s 
entries and your pick of the broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the Fortnight (or so)

As we said in our For Beginners on containers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
, when the answer is there in plain sight, the setter’s job is to hide it as 
best he or she can. Such hiding has seldom been done better than by Qaos (Meet 
the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/29/crossword-blog-setter-qaos>
) ...

24d Party to develop a “Third Way” (4)
[ found within (‘party to’) DEVELOPATHIRD ]

... in a staggeringly economical and readable clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/27077#24-down> which leads the 
solver straight up the garden PATH.
 