
There won’t be many celebrities at Donald Trump’s inauguration on Thursday. 
But there will be plenty protesting against Trump on his second day in office.


Scarlett Johansson, Katy Perry and Trump’s longtime adversary Cher will be 
among those taking part in theWomen’s March on Washington 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2017/01/all-the-celebrities-attending-the-womens-march.html>
 on 21 January, the day after the inauguration.

Related: Trump v Hollywood? Don't expect to see the culture war play out on 
screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/donald-trump-hollywood-culture-wars-movie-story-lines>

And during the ceremony itself, other A-listers will be hosting a live 
telethon – officially called a“Love-a-thon” 
<http://money.cnn.com/2017/01/04/technology/loveathon-facebook-live/index.html> 
– to raise money for Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union.

Presidential inaugurations have traditionally been star-studded affairs. 
Beyoncé and Kelly Clarkson performed at Barack Obama’s second inauguration in 
2013. Aretha Franklin sang at his first in 2009. Bob Dylan performed at Bill 
Clinton’s inaugural concert in 1993, and Fleetwood Macreformed to play his 
inauguration gala 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/videos/flashback-fleetwood-mac-reunite-for-bill-clintons-inauguration-20130122>
.

Frank Sinatra actually organized John F Kennedy’s inaugration gala 
<http://www.pophistorydig.com/topics/tag/1961-inaugural-gala/> in 1961, while 
even George W Bushmanaged to get Ricky Martin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A_SF-DMAfw4> to play for him.

But this time around most of the country’s rich and famous will be engaged 
elsewhere. The Women’s March on Washington, which takes place the day after 
Trump’s swearing-in, is expected to be the main protest against the new 
president. Technically the march is a collection of demonstrations around the 
US, although the largest will be in the capital, with more than 200,000 
expected in Washington DC alone.

The protest will feature dozens of activist groups, with Ugly Betty actor 
America Ferrera chairing an “artist table” subset 
<http://www.salon.com/2017/01/09/celebrities-to-turn-out-for-womens-march-on-washington/>
. Johansson, Amy Schumer, Julianne Moore and singer Zendaya are expected to 
march in Washington DC or elsewhere, or at least express dissatisfaction in 
some form.

Comedian and actor Chelsea Handler will lead a corresponding women’s march in 
Park City, Utah, on Saturday. The demonstration will take place duringthe 
Sundance film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>.

“Women are under a right-wing political assault,” Handler wrote in the 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/chelsea-handler-why-shell-lead-sundance-march-predator-chief-guest-column-964821?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=THR%27s%20Today%20in%20Entertainment_now_2017-01-17%2007:10:07_ehayden&utm_term=hollywoodreporter_tie>
. “And I intend to fight back with all my might against a Republican president, 
a Republican Congress and the radical, religious right who are drooling to 
defund Planned Parenthood health services nationwide.”

Related: Healthcare without Planned Parenthood: Wisconsin and Texas point to 
dark future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/planned-parenthood-congress-wisconsin-texas>

Katy Perry is another performer who will be demonstrating against Trump. On 11 
January Perry, who campaigned for Hillary Clinton during the presidential 
election,released a video titled “Don’t normalize hate” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OBsImjKVof4>, in reaction to Trump’s calls for 
a Muslim registry.

Cher, who has been feuding with Trump on Twitter for over six years 
<https://twitter.com/cher/status/126442838216028160>, is expected to attend one 
of the marches. In August 2015 the singercompared Trump to Godzilla 
<https://twitter.com/cher/status/646309563000487936>, and the next month she 
suggested <https://twitter.com/cher/status/648624897598459905> throwing the 
businessman into a volcano.

Trump, who is notoriously unwilling or unable to ignore criticism, has 
characterised 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2232405/Dump-Trump-More-500-000-people--including-Cher--signed-online-petition-urging-Macys-cut-ties-cretin-Donald.html>
 Cher as having a “dying career”. As is the president-elect’s wont, he has also 
criticized her appearance, andhas claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/23/donald-trump-biography-michael-dantonio-dead-marriage-cher>
 that he “knocked the shit” out of the singer during their Twitter exchanges.

The dearth of talent at Trump’s inauguration is not for lack of trying. Celine 
Dion, Elton John, Andrea Bocelli and Garth Brooks all reportedly declined 
invitations to perform. Gene Simmons’ wife, Shannon Tweed, told TMZ that Kiss 
had been invited to appear at the inauguration – the glam rock band would have 
been a particularly avant garde choice – but also refused.

Instead the headline act on Trump’s big day will be Jackie Evancho 
<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/05/politics/trump-inauguration-performers/>, who 
took part in America’s Got Talent six years ago and has since released several 
albums. Country music singer Toby Keith and rock band 3 Doors Downwill perform 
the day before 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/inauguration/7655158/trump-inauguration-acts-toby-keith-3-doors-down-jennifer-holiday>
 the inauguration, at a “Make America great again welcome celebration 
<https://www.58pic2017.org/events/welcome-celebrations>”, although that event 
will compete with an anti-Trump, pro-Planned Parenthood concert,which will 
feature the rapper Common 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/music/la-et-ms-plannedparenthood-concert-20170110-story.html>
 and the popular rock band the National.

For his part, Trump has said 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/expect-donald-trumps-inauguration/story?id=44737678>
 the inauguration ceremony will be “very, very special, very beautiful”, 
without offering specifics.

On 10 January Tom Barrack, the chair of Trump’s presidential inaugural 
committee, offered a little more informationwhen he said 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/katherinemiller/trumps-inauguration-will-have-a-soft-sensuality-poetic-caden?utm_term=.neXlmmEb3#.ptle99BX4>
 the plan for the day was “to surround [Trump] with the soft sensuality of the 
place”.

“We’re fortunate in that we have the greatest celebrity in the world, which is 
the president-elect,” Barrack said in response to questions about the lack of 
A-list talent.

Related: Bruce Springsteen tribute act B-Street Band pull out of Trump 
inauguration gala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/17/bruce-springsteen-tribute-act-b-street-band-pull-out-of-trump-inauguration-gala>

While the main protests against Trump will be the day after he takes his oath, 
theLove-a-thon <http://www.telethon.online/> is planned for during the 
ceremony. Jane Fonda, Jamie Lee Curtis, Judd Apatow and Christopher Guest are 
among those who will appear on Facebook Live, with viewers encouraged to donate 
to Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union through 
fundraising platformCrowdrise <https://www.crowdrise.com/love-A-thon>.


If all that wasn’t quite enough, there is also the “Our First Hundred Days 
<http://ourfirst100days.us/about/>” project, which involves a collective of 
musicians releasing a song a day for the first 100 days of Trump’s tenure.

Angel Olsen, Whitney, Beach Fossils, and Minus the Bear are some of the 
artists involved. They aim to “protect the causes that will come under threat 
from this administration”.

It costs $30 to subscribe, money which will go to organizations working on 
climate change, women’s rights and immigration.
 