
“Yes, actual Joe Cole,” the tweet read. “Seriously, Joe Cole. The real Joe 
Cole.”Coventry City’s official Twitter account was incredulous. 
<https://twitter.com/coventry_city/status/655050614230130688?lang=en-gb> Joe 
Cole, winner of three Premier League titles, two FA Cups and 56 England caps, 
had signed on loan for a League One side who, until recently, were unable to 
play home games in their own stadium. From the outside it may look like a case 
of the mighty falling, but both Cole and Coventry have the opportunity to do 
something that hasn’t happened regularly throughout his career – they can use 
him properly.

There is nothing the British media loves more than hype. We are a nation so 
starved of footballing star quality that we thrust enormous amounts of pressure 
and expectation on the fragile, underdeveloped shoulders of any youngster who 
shows a glimmer of something special. It’s a mistake to think this is a recent 
phenomenon; the frenzied media circus around Cole was already in full swing 
before he had even made his professional debut in 1999.

As damaging as this tendency is, it’s easy to see why the media fawned over 
him. You need onlywatch his performance over both legs of an FA Youth Cup final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pi75EQ8OC5I> against Coventry City, of all 
opponents. It was breathtaking and highlighted all of the qualities he 
possessed as a player: creativity, flair, technical ability, vision and 
overflowing self-confidence. He was the ethereal, ill-defined concept of “the 
West Ham way” made flesh – a nutmeg incarnate, a rabona in a flat-peak cap. In 
short, he had all of the attributes to play as a trequartista, a footballer 
tailor-made to play as a No10. It’s just a shame that managers rarely used him 
as one.

Joe Cole: ‘I joined Coventry City to play more games, not for the money’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/joe-cole-coventry-city-money-aston-villa>
Some players are said to have been born in the wrong era. This line is often 
used for hatchet-men centre-halves and lumbering target men, and is generally 
used to refer to the physicality of a current player being more suited to a 
previous era when you could physically assault opponents and come away with 
nothing more than a stern look from the referee. But the sentiment is more 
applicable to Cole, who has been a victim of tactical circumstance. Cole’s 
potential was hamstrung by being born in a time – and a country – with slavish 
adherence to tactical systems that had no room for a pure attacking midfielder 
of his ilk.

When Cole pulled on the claret and blue for the first time in the 1998–99 
season, it was apparent just how talented Cole was. He frequently showed great 
invention and assuredness in possession beyond his years, the sort of player 
who could do a Cruyff turn in a phone box. After making a handful of 
appearances that season, he became an established member of the first team. He 
showed great leadership at West Ham, always willing to receive a pass and take 
on the responsibility of possession in a side that, at times, struggled to keep 
hold of the ball.

This maturity led Glenn Roeder to give him the captain’s armband at the age of 
21. However, playing with a dedicated attacking midfielder is a luxury that 
struggling teams can rarely afford, so perhaps it’s understandable that he had 
to sacrifice his game for the good of the team. His talents were enough to earn 
him theHammer of the Year award in 2003 
<http://thesefootballtimes.co/2015/06/19/west-ham-best-team-to-get-relegated/>, 
but not enough to stop his boyhood team being relegated.

Cole had impressed enough, despite his team’s plight, to catch the eye of 
Claudio Ranieri, and the Italian signed the West Ham skipper, referring to him 
as “our new Gianfranco Zola” and highlighting Cole’s dribbling as a vital 
attribute. Such glowing praise was rarely followed through though; for all the 
talk, Cole found himself plugging gaps all across midfield, a footballing 
equivalent of Polyfilla. He did not operate as a true successor to Zola but he 
had a fruitful first season atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> as they qualified for the 
Champions League with a last-day victory against Leeds. Then, José Mourinho 
came along.

Cole’s move to Chelsea brought him great success and much was made of Mourinho 
moulding him into a better player, instilling Cole with a more committed work 
ethic and a more defensive mindset. But Cole found himself hindered once again 
by tactical circumstance, with Mourinho’s strict adherence to 4-5-1 meaning the 
only opportunity was out on the wing. During his time at Stamford Bridge, he 
changed from the sort of player who could win a game by himself into just 
another cog in the Mourinho machine.

He was undeniably effective in this role, capitalising on the opportunities 
granted to him by his injury-prone winger team-mates. Cole’s trickery and 
ability to take on players in one-on-one situations enabled him to flourish for 
spells and become a reliable source of goals and assists. At times, though, he 
was an isolated figure, his impact diminished by having to play his game on the 
periphery of matches rather than at the heart of them. Mourinho’s influence 
made Cole a better winner but did he make him a better footballer?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F066088a306bd70a99a367e8d66138b1f038dd244%2F0_12_1301_781%2F1301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20Joe%20Cole%2C%20once%20England's%20great%20hope%2C%20end%20up%20on%20loan%20in%20League%20One%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20Joe%20Cole%2C%20once%20England%27s%20great%20hope%2C%20end%20up%20on%20loan%20in%20League%20One%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F066088a306bd70a99a367e8d66138b1f038dd244%2F0_12_1301_781%2F1301.jpg>
 Chelsea manager José Mourinho shouts at Joe Cole after his goal against Fulham 
in the Premier League in April 2005. Photograph: Mike Finn-Kelcey/Reuters 
Burdening Cole with disciplined tracking back seemed to shackle him; an artist 
made to paint with boxing gloves on. This has always been the terms of the 
Faustian bargain when it comes to playing for Mourinho: your soul for medals 
and a manager so consumed by the force of his own personality that he must 
coach it out of his players. In retrospect, Cole’s development could act as a 
blueprint for what happened at Chelsea with Kevin de Bruyne and Juan Mata: 
learn to defend first or you’re out.

Still, it was the most successful period of his career and it was during this 
time that Cole cemented himself as a fixture in theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> squad. A combination of his wide 
role for Chelsea, Sven-Göran Eriksson’s dogmatic insistence on playing 4-4-2, 
and the national team’s dearth of left-footed wingers meant that Cole had to do 
the graveyard shift on the left of midfield.

He is one in a long list of England players whose creativity has been wasted: 
Glenn Hoddle, Matt Le Tissier and Paul Scholes all found their impact on the 
national stage limited by either not being played in their best position or 
barely playing at all, and is indicative of a nation that consistently fits 
players to suit a system rather than fitting a system to suit players. Cole 
performed admirably in what was a broadly thankless task but it was nowhere 
near the best use of his abilities. There were glimpses though – his 
razor-sharp volley against Sweden in 2006 giving a taste of what could have 
been.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7996c8f974150feb39797186e80b71b45ccf400f%2F0_165_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20Joe%20Cole%2C%20once%20England's%20great%20hope%2C%20end%20up%20on%20loan%20in%20League%20One%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20Joe%20Cole%2C%20once%20England%27s%20great%20hope%2C%20end%20up%20on%20loan%20in%20League%20One%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fjoe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7996c8f974150feb39797186e80b71b45ccf400f%2F0_165_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Joe Cole scoring for England against Sweden at the World Cup in 2006. 
Photograph: Eddie Keogh/Reuters 
A string of injuries hampered the end of his Chelsea career, meaning his time 
on the pitch was severely limited. So, at the end of his contract, a free 
transfer to Liverpool represented a fresh start, both in terms of club and 
role. First impressions can be difficult to shake though, and it’s difficult to 
think of many worse first impressions than Cole’s league debut at Liverpool, 
which lasted just 45 minutes after a red card for a late challenge on Laurent 
Koscielny. He followed this up by missing a penalty in his next competitive 
game, and never truly recovered from these initial setbacks to impose himself 
in a leading role. Liverpool was a chance for Cole to establish himself as the 
creative force he always promised, but it wasn’t to be.

Instead, he was sent out on loan the following season to Lille, where he 
proved to be a popular figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/oct/14/joe-cole-lille-england>, and 
where he arguably came closest to fulfilling his potential as a playmaker. With 
Lille coming off a title-winning season and looking to supplement their squad 
for a Champions League campaign, Cole was a low-risk option. It proved to be a 
much better fit for him than Liverpool.

Rudi García had a clear appreciation for the potential benefits of allowing 
his most creative players to play free of restrictions – you need only look at 
the way Eden Hazard, Ludovic Obraniak and Dimitri Payet were allowed to express 
themselves. The French side deployed Cole in his best role, giving him the 
licence to play with unbridled creativity, to exchange passes with his fellow 
playmakers, and to allow other players to do his running.

There are frequent calls for more British players to play abroad, and while 
Cole should be applauded for his willingness to experience life in another 
country, the praise comes with a few caveats. Cole initially commuted to the 
north of France from his London home and it was no surprise that he ended up 
coming home. Like a Cockney sparrow coming home to roost, he found his way back 
to Upton Park.

It’s testament to Cole that he wasn’t booed when returning as an opposition 
player to the Boleyn Ground; just think of the receptions that Frank Lampard, 
Jermain Defoe and Paul Ince have received after leaving. But, even though this 
was a markedly different Cole to the one who left a decade previously, it was 
never going to work out with Sam Allardyce; you couldn’t find less of a Big Sam 
player if possible.

Cole was relegated to cameo appearances from the bench and, even then, he was 
coming on to play on the wing. He had never relied on pace and attacked space 
in behind defenders, but he required a quickness of feet that allowed him to 
manipulate the ball fast enough to beat his marker. Injuries and age meant he 
often struggled to impact games as some of his sharpness had been dulled; he 
was now more spatula than scalpel. It was not the happy homecoming he desired.

Steffen Freund, Tottenham Hotspur and the changing role of central midfielders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/oct/19/steffen-freund-tottenham-hotspur-and-midfielders>
He suffered the same fate at Aston Villa, in a side that couldn’t afford to 
employ a pure attacking midfielder due to the threat of a relegation scrap. He 
was afforded even less game time at Villa Park than he was in his second coming 
at West Ham, although Tim Sherwood did find time to praise him for the positive 
influence he had on Jack Grealish, a player who could easily fall into the same 
trap that Cole did – having his inherent creativity coached out of him to 
produce a more industrious type of player.

A loan move away seemed inevitable, but it’s surprising that he has dropped 
two levels. This move presents a real opportunity for both Cole andCoventry City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry>. They could utilise him 
properly by allowing him to play centrally with the sole responsibility of 
finding space and manufacturing opportunities for his team-mates. Cole has had 
the misfortune of rarely finding himself playing for managers who value the 
type of player he is by nature. He’s likely to be something of a marked man in 
League One due to his reputation, but it’s a challenge he will undoubtedly 
relish.

Given a chance, we could see him return to the carefree playmaker he was in 
his youth and perhaps in the process catch a glimpse of what could have been if 
things had turned out differently. All we can hope for is that he is granted 
the same creative freedom that Coventry City’s social media team were.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Tom 
Mason <https://twitter.com/Mase159> on Twitter
 