
When Hallam FC entertain Pontefract Collieries in the North Eastern Counties 
Football League Division One at Sandygate Road on Boxing Day, the club based in 
the Sheffield suburb of Crosspool will continue a tradition they helped start 
exactly 156 years ago. An offshoot of the local cricket club, Hallam FC are the 
world’s second oldest football team and were formed to provide opposition for 
nearby Sheffield FC. The sides clashed in football’s first Boxing Day fixture 
in 1860, with the hosts forced to call on extra bodies from the nearby hamlet 
of Stumperlowe to make up the numbers for a match that was won by the visitors, 
whose three years of extra experience clearly proved telling.

As they reflected on the action over a few snifters in The Plough, an adjacent 
watering hole that remained open until earlier this year, the supporters of 
both teams could have had little or no idea they had unwittingly drawn up a 
blueprint that would dictate the behaviour of millions of like-minded 
individuals of future generations courtesy of the peculiarly British tradition 
of scheduling football matches on each year’s Feast of Stephen.

Thistlecrack and Cue Card to go head-to-head in Kempton’s King George
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/thistlecrack-cue-card-kempton-king-george-colin-tizzard-confirms-horse-racing>
First match. Last match. Local derby. Boxing Day. They are invariably the 
first four of the games every fan’s eyes flick towards upon the release of the 
fixture list each summer and if you’re away from home on 26 December, the 
fervent hope is that you won’t have to travel too far. This year in the top 
flight, the already beleaguered West Ham hardcore can be considered to have 
drawn the short straw: a 740-kilometre round trip to see their team take on 
Swansea City.

Rugby. Horse-racing. Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts>. Cricket 
from Melbourne’s MCG. It behoves us to point out that football does not enjoy a 
Boxing Day monopoly and, for the general armchair sports fan, few days in front 
of the television are better than this one. However, it is with the annual 
nationwide stampede for a bracing afternoon of festive football entertainment 
that this day on the calendar remains most readily associated.

With their own leagues having paused, supporters in countries such as Spain, 
Germany and Italy invariably gaze our way with a mixture of incredulity and 
envy as hundreds of thousands of their endearingly odd British counterparts 
brave the cold and head off to enjoy a rare and edge-free air of stadium-based 
conviviality and bonhomie that – let’s not forget this is football – invariably 
evaporates within a few minutes of the referee’s first whistle.

Following the precedent set by Hallam FC and Sheffield FC 28 years previously, 
the newly formed Football League staged its first Boxing Day fixture in 1888 
when Preston North End beat Derby County. The match was played at a time when 
Christmas Day was a rare public holiday and those who carp about the demands of 
the festive schedule may be interested to learn that while Preston were putting 
five past Derby, the players of Everton were lacing up their boots for their 
third match in two days. On Christmas morning in 1888, William Edward Barclay’s 
men beat Blackburn Park Road in a Lancashire Senior Cup match, before playing 
an exhibition match against Ulster FC that afternoon. The Boxing Day game 
against Bootle ended scoreless to make it a relatively happy but exhausting 
Christmas in which Everton pulled of the commendable feat of going unbeaten in 
three matches over 24 hours – heroics one suspects the current side might 
struggle to emulate.

Joy of Six: greatest Christmas matches
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/dec/21/1> 
On this day last year the Premier League served up 23 goals, a thoroughly 
unremarkable tally from the 10 matches played. On Boxing Day in 1963, however, 
scoreboard operators across the country were kept busy as the same number of 
top flight matches yielded an astonishing 66 goals. That remains a record. 
Eleven of them were scored at Craven Cottage, where Fulham hammered Ipswich 
Town 10-1, and anyone tuning in to hear the classified results on that 
particular evening could have been forgiven for thinking the wireless announcer 
had been at the sherry: Liverpool 6-1 Stoke City, West Ham 2-8 Blackburn, 
Blackpool 1-5 Chelsea, Burnley 6-1 Manchester United, Nottingham Forest 3-3 
Sheffield United, West Brom 4-4 Tottenham, Wolves 3-3 Aston Villa, Sheffield 
Wednesday 3-0 Bolton and the comparatively tedious Leicester 2-0 Everton.

For all its apparent randomness, myriad are the factors that need to be 
considered before the fixture computer does its thing each summer, and the 
avoidance of big matches with a potential for crowd trouble on Boxing Day is 
one. It was not ever thus and derbies were once a regular feature of the 
Christmas calender in order to reduce the need for fans to travel.

Having begun this column in Sheffield, it is there we will return to revisit 
the scene of another famous Boxing Day derby. On 26 December 1979 more than 500 
police were in attendance to supervise the 49,309 locals who had turned up at 
Hillsborough to see Sheffield Wednesday take on Sheffield United in a Division 
Three match.

Having scored Wednesday’s second in a 4-0 rout, Terry Curran was unable to 
resist the temptation to slide triumphantly across the turf in front of the 
Leppings Lane end where several thousand Blades fans were assembled and was 
promptly pelted with coins for his part in what would become known locally as 
the Boxing Day Massacre. It seems that even in the season of goodwill to all 
men, many have their limits.

 * This article was amended on 26 and 28 December 2016. West Ham are playing 
at Swansea City on Boxing Day and not the other way around. This article was 
further amended because an earlier version said The Plough was still open. The 
pub closed earlier this year.  