
Margaret Lawson is relieved that she bought an annuity in April before the 
rates sank any further. It was an astute decision by the 66-year-old dairy 
farmer. Since the vote at the end of June that the UK should leave the European 
union,rates have dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit> 
by 3.5%.

“I only had a small personal pension of around £16,000,” she says. With this, 
she bought a Prudential annuity through investment adviser Hargreaves Lansdown, 
which pays her £75 a month. Lawson acknowledges that this is not a lot, but she 
is not relying on it alone to fund her retirement. “It will help towards basic 
bills,” she says.

Her husband Andrew will also buy an annuity with his personal pension pot when 
he reaches retirement. “However, we plan to continue working and producing an 
income from the farm,” she says.

Like many people of their age, the Lawsons watched the Brexit vote closely, 
and the after-effects. While fears that billions would be wiped off pension 
funds after the surprise leave vote were unfounded, many people approaching 
retirement will not be reassured as they watch interest rates and rates on 
annuities sink to all-time lows.

But, fortunately, changes to pension rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/05/pension-planning-retirement-annuity-new-rules>
 introduced in April 2015 provide more freedom for retirees. In the past, most 
workers had to swap the pension pot they had built up for an annuity, which 
then paid out a monthly sum until death. Annuities, however, were regarded as 
poor value for money – particularly for those with life-threatening health 
issues – and the government did away with the requirement to buy one.

Now, anyone over 55 can do what they like with their savings, including taking 
greater sums in cash, staying invested, or moving into buy-to-let. But it is a 
new freedom which may be intimidating for many people who are looking at what 
to do with their pension pots. “The choices can seem baffling – with difficult 
decisions to be made during uncertain times,” says Richard Parkin, head of 
pensions at Fidelity International.

Here we consider some of the available options:

Staying invested

Known as “drawdown”, this option enables savers to take an income from their 
pension. This may rely on corporate bonds paying fixed sums of interest, for 
example, or companies dishing out dividends.

Don’t panic – yet. The Brexit vote has had a surprise effect on pension funds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/02/brexit-vote-surprise-effect-pension-funds>
You take out only the sum you need and keep the remainder invested. This gives 
it a chance to grow and ride out any stock market volatility.

However, Jason Witcombe of Evolve Financial Planning, warns: “High withdrawal 
levels coupled with a fall in fund values can be an extremely toxic mix.”

Investors should always stick to a diversified portfolio of funds, says 
Patrick Connolly from IFA Chase de Vere. “This way investors can ride out any 
periods of volatility and ensure their retirement plans remain on track.”

Pros: Your money could continue to grow. Remaining funds can be passed on to 
beneficiaries free of inheritance tax.

Cons: Generating an income from shares, bonds and funds can be stressful 
during uncertain economic times. And your income is not guaranteed. If you live 
longer than expected, spend too much, or a stock market shock hits your fund, 
you could run out of money.

Cashing in 

Those aged 55 and over are free to cash in their pension pot, but the majority 
will be subject to tax. You can take a 25% tax-free lump sum, with the tax for 
withdrawing the rest set at your personal rate.

“We see a lot of people taking tax-free cash just because they can,” says 
Parkin. “The double risk here is that they take cash after a market fall, 
locking in losses, and hold this in cash where it has little prospect for 
growth.”

Pro: You have the flexibility to do what you want with your money, rather than 
lock into low annuity rates.

Cons: You risk being bumped into a higher tax bracket if you make large 
withdrawals. You still need to decide how to generate an income with your money.

Investing in property

Some pensioners are more comfortable with assets they can see and understand, 
such as buy-to-let property. Once the mortgage is paid off, property may 
provide income in retirement.

However, Connolly says: “Property isn’t a tax-efficient investment – and there 
are more changes on the way which means that those who own buy-to-let 
properties face bigger tax bills in the future.”

Pros: A tangible asset that may produce an income, with the potential for 
capital appreciation.

Cons: Rental income could be slashed by mortgage costs, letting fees, periods 
when there are no tenants, and maintenance costs. And there is tax to pay on 
the income. If you need to sell, you may not manage to do this at the price you 
want, when you want.

Buying an annuity

An annuity is a product bought from insurers with all or part of your pension 
savings to deliver an income for life after retirement.

If you have modest savings, you could buy some guaranteed income with an 
annuity to ensure you can always pay your bills, but rates have fallen.

On average, a £100,000 pot would have bought you an income of £7,060 a year at 
age 65 back in 2006. Today, the same pot would provide £4,770, according to 
figures from Retirement Advantage.

Shopping around for a better rate can substantially improve your monthly 
income for the rest of your life – and, remember, you receive a higher income 
if the provider thinks you’ll die early. So-called “enhanced” annuities are for 
smokers and the obese.

Pros: A guaranteed income for life, giving peace of mind and some security. 
There is no further effort involved once it is bought.

Cons: Rates are currently poor. You risk locking into unattractive rates that 
won’t give you the income you need. When you die, the income dies with you.

Pick and mix

You don’t have to do one thing or the other; you can mix and match. This way 
you keep your options open and make changes as and when your circumstances 
change.

You could buy an annuity to meet the bills and leave the rest invested, taking 
lump sums as and when needed. Or you may start retirement doing drawdown, 
before buying an annuity at a later stage.

However, be warned that annuity rates are unlikely to improve any time soon.

Pros: Flexibility and access to lump sums as and when required. With some 
luck, growth of any remaining invested pension will help you cope with 
inflation over the years.

Cons: Working out the best mix and match approach can seem complicated. You 
may need to pay for ongoing financial advice.

Case study: ‘We’re worried what we’ll get for our savings’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftread-carefully-negotiate-pensions-minefield-in-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfda34b3e6339b4404176fbac6f705b5cb6483a5%2F1042_415_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20negotiate%20the%20pensions%20minefield%20in%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftread-carefully-negotiate-pensions-minefield-in-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20negotiate%20the%20pensions%20minefield%20in%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftread-carefully-negotiate-pensions-minefield-in-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfda34b3e6339b4404176fbac6f705b5cb6483a5%2F1042_415_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
 Lee Hyams and his wife Debra Isbitt at their home in Hendon. Photograph: Karen 
Robinson for the Observer 
Since the outcome of the EU referendum, Lee Hyams has put his pension plans on 
ice. Hyams, 61, runs a fashion business with his partner Debra Isbitt, 54. They 
live in north-west London.

“I need my pension savings to work hard for me, but I am worried about this in 
the current climate,” says Hyams.

The couple have two personal pensions and cash Isas. They have dipped into 
their pension to withdraw some cash.

“We have accessed some of the tax-free lump sum, using this to pay off the 
mortgage,” Hyams says. “The rules seem to be pretty flexible, but I am worried 
what I’m going to get in return for all my savings made over the years.”

Retirement will not mean stopping working, however, as the couple will 
continue part-time to help make ends meet.

“It seems prudent to keep all options open, and to take a mix and match 
approach including drawdown and annuities at a later stage,” he says.

The couple have consulted a financial adviser, and used the government’s free 
guidance service Pension Wise.

Steps to take in planning for retirement

 *  Ask for an up-to-date valuation on the size of your pension pot.

 * Do you have any final salary pensions? If so, contact the scheme 
administrator for the details. 
 * Are there any old pensions you may have forgotten about? Use the 
government’s pension tracing service to track them down.

 * Request a state pension forecast from the Department for Work and Pensions.

 * Consider tax efficiency. Do you have savings that could be placed in a 
tax-efficient environment?

 * What will your living expenses be in retirement? Draw up a budget to help 
calculate this. Fidelity.co.uk offers aretirement budgeting calculator 
<https://www.fidelity.co.uk/investor/retirement/retirement-income-calculator.page>
.

 * Factor in any existing debts that need to be paid off.

 * Get advice. You can find independent financial advisers at unbiased.co.uk 
<https://www.unbiased.co.uk/> (0800 020 9430). You can also get free guidance 
fromPension Wise <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/> (0800 138 3944) and the 
Pensions Advisory Service <http://www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk/> (0300 
123 1047).

For guidance on annuities and more, call or visit the websites of Hargreaves 
Lansdown <http://www.hl.co.uk/pensions/annuities> (0117 980 9940) or Retirement 
Advantage <http://www.retirementadvantage.com> (0800 032 7690).
 