
Behind smart Georgian facades in prime West End addresses a little-known 
industry that serves the growing numbers of theglobal super-rich in London is 
booming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/23/london-fawning-politicians-welcome-rich>
.

Boasting marble foyers and plushly carpeted meeting rooms, some of these 
companies might be mistaken for luxury hotels. In fact, they are private 
offices that manage family wealth that can compare with the assets of FTSE 250 
companies such as Tate & Lyle and Debenhams.

Almost half of Britain's private wealth owned by top 10% of households
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/18/britain-private-wealth-owned-by-top-10-of-households>
Family offices have their roots in the sixth century when a king’s steward 
held responsibility for managing royal wealth, a model later adopted by many 
aristocrats,according to accountancy firm EY 
<https://familybusiness.ey-vx.com/pdfs/1003023-family-office-guide-v3-lr.pdf>. 
But the modern concept of the family office – an organisation that manages 
private wealth and other family affairs – was developed by the financier JP 
Morgan and the Rockefellers in the 19th century.

The number of single-family offices in the UK has more than doubled to around 
1,000 since the 2008 financial crash, and they manage more than $1,000bn 
(£700bn) in assets, with London now the premier global hub for the secretive 
organisations. The figures come as researchers from Goldsmiths, University of
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and Newcastle University claim 
the proliferation of family offices is entrenching the rise of inherited wealth 
and income inequality in Britain.

They conclude that the industry has promoted “entrenched elitism”, with a 
growing butler class of financiers and lawyers handsomely rewarded to preserve 
the wealth and social position of the super-rich.

The number of single-family offices worldwide is estimated to have risen by up 
to 40% since 2008 to 10,000-11,000, with combined investable assets of up to 
several trillion dollars, according to industry experts. The exact total is 
difficult to calculate because they are structured in different ways and they 
are so secretive that some families may have two offices that are not aware of 
one another.

In the UK, those that only manage a single family’s wealth are unlikely to 
require registration with theFinancial Conduct Authority <http://fca.org.uk/>. 
Therefore, they are subject to far less scrutiny than private banks and hedge 
funds, despite the size of their assets making family offices influential 
players in the global economy.

These offices serve individual families with investable assets of at least 
$100m but typically more than $250m, with the top tier managing fortunes of 
several billion. There are 44,900 individuals with fortunes of at least $100m 
and 4,500 worth more than $500m,according to Credit Suisse 
<http://publications.credit-suisse.com/tasks/render/file/index.cfm?fileid=C26E3824-E868-56E0-CCA04D4BB9B9ADD5>
. The average assets under management of 157 single-family offices surveyed by 
Campden Wealth in 2015 was $662m. The uber-wealthy known to have family offices 
include Bill Gates, former Google boss Eric Schmidt, Oprah Winfrey, the Duke of 
Westminster, the Sainsbury and Goldsmiths families, and inventor James Dyson. 
There are now about 1,000 single-family offices in the UK, compared with 400 in 
2008, according to Sebastian Dovey of wealth consultancy Scorpio Partnership.

Keith Johnston, chief executive of the Family Office Council 
<https://familyofficecouncil.com/>, which represents 100 single-family offices 
with combined assets of $100bn, estimated the total assets under management by 
all offices in the UK was $1,000bn. He added the figure could be higher as 
there could be as many as 1,800 offices in the country.

Johnston said the rise was spurred by the 2008 financial crisis because 
super-wealthy families were “very cheesed off with their private banks” because 
of the poor performance of their investments. “They decided to take more 
control and create a structure which they felt was … entirely doing their 
bidding,” he added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffamily-office-private-wealth-funds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21ca6258910baa5b50d16d729a865bef8a6705d%2F0_83_3831_2298%2F3831.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20London%E2%80%99s%20booming%20%E2%80%98butler%20class%E2%80%99%20takes%20care%20of%20the%20wealthy%20elite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffamily-office-private-wealth-funds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20London%E2%80%99s%20booming%20%E2%80%98butler%20class%E2%80%99%20takes%20care%20of%20the%20wealthy%20elite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffamily-office-private-wealth-funds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21ca6258910baa5b50d16d729a865bef8a6705d%2F0_83_3831_2298%2F3831.jpg>
 Bill Gates has a family office. Photograph: Ted S Warren/AP 
Karen Clark, managing director of the Family Office Exchange, which represents 
450 single-family offices worldwide with median assets of just more than $500m, 
said the rise was also spurred by the subsequent spike in the number of 
ultra-high net worth individuals, especially since the economic upturn from 
2011-12. Over the next 30 years, they will transfer $16tn in assets, which will 
increase the need for family offices,according to analysts Wealth-X 
<http://www.wealthx.com/articles/2015/five-family-office-trends-2015/>.

Clark added that London had become the prime location for family offices, not 
only because of the high concentration of financial and luxury lifestyle 
services available to meet the needs of the global super-rich but also because 
it offered a safe haven for those from Russia, China and the Middle East, and a 
more favourable tax and regulatory environment than its chief rival, New York.

The surge in family offices has also led to exponential growth in a wealthy 
butler class as the organisations employ three-to-12 core staff, including 
chief executives and chief investment officers, who are usually senior bankers 
and investment analysts. Major banks, accountancy and legal firms, and estate 
agents have also established dedicated teams for super-rich families.

Single-family office CEOs typically earn $330,000, according to Campden 
Wealth’s 2015 Global Family Office report 
<http://www.globalfamilyofficereport.com/>. But Mark Somers, founder of wealth 
management recruitment firm Somers Partnership 
<http://www.somerspartnership.com/>, said those employed by the largest family 
offices, with assets of several billion, could earn “easily double or triple 
that”. They may also receive bonuses of up to $400,000, according to theFamily 
Office Club <http://familyoffices.com/>. Other rewards include use of the 
family’s properties or private jets.

Only the largest family offices, which can have more than 100 employees, 
usually provide in-house lifestyle management services, according to the 
Goldsmiths and Newcastle study. The concierge staff organise everything to the 
liking of the family’s members, wherever they are in the world: “Everything 
would be taken care of, globally, so that the right kind of drinks would be 
available in the car that picked them up, on the plane, and so on. Upon 
arrival, the properties would be perfect, not just clean but recently decorated 
to the owner’s specification with permanent staff whose job it was to take care 
of maintenance and gardening.”

The study aims to illuminate how family offices create dynasties by 
maintaining the wealth and lifestyles of the global super-rich. Co-author Luna 
Glucksberg attended a family-offices conference in a hotel in a converted 
castle in the Swiss Alps, which heard that only 10% of super-rich families 
manage to retain their wealth over three generations.

One in 65 UK adults now a millionaire, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/27/number-of-millionaires-in-uk-rises-by-200000>
The study said the most successful families shared a vision of the purpose of 
their wealth over future generations. The mechanisms employed by family offices 
to achieve this include creating family constitutions, which set out rules the 
family members have to follow, such as attending annual or biannual meetings, 
which keep the various branches and generations together. The rules “may state 
that all family members have to get their spouses to sign ‘pre-nups’ to protect 
the family capital. It may stipulate how succession is worked out, how 
inheritances are planned or what happens when family members are not interested 
in … family businesses.”

The researchers write that family offices do not just prepare the money for 
the children, but prepare the children for the money: “The wealth needs to be 
preserved just as well as the family line … It is about creating dynasties.”

Family office associations said children could be incentivised to generate 
their own wealth by match-funding: giving them a sum from the family’s assets 
equivalent to their independent earning. Johnston said some family offices 
encouraged entrepreneurship by enabling the offspring of the super-wealthy to 
turn their hobbies into businesses. For example, he said the son of a Middle 
East magnate, who had no interest in the family business, was given funding to 
set up a gallery because he collected art.

Mike Savage, professor of sociology at the London School of Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> and author of Social Class in 
the 21st Century, criticised family offices for promoting the rise in inherited 
wealth, which now accounts for 70% of total wealth in Britain and is expected 
to rise to 80% by 2050. He said: “We can see them as key drivers of the 
inter-generational reproduction of inequality and their proliferation is likely 
to entrench inequality.”

Disputing this, Johnston said family offices have a positive impact on the 
economy. He added: “From a social point of view, since wealth is more 
concentrated it’s important that those who deploy family capital spend that 
money wisely. It’s key that families are well-governed and make sustainable 
investments because that has a wider impact on the economy in terms of jobs, 
tax and investment.”
 