
Manny Pacquiao was the second best paid athlete on the planet last year. The 
boxer banked $160m in 2015, but he won’t be making any more money from his 
sponsor Nike.The company dropped Pacquiao this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/manny-pacquiao-gay-comments-nike-boxing>
 after he described gay people as “worse than animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
”. Pacquiao has since apologised “for hurting people”, pointing out that he was 
“not condemning LGBT <https://www.instagram.com/p/BB2BV-wudy1/>”, just opposing 
gay marriage and “telling the truth”.

His comments – which came a few days after the Paris-Saint Germain defender 
Serge Auriercalled his manager a “faggot” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/15/laurent-blanc-paris-saint-germain-serge-aurier-pitiful-chelsea>
 – were another blow to anyone who thinks sport and equality should go together.

Sport seems to be out of step with society. In the Out on the Fields survey 
<http://www.outonthefields.com/> last year, 80% of the people polled said they 
had witnessed or experienced homophobia in sport. As if that statistic wasn’t 
damning enough, 73% of the gay men polled reported that homophobia was more 
common in team sports than in the rest of society.

Manny Pacquiao provokes storm by calling gay people ‘worse than animals’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
Erik Denison, who managed the survey, has seen some reasons for hope this 
week. “I was thinking about the strong reaction to Manny’s comments and thought 
it was great that the defence of LGBT people is expanding beyond western 
countries,” said Denison. “There is a global shift under way. It is very 
possible to change sporting culture, as young people are far more accepting of 
LGBT people than older generations.”

A widespread problem

The problem of homophobia is not confined to a few elite players. When we 
asked our readers if they had experienced homophobia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/homophobic-abuse-sport-your-experiences>
 at sporting events earlier this week, it did not take long for people to come 
forward with depressing stories.

“Just on Saturday at a lower league game in Scotland I heard a player 
described as a ‘poof’ because he was wearing gloves on a cold February 
afternoon,” said one reader. “That was our own team’s player. Opposition 
players were called ‘poofs’ and ‘faggots’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca879d247a265151aa160ddf1039f4cd826d9254%2F0_0_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca879d247a265151aa160ddf1039f4cd826d9254%2F0_0_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
 Paris Saint-Germain defender Serge Aurier called his manager a ‘faggot’. 
Photograph: Karim Jaafar/AFP/Getty Images 
Another reader, Liam, attended Stoke City’s recent home match to Norwich and 
“had the displeasure of sitting in front of one individual who found it 
necessary to use Declan Rudd’s pink goalkeeping kit as an indication of his 
sexuality – insults such as ‘fudge packer’ and the more simplistic ‘GAY’ were 
shouted at regular points throughout the 90 minutes.”

A Leeds fan said: “Calling opposing players ‘faggots’ is entirely normalised 
at Elland Road. It is amplified if there have been rumours about a player’s 
sexuality. Other amplification catalysts include diving, being injured, meekly 
pulling out of a challenge – essentially anything that challenges the masculine 
notions of the sport.”

Carol, a long-time season ticket holder at Chelsea, was similarly emphatic: “I 
constantly witness homophobia, unfortunately. Last Sunday a bloke near me 
yelled at the opposing goalie that he should stick to the ballet like a 
‘cock-sucking poof’. The keeper could hear this clearly. It would be extremely 
difficult for a gay footballer to come out. Any gay men or women in the crowd 
probably feel the need to keep quiet about their sexuality. As for anyone who 
is transgender, well, I wouldn’t imagine they’d fare very well, sadly.”

The stories began to feel familiar, but they were not limited to British 
football.

“There is a culture of homophobia within American football culture and it is 
utterly disgusting,” said Andrew. Though he loves sport, he is now sworn off 
attendingNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> matches at the MetLife 
stadium after attending a Jets v Titans game with his girlfriend and being 
“vilified from the parking lot to my seat for wearing a scarf”.


“It was cold that night, but apparently wearing a scarf makes you ‘a 
scarf-wearing, cocksucking faggot’. That’s just one example of the many insults 
thrown my way on that night.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967a02778bba8f3199a010b3921e40f0b7872e58%2F0_251_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967a02778bba8f3199a010b3921e40f0b7872e58%2F0_251_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Tottenham Hotspur’s Harry Kane wears a Football v Homophobia T-shirt during 
warm-up before a match against Manchester City. Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
Responding with humour

In British football, a lot of the most obvious and tiresome abuse is directed 
at Brighton fans.

“Apparently, due to a large gay population, Brighton fans and players are ‘all 
gay’ and this is a reason to berate them,” said Gareth.

Brighton fans are well versed in the chants and have developed a repertoire of 
responses. David, a regular at the club, said: “Brighton fans have been known 
to sing ‘You’re too ugly to be gay’ in reply, or ‘One nil, to the nancy boys’. 
Some fans reply with abuse of their own, but most of us just sigh and either 
ignore it or try to come up with something wittier in response.”

When Liam heard abuse at Manchester United’s ground, he injected a dose of 
humour into his response. “John O’Shea made a poor pass and a man two rows in 
front of me shouted, ‘Learn to pass, John O’Gay,’ and kept disparaging him in a 
similar vein when he did anything slightly wrong. I shouted over that it was a 
really shit pun, and that, if he was going to be offensive, he might as well 
try to be more creative. He went quiet.

“When dealing with insults, humour is the one universal currency between 
football fans. It’s harder for someone to say those things if they feel they 
are going to be mocked.”

To react or not to react?

Humour might work, but it only goes so far. Some of our readers told us they 
had spoken up when they witnessed homophobic abuse.

“I’m gay,” one reader wrote. “My friend was aware of this. He has no problem 
with me or other gay people. He was sitting next to me at a football match and 
shouted ‘faggot’ at an opposition player. I turned to him and said: ‘What the 
fuck?’ He said sorry and I’ve never heard him say it again.”

While many of our readers admitted to feeling ashamed, cowardly or guilty for 
not speaking out, they also acknowledged that large crowds were intimidating 
and that they were afraid of inciting more trouble.

“If a bloke in the crowd shouts out homophobic abuse to a player, I feel 
powerless to do anything or say anything to challenge it,” said Carol. “I hate 
that I can’t speak out, but I am a middle-aged woman who mostly attends games 
on my own and I would receive abuse in return.”

When Stuart, a Brighton fan, heard the chant “You’re just a town full of 
faggots”, he wanted to do something, but instead he “stood quietly and wished 
it wasn’t happening. You try telling 2,000 fans to shut up.”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb239bcc0bb5f4bf8d97f3e9c0bfbb5c6aab45ca%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb239bcc0bb5f4bf8d97f3e9c0bfbb5c6aab45ca%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Gay football fans from LFCLGBT and Canal Street Blues at a match between 
Liverpool Ladies and Manchester City. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Report it

Thankfully, there is a way to stand up to this abuse. The Kick It Out app 
<http://www.kickitout.org/get-involved/report-it/the-kick-it-out-app/> offers 
fans a safe and anonymous way to report abuse. “Our app allows users to report 
incidents in a discreet way, instantly, during the game,” said Kick It Out’s 
Anna Jӧnsson.

“The app will figure out which stadium you’re in, and your complaint will be 
sent immediately to the control room in the ground. The club can then take 
action against the offenders during the game, while you stay anonymous and do 
not have to approach a steward to report the incident if you feel uncomfortable 
doing so.

Take a stand and speak up because otherwise it just carries on and nothing 
ever changes
Ali Mahoney 
“We will follow up the complaint with you and the club to ensure it’s being 
investigated. If your phone doesn’t have signal, the complaint will be queued 
and sent on as soon as you have signal.”

Kick It Out <http://www.kickitout.org/> can be contacted by email, through 
their website 
<http://www.kickitout.org/get-involved/report-it/online-reporting-form/>, on 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/kickitout>, and by using their free and 
confidential phone number <http://www.kickitout.org/get-involved/report-it/>. 
They employ a full-time officer who follows up these reports, and last season 
40% of the complaints they received about homophobia were proved and acted on, 
with punishments handed out to abusive fans and negligent stewards.

Most top level clubs have their own reporting services 
<https://www.mcfc.co.uk/~/media/Files/Kick%20It%20Out%20Reporting%20Guide.ashx>
. Ali Mahoney of theFootball v Homophobia <http://www.footballvhomophobia.com/> 
campaign is adamant that fans should use them. “Football should be a place that 
is welcome to all, regardless of sexuality or gender identity,” she said. “The 
main thing is to report it and not let it go. Our message is: take a stand and 
speak up because otherwise it just carries on and nothing ever changes. People 
are starting to switch on and realise that abuse is just not acceptable any 
more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F570c27bdfc0169c15c55c2a19c79c8ad09f8f8d3%2F0_98_3160_1895%2F3160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20I%20...%20respond%20to%20homophobic%20abuse%20at%20sporting%20events%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fhow-do-i-respond-to-homophobic-abuse-at-sporting-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F570c27bdfc0169c15c55c2a19c79c8ad09f8f8d3%2F0_98_3160_1895%2F3160.jpg>
 Australian rugby star David Pocock has stood up against homophobia on and off 
the field. Photograph: Mike Hewitt/Getty Images 
Brave David Pocock should be commended for propagating cultural change | James 
Norman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/24/brave-david-pocock-should-be-commended>
Being brave isn’t easy, but the example set by David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/24/brave-david-pocock-should-be-commended>
 is there to be followed. When the Australia international heard that one of 
his team-mates had been called a “faggot” during a rugby match, he turned to 
the referee and said: “You heard that, sir – you can’t say that, there could be 
gay players out there.”

Pocock was told “that’s rugby” by the opposing captain, but the Australian 
rugby authorities disagreed and fined the guilty player, who has since 
apologised.

Pocock said he did want the story to turn into “a witch-hunt” of players, but 
he was adamant that his team would not tolerate homophobic slurs. “You can be 
the toughest man in the world, but it’s got nothing to do with using that sort 
of language,” he said.

It’s time some of his fellow athletes and sports fans learned that lesson.

 