
In a shed next to his Portsmouth home, former soldier Paul Quinn plugs into 
state-of-the-art technology, costing only £20 and operated through his iPad, to 
manage his chronic, life-threatening respiratory disease. He exercises there 
with his wife Elizabeth, guided by printouts of routines he has pasted to the 
walls.

Since the 64-year-old started using the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) management app he has lost weight, his depression has lifted, he sees 
his GP once a year (compared with twice-monthly visits previously) and he has 
not needed hospital treatment for 18 months. Quinn says he has his life back. 
This is not what he expected three years ago after developing acute breathing 
problems and being diagnosed with COPD. At that time he was handed an 
end-of-life pamphlet.

Digital transformation

Chronic disease dominates the expenditure of the cash-strapped NHS. COPD is 
one of a number of chronic conditions including diabetes, arthritis and heart 
disease which, according to NHS England figures, affect 15.4 million people and 
absorb 70% of the budget. Heavy investment is being channelled into all areas 
of technology byNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England but its 
greatest hopes for IT are in tackling chronic disease.


Can a digital revolution save the NHS?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/03/can-digital-revolution-save-nhs>
Juliet Bauer, the new director of digital experience for NHS England, says: 
“The system we have presented to patients up to now has been too difficult to 
use. People want simplicity and to be able to manage their experiences 
regardless of disease.”

The transformation of Quinn’s life has come about from using an app called 
myCOPD <https://mymhealth.com/> every day. The programme’s bright, simple 
layout means he can easily assess his symptoms and make decisions on medication 
use to prevent respiratory crises. Information is shared with his GP and his 
consultant, who in turn can keep tabs on whether he is struggling and might 
need to be seen. His medication is tracked, ordered and delivered, without 
Quinn needing to travel to the surgery. Quinn says: “For me the app has been a 
life saver and for the NHS it has saved an absolute fortune”.

He has hit the nail on the head. COPD costs the NHS more than £800m each year 
in treatment alone, not to mention the costs of caring and days of work lost. 
MyCOPD costs just £20 per patient.

The app was developed by respiratory specialist Dr Simon Bourne, working as 
part of a team of healthcare and tech experts calledMy mhealth 
<https://mymhealth.com/>, who are committed to finding digital solutions to 
managing long-term conditions. Bourne despaired at the poor outcomes for 
patients with this condition and the lack of availability of pulmonary 
rehabilitation places.


If you put the right tool in patients’ hands, they really can become experts 
in their condition
Dr Simon Bourne 
After evaluation by the NHS Innovation Accelerator 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/innovation/nia/> and the National Institute 
for Health Research’s Small Business Research Initiative, the app is now used 
by 1,700 patients throughout the UK. The patients are based in 22 different 
clinical commissioning group areas and it has been estimated to save each 
between £200,000 to £300,000 in the first year alone, according to Department 
of Health figures.

“We have proved that if you put the right tool in patients’ hands, they really 
can become experts in their condition and transform the way they use healthcare 
facilities,” says Bourne.Apps <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> for 
managing diabetes and asthma were released in October, and another for heart 
failure will follow in spring 2017.


Staying connected

Almost everyone has a mobile or a tablet and people often prefer interacting 
with digital technology to visiting hospital, as has been proven by theDawn 
(Diabetes Appointments via Webcam in Newham) scheme 
<http://www.qualityincare.org/diabetes/case_studies/dawn_diabetes_appointments_via_webcam_in_newham>
, which was aimed at 16 to 25-year-olds with diabetes in the disadvantaged area 
of Newham in east London.

Only 11% of young patients with type 1 diabetes here were properly controlled, 
and persuading them to attend appointments was a struggle. At the young 
people’s request, however, Newham CCG and Barts health NHS trust introduced 
Skype appointments. Non-attendance rates dropped from 28% to 16%. The young 
diabetics also felt clinicians concentrated on them more fully during Skype 
appointments. Based on Dawn’s success, a service called Vocal has been 
developed for people after cancer surgery.

Dragon's Den rejected me but my invention saves lives across the NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/12/dragons-den-rejected-invention-saving-lives-nhs-nurses>
Social prescribing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/05/social-prescribing-fishing-group-doctor-ordered>
 can also be boosted by technology. In the Creggan estate in Derry, one of the 
poorest areas of Northern Ireland, a 12-week pilot programme is being rolled 
out by social prescribing software company Elemental. Through using its 
software, 56 pre-diabetic participants had the choice of more than 40 different 
activities relating to diet, motivation and mental health. All participants 
lost weight – some as much as 4 stone – by engaging with the programme. Now 
eight NHS organisations in England are set to sign up to Elemental’s scheme.

The pressure to move ahead with technology is clear from the number of IT 
initiatives announced by the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> over the summer, but it is crucial 
to first assess whether they are effective and add value.


Work is underway to help clinicians choose and recommend reputable apps, 
starting with mental health, diabetes and COPD. The NHS’s first chief clinical 
information officer, Keith McNeil, a former transplant specialist, says that 
“for the NHS to move quickly we need to put in place a rigorous system and get 
the balance right between the need for innovation and getting it right for the 
patient”.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 