
It has become popular to write off 2016 as one the worst years in recent 
history. In the world of work there has been both progress and setbacks. With 
ongoing issues such as the gender pay gap, workers’ rights, automation and 
Brexit we can expect even more turbulence in the workplace next year.

The gig-economy backlash

Once heralded as way of liberating workers to become their own bosses, or a 
means of supplementing income, the promise of the gig-economy turned into 
disappointment 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fecd0145daddd05480414f4159fffccf3fc0030%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fecd0145daddd05480414f4159fffccf3fc0030%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Uber taxi drivers protest, London 2016. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
As the popularity of on-demand services like taxi app Uber and food delivery 
app Deliveroo surged in the UK, many of their workerssp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/he-truth-about-working-for-deliveroo-uber-and-the-on-demand-economy>
oke out about the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/he-truth-about-working-for-deliveroo-uber-and-the-on-demand-economy>
 they pay for the convenience these services bring; including lack of job 
stability, paid leave and other workers’ rights.

There have been numerous lawsuits and protests 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37053348> over the poor conditions in the 
gig-economy, in which5 million  <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37605643>
people in the UK work <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37605643>. Uber, for 
example, classifies its drivers as self-employed, but there have been 
complaints from workers that the company exerts tight control over them, 
dictating working patterns and cutting the rates they can charge. In a recent 
report, Frank Field, a Labour MP and chair of the work and pensions committee, 
saidUber treats its drivers as Victorian-style “sweated labour” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/uber-drivers-report-sweated-labour-minimum-wage>
, with some taking home less than the minimum wage.

On these grounds, two Uber drivers, on behalf of a group of 19, took the 
company to an employment tribunal and won. In October,the court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/28/french-economy-returns-to-growth-as-gdp-rises-by-02-business-live>
 that Uber’s 40,000 UK drivers were not self-employed and the company should 
pay them thenational minimum wage and benefits like holiday pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
.

Uber drivers stage go-slow protest through central London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/22/uber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee>
The victory, which Uber is seeking to overturn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-appeals-against-ruling-that-its-uk-drivers-are-employees>
, was billed as a landmark test case that would impact the gig economy as a 
whole. Delivery firm CitySprint and car service Addison Lee are embroiled in 
similar legal disputes over the treatment of freelance workers, while courier 
service Hermes is beinginvestigated by HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/20/hermes-couriers-working-status-investigated-hmrc>
. Companies profiting from the casualisation of work, orbogus self-employment 
<http://www.managementtoday.co.uk/taxman-cometh-dont-caught-false-self-employment-trap/entrepreneurs/article/1398264>
 as it has been dubbed, will continue to be under intense scrutiny in 2017.

“What is interesting about the Uber case is that it shines a light on how 
people are ‘employed’, particularly casual workers,” says Kiran Daurka, partner 
at employment the law firm Leigh Day, which represented the twoUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> drivers. “There is a real 
question about what work looks like now; what are workers’ rights and how have 
some seemed to have fallen into these huge cracks, and don’t seem to have any 
protection?”

Workplace discrimination
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5f950264e08bf9f309d3567532a520fec0b2213%2F0_248_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5f950264e08bf9f309d3567532a520fec0b2213%2F0_248_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A 2016 report showed more than three-quarters of pregnant women experience 
negative treatment at work. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
 A series of damning reports this year showed that workplace discrimination is 
a persistent problem in the UK. And, in many cases, is getting worse.

 In March, a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/fifth-of-women-harassed-at-work-over-pregnancy-or-flexible-hours-report-finds>
 commissioned by the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) and Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills revealed that more than three-quarters of 
pregnant women and new mothers, the equivalent of 390,000 women, experience 
negative and potentially discriminatory treatment at work each year. One in 
nine lose their job as a result. This discrimination is bad for business too. 
The costs of hiring and training new staff, redundancy payouts and lost 
productivity after women are pushed out of jobs costs £280m a year, according 
to the EHRC.

This is one of the reasons why so little progress has been made on closing the 
gender pay gap – which at 19.2%,has not changed in four years 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/what-is-the-gender-pay-gap/>. A cross-party committee 
of MPs chaired by Maria Miller, reported in March that this gap is perpetuated 
by the part-time pay penalty, women’s disproportionate responsibility for 
childcare and the concentration of women in low paid sectors like care, retail 
and cleaning. Next year, private and voluntary sector employers with over 250 
employees will have to collect data on the gender pay gap at their 
organisations and report it the following year.

Workplace discrimination: when a pregnant pause becomes more long-term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/12/discrimination-work-pregnant-new-mothers-forced-out-jobs>
Daurka is not convinced these draft regulations go far enough. “The ongoing 
concern for me is that majority of businesses don’t have 250 employees – it 
would have been good to see a lower threshold,” she says.

Race discrimination is also persistent problem in UK workplace, with a major 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/human-rights-watchdog-urgent-action-deep-rooted-inequality>
 from the EHRC showing that black, Asian and minority ethnic workers faced 
higher unemployment rates, lower pay and were underrepresented in senior roles.

 Tribunal fees continue to be a major roadblock to creating more equal 
workplaces. Since the fees, which require workers to find up to £1,200 before 
they can pursue a case, were introduced in 2013, the number of of unfair 
dismissal claims has fallen by 73%, the Trades Union Congressreported in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/unfair-dismissal-cases-slump-under-tribunal-fee-system-study-shows>
. The union revealed that discrimination cases on the grounds of sex have 
dropped by 71%, race by 58% and disability by 54%. The government was due to 
publish a review on the impact of fees at the end of last year, but is yet to 
do so. “There is no point in having laws when people can’t enforce their 
rights,” says Daurka. “Employers, in my view, are likely to take these laws 
less seriously if they think people aren’t going to utilise their rights to 
bring a complaint,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e83ad4f39fdb75ecd5fa787ab7d3ad7daa0efa9%2F0_466_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e83ad4f39fdb75ecd5fa787ab7d3ad7daa0efa9%2F0_466_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Since the start of the financial crisis, Britain has seen a 10.4% decline in 
real wages. Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
A living wage?

 From revelations about Sports Direct paying under the minimum wage, to the 
focus on the “just about managing 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38049245>” in the chancellor’s recent 
budget, low wage Britain has been a major story this year. Since the start of 
the financial crisis, Britain has seen a 10.4% decline in real wages, which is 
a bigger fall than any other advanced country, apart from Greece, according toa 
TUC study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/27/uk-joins-greece-at-bottom-of-wage-growth-league-tuc-oecd>
.

 In April, the “national living wage” came into effect, meaning workers aged 
25 and above received a minimum wage of £7.20 an hour – 50p more than the 
minimum wage. In April 2017, this will go up to £7.50 an hour. While this led 
to an immediate pay rise for1.8 million workers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/30/osbornes-national-living-wage-minimum-wage>
 many businesses expressed their concerns saying it wouldlead to job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/sep/16/business-community-warns-living-wage-could-hit-employers-staff>
. Businesses, includingLe Pain Quotidian and Zizzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/29/le-pain-quotidien-ends-paid-breaks-staff-national-living-wage>
 reportedly cut staff perks, like paid breaks, when the national living wage 
was introduced.

 Campaigners argued that given its name, the national living wage should be 
calculated on the rising cost of living, taking into account wage stagnation. A 
report from the Living Wage Commission found that six months after its 
introduction, the national living wage wasfailing to provide the basic needs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/national-living-wage-low-paid-wage-commission-rent-wages>
 of low-paid households.

 “The government’s national living wage is really welcome but it isn’t a real 
living wage because it is not based on what it costs to live,” says Katherine 
Chapman, director of the Living Wage Foundation, a charity that has been 
campaigning for employers to pay a living wage for the past 15 years.

 The foundation calculates the living wage to be £9.75 an hour for London and 
£8.45 an hour outside of London. Despite any confusion that may stem from the 
similar name the former chancellor George Osborne chose for the national living 
wage, the Living Wage Foundation has doubled the number of employers paying the 
voluntary living wage since George Osborne first announced the national living 
wage in April 2015, says Chapman. The foundation has 3,000 employers signed up 
to pay the voluntary living wage, including Ikea, Majestic Wine, Lloyds TSB and 
National Grid.

“What is quite interesting about the government’s introduction of the national 
living wage is it has got businesses to look again at their business models and 
think how can we move towards a higher pay, higher skills, higher productivity 
business model,” she says.

 But with Brexit looming, rising costs of doing business may affect employers’ 
ability to pay the living wage. “It’s been a good year for awareness but there 
is still a lot of work to do,” says Chapman. “What’s more important than ever, 
is to make sure their employees are protected in these uncertain times, 
particularly as we know that inflation will go up,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073dc9843ccae85eb0b221b919f163d35c62f913%2F0_83_2416_1450%2F2416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20of%20work%20changed%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-the-world-of-work-changed-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073dc9843ccae85eb0b221b919f163d35c62f913%2F0_83_2416_1450%2F2416.jpg>
 It has been predicted that by 2050, 40% of jobs will be automated. Photograph: 
TASS / Barcroft Images 
The onward march of automation

There have been countless stories this year about robots stealing our jobs. It 
has been predicted that by 2050, 40% of jobs will be automated and no industry 
would be unaffected. While this projection is decades away, there have been 
many developments in artificial intelligence this year.Robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/robots> are being designed to be bank 
clerks, to host job interviews, to be therapists – which show how this 
technology is already having an impact on the way we work.

 An example of a profession that has really embraced artificial intelligence 
this year, and could benefit most profoundly from it due to its life or death 
outcomes, is surgery. Robots, such as da Vinci, have entered the operating 
theatre, carrying out operations with groundbreaking precision. This year, the
firs 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/robot-carries-out-its-first-kidney-transplant-two-british-patients-1580761>
t 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/robot-carries-out-its-first-kidney-transplant-two-british-patients-1580761>
kidney transplan 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/robot-carries-out-its-first-kidney-transplant-two-british-patients-1580761>
ts 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/robot-carries-out-its-first-kidney-transplant-two-british-patients-1580761>
 performed by robots in the UK were so accurate, the patients only had to be 
treated with paracetamol as a painkiller after.

 Other developments have not been so welcome. Much progress has been made in 
self-driving car technology, but there are concerns about their safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/05/tesla-crash-self-driving-car-software-flaws>
. In the Volkswagen factory in Germany, a worker wascrushed to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/02/robot-kills-worker-at-volkswagen-plant-in-germany>
 by a robot. And there is concern about what the onward march towards 
automation means for jobs security and wages – as theSouthern Rail dispute 
highlights. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/17/robotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers>

Surgeons use robot to operate inside eye in world first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/10/robot-eye-operation-world-first-oxford-john-radcliffe>
 “Technology is becoming more labour-saving and less job-creating. It is not 
creating as nearly as many jobs as it did in the past,” says Carl Frey, an 
economist at Oxford University. The move towards automation has been dubbed the 
fourth industrial revolution. But this term is misleading, he says. “Automation 
these days has more to do with services – it will transform services in the 
same way that the industrial revolution transformed manufacturing,” he says.

The Brexit vote

 The most momentous event to happen this year in the world of work was the 
referendum vote to leave the EU. Yet in the absence of a credible plan 
outlining when and how Brexit will happen, it is impossible to predict the full 
scale of its impact.

 Since the vote, there have been concerns that businesses might leave the UK 
and dampen their recruitment plans. Meanwhile EU workers living in the UK are 
still in the dark about whether they will be able to stay. While UK 
unemployment hit an 11 year low in September, theBank of England  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37997713>has forecasted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37997713> that it is set to rise amid 
uncertainty over Brexit. Brexit will also have many repercussions for 
employment law in the UK, with much of it influenced by EU law.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 