
Hillary Clinton has not yet revealed whether she will be calling time on her 
long political career. She usedher recent concession speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
, however, to address people at the beginning of theirs. “Please never stop 
believing that fighting for what’s right is worth it,” she said.

The US presidential election, like the EU referendum before it, has laid bare 
how millions of people feel disenfranchised by the political establishment. At 
the same time, this era of great political uncertainty will lead people to 
become more politically active and organised – it is these people Clinton was 
appealing to.

We are already seeing signs of this in the UK, post-referendum, with Labour, 
the Conservatives and theLiberal Democrats 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/lib-dems-say-membership-surge-directly-linked-jeremy-corbyns-re-election-1583520>
 all reporting a surge in membership. But where should those wanting to build a 
career in politics start?

Dozens of leading politicians in the UK have followed the same career 
trajectory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/23/ppe-passport-power-degree-oxford>
, reading politics, philosophy and economics at Oxford University before 
heading straight Westminster where they rise up the ranks, working for 
politicians before becoming one. A debate rages on about whether these career 
politicians – or those with experience outside of the political sphere – are in 
the best position to serve the public. Although this path into politics is 
well-trodden, it is certainly not the only route. There are many more ways to 
build a career in politics than becoming a politician.

If you want a political career but are unsure where to start, join us on 
Wednesday23 November from 1–2.30pm GMT for a live chat with a panel of experts. 
We will be discussing:

 * Whether having a degree is necessary 
 * How important experience outside of politics is 
 * Non-traditional paths into politics and careers outside of Westminster 
The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, tweet us
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
tosarah.shearman@theguardian.com <mailto:sarah.shearman@theguardian.com> who 
can post them for you.

The panel

Peter Allen is a senior lecturer in politics at Queen Mary University of 
London. He researches political representation and his book The Political Class 
will be published next year.

Shazia Awan is a PR consultant, writer, equality activist and media 
commentator. In 2011 she was named top Asian female entrepreneur for her 
clothing business. Before this she was a conservative parliamentary candidate 
and the first Asian woman to address a Welsh Conservative party conference.

Ivana Bartoletti is chair of the Fabian Women’s Network and vice chair of the 
Fabian Society. She worked with Sadiq Khan in the mayoral election and stood in 
Havering and Redbridge as a London Assembly candidate. She is a privacy and 
information professional with a background in European politics.

Jo Blackman is senior EU and international campaigner at Global Witness where 
she campaigns on deforestation and the illegal timber trade. Prior to that, she 
spent eight years working for the Labour Party in international relations. She 
has also worked for a Labour MP, MEP and as government relations manager for 
Save the Children.

Julian Cooke is national political officer for Unison. He has extensive 
experience of Unison’s relationship with the Labour party, helping young 
activists and the next generation of trade unionists build their careers. 
Before Unison, Julian worked in the health service.

Afzal Khan is a member of the European Parliament for the North West, 
representing the Labour Party. He is vice chair of the security and defence 
committee and a member of the foreign affairs committee. Before he became an 
MEP, he was the first Asian Lord Mayor of Manchester and served as a councillor 
for 15 years.

Fiona Richardson is senior careers consultant with The Careers Group London. 
She works with social science and public policy students at King’s College 
London, advising on careers in public policy, Westminster, government and 
international relations.

Caroline Russell is a Green Party politician who is a member of the London 
Assembly and an Islington councillor. She began her career as an artist before 
pursuing civil engineering and then transport campaigning and politics.

Carl Thomson is director of the Whitehouse Consultancy, an issues-led 
communications agency based in London. Before joining Whitehouse he worked in 
the House of Commons as an assistant to Theresa May and John Redwood. He was a 
Conservative Party parliamentary candidate at the 2005 general election and 
served as a local councillor for six years.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 