
Find ways to exercise in the office

A Lancet study 
<https://secure.jbs.elsevierhealth.com/action/consumeSsoCookie?redirectUri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.thelancet.com%2Faction%2FconsumeSharedSessionAction%3FSERVER%3DWZ6myaEXBLGZpQFlLdJmhw%253D%253D%26MAID%3DKCSyNu8FnALcAWx1O1Z%252F4Q%253D%253D%26JSESSIONID%3Daaagzhjkl9JaB4bmaGvKv%26ORIGIN%3D914579733%26RD%3DRD&acw=&utt=>
 from earlier this year found that people need to do at least an hour of 
physical activity a day to counter the negative health impacts of every eight 
hours spent sitting.

“The evidence suggests that if you are sitting for long periods of time 
without breaking it up, then any physical activity that you do is less 
beneficial for your health,” says Dr Fehmidah Munir, a health psychologist and 
reader at Loughborough University’s school of sport, exercise andhealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> science. 

If you are chained to your desk for hours on end, it is important to shoehorn 
in a bit of exercise. Cycling to work, getting off the tube or bus a stop 
earlier, taking the stairs, visiting colleagues in different parts of the 
office rather than emailing, are some of the many ways to do this, says Dr John 
Giles, an NHS consultant radiologist and medical director at Benenden. “Just 
half an hour of exercise a day can make a huge difference,” he says.

Take your lunch break

It is too easy to skip your lunch break and shovel in a sandwich while staring 
a computer screen. But taking time out in the middle of the working day is 
another way to cram in some exercise, even if it’s a short burst. “Just getting 
up and going for a walk after lunch is a brilliant idea as it helps to 
normalise blood sugar levels quicker so there’s no post-lunch slump,” says Jo 
Blood, managing director of Posture People, a commercial furniture consultancy.

Another way to make your lunch break more active is to exercise with a group 
of coworkers, says Julia Scodie, founder of Exercise in the City, a fitness 
group which runs office-based exercise classes. “You don’t need too much room, 
just move desks and chairs aside in a meeting room. Speak to your HR department 
about setting something up,” she says. If space is an issue, perhaps organise a 
group run or walk, she suggests.

Eight ways to eliminate stress at work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/dec/08/how-to-deal-with-stress-at-work>
Avoid neck and eye strain

As work becomes more sedentary we are spending more hours at a computer 
screen, which can cause eye strain and headaches. It is important, therefore, 
to take regular eye breaks. The 20:20:20 rule, where every 20 minutes you stare 
at something 20ft away for 20 seconds, helps. Set a timer or use an app such as
Eyecare 
<https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/eyecare-protect-your-visi/eeeningnfkaonkonalpcicgemnnijjhn?hl=en>
 to prompt you.

To reduce eye and neck strain, adjust your seat height so your eyes line up 
with the top on the computer screen, says Blood. Consider the lighting. “Try 
experimenting with a lamp by your desk, or a different colour tint on the 
screen might help,” she says. Apps such asScreenRule 
<https://www.clarosoftware.com/screenruler> and f.lux <https://justgetflux.com/>
 change the colour of the screen to reduce straining blue light.

 Walking around the office has an additional benefit, says Scodie. “Where you 
can, try to speak to colleagues face to face or call clients rather than 
sending emails. This can really help to reduce screen time.”

Dealing with stress at work

Workplace stress is a growing problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/dec/08/how-to-deal-with-stress-at-work>
. As well as affecting the mental health of employees it can manifest itself 
physically, whether that’s back and neck pain, stomach aches or headaches.

Hotdesking can be brilliant and evil all at the same time

In stressful situations the fight or flight response can be activated, says 
Justin Eade, an active workplace consultant and digital health innovator at 
Glimpse, a gesture technology company. “When we experience this at less 
appropriate times it can be very distressing and upsetting,” he says.

Maintaining physical activity at work and removing yourself from the task or 
issue at hand can help, says Andy Magill, a vitality coach at the health 
insurer VitalityHealth. “This is where meditation and deep breathing can be 
beneficial, as they allow you to gain a clear mind before returning to address 
what needs to be done.”

Healthy hotdesking

Hotdesking, where employees do not have designated seats, is on the rise as 
employers look toreduce costs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/guides/zgjmtfr>. 
“Hotdesking can be brilliant and evil all at the same time,” says Blood. While 
getting people to change places every day is thought to create a more 
collaborative work environment, the ergonomics of the different workspaces 
could cause health problems. “When ever you go to a new desk you’ve got to take 
the time to alter it to suit you,” says Blood. “Change the chair height, adjust 
the back angle, get the screen to the right height. If you can’t adjust things 
then your employer really needs to look at the hotdesking environment,” she 
says.

How to stay healthy and active in the office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/aug/24/how-to-stay-healthy-and-active-in-the-office>
Dodging the snacks

To work in an office is to run a daily gauntlet of endless snacks, 
meeting-room sandwiches and pastries andcake-pushing colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jul/07/office-cake-pushers-we-need-less-work-on-our-plates-not-sweets>
. The combination of sitting at your desk all day and being surrounded by 
workplace Bake Off fans can have a negative impact on your health.

Healthy snacks do not have to be “boring or sensible and tasteless”, says 
Nicki Cresswell, a wellbeing coordinator at the Chartered Accountants’ 
Benevolent Association. “Cheese is a great snack in moderation as is dark 
chocolate,” she says.

Eating a good lunch will also help curb snacking. “Preparing food the night 
before can seem like a pain but it has great payback, literally,” says 
Cresswell. Lunches that must be eaten with a knife and fork have the added 
bonus of preventing you from using your keyboard or taking calls while eating. 
If it is too much work to prepare, then you can team up with colleagues and 
take it in turns to bring in a healthy lunch each day.

Giles has a simple technique for resisting the temptation to snack, which also 
helps you get up more and avoid headaches: drink more water. “Your brain often 
gets confused with thirst versus hunger messages,” he says.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 