
Some of the most important stories published by the Guardian have come from 
whistleblowers. Their disclosures have been vital in exposing stories of huge 
public interest, sometimes with global ramifications. Our pledge is to protect 
our sources ‐ and not to disclose their identities, or our communications with 
them, unless their approval has been given. If you want to get in touch with us 
in a way that protects your security and anonymity, there are a number of 
technical options that may help – although,of course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/data-computer-security>, none of them 
can be 100% guaranteed.

Messaging apps 

Phone apps do little to hide who and where you are, but if your priority is 
confidentiality rather than anonymity, there are a number of apps that offer
“end to end” encryption <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/End-to-end_encryption>. 
They include Signal (from theOpen Whisper Systems <https://whispersystems.org/> 
not-for-profit organisation) andThreema <https://threema.ch/en>. (These are 
examples. We don’t endorse any particular security app.) The Guardian 
investigation team’s Signal number is +44 7584 640566.

End to end encryption means ‐ theoretically ‐ nobody else will be able to see 
the content of any message you send. To get started, you need to share mobile 
phone numbers with a reporter. That’s not difficult to do; you can ring the
Guardian head office <https://www.theguardian.com/help/contact-us> from a 
landline (preferably not from work or home, which could be easy to trace) to 
get put through to the reporter concerned, and then share details. Or you can 
do so using one of the following methods.

Email 

If you plan to write an email to a Guardian journalist about a sensitive 
matter, look intoPGP encryption 
<https://ssd.eff.org/en/module/introduction-public-key-cryptography-and-pgp>. 
It’s more complicated than using apps, but is probably more secure in practice, 
and email is much easier for sending longer messages and attachments. Used 
properly, PGP should make a message or document unreadable to anyone except the 
person who sent it and the person for whom it was encrypted.

How does it work? With PGP, you will use a “public key” that belongs to the 
person you are writing to, but is freely available on the internet. This key 
turns your message into an unreadable jumble. Your recipient – and no one else 
– has a corresponding “private key” which can unlock messages that were 
encrypted by their public key.

Public keys for Guardian journalists can be found on pgp.theguardian.com 
<https://pgp.theguardian.com/> and on many writers’ profile pages.

Two popular PGP encryption software packages are Gpg4win 
<https://www.gpg4win.org/> for Windows and GPG Suite 
<https://gpgtools.org/gpgsuite.html> for Macs. If you use a browser to access a 
webmail service, such as Gmail or Yahoo! Mail, you may want to look atMailvelope
 <https://www.mailvelope.com/>. 

PGP can be a bit fiddly. It’s best to play around with it first by sending an 
email containing relatively innocuous content.

Although there’s no easy way to break PGP codes, it does have shortcomings. An 
encrypted email message can still reveal the identity of the sender. One way to 
reduce that risk could be to create an independent email address solely for 
contacting the Guardian. You may want to use computers that aren’t associated 
with you when setting up and when using such an account. Going to an internet 
cafe is one option ‐ just be careful about who can see your screen and whether 
there are CCTV cameras nearby. And think about the information you provide 
while signing up to a new account. Does any of it link the new address back to 
you?

If you’re using a shared computer, remember that email and browser software 
normally retains a history of what you’ve been doing, unless you clear it or 
use a private browsing or incognito option. And consider the times at which you 
send messages. Could that information help prove that you sent them?

Tor 

Even an anonymous email address doesn’t conceal the IP address 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_address> from which a message has been sent, 
and an IP address could be traced back to you. To help avoid this you could use 
theTor network <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tor_(anonymity_network)>, which 
bounces your message through a series of relays to hide the source location. To 
access the Tor network you will need to installTor software 
<https://www.torproject.org/>. Tor browsers can be configured to discard your 
browsing history and to minimise the amount of information you share.

As with email, if your computer is being monitored at source, Tor does not 
protect you from that.

Tails 

Tails <https://tails.boum.org/>, which is short for “The Amnesiac and 
Incognito Live System”, is a computer operating system designed to preserve 
security. It connects to the internet using the Tor network; it helps guard 
against local monitoring; and when you log out, it wipes any unencrypted 
content. It is far more secure than using a normal computer or phone.

SecureDrop 

The best way to contact the Guardian securely is through our SecureDrop 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> document portal. 

The SecureDrop site is only accessible over the Tor network. All submitted 
messages and documents are automatically encrypted. We download those encrypted 
files on to Tails computers and then decode them in a secure environment on a 
computer that iscompletely offline 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)>. SecureDrop does not 
record where things came from: all we can see is what has been sent to us, the 
time it arrived, and a randomly generated code name for whoever submitted it.

For maximum security and anonymity, contact us via SecureDrop from a computer 
that you are confident is not being monitored.

You don’t have to provide us with a means of contacting you but it can 
sometimes be useful for us to be able to do so. It can also help us if you are 
able to provide some background about what is in the documents and why you 
think they might be of interest to us.

We previously mentioned WhatsApp in the Messaging Apps section of this page. 
In view ofconcerns over its implementation of encryption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
, we have removed it.
 