
As with so many cautionary tales in football, alcohol, arrogance, overweening 
ambition and alarming financial mismanagement were all partly responsible for 
Sheffield Wednesday’s initial downfall. All part of the start of what has 
turned into a 16-year exile from English football’s top tier.

This season their supporters began singing “we’re on our way back” before the 
3‑0 League Cup victory against Arsenal in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/27/sheffield-wednesday-arsenal-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 and will be upping the volume at Wembley on Saturday. Beat Hull City in the 
Championship play-off final and Wednesday really will have returned from the 
wilderness.

Sheffield Wednesday and Hull aim to make the most of unexpected chances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/sheffield-wednesday-hull-championship-play-off-premier-league>
They fell an awful long way before January 2015, when the club was sold to 
Dejphon Chansiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/29/sheffield-wednesday-takeover-thai-union-frozen-group-dejphon-chansiri>
, a Thai businessman whose family firm is the world’s largest producer of 
canned tuna, and last June, when a Portuguese coach, Carlos Carvalhal, became 
their 11th manager in 15 largely depressing years.

Benito Carbone believes it might never have gone wrong were it not for a row 
about the odd pint of beer. The alice-banded Italian midfielder and his 
compatriot Paolo Di Canio had formed a near telepathic on-pitch bond at 
Hillsborough in the mid- to late 90s but a damaging dressing-room schism was 
already developing. “Playing with Paolo at Wednesday was magical,” Carbone 
recently recalled. “But there were problems in the dressing room; two Italians 
on one side and the English on the other. The problem was they all wanted to go 
out for a pint but I didn’t drink. That’s where it all went wrong. If I had my 
time again I’d go out with them, have a Coke, and joke about it.”

In 1999 both Carbone and Di Canio – who infamously pushed over the referee 
Paul Alcock the previous year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/sep/27/paolo-di-canio-premierleague>
 – departed; in 2000 Wednesday were relegated from the Premier League with 
Peter Shreeves unable to halt a slide which saw Danny Wilson sacked in the 
March. Wilson’s exit had been preceded by calls for his head from four local 
MPs including David Blunkett, the former home secretary.

By then complacency and arrogance had long since set in – how else was the 
temperamental Dutch midfielder Wim Jonk granted a contract offering him 
£5,000-a-game appearance money, payable even when he did not actually appear? 
Small wonder Wednesday arrived in what is now theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> nursing crippling debts.

The fatal 1999-2000 campaign had been an awful season. Wilson’s side lost 8-0 
at Newcastle United, during which the volatile Belgian Gilles De Bilde led a 
toothless attack. Once relegated, Paul Jewell, Terry Yorath, Chris Turner, Paul 
Sturrock, Brian Laws, Alan Irvine and Gary Megson had a go at arresting what, 
at times, threatened to turn into a terminal decline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5102d7f3a0e858fdfae677758e78948ef76ac4%2F458_413_3095_1857%2F3095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sheffield%20Wednesday%20returned%20from%20wilderness%20to%20stand%20on%20verge%20of%20big%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sheffield%20Wednesday%20returned%20from%20wilderness%20to%20stand%20on%20verge%20of%20big%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5102d7f3a0e858fdfae677758e78948ef76ac4%2F458_413_3095_1857%2F3095.jpg>
 Gilles De Bilde sits on the Hillsborough turf as Sunderland celebrate a 2-0 
win in April 2000 to edge Sheffield Wednesday closer to relegation from the 
Premier League. That was Wednesday’s most recent season in the top flight. 
Photograph: Michael Steele/Getty Images 
Two relegations – in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/apr/22/match.sport10> and 2010 – 
heralded brief descents into the third tier, and there were assorted winding-up 
orders. Salvation arrived in 2010 with the appearance of Milan Mandaric, the 
former Portsmouth and Leicester City owner. Although he formally paid only £1 
to purchase the Owls, Mandaric dealt with a £1.8m debt owed to the Inland 
Revenue while also renegotiating a £28m bank loan.

“My football heart ruled my business head,” said Mandaric shortly afterwards. 
“I could have let Wednesday go into administration but I didn’t want that. I 
quickly found out that the challenge was a lot bigger than I thought. I could 
see the club had been abused over 15 or 16 years. But it’s a lovely club.
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
should be admired. It’s got two big assets: the name and the support.”

If increasingly distant, the glorious club history that beguiled Mandaric 
contains plenty of high points, serving as reminders that Sheffield is famous 
for much more than its seven hills, The Full Monty and the Arctic Monkeys.

In the early 90s, Wednesday won the League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/feb/24/joy-of-six-league-cup-final-upsets>
, finished third in the top tier, competed in Europe and were beaten by Arsenal 
in the 1993 FA and League Cup finals. Managed by Ron Atkinson and then Trevor 
Francis, they were noted for exciting, skilful football starring John Sheridan, 
David Hirst – who could not stop scoring – and Chris Waddle. For a time it even 
seemed they might reprise their early 20th century zenith when four English 
titles and three FA Cups were won but, instead, a nadir beckoned.

If Mandaric’s intervention was vital, things really changed when he sold the 
club to Chansiri for £37.5m, a key figure in the Thai Union Group – owner of 
the John West brand. By now Stuart Gray was the manager but he was swiftly 
replaced by Carvalhal who has made good use of the loan system with, among 
others, Gary Hooper – who has since completed a full transfer – and Michael 
Turner arriving from Norwich.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e69955dce376dbbab6aad3dc556f18411f735a%2F0_30_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sheffield%20Wednesday%20returned%20from%20wilderness%20to%20stand%20on%20verge%20of%20big%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sheffield%20Wednesday%20returned%20from%20wilderness%20to%20stand%20on%20verge%20of%20big%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fsheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e69955dce376dbbab6aad3dc556f18411f735a%2F0_30_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
 Carlos Carvalhal, formerly in charge of Sporting Lisbon and Besiktas, has done 
an impressive job as Sheffield Wednesday’s manager. Photograph: Martin 
Rickett/PA 
Meanwhile, the dated training facilities have been dragged into the 21st 
century and some proper shopping has also been done. Fernando Forestieri, a 
gifted Argentinian-Italian striker (with an unfortunate penchant for diving), 
has largely impressed following his £3m transfer from Watford while Lucas João, 
a Portuguese forward, arrived from Nacional for around £2.5m.

Some of Wednesday’s success, though, has been down to the performances of Sam 
Hutchinson in midfield, where the former Chelsea defender – who was temporarily 
forced to retire from football with serious knee trouble – has shone.

Calvalhal, formerly in charge of Sporting Lisbon and Besiktas, is an 
interesting character who studied for his coaching badges alongside José 
Mourinho and has written a coaching manual entitled Soccer – Developing a 
Know-How. A typical passage reads: “Tactical periodisation is a practice 
concept that has a conceptual matrix,” while another chapter addresses the 
“Principle of Horizontal Alteration specificity.”

If that hardly sounds ideal bed-time reading for your average footballer the 
50-year-old seems much clearer and more concise when it comes to translating 
theory into practice. “Carlos is a thinking coach,” says Waddle, who still 
lives in Sheffield and regularly meets up with Hirst to reminisce about old 
times. “He looks at what opponents have and what they don’t have then tries to 
set up Wednesday to cause them problems.

“Carlos likes to play open, attacking football but defensively Wednesday are 
quite solid and quite well organised. Their problem is that Hull are still 
virtually operating as a top-flight club. Steve Bruce has kept a nucleus of his 
Premier League team including Tom Huddlestone and Michael Dawson – relatively 
recent England players. My heart says Wednesday can do it at Wembley – but my 
head says Hull will be difficult to beat.”
 