
As the dust settles on the chancellor’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/23/local-government-mixed-views-autumn-statement-social-care-devolution-philip-hammond>
, the future of social care remains one of the hottest topics of discussion 
among MPs, political pundits and practitioners alike.

Adding to the debate is the issue of how we deliver a more joined up health 
and social care service in a world where demand for both is increasing.

Let’s consider what an integrated health and social care system might look 
like. Should the cultural differences between health and social care be 
preserved within a closer partnership? And what role can technology play in 
bringing together services that have traditionally worked in parallel?

Bridging the divide: how can the NHS get collaboration right?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/14/bridging-the-divide-how-can-the-nhs-get-collaboration-right>
‘This shouldn’t be a land grab’

For some local authority leaders, there should be a focus on ensuring the 
distinct strengths, values and characteristics of the sectors are not 
diminished in any way.

This was one of the topics raised at a roundtable event hosted by the 
Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/home> in partnership with Capita One 
<http://www.capita-one.co.uk/>, where seven directors of adult social care 
contributed to the discussion.

Liz Bruce, director of adult social services for the London tri-borough 
councils, said: “The strengths and skills you have if you mix up health and 
social care are tremendous if we get it right.Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> is really good at things that we 
in social care shouldn’t take the lead in. This shouldn’t be a land grab, it 
should be a partnership.”

Cultural shift

To build a joint working environment that meets the needs of vulnerable 
citizens and their families, the first step is to get a clear picture of the 
potential barriers to success so they can be broken down.

A Capita One survey <http://bit.ly/2h1Gcxi> designed to explore whether the 
challenges around health and social care integration were regarded as cultural 
or technical found 65% of local authority leaders believed the greatest 
challenge was the cultural shift for the people involved. Only 35% of 
respondents said the greatest difficulty would be bringing the systems together.


These figures reflect the wider view that when it comes to helping people 
adapt to a new way of working, the importance of relationships should not be 
underestimated. As John Powell, director of adult social services for the 
London borough of Redbridge, explained during the roundtable discussion: “Where 
integration and joint working is successful, it is because of long-standing 
arrangements with relationships between people in the various organisations.”

The need to cement lasting relationships between health and social care is 
central to Redbridge’s approach to integrating services. “We’ve gone into GP 
practices, starting dialogues and working together. GPs, district nurses and 
social workers are all working together,” Powell said. “What we’re now trying 
to do is build on the existing relationships we have.”

‘Under the radar’ integration reaps rewards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/03/under-the-radar-integration-reaps-rewards>
Effective technology

So, what role can technology play in enabling a more people-centric, 
communications-based approach to health and social care integration?

Bringing different IT systems together may not be regarded as the main barrier 
to achieving more joined up ways of working. However, the roundtable debate 
revealed services can face other challenges in this area.


Health and social care professionals may be used to working separately, so 
technology needs to make it easier for authorised people in each service to 
share data, without needing to spend additional time or effort in doing so.


David Pearson, director of adult social services at Nottinghamshire county 
council, said: “No matter how these systems are brought together, it is 
important that, for social workers and health professionals, it feels as if it 
is one integrated system rather than multiple systems.”

New software solutions are being developed that can ensure people working in 
health and social care see the same information on an individual or family they 
are in contact with, in real time. For local authorities, such tools can free 
people to work more effectively to meet the often complex needs of vulnerable 
citizens and their families.

But it’s not just about sharing information more effectively. The role of 
technology in supporting and managing people’s needs could be significant too. 
Devices that remotely monitor patients’ wellbeing and allow instant contact 
with services in an emergency are one example of how people with specific needs 
could get the support they require to remain in the community.

With the right steps in place, local authorities can achieve a genuine shift 
in culture that will enable health and social care teams to work together, 
without losing sight of their distinct identities and responsibilities. 
Technology also has an essential role to play in paving the way for a future 
where health and social services have the tools they need to support our most 
vulnerable citizens in living happier, healthier and more independent lives, 
for longer.

 * Mark Raeburn is managing director of Capita One. Read the full local 
authority interviewshere <http://www.capita-one.co.uk/ADASSOneVision>.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 