
When Sue Campbell sat next to the prime minister on Super Saturday at London 
2012, she had one thing on her mind. It was an intervention that has led 
directly to Great Britain leading China in theRio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> medal table and crashing through a 
target of making this its most successful “away” Games days before the closing 
ceremony.

Amid the afterglow of what remains one of the most sensational 46 minutes in 
British sporting history, the then chair of funding agencyUK Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport>, Lady Campbell, argued that the 
money poured into ensuring that the hosts were not embarrassed at their own 
party must not be a one-off.

“It was Super Saturday. Seb [Coe] was sitting next to the prime minister and 
had to go and do Jess’s gold medal ceremony. Jeremy Hunt was asked to sit on 
the other side, but he was insistent that I went and sat next to the prime 
minister,” recalls Campbell, now tasked with repeating the successful UK Sport 
formula at the Football Association as head of women’s football. “We discussed 
how elite sport was funded and why it was critical to sustain it at that level.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad53d7728a5486a5eddf473d4f5ae841a98e36cd%2F0_151_4000_3201%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Super%20Saturday%20at%20London%202012%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Rio%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Super%20Saturday%20at%20London%202012%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Rio%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad53d7728a5486a5eddf473d4f5ae841a98e36cd%2F0_151_4000_3201%2F4000.jpg>
 The head of UK Sport in 2012, Baroness Campbell. Photograph: John 
Robertson/Commissioned for the Guardian 
The very next day, David Cameron, bathing in the warm glow of the achievements 
of Mo Farah and company, announced that the funding formula that had delivered 
success in Beijing and London would be maintained for the next Olympic cycle in 
Rio. In fact, in an attempt to ensure that Britain became the first country not 
to experience a serious comedown after its Olympics as the system relaxed, key 
staff drifted away and funding was cut, the amount for Olympic sports was 
marginally increased, from £264m to £274m. Taking the Paralympics into account, 
the overall investment swelled to £350m. A separate pot of about the same 
amount has been invested in grassroots sport throughSport England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport-england> over the same four-year 
period, with more mixed results.

'Worst Olympic flop': Chinese media bemoans Rio medal haul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/worst-olympic-flop-chinese-media-rio-medal-haul>
Simon Gleave, head of sport at data analysts Gracenote, has predicted that 
China, castigated in its own media for a disappointing performance compared 
with its own home Games in Beijing and then London, will eventually just pip 
Team GB for second place in the medal table. One crucial factor in the final 
result is likely to be the “six pointer” in the diving pool whenTom Daley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tomdaley> takes on Chinese favourite Qiu Bo 
in the 10m platform event.

Gracenote also predicts that Team GB will probably just miss out on topping 
the 65 medals they achieved in London, with 23 golds compared with 29 four 
years ago, which would still be a phenomenal result.


The continued success is partly a result of maintaining investment but also a 
sustained belief in the system that has been created to support it. In other 
host countries there has also been a tendency to re-examine the priorities for 
spending on sport in the wake of a home Games. That happened in the UK too, 
with a post-Games review to determine whether the “no compromise” approach 
fostered to deliver success in Beijing then London was too extreme, 
particularly with sports such as basketball that arguably delivered a wider 
benefit than could be measured in precious metal falling off the programme .

The verdict was that UK Sport was essentially on the right track when it came 
to elite sport, though there was a wider admission by the government that 
grassroots sport was stuttering amid evidence of stalling participation figures 
and local authority cuts. For UK Sport, there was also more money to go round, 
with some sports that were funded for the first time in London, such as 
handball and volleyball, dropping off the funding programme because they were 
unlikely to yield medals at the next two Games in Rio and Tokyo.

So levels of funding were maintained or increased for those sports, such as 
cycling, sailing and rowing, that had underpinned the rise up the medal table 
from 36th in Atlanta in 1996 to 10th in Athens in 2004, then fourth in Beijing 
and third in London. In cycling, already high expectations have been exceeded 
by the likes ofSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>, Jason Kenny and Laura Trott 
with 12 medals secured and every member of the track cycling squad that 
competed winning at least one. Younger riders such as Callum Skinner and Owain 
Doull suggest the future is bright in one sport where Britain has vastly 
outspent but also consistently outsmarted its rivals, leading some to mutter 
darkly about the means by which it is being done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2f6473da015847fda85b6f4aeb29255e23b0a77%2F104_406_5224_3135%2F5224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Super%20Saturday%20at%20London%202012%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Rio%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Super%20Saturday%20at%20London%202012%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Rio%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fsuper-saturday-london-2012-rio-success%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2f6473da015847fda85b6f4aeb29255e23b0a77%2F104_406_5224_3135%2F5224.jpg>
 Team GB cyclists Katy Marchant, Rebecca James, Jason Kenny and Laura Trott 
pose with their medals from Rio. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
But funding levels were also increased for those sports that had shown that by 
applying the same mindset that had been introduced to cycling, rowing and 
sailing by an idiosyncratic, driven generation of performance directors, 
including SirDave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>
, Sir David Tanner and Stephen Park, they could yield similar results. That has 
been the case in sports such as gymnastics, which has delivered six medals, and 
diving, in which Team GB has won three with Daley’s individual event still to 
come.


Cameron was not the first to find Campbell hard to say no to. One of the 
unsung heroes of the revolution in British Olympic sports since the lottery 
funding tap began to flow, she said that aside from the sustained funding – 
which comes 75% from the National Lottery and 25% from the exchequer – another 
key decision had been to extend the timeline on which decisions were made from 
four to eight years. That meant that athletes who might win a medal at the 
Games after next were also taken into account when funding decisions were made.

“When I arrived in 2003, decisions were taken on a four-year funding cycle. 
Peter Keen [the then performance director] thought it should be longer and I 
convinced the then secretary of state, Tessa Jowell, to change that to eight 
years, and that was a key thing. Max [Whitlock] and all the gymnastics boys 
were among those who benefited from that,” she said.

Another key factor was a more discerning focus on which athletes to fund. “The 
other thing was going to a very athlete-centred funding model. We went from 
vague plans to specific plans for individual athletes,” said Campbell, who left 
UK Sport after the London 2012 Games and was succeeded by Rod Carr.


A wider debate will follow about how best to ensure that success at the elite 
end is replicated in grassroots sport, which faces far wider and more complex 
societal and funding challenges.

 Mark England, the Team GB chef de mission for the past 14 years, has said the 
team dynamic in Rio is the “best ever”, also admitted that some sports “missed 
the boat” after London. “The legacy thing is interesting. In many respects, a 
lot of sports missed the boat after London,” he said. “It isn’t about standing 
up and cheering and shouting at the television or on the trackside or the 
poolside. It’s about actually – whether it’s the local authorities or Sport 
England or the government sectors – investing.”


He said that a new sport strategy introduced by the government last year 
should start to bear fruit in terms of applying the lessons learned in elite 
sport to the grassroots. “For some sports, it slipped away. But there is a real 
determination now that they’ve got a second bite,” said England. “These are 
ordinary kids doing extraordinary things who live around us and breathe around 
us and travel on the same trains and the same tubes and go to the same gyms.”

For Campbell, too, the question is not whether Britain should be maintaining 
its investment in elite sport but whether the same rigour and focus can be 
applied to investment in the grassroots. “We’re a nation that needs reminding 
that when we’re given the chance and the right investment, we can do pretty 
special things,” she said. “We are at our best when we’re working together. 
Every four years, this is just brilliant. The public love it. It lifts the 
country. It raises our belief in our nation and ourselves.”
 