
When I was in primary school, one of my favourite books was Ted Hughes’ How 
the Whale Became. For children who persistently ask “why” about everything, 
Hughes provided tall tales to explain animal origins, using the bizarre logic 
that children’s fiction thrives upon. For example: the hare grew long ears to 
hear the answer to its marriage proposal to the moon. Well, naturally. These 
stories fuelled my imagination about animal origins, albeit in an absurdist
Lamarckian <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lamarckism>fashion. 

We now know, thanks to Darwin, Russel Wallace, and the many great scientists 
since, that living things don’t evolve traits in order to accomplish a goal. 
Traits that improve survival are passed along to an animals’ offspring. The 
hare didn’t grow his ears to listen for whispers from a high place, but an 
ancestor with bigger ears thanks to a random mutation, would have heard danger 
approaching before the other proto-hares. And so it survived to produce 
bigger-lugged babies.

Hughes’ choice of the whale is not unexpected: these enormous creatures have 
left mankind scratching their heads for centuries. Thanks to fossils from 
places such as Wadi El Hitan in Egypt – aka “Whale Valley” - the surprising 
voyage of the whale’s landlubber ancestors to the sea is well understood. But 
nature keeps her cards close to her chest: there are still plenty of mysteries 
for palaeontologists to solve. Not least is the origin of the whale’s 
“moustache”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcba597f2d7430e1f4f6b6db4b31b8e5d3658080%2F0_232_3648_2504%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcba597f2d7430e1f4f6b6db4b31b8e5d3658080%2F0_232_3648_2504%2F3648.jpg>
 A section of baleen plates from a minke whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata). 
Photograph: Elsa Panciroli 
It may come as a surprise that whales and dolphins, collectively called 
cetaceans, are most closely related to the hoofed animals called artiodactyls. 
The latter include deer, pigs and hippos. At first glance, you may not see the 
family resemblance betweenMoby Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/albicetus-new-whale-species-moby-dick>
 andBabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/mar/03/the-film-that-makes-me-cry-babe>
, but you need to check out their ankles. Anatomists identified a unique shape 
in the astragalus (one of the ankle bones) of ancient proto-whales that still 
had hind limbs, a shape shared only with artiodactyls. Since the 1990s, 
examination of whale DNA has come to the same conclusion: these groups share a 
common ancestor. And so the taxonomic order Cetartiodactyla was named, 
amalgamating deer and dolphins.

Around 50 million years ago, cetacean ancestors took to the water. It’s not 
only those hoofy legs they’ve modified and lost in their consequent 
evolutionary journey. Half of the group kept their teeth, multiplying the 
number of pointy gnashers in their jaws to make them effective fish catchers. 
These are the odontocetes: including porpoises, dolphins andkiller whales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/31/secrets-of-killer-whale-evolution-revealed-by-genetic-study-orcas>
. The rest of the cetaceans however, abandoned their teeth – and donned a 
moustache.

This moustache is properly called baleen, and is found in the mystecetes: the 
group of whales that include the famous giants such as humpbacks, bowheads and 
blue whales. It is neither hair nor tooth, but a stack of keratinous plates 
that hang, closely packed and bristling, from the upper jaw inside a whale’s 
mouth, forming a brush-like sieve for feeding. Recent research suggests it 
evolved from the gums, but exactly when and how it first appeared in ancient 
whales is difficult to figure out. Baleen may have been around for up to 30 
million years, but it almost never preserves in the fossil record. The oldest 
direct fossil evidence is only 8 million years old.

This is where Alfred comes in. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae99dd4d5b21f24240ef12470c61522de4acc80a%2F0_232_2933_2344%2F2933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae99dd4d5b21f24240ef12470c61522de4acc80a%2F0_232_2933_2344%2F2933.jpg>
 Digital reconstruction of the skull of ‘Alfred’ the Aetiocetid (fossil whale). 
Specimen held at the Museum Victoria, Melbourne. Illustration: Marx et al. 
2016/Memoirs of Museum Victoria 
A 25-million-year-old fossil whale from Washington State, specimen NMV P252567 
– or ‘Alfred’ to his friends – belongs to an extinct group of whales called 
aetiocetids. This group of whales certainly still had teeth, but grooves and 
holes in their upper jaws suggest they had baleen at the same time. This 
combination of both has been proposed as a transitional state between 
possessing only teeth, and possessing only baleen. However, although this 
evolutionary step of baleen and teeth in the same whale has generally been 
accepted by palaeontologists, the mechanism by which an animal with such a 
mouthful ate its food has remained contentious.

“We are essentially rejecting the accepted model, which has been around for 
quite some time” Travis Park, co-author ofa new paper out this week 
<https://museumvictoria.com.au/pages/383548/071-082_MMV75_Marx_3_WEB.pdf> told 
me. “Alfred is the key to understanding the evolution of baleen.”

In this exciting study of the Oligocene age skull - reconstructed digitally by 
an international team from CT-scans - palaeontologists have challenged the idea 
of a baleen and tooth transitional stage in ancient whales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F703bda2ddaedf8c772f1d865b173e3a2157b28ba%2F48_0_3445_2067%2F3445.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F703bda2ddaedf8c772f1d865b173e3a2157b28ba%2F48_0_3445_2067%2F3445.jpg>
 Suction feeding in a fossil whale. Photograph: Marx et al., 2016/Memoirs of 
Museum Victoria 
Travis told me Alfred’s story: “I had begun preparing this fossil in 2014, but 
it wasn’t until one of my co-authors, Tim Ziegler, began more intensive 
preparation of the specimen early this year that the teeth were first noticed. 
We realised that these marks could only be explained by abrasive material being 
sucked into the mouth, wearing down the teeth. Alfred was a suction feeder!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46ffb1d50999072e4648084ed3e37f925989925d%2F0_0_2480_1654%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46ffb1d50999072e4648084ed3e37f925989925d%2F0_0_2480_1654%2F2480.jpg>
 Travis Park, Erich Fitzgerald, Tim Ziegler and Felix Marx with Alfred’s 
fossil, and a 3D print. Photograph: Benjamin Healley 
The presence of scratches on the inner surface of Alfred’s teeth suggest he 
was rasping his tongue along the back of them when feeding. This is also seen 
in living marine mammal suction feeders such as beluga whales, leopard seals 
and fur seals. When feeding this way, sand particles and other hard debris 
sucked into the mouth along with their prey scratch the predators’ teeth, like 
needles on a vinyl record, leaving tell-tale marks in the enamel and dentine.


 “If Alfred had baleen in its mouth, the teeth would have been shielded from 
this abrasive wear – so, no baleen in this one!” explains Travis. He and his 
co-authors argue that suction feeding in this manner would have been impossible 
if there were baleen plates getting in the way. This means Alfred only had 
teeth, and fed by suction rather than using them to chomp on fish. It is 
therefore possible that other, if not all, Aetoiocetids fed in this way.


What you don’t use, nature has a tendency to lose. If ancient whales like 
Alfred weren’t using their teeth to bite, over many generations the redundant 
teeth may have been lost, paving the way for the evolution of baleen from 
modified gum tissue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a1ae74027cb1bba0e710ccaac5f95fde103bed%2F0_6_780_503%2F780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a1ae74027cb1bba0e710ccaac5f95fde103bed%2F0_6_780_503%2F780.jpg>
 The evolution of baleen in whales. Photograph: Marx et al., 2016/Memoirs of 
Museum Victoria. 
“This suggests a new model for the evolution of baleen,” Park explained, 
“whales first switched from biting prey to suction feeding, which over time led 
to the loss of the now largely redundant teeth. Baleen then evolved somewhat 
later from the gums, to help hold prey in the mouth while water drawn in during 
suction was expelled.”

“The origin of baleen must lie much closer to the origin of toothless 
mysticetes” Park explained.

What would whales like Alfred have looked like? I asked Travis: “Alfred would 
have looked different to any whale alive today - something the size of a 
dolphin (around three metres long) but with a broad, flat snout instead of a 
bulging forehead.” He shared the reconstruction of this fossil whale feeding: 
“I imagine Alfred could have spent its time foraging on the seabed, sucking up 
small fish and squid.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f4f646609744b10ee7bfe6b0ca836d1cbd3e88e%2F0_110_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20whale%20get%20its%20%E2%80%9Cmoustache%E2%80%9D%3F%20%7C%20Elsa%20Panciroli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fhow-did-the-whale-get-its-moustache-baleen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f4f646609744b10ee7bfe6b0ca836d1cbd3e88e%2F0_110_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
 Reconstruction of fossil whale, an Aetiocetid nicknamed ‘Alfred’, suction 
feeding. Illustration: Carl Buell 
The puzzle of baleen is still missing many pieces. The oldest fossils from the 
modern baleen whales come from around 20 million years ago, not long after 
Alfred swam the ancient seas. Such a radical change from biting teeth to 
fibrous moustachioed mouths would have required many generations of selective 
advantage leading to baleen, and huge changes in feeding behaviour. How this 
took place remains to be solved by future revelations from the fossil record - 
and the diligent work of the palaeontologists who study them.

In the meantime, we are left to wonder at the evolution of these giant 
moustachioed hipsters of the sea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dszf_aJIhcdY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dszf_aJIhcdY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dszf_aJIhcdY&media=>
 The discovery of Alfred and implications for the evolution of filter feeding 
whales. 
References

Marx FG,Hocking DP, Park T, Ziegler T, Evans AR, Fitzgerald EMG. 2016 Suction 
feeding preceded filtering in baleen whale evolution 
<https://museumvictoria.com.au/pages/383548/071-082_MMV75_Marx_3_WEB.pdf>. 
Memoirs of Museum Victoria, 75: 71-82. 

Graur D, Higgins DG. 1994 Molecular evidence for the inclusion of cetaceans 
within the order Artiodactyla 
<http://www.bioinf.ucd.ie/publications/pdfs/graur94.pdf>. Molecular Biology and 
Evolution, 11: 357-364.

Deméré TA, McGowan MR, Berta A, Gatesy J. 2006 Morphological and Molecular 
Evidence for a Stepwise Evolutionary Transition from Teeth to Baleen in 
Mysticete Whales <http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/content/57/1/15.full>. 
Systematic Biology, 57: 15-37.
 