
We’ve all had a laugh at the Rocky training montages over the years, but not 
so long ago the average fighter’s preparation wasn’t a million miles away from 
necking half a dozen raw eggs, pounding the pavement to exhaustion and 
blattering seven shades out of frozen and unsuspecting animal carcasses. The 
elite warriors of today are more discerning characters, however, and their 
physical preparation for battle must be tailored accordingly.


Leading the way in Ireland over the past decade has been the Irish Strength 
Institute <https://www.facebook.com/isihealth/>, a personal training service 
founded by John Connor and Eoin Lacey in 2004. The pair have opened three 
facilities in Dublin and one in the Algarve, and have quickly grown into the 
premier strength and conditioning and nutrition specialists in the country. 
When Conor McGregor’s head coach, John Kavanagh, came calling in 2008, Connor 
and Lacey set up the strength and conditioning unit within Kavanagh’s famed
Straight Blast Gym in Dublin <http://www.sbgireland.com/> and agreed to look 
after all his MMA fighters.

Speaking to Connor a couple of days before his most famous client aims to 
become the first man to hold two UFC belts simultaneously, the 36-year-old 
coach is reflecting on when he first met McGregor. “Conor had only had a few 
fights and was nowhere near the UFC at that stage. It was around the time Tom 
Egan became the first Irishman in the UFC and it was dawning on John Kavanagh 
that he couldn’t keep doing absolutely everything himself. So John invited Eoin 
and I in and we took over the nutrition and strength and conditioning side of 
things. We’ve worked with a host ofUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 
stars including McGregor, Cathal Pendred, Paddy Holohan, Gunnar Nelson, Artem 
Lobov and Aisling Daly, and we’ve all had great success together.”

Connor McGregor to fight Eddie Alvarez in UFC 205 headline bout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/conor-mcgregor-to-fight-eddie-alvarez-in-ufc-205-headline-bout>
With a master’s degree in exercise and nutrition science, time served under 
the renowned strength and conditioning godfatherCharles Poliquin 
<https://twitter.com/StrengthSensei>, and a PhD in health and human performance 
underway, Connor isn’t short of certificates, but he says he has gained more 
knowledge from being out in the field than in the classroom.

“I’ve travelled the world learning from what other guys are doing. I’ll go to 
a gym in the UK or the US or Australia and spend time chatting to different 
coaches about their methods and philosophies. Then, back in Dublin, we do our 
own experimentation and evaluation to figure out what works and what doesn’t. 
The fields of nutrition and strength and conditioning are always evolving and 
parts of them are unrecognisable from even ten years ago.”

He continues to learn from others, but Connor is a respected teacher in his 
own right and it was while delivering one of his seminars that he came across 
the current BritishBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of 
Control trainer of the year, Shane McGuigan.

“Shane was on one of my courses in Dublin and another in Rhode Island, along 
withDaryl Richards <https://twitter.com/DBRichards80> and Steve Broughton 
<https://twitter.com/sb_boxing> [two other integral cogs within the Team 
Frampton machine], and we quickly hit it off. I passed on my knowledge and we 
all now learn from each other’s experiences. When Shane began training Carl 
Frampton they came to visit us for testing and treatment and I’ve been involved 
ever since in some shape or form.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3583495159c5bbe4ae204ca88d132bc99b249c78%2F0_153_2730_3037%2F2730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20look%20good%20while%20fighting%2C%20by%20Conor%20McGregor's%20strength%20coach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20look%20good%20while%20fighting%2C%20by%20Conor%20McGregor%27s%20strength%20coach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3583495159c5bbe4ae204ca88d132bc99b249c78%2F0_153_2730_3037%2F2730.jpg>
 Conor McGregor in training. Photograph: Julio Cortez/AP 
Connor’s involvement with an athlete tends to vary fighter by fighter, and 
even fight by fight, according to the needs of the camp. He was McGregor’s main 
strength guru for years, running him through his drills in the gym and helping 
him recover and improve afteranterior cruciate ligament surgery 
<http://www.bloodyelbow.com/2013/9/7/4703998/ufc-conor-mcgregor-injury-acl-knee-surgery-recovery>
. But when the UFC featherweight champion ran out of steam andlost to Nate Diaz 
last March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/conor-mcgregor-nate-diaz-holly-holm-miesha-tate-ufc-196>
, Connor switched his focus to improving McGregor’s cardio fitness and drafted 
in the relevant specialists accordingly.

Frampton is based in London, where Richards attends to his strength and 
conditioning, so Connor now adds most value with his soft-tissue expertise 
during fight week. “It’s sports massage in layman’s terms,” he says, “but at a 
very high level. Regardless of how well you structure your training, you’ll 
always pick up a few bumps and bruises along the way.MMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> guys in particular, due to all the 
grappling, tend to be carrying knocks all the time. With some fighters I’m 
there throughout the camp providing fascial stretch therapy, but for Carl I’ll 
fly in only for fight week. We start with some really deep muscle work to break 
down scar tissue and adhesions because his body will need time to recover from 
that manipulation. Then it’s a question of fine-tuning. If something is weak, 
we’ll strengthen it. If something is tight, we’ll loosen and stretch it.”

Wherever he fights in the world, two-weight world champion Frampton is always 
much happier to have Connor close at hand. “He’s a great guy to have around,” 
Carl tells me from his training camp in London, where he is preparing to defend 
his WBA featherweight title against Léo Santa Cruz in Las Vegas next January. 
“Daryl is in charge of my strength and conditioning throughout camp now but 
John is the man to work on my muscles and joints during fight week. He gets 
everything firing on all cylinders and I feel the effects immediately after a 
session. I’ll shadow box and feel looser and, as silly as it sounds, it’s as if 
my hands are lighter and I’m punching faster.”

I saw Connor’s magic hands in action in the changing room in Manchester in 
February on the night Frampton beat Scott Quigg to add a WBA bantamweight belt 
to his collection. Josh Taylor, now Commonwealth super lightweight champion, 
felt a stiffness in his neck as he warmed up and looked to Connor for help. A 
stretch and a rub later, Taylor was good enough to walk out and blow away a 
durable opponent in less than five minutes. Connor is an apparent genius at 
oiling the joints and making aches and pains disappear in an instant. But as a 
strength and conditioning expert, he knows the key to combat sports today: 
power.

“Power is what every fighter wants, but it is the hardest thing to train. 
Improving endurance is not a problem, increasing strength isn’t too bad either, 
but power is perhaps the toughest thing to add and, conversely, one of the 
easiest things to ruin though over-training or choosing the wrong exercises. 
Conor and Carl both hit very hard naturally and so it is as much a question of 
managing their power as anything. From a strength and conditioning perspective, 
my priority is keeping my client healthy. I then make them stronger before I 
make them more powerful. Some people skip the initial foundation steps and end 
up doing more harm than good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acf463ab6bed8449aa045d0e644bacf95e102c7%2F9_297_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20look%20good%20while%20fighting%2C%20by%20Conor%20McGregor's%20strength%20coach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20look%20good%20while%20fighting%2C%20by%20Conor%20McGregor%27s%20strength%20coach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthe-balls-of-wrath%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fconor-mcgregor-carl-frampton-strength-conditioning-nutrition-ufc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acf463ab6bed8449aa045d0e644bacf95e102c7%2F9_297_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
 Carl Frampton preparing for his fight against Léo Santa Cruz. Photograph: 
Presseye/INPHO/Rex/Shutterstock 
A fighter’s style also dictates how they should be trained. Connor recalls 
conversations with Frampton’s manager, Barry McGuigan, who was worried that his 
man wasn’t being readied in the same manner he had been years before. McGuigan 
was always a volume puncher so needed a certain cardio fitness to execute his 
gameplan. Frampton, on the other hand, is built to out-box and stop opponents 
with knock-out power and so requires a different preparation.

McGuigan himself is quick to praise Connor’s contribution. “John is a great 
guy,” says McGuigan. “He’s very professional, extremely competent and I like 
him because he is a straight talker. His knowledge, and that which he has 
generously passed on the Shane and the rest of the boys, is so important today 
as the sport continues to squeeze bigger and bigger athletes into smaller and 
smaller weight classes. In my day we weighed in on the day of the fight and I 
maybe added five or seven pounds before the first bell. Today it’s double that 
and beyond, and guys like John are experts in managing a fighter’s weight 
through a camp to take advantage of the system.”

Despite rubbing shoulders with Ireland’s elite athletes – rugby and GAA 
players are also on the client list – Connor’s bread and butter is still the 
general public’s never-ending quest for a fitter, healthier lifestyle. “Fat 
loss for the general pop,” is how he cheerfully describes it. I wonder about 
the stark contrast between working with some of the greatest fighters on the 
planet before lunch, and Joe Everyman with his beer gut and chronic back pain 
after. He uses a variation of the rocks, pebbles and sand in a jar parable to 
explain from a nutritionists’ point of view.

“We all more or less have the same big rocks in the jar. One will be a desire 
to look good naked and so I’ll focus on calorie intake and the ratio of 
proteins, fats and carbs. Now, that stuff is a given for an athlete – and they 
already look good naked! – so with them it is all about the pebbles and sand. 
That may mean tailoring supplements and playing with the timing of their 
calorie intake to try to provide the slightest edge that can make all the 
difference in high-level competition. There are no general guidelines anymore; 
everything must be specific and personalised.”

Connor is firmly established within both boxing and MMA circles and is quick 
to highlight the overlaps and the opportunities for the two disciplines to 
learn from one another. “Patrick Hyland [Irish super featherweight boxer] comes 
into the SBG to work with John Kavanagh and I know Conor often goes to see 
Paschal Collins in the Celtic Warrior boxing gym. And I remember a few years 
ago Carl came down to Dublin and put on a boxing seminar in Owen Roddy’s 
[McGregor’s striking coach] gym. They can definitely learn from one another, 
especially with MMA now in an era of strikers dominating. Top boxers tend to be 
very good at controlling the distance of a fight and I think that’s an area the 
MMA guys are looking at right now.”

He dismisses the bizarre rivalry that some fans have created between the two 
sports. “It’s like comparing rugby and soccer,” he says. “Like saying Brian 
O’Driscoll would out-rugby Robbie Keane – of course he would, it’s a different 
bloody sport!”

But the opportunities for boxing to learn from MMA, and vice versa, are 
certainly real and Connor believes a young coach such as Shane McGuigan is in 
prime position to reap the benefits of an open-minded approach to his craft.

“Shane’s a young guy from a strength and conditioning background so he is very 
open to introducing new ideas to his fighters. And you can see the success he 
has had, partly because of that. Old-school boxing gyms have their merits, but 
many are stuck in the past, doing too much steady-state cardio, not enough 
strength and conditioning, and employing out-dated approaches to nutrition and 
weight-cutting. There’s an attitude that, if it has worked this long, we’ll 
keep doing it. But MMA is such a young sport and it is bringing in people from 
a lot of different backgrounds who all have something to offer. It would be 
stupid to ignore them.”

At the same time, he concedes that some go too far on the science-based 
approach and forget about other necessary and less glamorous fundamentals. “All 
sports have tactical, technical, mental and physical components to them and the 
secret is to find the correct balance between all four. Sometimes a guy can be 
a perfect physical specimen, but just lack some mental toughness or the desire 
to simply work hard. You see it all the time in boxing, the guy in perfect 
shape losing to someone not apparently as ripped and fit. Carl and Conor are 
the exceptions. They always look like better physical specimens than their 
opponents and they invariably win too!”

Carl Frampton announces world title rematch with Léo Santa Cruz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/carl-frampton-wba-world-featherweight-title-rematch-leo-santa-cruz-boxing>
McGregor will have his hands full with the UFC’s lightweight champion Eddie 
Alvarez in Madison Square Garden on Saturday night, but I can’t end the 
conversation without asking an opinion on the seemingly ludicrous rumours of a 
match-up with Floyd Mayweather. Connor, a Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu purple belt 
himself, is smart enough to know that each man would be an unbackable underdog 
in any contest outside their own speciality, but his loyalty to McGregor 
ensures he has to make some case for the Irishman.

“Conor can take a punch and Floyd is not renowned for knockout power,” he 
says. “I can see Conor surviving into the 12th then kicking Mayweather in the 
leg, taking him down, submitting him and just accepting the DQ. He won the 
boxing match, but I won the fight, he’ll say!”

“Yeah, right,” I instinctively laugh, before considering the circus the event 
would be and furtively checking to see if the bookies are offering odds on such 
shenanigans.

• This article appeared first on The Balls of Wrath 
<http://theballsofwrath.com/>
• Follow The Balls of Wrath <https://twitter.com/PaulieDGibson> on Twitter
 