
Certain books gain a reputation for changing lives and Helen Forrester’s 1974 
autobiographical novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/02/helen-forrester>, Twopence to 
Cross the Mersey, is regularly cited as a big influence – particularly by 
women. The columnist and writer Caitlin Moran once chose it as the book by a 
female author that had most affected her, saying it was responsible for making 
her “start to educate myself about the history of England”.

Now, for the first time, the unconventional love story that took one of 
Liverpool’s best-loved daughters away from the banks of the Mersey is to betold 
in a biography <https://helenforrester.com/> that draws on Forrester’s accounts 
of her courtship and marriage.

Helen Forrester, bestselling memoirist, dies aged 92
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/29/helen-forrester-memoirist-dies-aged-92>
Robert Bhatia, Forrester’s only child, has used his late mother’s archive of 
letters to piece together the secret turmoil that led her to leave Liverpool to 
find a new life abroad. His book,Passage Across the Mersey, is out this week. 
“My father had travelled to England from India to study for a PhD in physics at 
Liverpool University and he was already married, unhappily, when he met my 
mother,” said Bhatia, who lives in Edmonton, Canada. Forrester, whose real name 
was June Huband, had already lost two fiances during the second world war; 
tragedies that are described in three popular sequels toTwopence to Cross the 
Mersey,Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> Miss (1979), By the 
Waters of Liverpool (1981) and Lime Street at Two (1986) – sequels that jointly 
sold 4.5 million copies.

By the time Forrester met Bhatia’s father she had resigned herself to a single 
life. Her first love, Harry O’Dwyer, had died in 1940 when his ship went down. 
Later she became engaged to Edward Parry, who was killed in action in France. 
When peace came, she volunteered to arrange social events for students from 
abroad. One day, as Forrester staffed the inquiry desk of the British Council 
office, a shy young man, Avadh Bhatia, described by her later as “the most 
exquisite-looking Indian”, struck up a conversation and “very precisely asked 
me if I would like to go to the cinema with him”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F069c90f3c5af1ceb46c8144509ba3c56cf280573%2F0_134_2463_1477%2F2463.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20true%20love%20led%20Helen%20Forrester%20to%20leave%20Mersey%20for%20Indian%20exile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20true%20love%20led%20Helen%20Forrester%20to%20leave%20Mersey%20for%20Indian%20exile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F069c90f3c5af1ceb46c8144509ba3c56cf280573%2F0_134_2463_1477%2F2463.jpg>
 Robert Bhatia in Liverpool. Photograph: Courtesy of Robert Bhatia 
“Not only was my father married, he was also due to go back to India,” Bhatia 
told theObserver. “So there was a significant personal drama going on. What 
makes the letters they exchanged so compelling is that each of them is trying 
to carry on their own life at the same time: my father was establishing his 
career back in India, while she was working in Liverpool. And yet they were 
planning a life together.”

Before Forrester died in 2011 she talked to her son about using her 
correspondence to put together a biography: “My mother had cleared out her 
personal papers a couple of times when she moved, but kept the most important 
things. I found two dozen boxes of material, including her manuscripts,” he 
said. “Leafing through, it became clear that there was a complete narrative 
there in the letters between my mother and father in the months before they got 
married and went to India.”

Avadh Bhatia had been brought up in India’s upper middle classes, but had been 
altered by his exposure to western liberal ideas. Forrester, for her part, was 
enthusiastic about adopting Indian ways to escape her painful past. “My 
grandparents seem to have accepted my father all right, although they did not 
get along with their own daughter and warned she would be ostracised if she was 
jilted by him,” said Bhatia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2295661d1210fe5690035f3f6cf1ab6dd32ead65%2F0_0_5485_7977%2F5485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20true%20love%20led%20Helen%20Forrester%20to%20leave%20Mersey%20for%20Indian%20exile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20true%20love%20led%20Helen%20Forrester%20to%20leave%20Mersey%20for%20Indian%20exile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhelen-forrester-twopence-to-cross-the-mersey-biography-robert-bhatia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2295661d1210fe5690035f3f6cf1ab6dd32ead65%2F0_0_5485_7977%2F5485.jpg>
 Helen Forrester with her son Robert as a young boy Photograph: Courtesy of 
Robert Bhatia 
The letters show the occasional cultural misunderstanding. “There were 
problems sometimes. My father, for example, had not given my mother an 
engagement ring,” said Bhatia. “In the letters she tells him that people 
doubted that she was actually engaged. My father replied that she should just 
go and buy a ring herself, adding “but don’t spend too much. He didn’t guess 
how she felt.”

The couple were married in Rajasthan in 1950 and lived in Gujarat for two 
years. Forrester’s later novels,Thursday’s Child and The Moneylenders of Shahpur
, were set in the region. They then moved to Canada, where Bhatia became 
director of the Theoretical Physics Institute at the University of Alberta. He 
died in 1985.

The dramatic “riches to rags” story told in Forrester’s best-known book 
revolves around the moment when, at the age of 11, her comfortable life in the 
south of England was turned on its head. Her stockbroker father lost all his 
money in the Great Crash of 1929 and took his large family back to his native 
Liverpool to live in one room in a tenement block. Incapable of finding work or 
coping, both her parents burdened the young Forrester with domestic 
responsibilities, taking her out of school. The children all slept under coats 
and the young Forrester sold items of clothing for money to buy bread for them. 
The title of the book refers to the unaffordable fare for the ferry to 
sanctuary in Birkenhead, where her grandmother lived. Eventually Forrester 
gained an education at evening classes.

Twopence to Cross the Mersey was adapted into a play and then a musical, which 
has enjoyed four runs at Liverpool’s Empire theatre, taking more than £2m at 
the box office. In 2015, a new version of the stage play was produced at 
Liverpool’s Epstein Theatre, and toured the country last year.

Despite her literary success, Forrester believed her greatest achievement was 
having “survived the misery of my girlhood, of always being put down as ugly, 
stupid and useless, except as an unpaid domestic servant in my parents’ house”.

This weekend her son said he had found a new understanding of his mother’s 
troubled early life in writing her biography, as well as a fresh respect for 
her storytelling: “She wrote clearly and sparsely, with a great warmth and 
compassion for her characters.”
 