
It’s 8pm. Your shift finished at 5pm. You’re still at your desk. Everybody 
else is still at their desks. Nobody wants to leave, even though you’re no 
longer being paid. When you do finally get home, you check your email. You 
don’t want to be the person who didn’t respond, even though the message arrived 
in your inbox at 11pm. Even though you’re putting your kids to bed, or having 
drinks with an old friend, or in the middle of watching Homeland. And not being 
paid.

I want to throw up when someone 'reaches out' to 'touch base'

It’s fair to say that John Maynard Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/05/seven-things-john-maynard-keynes>
 got it wrong whenhe predicted in a 1930 essay 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/08/13/432122637/keynes-predicted-we-would-be-working-15-hour-weeks-why-was-he-so-wrong>
 that in the future we’d all be working 15-hour weeks and living a life of 
leisure the rest of the time.

Instead, the average working week in the UK is up to 42.7 hours for those in 
full-time employment (according to2011 ONS figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/dec/08/europe-working-hours>) 
and, along with a few other countries, the UK has a partialopt-out of the EU 
limit 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/11732668/david-cameron-working-time-directive-eu-referendum.html>
 of 48 hours. In Europe, Greeks work the longest hours, but worldwide,Mexicans 
put in the most graft <https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS>. 
Donald Trump, I hope you’re reading.

While there are cultures that seem less invested in the rat race – France, for 
instance, has limited its working week to35 hours since 2000 
<http://www.lorraine.direccte.gouv.fr/evolution-de-la-duree-du-travail-en-france-et-dans-le-monde>
 (although in practice, this doesn’tquite hold true 
<http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015-08-12/france-s-35-hour-week-has-done-its-job>
), and Swedes (who are good at everything)trialled a six-hour working day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/efficiency-up-turnover-down-sweden-experiments-with-six-hour-working-day>
, many of us feel the pressure of presenteeism and a 24-hour work culture.

The worst part of all this? Email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/email>. It makes me want to throw up 
when I get an email from someone “reaching out” to request we “touch base” – 
but especially when I get it at 9pm on a Saturday.

How, then, can we switch off and log out?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32bf30e7f27af26b7d2c990646052f27043a7ba3%2F0_0_3780_4739%2F3780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%2024%2F7%20email%20ruining%20your%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%2024%2F7%20email%20ruining%20your%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32bf30e7f27af26b7d2c990646052f27043a7ba3%2F0_0_3780_4739%2F3780.jpg>
 ‘So, what to do? Go back to Bora Bora and spend a life marvelling at how, 
like, really really blue the water is?’ Photograph: Lisa Romerein/Getty Images 
The first person I turn to for advice is Guardian columnist Oliver Burkeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/oliverburkeman>, who, along with Ferris 
Bueller, is one of my lifestyle gurus. I have literally never seen Burkeman in 
the office, so I figure he’s a good person to ask about how to do less work 
(I’m joking, of course – this attitude is precisely part of the problem).

“Obviously the ideal situation would be if managers everywhere understood that 
presence in the office isn’t the same as results,” writes Oliver.

“But in the absence of such enlightened bosses, I think the best bet is to 
cultivate a reputation for reliability, as a substitute for 24/7 availability – 
if you can be depended upon to answer emails, say, within a modest and 
predictable amount of time, you’re more likely to be forgiven for not answering 
them instantaneously at 9pm.”

I note down Oliver’s advice, which he sends to me in an email that I read at 
11pm.


Psychotherapist and writer Philippa Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philippa-perry> is even more forthright: 

We don’t live to work, we work to live. Why don’t we say so? | Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/09/we-dont-live-to-work-we-work-to-live-why-dont-we-say-so>
“I’m sure it was less 24/7 before we had mobiles. My advice is to switch them 
off. Stick to your contract, put down boundaries and in working hours work and 
out of hours don’t. You know, make a decision, stick to it, take charge of your 
life. You can decide to have a life outside of work and follow through. And 
people don’t concentrate more if they’re ‘on’ 24/7. We do better with 
boundaries.”

I note down Philippa’s advice, which she sends to me in an email that I read 
at 11pm.

I have written before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/01/how-to-write-perfect-out-of-office-email-message>
 about how to craft the perfect out-of-office reply. About how people don’t 
understand the word “urgent”; about how important it is not to include a 
horrific typo that will go viral while you’re on a beach in Bora Bora, entirely 
oblivious. My own current OOO reply is succinct to the point of brutality. It 
consists, in its entirety, of the body copy:

 “• Me <-distance-> • The office”

I don’t even leave addresses of alternate contacts any more because, perhaps 
sadistically, I think the onus is on the person to find out. If it’s a 
colleague, it shouldn’t be difficult to discover, and if someone is emailing 
from outside the organisation; well, there’s Google (other search engines are 
available). If some effort on their part is required to email someone else, 
they usually realise it’s not that urgent at all. That it can – horror –wait.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61edd7b7bbcaa0a87909de8e2d940f94c0bf10fb%2F0_0_2992_1798%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%2024%2F7%20email%20ruining%20your%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%2024%2F7%20email%20ruining%20your%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2F24-7-email-work-inbox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61edd7b7bbcaa0a87909de8e2d940f94c0bf10fb%2F0_0_2992_1798%2F2992.jpg>
 ‘It’s fair to say that John Maynard Keynes got it wrong when he predicted 
that, in the future, we’d all be working 15-hour weeks.’ Photograph: Eric 
Vidal/Rex 
Of course, I’m not as disciplined as all this suggests. I admit to scrambling 
across rocks in Anglesey to get a mobile phone signal, and I’ve spent a whole 
day mainlining lattes just to use a cafe’s Wi-Fi – when I was supposed to be on 
holiday. I have interviewed people at 3am –because timezones!

Recently, however, I’ve begun to notice colleagues switching their 
out-of-office replies on in the evening. They aren’t sick, they aren’t on 
holiday, they’ve just, you know, gone home. Their working day is finished. It’s 
7pm and, as Burkeman says, getting back to a mail within a reasonable amount of 
time should be enough.

It speaks to how insidious 24/7 working culture is that the first time I 
noticed a very senior colleague had switched on her OOO in the evening, I 
remarked that I didn’t know she was going away anywhere. And she hadn’t – she’d 
just gone home.

Jonathan Crary <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Crary> is a critic and 
professor at Columbia University who has written extensively on 
around-the-clock working and the modern economy. I ask about the psychology 
behind this culture – why am I answering work emails on a smartphone in bed at 
night?

One is expected to fashion one's existence as perpetually flexible and 
adaptable
Jonathan Crary 
“The economic principle of competition has penetrated almost every area of 
social and personal life, which disempowers and isolates us in so many ways,” 
he says.

“We’re not only competing against others but against our own performance as 
well. Mere consistency or dependability on the job is no longer acceptable. 
This is why the possibility of down time for rest or regeneration is 
incompatible with current economic demands and expectations.


“Wherever one works now, it’s imperative that one fully internalises the 
demand for maximum performance regardless of the toll it might take on one’s 
health, family or sanity. One is expected to fashion one’s existence as 
something perpetually flexible and adaptable.”


Flexitime, which was introduced to liberate the worker, is almost made 
redundant when, no matter what hours or arrangements an employee has, the 
expectation still seems to be, as Crary notes, that all workers are constantly 
available.


Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbxUSsFXYo4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbxUSsFXYo4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbxUSsFXYo4&media=>
 Dolly Parton - 9 to 5 
So, what to do? Introduce a law like the one in France (often wrongly 
reported) that means certain non-full-time employees in technology and 
consultancy industries have todisconnect after 13 hours of work 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/charlemagne/2014/04/frances-6pm-e-mail-ban>? Go 
back to Bora Bora and spend a life marvelling at how, like, really really blue 
the water is?

Here’s what I suggest. Taking a cue from my boss, I’m going to be turning on 
my out-of-office reply when I actually leave the office in the evening. On 
time. For homeworkers, or flexiworkers, that means when your shift is over. 
Because an automated out-of-office email that reads:

“Hi. Thanks for your email. I’ve finished work for the day and I have left the 
office. I’m now bathing my son and about to watch that new drama – the one with 
Ben Whishaw – and have a couple of glasses of pinot, but if anyone asks I’ll 
say it’s one. Might even order a takeaway. I’ll be able to answer your email in 
the morning, when I’m being paid to, at around 9am. Have a lovely evening too.”

… well, that would probably go viral. 
 