
The readers’ editor

The readers’ editor is the Guardian’s internal ombudsman. The Guardian was the 
first UK newspaper to adopt a readers’ editor in 1997.


The job of the readers’ editor is “to collect, consider, investigate, respond 
to, and where appropriate come to a conclusion about readers’ comments, 
concerns, and complaints in a prompt and timely manner, from a position of 
independence within the paper”.
 Paul Chadwick Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
Paul Chadwick is the Guardian’s fourth readers’ editor and took up the role in 
June 2016. Paul, journalist and lawyer, was director editorial policies at the 
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, where he was responsible for reforming the 
broadcaster’s self-regulatory framework.

The Guardian’s policy is to correct substantial errors as soon as possible. 
Corrections appear on the relevant web page and/or in the newspaper and 
significant corrections are collated in ourcorrections and clarifications column
 <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/series/correctionsandclarifications>.


What does the readers’ editor cover?

The readers’ editor can look into complaints about articles in our newspapers 
and the online services that we control. The readers’ editor looks at 
complaints and queries against theGuardian News & Media Editorial Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>.

The Editors’ Code, which was developed by the industry and used by the Press 
Complaints Commission over many years, has formed the basis of the Guardian 
News & Media Editorial Code since the post of readers’ editor has been in 
existence.

Before contacting the readers’ editor, you should read through Guardian News & 
Media’s Editorial Code to understand whether the readers’ editor is the correct 
route for your complaint. The Editorial Code handles complaints in 16 areas. 
They are:

 * Accuracy

 * Opportunity to reply

 * *Privacy

 * *Harassment

 * Intrusion into grief or shock 
 * *Children

 * *Children in sex cases

 * *Hospitals

 * *Reporting of crime

 * *Clandestine devices and subterfuge

 * Victims of sexual assault

 * Discrimination

 * Financial journalism

 * Confidential sources

 * Witness payments in criminal trials

 * *Payment to criminals

Where there are asterisks above, the Editorial Code recognises that complaints 
should be weighed against a judgment as to whether the story is in the public 
interest.


What the readers’ editor won’t look at

The readers’ editor won’t look at complaints that fall outside of the Guardian 
News & Media Editorial Code (see above).


The readers’ editor office was created to resolve substantial complaints and 
queries from individuals who feel we’ve breached the Guardian’s editorial 
standards. As such, the readers’ editor’s time, effort and resources will be 
focused on such complaints, and he reserves the right not to consider 
complaints:

 * From anyone not personally and directly affected by the matter which forms 
the subject of the complaint. 
 * That are trivial, hypothetical or otherwise vexatious or insignificant. 
 * That are without justification (such as an attempt to argue a point of view 
or to lobby). 
 * About advertising (unless in exceptional circumstances). 
 * About Guardian reader offers. 
 * That are legal complaints. 
How do I complain?

Please read the Guardian News & Media Editorial Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code> first to understand 
whether the readers’ editor can look into your complaint. You can then email 
the readers’ editor’s office directly onguardian.readers@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.readers@theguardian.com> or write to The readers’ editor, The 
Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU outlining the following 
points:

 * The article you’re complaining about. 
 * The date on which it appeared. 
 * Whether the article appeared in print or online (and whether through a 
browser or via one of our mobile apps). 
 * The nature of your complaint in no more than 500 words. 
 * Which part of the Editorial Code it breaches. 
You can also get in touch with the readers’ editor’s office by phone on +44 
(0)20 3353 4736 between 10am and 1pm Monday to Friday UK time.

The readers’ editor is also on Twitter @GdnReadersEd 
<https://twitter.com/GdnReadersEd>.

Please note that in making a complaint, you agree to respond promptly to any 
request for further information. Our complaints process is free of charge, 
regardless of outcome.

We reserve the right to amend this policy as required. We will publish the 
current policy on our website. Your complaint will be considered against the 
published policy on the date of receipt of your complaint.


What happens to your complaint?


Once we’ve received your complaint, you should receive an automated reply 
acknowledging receipt. If your complaint is being taken up, we aim to contact 
you within 72 hours.

We aim to give a substantive response to your complaint within 28 days of 
receiving all the necessary information to allow us to investigate. However, 
this may take longer in more complex cases where more information is required, 
or where journalists are away or unreachable.


If we receive multiple complaints about the same issue we may not respond to 
all.

If the readers’ editor deems there to have been a breach of the Guardian 
Editorial Code, he will suggest an appropriate remedy. Corrections and 
clarifications will appear on the relevant web page and/or in the newspaper.

We will always aim to handle your complaint fairly, courteously and with 
respect. We expect the same behaviour from complainants and reserve the right 
to decline to consider complaints that are abusive or gratuitously offensive.

If at any stage of your complaint we do not hear back from you within 28 days, 
we will consider your complaint satisfied and closed.


Appeal process

If you are unhappy with our final response to your complaint the readers’ 
editor will direct you to theReview Panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/nov/20/review-panel>, which provides an 
external review of the decision of the readers’ editor.

Should your complaint reach this stage, the readers’ editor will send you all 
the information you need to appeal to the Temporary Review Panel.


Useful links

Open Door <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/open-door> is a 
regular column by the readers’ editor about your suggestions, concerns, 
complaints and other things.

To find out more about the readers’ editor and his remit, please read the full 
terms of reference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/may/14/readers-editor-terms-of-reference>
.

See our information site <https://www.theguardian.com/info> for other contact 
information, terms of service, help for contributors and more.
 