
Subscribe

To subscribe to the Guardian and Observer print and digital editions, and to 
find out how to get the paper delivered to your door, see our dedicated
subscription site <http://subscribe.theguardian.com/>

Daily edition


To read the daily Guardian and Observer newspapers enhanced for your iPad, 
Android tablet or Kindle Fire, sign up for a two-week free trial of theDaily 
edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/2014/may/29/the-guardian-and-observer-daily-edition>

Guardian app for iOS and Android

Our live apps feature all the content from the Guardian website, optimised for 
phones and tablets. Take a look at ourshowaround 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 to find out more

Digital edition

To read the paper online exactly as it was printed, subscribe to the Guardian 
and Observer digital edition 
<http://guardian.newspaperdirect.com/epaper/viewer.aspx>

Guardian back issues

For a comprehensive range of English, Scottish and Irish editions from the 
past nine months visitGuardian back issue newspapers 
<http://www.guardian.backissuenewspapers.co.uk/Default.aspx>, or for genuine 
originals dating back to 1900 go toHistoric newspapers 
<http://www.historic-newspapers.co.uk/>

Observer back issues

Please visit Observer back issue newspapers 
<http://www.observer.backissuenewspapers.co.uk/Default.aspx>

Buy copies of photos


For a range of editorial, war, politics and sport pictures, as well as images 
from the Eyewitness series and selected agencies, go toGuardian and Observer 
news prints <http://theguardiantheobserver.newsprints.co.uk/>

Digital archive

The archive features 1.2 million replica pages of the Guardian and Observer 
dating back to 1791 including almost 13 million articles and thousands of 
photographs. For more information and to access it read ourintroduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/jul/25/digital-archive-notice>

Guardian Weekly

To find out more about the Guardian Weekly and to subscribe, see our dedicated 
site <https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/subscribe>

International editions


Guardian News and Media no longer publishes international print editions. For 
more information, please see ourFAQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2011/sep/16/guardian-observer-international-editions>
 