
For all the current anxieties about zero-hours contracts, insecure 
self-employment and the new “precariat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/09/precariat-charter-denizens-citizens-review>
”, flexibility in the workplace doesn’t have to be a bad thing. If you want to 
drop to part-time, work a few days from home, arrange your working hours around 
childcare or consider phased retirement, flexible working can help to restore 
your work-life balance, and there’s good evidenceit boosts productivity 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/pm/peoplemanagement/b/weblog/archive/2016/02/09/flexible-working-boosts-profits-and-productivity-say-majority-of-employers.aspx>
, too.

Since June 2014 any employee who has been in a job for six months or more has 
the right to request flexible working; 4 million Britsare estimated 
<http://www.personneltoday.com/hr/one-seven-now-working-home/> to have worked 
from home in 2015 alone. But while employers are often sympathetic to 
flexi-time options, it can be hard to know when and how to bring the topic up, 
especially if you’ve been working a full and regular 9-5 for some time – and 
many employers remain more hostile to the concept.

There are downsides: as Suzanne Bearne explored recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/05/flexible-working-freedom-ever-switch-off>
 for the Guardian, “there are issues around putting in longer hours when you 
are working remotely”, and a dependancy on technology means flexible working is 
still heavily skewed towards high-earning, technically-proficient career paths, 
whichleaves large sections of the population feeling they have fewer options 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37556704>.

Some jobs lend do themselves more naturally to flexible working practices, but 
many business leaders already believe that flexible working is going to 
constitute a cornerstone of the oncoming “fourth industrial revolution 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond>
”.

So is flexible working right for you? And if so, how do you go about getting 
it? Join us onWednesday 12 October from 1-2.30pm BST for a live chat with our 
expert panel. We’ll be discussing:

 * Flexible working options. 
 * How to approach your boss. 
 * Advice on protecting your hours if you want to move part-time. 
 * Tips on returning to full-time work if you’ve been part-time.

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link> or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profile to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet 
us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
, who can post them for you.

Panel

Jessica Chivers is founder of The Talent Keeper Specialists 
<http://talentkeepers.co.uk/>, who works with employers to shape inclusive 
workplaces where part-time can still mean progression. Chivers is also a 
coaching psychologist, and author of Mothers Work! How to Get a Grip on Guilt 
and Make a Smooth Return to Work (Hay House, 2011).

Jason Romayne is a business development manager for Flexiworkforce 
<https://www.flexiworkforce.com/>. He works to manage new business for 
part-time and home-based work that promotes flexible working patterns from 
employers.

Jo Martin is a senior employment law specialist at Bond Dickinson LLP 
solicitors <http://www.bonddickinson.com/>, and advises employers and employees 
on all legal issues arising, from discrimination to contractual matters, 
restructuring to dismissals.

Tom Ball is an industry expert on flexible working and founder of NearDesk 
<https://www2.neardesk.com/>, which hosts a network of over 300 workspaces 
across the UK. He is on a mission to promote flexible working and get more 
people to work near home.

Catherine Rogan is a rights adviser for Working Families’ 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/advice-information/> legal advice service 
and has over 13 years of experience advising parents and carers on flexible 
working and their rights at work.

Katie Wood is legal officer for Maternity Action 
<http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/wp/>, a charity that provides free advice on 
maternity and parental rights and benefits to parents, health professionals and 
employers. She has contributed to numerous guides on parental and 
discrimination law and wrote Maternity and Parental Rights – a guide for 
parents.

Kate Headley is development director at diversity consultancy, The Clear 
Company <http://www.theclearcompany.co.uk/>. She has over 15 years’ experience 
in diversity and talent management and is known for her expertise in inclusive 
talent solutions, such as flexible working.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 