
McAuley and Morrison complete West Brom fightback against wilting Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/west-bromwich-albion-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
The former Birmingham City manager Gary Rowett is the early bookmakers’ 
favourite to take over atHull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> after the Premier League’s 
bottom club parted company with Mike Phelan.

The 54-year-old, who was appointed on a permanent basis in October, was shown 
the door followingMonday’s 3-1 defeat at West Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/west-bromwich-albion-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
, which left the club with 13 points from 20 games.

“The club can announce it has parted company with head coach Mike Phelan,” 
Hull confirmed via their Twitter page.

Phelan stepped in after Steve Bruce left shortly before the start of the 
season. Bruce had only months earlier led Hull into the top flight. They won 
their first two matches, against last year’s champions Leicester and Swansea, 
but have been unable to build on that strong start.

Hull’s statement added: “We would like to thank Mike for his efforts both as 
assistant manager and head coach over the last two years. The search for a 
replacement has begun and an announcement will be made in due course.”

Rowett is keen to return to football after his surprising sacking at St 
Andrew’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
where his successor Gianfranco Zola has struggled to win over supporters and 
found results difficult to come by.

Seen as one of the brightest and most eloquent English managers in the game, 
the 42-year-old was in the running for the Swansea job before losing out to 
Paul Clement and has also been linked with a move to Nottingham Forest.

Rowett remains highly regarded for his work at Burton and transforming 
Birmingham from relegation strugglers into promotion contenders. However, he 
may have to be convinced Hull are right for him with uncertainty around 
ownership continuing to blight the club.

The new manager will have the benefit of an open transfer window in which to 
do business, although attracting players to a relegation dogfight may demand 
strong powers of persuasion. Hull’s last victory came on 6 November against 
Southampton.

The former Crystal Palace manager Alan Pardew has also been linked with the 
vacancy, along with Chris Coleman and Roy Hodgson.
 