
More than half a dozen political prisoners in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> should freed, the United States and 
European Union have said, citing a deteriorating human rights situation that 
has seen hundreds lawyers and activists detained in the past year.


Since coming to power in 2012 the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has presided 
over a wide-ranging crackdown on freedom of expression, rights lawyers, 
feminists, activists and religion. About 250 lawyers and activists were 
detained by police starting in July last year in what some have called a“war on 
law” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/shanshans-year-anguish-of-jailed-lawyers-families-laid-bare-in-chinese-film>
.

Salman Rushdie leads World Human Rights Day protest for Chinese writers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/10/salman-rushdie-leads-world-human-rights-day-protest-for-chinese-writers>
“I remain extremely concerned about the ongoing detention of Chinese lawyers,” 
Max Baucus, the US ambassador to China,said in a statement 
<http://beijing.usembassy-china.org.cn/mobile//ambassador-human-rights-day-statement-2016.html#.WEsVOtgzn8N.twitter>
. “China’s treatment of these lawyers and advocates calls into question its 
commitment to the rule of law.”

Crusading attorneys Li Heping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/my-friend-li-heping-the-man-china-thinks-is-more-dangerous-than-bin-laden>
,Wang Quanzhang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/china-should-be-proud-of-wang-quanzhang-instead-it-persecutes-him>
, Xie Yang and Xie Yanyi all remain behind bars, and Baucus singled out their 
cases and called for their release. The EU echoed many of the same sentiments 
and highlighted the same jailed lawyers.

“We urge China to immediately release any individual who has been detained … 
for seeking to exercise, protect or promote their own rights or the rights of 
others,” the EU statement said.

The US and EU made the calls to mark Human Rights Day 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/humanrightsday/>, a United Nations holiday 
commemorating the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> signed.

“During the past year, we have been extremely troubled about the deterioration 
of the situation with respect to freedom of expression and association,” the EU 
statement said.

“We are equally concerned about all human rights defenders and their family 
members who have been harassed and punished because of their work in promoting 
rights which are protected in China’s Constitution and international law.”

Trump and China: fears that deal-making will consign human rights to political 
'roadkill'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/trump-and-china-fears-deal-making-consign-human-rights-to-political-roadkill>
Both the US and EU called for Nobel Peace prize laureate and democracy 
activist Liu Xiaobo, who has been in prison since 2008, to be freed.

Tashi Wangchuk, a jailed Tibetan language advocate, was also mentioned by both 
governments. His case is emblematic of the hardline stance China has taken 
towards ethnic minorities who do not toe the Communist party line. Another 
victim of those policies is Ilham Tohti, a Muslim Uighur academic sentenced to 
life in prison, who the EU said should be released.


“I can tell you that China’s approach to human rights directly impacts our 
overall bilateral relationship,” Baucus said. “While other countries celebrate 
when their citizens win the Nobel Peace prize, Chinese Peace prize winner Liu 
Xiaobo remains jailed.”


China should be proud of Wang Quanzhang - instead it persecutes him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/china-should-be-proud-of-wang-quanzhang-instead-it-persecutes-him>
The strongly-worded statement on human rights from the US may be its last for 
a while,Chinese activists worry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/trump-and-china-fears-deal-making-consign-human-rights-to-political-roadkill>
. They fear president-elect Donald Trump will pull back from defending right 
around the world.


Curiously absent from the EU statement was Gui Minhai, a Swedish national and 
publisher of books critical of China’s leaders, who was allegedlyabducted from 
Thailand a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/gui-minhai-the-strange-disappearance-of-a-publisher-who-riled-chinas-elite>
. He later appeared in China, giving a televised “confession”.

More than 120 authors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/10/salman-rushdie-leads-world-human-rights-day-protest-for-chinese-writers>
 also took the opportunity of Human Rights Day to call on Xi to his end his 
government’s fierce crackdown on writers and dissidents, with the authors 
saying they “cannot stand by as more and more of our friends and colleagues are 
silenced”.
 