
As soon as I was placed on a mental health unit as a student occupational 
therapist I knew: working on a psychiatric ward was my dream job.

I was very lucky – I got that job pretty quickly after qualifying and worked 
with a dedicated team of professionals. Most really enjoy their work, although 
it’s not always easy.Mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> care can be extremely 
pressured, challenging, exhausting and some days downright sad. You see such 
desperate situations but you toughen up and eventually learn that despite 
trying, you can’t save everyone.

I loved my job and worked hard with the team to keep patients safe, so it was 
extremely difficult when someone close to me became very mentally unwell. We 
called upon mental health services; I put my faith in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and trusted it would not let me down.

 He was admitted for treatment into a psychiatric unit. I can remember 
thinking what a relief it was just to know he would be kept safe and get the 
help he desperately needed and wanted.

My OT and I: how occupational therapists achieve the impossible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/nov/04/my-ot-and-i-how-occupational-therapists-achieve-the-impossible>
Then, one day, I got bad news I knew would affect him. I immediately told 
staff on the psychiatric unit, as I knew the news would have a devastating 
impact. My message was not passed to the nursing team and the next day, when he 
left the ward for fresh air accompanied by a healthcare professional, he 
received a telephone call notifying him of the sad news. He ran away, made a 
serious attempt to end his life, and is now in a persistent vegetative state.

It was and still is shattering. I was devastated. You never imagine it will 
happen to you. You experience intense emotional pain followed by many 
unanswered questions; you feel guilt, sadness and desperation, along with 
anger, low mood and anxiety which can be overwhelming. I can remember thinking, 
“That’s it, my career as an OT is completely over. I will never be able to work 
in mental health services again”.

I felt that mental health services had failed to keep a loved one safe and had 
desperately let us all down. It had destroyed my faith when we trusted them to 
care for him in a time of crisis and keep him safe.

During this time of grief aspects of my professional life stayed with me. To 
get through this I applied what I advised my patients, to myself. I walked to 
improve my mood and reduce the stress and anxiety. I listened to relaxing music 
to aid sleep at night.

After months off work I began to think about my job. I missed work, the 
structure, routine, and the patient contact. I missed my OT team, who had kept 
in touch throughout my sick leave by visiting and being there to listen. The 
nurses sent messages of support.

I eventually returned to my job on a phased return. The patients also kept me 
going without even realising. Work on an acute psychiatric ward is extremely 
busy so meeting and helping new people kept me distracted and focused.

The day an occupational therapist changed my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jun/30/occupational-therapy-changed-my-life>
I won’t pretend it’s always easy. Listening to handover can still be 
difficult, particularly when a patient is admitted to the ward in similar 
circumstances. You can’t help but relate it to your own situation; you think 
about the person, the pain and desperation and what their family may be going 
through. At times I wish I could tell them that I understand – I have been 
there and I know it hurts – but I think this would be unprofessional.

My situation gives insight that you wish you never had. It’s tough but you 
continue to fight for your patients’ recovery as you would fight for your own 
friend or family member. You learn to use this insight as a positive to help 
others.

 Occupational therapy provides support to enable people to facilitate 
recovery, to overcome barriers during illness or disability which prevent them 
from doing the activities that matter to them. Each day I walk into the 
hospital I put my OT skills into practice for my patients and now for myself.

Being a mental health OT is my passion. I meet wonderful people from all walks 
of life who need our care in the NHS and I’m thankful that I’m still an 
occupational therapist who can help them.

If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 