
I’ve got a pretty good CV when it comes to long distance events. Three Great 
South Runs, a marathon earlier this year and a 24-hour endurance event in April 
in which I covered 70 miles. So why has the Brighton Marathon told me that I 
need a chaperone if I want to take part? Because I’m a wheelchair user. Yes, I 
thought it was 2016 too.

It’s hard sometimes to explain everything a disabled person comes up against 
in everyday life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/person-disabilities-trailblazer-society-convince-life>
 without sounding like a tantrum-throwing two-year-old, but each day I accept
being patronised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/nine-things-never-say-wheelchair-user>
, I accept people assuming that I can’t manage, I accept people rushing over to 
assist. I put up with thesenever-ending attacks on my independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/life-wheelchair-disabled-people-equal-rights>
 with as much grace as I can muster because, after all, people are just trying 
to help. There isn’t enough kindness in the world for me to go around refusing 
it.

But I am a gutsy, determined, never-say-die son-of-a-gun, and as much as I 
will accept kindness, I refuse to let anyone tell me what I am and am not 
capable of. So on looking into entering the Brighton Marathon and seeingin the 
FAQs <http://www.brightonmarathon.co.uk/faqs> under “Can I take part with a 
wheelchair?” the phrasing, “If you have a standard wheelchair … this will be 
allowed … provided another participant is pushing the chair …” I’ll be honest 
with you: I was furious.

Because from the day I was born without tibia bones, which resulted in both my 
legs being amputated a few months later, I have proved people wrong time and 
time again.

So imagine how angry I was to be told I couldn’t compete in a sporting event? 
That I’m not a valid participant; that I can take part, but, umm, not really … 
just be quiet now and go away, will you? I cannot and I will not accept that. I 
am too old and too proud.

Brighton is the only such major marathon in the UK to insist upon the 
infantilisation of disabled athletes, because parts of the course are not 
accessible and “could pose significant problems should they run into 
difficulty”. Yes, they actually sent me a direct message on Twitter with that 
phrasing. Hilarious? I nearly fell out of my chair.

If the course could pose significant problems, change the course! Not just for 
me, I know I’m not that important, but for everyone who ever wanted to do 
something and were told they couldn’t because someone else didn’t believe they 
were able to. Why not find out if a wheelchair athlete can complete your 
course, instead of assuming they can’t. Stop seeing the “dis” andstart seeing 
the “ability” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/the-guardian-view-on-the-paralympics-focus-on-ability-not-disability>
.

I am a guy who happens to have no legs but who pushes myself (lol, as the 
young folk say) as hard as I can in order to prove, over and over again, that 
there is nothing others can do that I cannot. My message is simple: your 
limitations are not my limitations.

I’ve received lots of support on social media, along with friends emailing the 
Brighton Marathon in protest. So much so that on the same day they insisted I 
must be pushed around the course, the organisers amended the wording on their 
website to say people like me are “able to take part but on the agreement that 
the wheelchair user is accompanied by a runner throughout the 26.2 miles. The 
accompanying runner does not have to push the wheelchair during the race but 
must participate alongside them throughout”.

Turning Paralympians into ‘superhumans’ is no help to disabled people | Penny 
Pepper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/paralympians-superhumans-disabled-people>
What this non-concession means is that I must still be babysat, albeit with my 
babysitter allowed to back off a few inches. Sorry, but that still isn’t good 
enough. If I can’t do this alone, how can I ever prove that I am able to do it 
alone?

The point is this: we’re not the same, you and I. And nor are all disabled 
athletes the same. Some with less mobility than me might quite enjoy being 
pushed round the course. Equally, some might like someone to chat to along the 
route and to be there as a fail-safe should they, ahem, run into difficulty. 
But not me. I’ll do it my way. It is my victory or my defeat. No one gets to 
tell me what I achieve; no one gets to tell me what I fail at.

This is my story of refusing to accept anyone else choosing my limitations. 
Because you don’t have to be able to stand up in order to stand up for yourself.
 