
I sometimes long for a proper retirement, just pottering about in the garden, 
going on dog walks, playing the piano, or lying about reading, snacking, 
watching telly, snoozing the afternoons away. But it’s a pipe dream. Really I 
suspect I’d be bored stiff, and anyway, like many people my age, I couldn’t 
afford it because my pension – combined state and measly private one – is too 
small.

According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
British workers will have the worst pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/01/british-workers-worst-pensions-major-economy-uk-retirement-age-oecd>
 of any major economy – 38% of their salary. And as we’re all living longer, 
retiring at the age of 65 would mean 30-40 years of living on peanuts, like so 
many fading Bob Cratchits. No wonder a quarter of people on the cusp of 
retirement can’t afford to give up work. And even if they can, 51% ofpotential 
retirees <http://www.pru.co.uk/pdf/presscentre/pre-tirement-release.pdf> would 
prefer to keep active.

But do they have much of a choice? How do companies respond to older people 
who want to stay at work, or apply for a job? And when is the retirement age 
now? It’s all rather confusing. The default retirement age (formerly 65) has 
been phased out – most people can now work for as long as they want to, 
according to thegovernment website <https://www.gov.uk/retirement-age>. People 
can’t bediscriminated against <https://www.gov.uk/discrimination-your-rights> 
yet “some employers can set a compulsory retirement age if they can clearly 
justify it”.

British workers will have worst pensions of any major economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/01/british-workers-worst-pensions-major-economy-uk-retirement-age-oecd>
There may be laws against discrimination, but as pensions minister Ros Altmann 
warned in areport last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-new-vision-for-older-workers-retain-retrain-recruit>
, the recruitment industry still needs to raise its standards to ensure 
compliance with the law. In the meantime, many older people seem to have just 
got on with it themselves. There has been a140% increase 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/411420/a-new-vision-for-older-workers.pdf>
 in over-65s running their own businesses.

Most friends and acquaintances of around my age (I’m 73) are freelance and 
still working, or retired and working for free, for charities. But work can 
fizzle out for freelancers (so it was nice of a former minister to suggest
pensioners could be low-wage fruit pickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/tory-minister-wanted-uk-pensioners-to-be-low-wage-fruit-pickers>
).

For John, 66, a location manager in the film industry “the phone calls just 
stop coming”. Andrew, after 35 years teaching in a London comprehensive, was 
forced to take early retirement, aged 60, along with the rest of his age group 
and anyone else in the NUT, when the school became an academy. He was given the 
most difficult classes, the pokier, more unpleasant classrooms and almost 
impossible targets, until he had to leave, with dangerously high blood-pressure.

In my local branch of NatWest, machines have been increased, human cashiers 
reduced, and thefew remaining must stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/01/cashiers-bank-stand-all-day-natwest>
 all day, which does not display consideration for older staff.

Companies need older staff

But these are just my personal anecdotes. Officially, things are apparently 
not so dire. I have naively accepted the general view that there are not enough 
jobs to go round, and the elderly, if they insist on hanging on, will be 
robbing the young of desperately needed work. Not so. According toBusiness in 
the Community (BITC) 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/our-resources/report/missing-million-pathways-back-employment>
, between 2012 and 2022 there will be 14.5mvacancies created 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/system/files/the_missing_million_-_rec_for_action_23-4-2015.pdf>
 by retirees and economic growth, but only 7 million younger workers will be 
available, leaving 7.5m jobs to be filled.

“We’re working with companies saying you’re going to have to retain and 
recruit older [people], because there aren’t enough young ones coming through,” 
says Rachael Saunders of BITC. “It can be solved by creating wealth without 
humans [in other wordsmachines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/video/2016/feb/17/last-job-on-earth-automation-robots-unemployment-animation-video>
] but if we want growth through people, we need to recruit older staff and keep 
them longer. We’re in the early days of working this out.”

Thank heavens there already are some companies that encourage older people to 
stay at/apply for work. June Shepherd, 80, works forHome Instead Senior Care 
<http://www.homeinsteadjobs.co.uk/case-studies/age-is-no-barrier-to-a-career-in-care-7>
, caring for people in their own homes. She has been an auxiliary nurse, 
factory worker and forklift truck driver, has 10 grandchildren, felt fit, 
wanted to keep working and can because this firm realises that older people 
relate well to the people with whom they are working. Aviva and Nationwide use 
older people in customer service, as they believe that they have life 
experience which enables them to relate well to people phoning others.

Age discrimination is still seen as okay in the workplace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/02/ageing-retirement-workforce-discrimination>
 BITC’s Championing an Ageing Workforce 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/awards/responsible-business-awards/award-stories-2015/championing-ageing-workforce-award>
 awards have gone to the Department of Transport for itsAge and Carers’ network 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/our-resources/case-studies/department-transport-age-and-carers-initiative>
, which according to BITC has “increased its understanding of older people in 
its workforce”, and to Sodexo’sGenerations Workstream 
<http://age.bitc.org.uk/all-resources/case-studies/sodexo-generations-workstream-started-2012>
, which has “built understanding between different generation groups in its 
workforce”. This is admirable, but it is worrying to find that companies have 
to help their workforce to understand older people, as if we come from another 
planet.

Sodexo uses board games, putting cliches next to various generations – enjoys 
the Beatles, is sometimes late – to show that such generalisations are not 
necessarily accurate. Although we know what gender and race discrimination 
looks like explains Saunders, “with age we haven’t worked it out yet. It’s 
exciting that the baby boomer generation are changing it. They will not take 
these stereotypes lying down”. I hope she’s right. “It’s early days,” she says. 
We must just keep banging on.

Meanwhile, Altmann, is keen to highlight 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-new-vision-for-older-workers-retain-retrain-recruit>
 the value that older people (50 plus) bring to the workplace and society 
overall. She would like retirement to become “gradual, not a cliff-edge event”, 
and wants employers to “focus on the 3Rs: retain, retrain, recruit”. Which 
would be lovely, but I suspect we have an awfully long way to go before her 
wish comes true.
 