
I had recently resigned from a well-paid job when I started working for the NHS
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in an administrative role. I was 
happy to be performing a useful service in the interests of a larger social 
goal, while no longer being required to write strategy documents or meet 
financial targets. However, in my seven months as a hospital specialty 
coordinator (a posh term for medical secretary, invented in order to create a 
sense of potential job progression), I experienced more stress – of several 
different kinds – than I have ever experienced.

The NHS is 25 years behind the rest of the country in terms of technology and 
management techniques

After the 2013 final report of the public inquiry into the “deaths by human 
error” at the Mid Staffordshire NHS foundation trust, the induction training 
programme for all new starters in the NHS – both clinical and administrative – 
was substantially rewritten. The major change in the day-long training sessions 
was the section on transparency and accountability. All new staff, we were 
told, were encouraged to follow the trust’s whistleblowing policy: this meant 
that we should feel duty-bound to report any incident, however small, that 
might jeopardise the wellbeing of a patient.

The NHS is 25 years behind the rest of the country in terms of technology and 
management techniques. Despite millions of pounds spent on computer technology 
in the NHS, I was amazed to discover that everything done within the health 
service – every clinic letter, investigative test, scan result – requires a 
hard copy file note to accompany its electronic counterpart. Across the 
country, hospital administrative staff, such as myself, waste thousands of 
hours each week trying to locate hard copy patient notes that could be anywhere 
within numerous hospital departments, and in many cases, across several 
different hospitals.

The most familiar sight in any hospital admin department is overloaded 
trolleys with patient notes being trundled from one section of the hospital to 
another, and overflowing filing trays that require staff to come in at weekends 
just so that they don’t start Monday mornings depressed by the amount of filing 
they have to do.

I start the day with anti-depressants and end wishing I didn’t work in NHS 
payroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/feb/23/working-in-nhs-payroll-back-office>
I could not work out why technological advancements and concern for the 
environment could have somehow bypassed the NHS, the fifth largest employer in 
the world. Jeremy Hunt’s goal of apaperless health service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/jeremy-hunt-challenges-nhs-to-go-paperless-by-2018--2>
 by 2018 looked to be a long way off, particularly since most of the managers 
preferred the security of hard copies (as back-up in the event of a computer 
glitch, and also in terms of patient confidentiality, since paper is not 
vulnerable to computer hacking).

Managers struggled to address the problems of their increasingly demoralised 
staff, who were trying to cope not just with the paperwork, but also with the 
constant demands of patients who wanted to know why their test had not been 
scheduled, or why they had not received their results. Absenteeism was rife 
because staff frequently called in sick with stress. On some days I found 
myself doing three people’s jobs. If a consultant was sick, their clinic for 
that day was cancelled. If a medical secretary, or two, or three, called in 
sick, the patients kept coming, and so did the accompanying paperwork.

I felt like I didn’t have time to breathe, let alone take a lunch break, and 
inevitably, when people are stressed, they take it out on each other. In my 
experience, the consultants, registrars and junior doctors were polite and 
considerate to the admin staff; and the patients were understanding and 
forbearing: it was the other admin staff who were the most unpleasant to one 
another. On one occasion, for example, a group of admin staff organised an 
official meeting to complain that their colleagues were “hogging” the few hours 
per week of a temporary helper.

Tears, tantrums and no pay – my life on a zero-hours contract in the NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/jun/01/tears-tantrums-no-pay-life-zero-hours-contract-nhs>
Some managers tried a technological fix to the problem of overwork and 
paperwork – “two computer screens will make you more efficient by speeding up 
your processing times” – whereas what we needed was less absenteeism and better 
systems. We were, however, forbidden to use any external agency staff to cope 
with the dire shortages. These were considered an expensive luxury at a time of 
cost-cutting. Since all managers were assessed on their ability to achieve 
targets and avoid serious incidents, the real reasons for the poor performance 
of their staff were disregarded as long as no breaches of the trust’s policies 
needed to be reported.

In the end, I felt like a workhorse who was flogged too hard for trying and 
failing to shoulder the burdens of the job. I have left the NHS and am working 
in a job where I no longer dread the thought of Monday morning. I never 
reported a colleague through the whistleblowing hotline and, as far as I know, 
no one reported me. I can’t help feeling guilty, though, at the thought of the 
continued toil of my former workhorse colleagues I left behind.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 