
The phone starts ringing on the dot at 9am. It is my day as duty worker in our 
busy child and adolescent mental health service (Camhs) and the phone is 
ringing off the hook. In addition to managing my caseload as a mental health 
practitioner, at Camhs we run a duty system to deal with urgent referrals, 
enquiries and hospital referrals for deliberate self-harm in young people aged 
under 18.

The day is shaping up to be a busy one. There are three referrals already in; 
I must attend hospital wards to assess whether children who have taken 
deliberate overdoses are safe to be discharged home with a safety plan in place.

The phone call turns out to be a worried teacher describing how a 15-year-old 
boy is distraught, saying that he wants to kill himself. I arrange for him to 
be brought in for an urgent assessment. A sense of worry grips me as I try to 
organise who will see him; I have to go out to the hospital so I beg a favour 
from a colleague who has to ring and cancel their routine patient so they can 
see this urgent one. We areall overstretched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/childrens-mental-health-in-crisis-readers-share-their-stories>
 – there should be two of us on duty. Today there is only one.

'I left to save myself': the reality of working in children's mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/06/reality-working-child-mental-health-services>
The next phone call is from an upset parent who has a child waiting to be 
allocated a Camhs therapist. They have been waiting for months, their anxiety 
is getting worse and they are not attending school. I feel awful as I apologise 
and explain that their child is not urgent enough to be moved up the waiting 
list. The demands are such that a child has to be at high risk of suicide to be 
seen quickly and we have hundreds of children in our service who are a risk to 
themselves in this way. The number of suicidal children referred to my team in 
the last couple of years has skyrocketed, part ofa national epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/quarter-of-a-million-children-receiving-mental-health-care-in-england>
.

I seize a moment to check my emails. Far too many, as usual. I feel rising 
concern as I read an email describing changes that will be happening at my 
Camhs over the next few months. The service is going out to tender – again. It 
is commissioned on a temporary contract, so every few years we go out to tender 
to see which organisation wants to bid for us. In the running is our current 
NHS trust and a private healthcare provider. The thought of being tendered out 
of the NHS to a private provider is a frightening one; we have seen allied 
services such as counselling fail as a result of going to private providers who 
promise the health commissioners the earth but struggle to deliver. Even 
staying with anNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> provider is a 
worry as it would bring huge changes when we have only just settled from the 
last round of “service transformation”, which included wage cuts for 
practitioners as they moved to lower pay bands and worsening working conditions.

I glance at my colleague who is reading the same email. He has a grim look on 
his face. A subsequent email informs me that a firm of health consultants will 
be coming in to support us during this period. I wonder how many thousands that 
will cost.

We have only just settled ​from the last round of ‘service transformation’, 
which included ​​wage​ cuts

Later that day I get into my car in a hospital car park. I have had no further 
time to think about service changes and what impact they might have. I have 
spent the last three hours assessing the mental health of a teenage girl who 
had taken an overdose. She was not safe to be discharged home; the ward staff 
were not happy due to the shortage of beds, and as I put my bags in the car my 
phone rings. It is an irate hospital bed manager.

I manage to remain civil as the discussion gets heated. We both argue our 
corner – me, that the girl is in need of and entitled to a bed for the night 
due to her mental state, and the manager that a bed is not available. In the 
end a bed is agreed, with the assurance that I will re-assess the girl in the 
morning.

Disagreements like this are unpleasant and all too frequent, caused by the 
conflicting pressures on our services. I hope she is well enough to be 
discharged home tomorrow, as sourcing an inpatient bed at a specialist 
children’s mental health hospital is almost impossible. If she is not safe to 
be discharged home, and there are no specialist inpatient beds available, then 
a further tussle with the ward is inevitable. If she does need a specialist bed 
and there is one available, it may be the other end of the country.

I almost lost my daughter because of her mental health problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/dec/05/almost-lost-daughter-mental-health-problems-camhs>
Sitting in my car I see it is late in the day and I have several missed calls 
from my team leader asking if I am OK. I ring her and we have a quick debrief. 
She informs me that a boy on my caseload is on his way to A&E after cutting his 
arms. I sigh at this – worried for the boy, but relieved that I am now on my 
way home and this will be passed to my out-of-hours colleagues. An evening of 
writing up the notes and assessment of the girl on the ward awaits, but at 
least she is safe for now.

I realise as I sit there how tense I am. I am gripping the steering wheel but 
the engine is not switched on. My head swims and I am breathing fast, my heart 
beating overtime. This level of stress is normal now. I cannot bear to think 
what the future holds for my service. I want to remain a part of it but I don’t 
know how much longer I can manage. Quelling a feeling of rising panic, I drive 
home.

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>. 

If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears>, 
about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 