
The way we work <https://www.theguardian.com/money/work-and-careers> is 
changing: colleagues can be the other side of the world, and you can set up a 
business from a smartphone and be “self-employed”, while dependent for income 
on an online platform. These are the issues I will look into as chair of an 
independent review on modern employment that Theresa May is to announce today

Being self-employed means freedom. Freedom to be abused and underpaid | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/self-employed-freedom-underpaid-contractors>
More and more people are their own boss – the 4.8 million UK self-employed 
<https://www.ipse.co.uk/news/call-government-review-low-paid-self-employed-0> 
are a record. And more work is flexible, with900,000 on zero-hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/08/uk-workers-zero-hours-contracts-rise-tuc>
 and a further 1.7 million in temporary work. Taken together that is around one 
in five British workers in what are, increasingly unhelpfully, described as 
“non-standard work arrangements”. Few people think these trends will reverse, 
and many predict that traditional employment will eventually become a minority 
pursuit.

We know some of the causes of these changes. Business innovation, 
technological possibility and lifestyle preferences are combining. By and 
large, the flexibility is popular. Surveys consistently show that self-employed 
people arehappier with their work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/28/self-employed-greater-job-satisfaction-rsa-report>
 than employees. About two-thirds of temporary workers choose to work 
temporarily, while the same proportion on zero-hours contracts do not want 
fixed hours; most report that they are happy with theirwork-life balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/work-life-balance>. But not everyone’s 
experience of new work is positive.

There is, for example, a particular problem with job security. While 92% of 
peopleconsider it to be important 
<http://www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/media/39061/bsa33_work.pdf>, only 65% people think 
their job is secure, and 15% think it is insecure – that’s around 5 million 
people wondering if they will be able to pay the bills each month, or what will 
happen to the mortgage if they’re suddenly out of work. Stress in employment 
used to be correlated with seniority. Now those with lower incomes are just as 
likely to suffer anxiety at work.

What’s more, around 6 million people are not covered by the standard suite of 
workplace rights. Worryingly, that number continues to grow, and it shows how 
rapidly changing business models and working practices are continually 
stretching the limits of our employment rules. This is not to say that we need 
to rip up existing models; current employment rules do work for the majority of 
people. Indeed, employment in this country is at a record high; we have one of 
the fastest-growing developed economies in the world and we are flying high in 
the sectors – such as the creative and tech industries – that benefit most from 
flexibility in working practices. The question isn’t how we reduce flexibility, 
but how we can make it work for more people.

A world without work is coming – it could be utopia or it could be hell | Ryan 
Avent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/world-without-work-utopia-hell-human-labour-obsolete>
From employment regulations to tax and welfare rules, to public service 
operating hours, much is still premised on traditional employment. Can 
government do more to support non-standard workers? Can we strengthen their 
voice at work and in the corridors of power? Can we explore and promote new 
forms of enterprise as the distinction between owner, worker, contractor and 
consumer gets more blurred? And how can we create a virtuous cycle whereby 
better employment practices and opportunities for career development feed into 
higher productivity? These are among the questions I will be reviewing.

No government can meaningfully improve the lives of ordinary people without 
addressing our experience of work. As the Guardian’s John Harris has pointed 
out, there is aworld of difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/does-the-left-have-a-future> 
between the happily self-employed software consultant in Hackney and a worker 
on zero hours desperate for greater security and job progression, so I want the 
inquiry to get out and about talking to people from across the country about 
how their experience of work affects their day-to-day lives. Government can 
play an important role but this is also about the decisions we make as workers, 
investors, consumers and citizens.

The world is changing fast, sometimes bewilderingly so, and there is every 
reason to be excited. But policy has to become ever more adaptive. The 
government has to think hard about the difference it can make not just by 
changing laws but by shaping expectations, promoting dialogue and encouraging 
innovation. As chair of the inquiry I start out with an open mind to the 
methods of change, but we can all surely agree on the goal: that the 
fast-changing modern labour market is one that should offer citizens growing 
opportunity and control.
 