
A study by a parcel delivery service – perhaps based on the number of pairs of 
jeans that get sent back – found that most people think other peopleshouldn’t 
wear jeans after they’re 53 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/why-jeans-are-just-for-cowboys-gardeners-and-the-under-53s>
. Why 53? Come to that, why jeans?

The answer to the second question may explain everything. Jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/jeans> are universal, intergenerational 
and global. They can be invisible or absolutely in your face. Nine tenths of 
the world’s population – not a scientific number – must have owned a pair at 
some time. So pretty well everyone is going to have a view on when to stop 
wearing them. Why 53? Just to be annoying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc24607102803f9bd8281345d16b6ca39a07271dc%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20over%2053%20and%20won't%20stop%20wearing%20jeans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m%20over%2053%20and%20won%27t%20stop%20wearing%20jeans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc24607102803f9bd8281345d16b6ca39a07271dc%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Anne Perkins wearing jeans. Photograph: Anne Perkins 
Like all the most irritating “studies”, this stinks. It is random fashion 
police activity that is nothing to do with fashion and all about making one 
group of people feel bad about themselves with a side of schadenfreude for 
everyone else. Maybe there are now thousands of people squeezing themselves 
into their skinny jeans thinking, at least I’m not 53, while those of us who 
are a) over 53 and b) rely on jeans for daily wear, feel if not foolish then at 
least a bit self-doubting.

Don’t get me wrong, I am not saying that age is irrelevant, just that judging 
what is age appropriate is totally subjective. It’s a factor along with all the 
other factors that interfere with leaving the house, like does my bum look 
big/my legs fat/insert personal phobia here. The only rule is that there are no 
rules, just like all the other so called rules about what to wear.

From long and sometimes costly experience I have learned that if I ask myself 
if it looks a bit young, the answer is that it does. Not that I always listen 
to my inner adviser, which is why there are dresses in my wardrobe that I never 
wear because they make me feel a bit like Grayson Perry. Obviously, a 
subliminal yearning for girly frocks is some kind of eruption of suppressed 
regret for the curvy figure I never had.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63255d1c2965c9824b3a72f9bd82bc908ec513ce%2F131_381_1638_2389%2F1638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20over%2053%20and%20won't%20stop%20wearing%20jeans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m%20over%2053%20and%20won%27t%20stop%20wearing%20jeans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fim-over-53-and-wont-stop-wearing-jeans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63255d1c2965c9824b3a72f9bd82bc908ec513ce%2F131_381_1638_2389%2F1638.jpg>
 Kristin Scott Thomas in denim. Photograph: Canadian Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Maybe jeans, in the eyes of the judgmental, are a bit less forgiving than most 
other clothes. If you look like Kate Moss, then in a way that absolutely no 
other single item of clothing can, they convey the 
I’m-not-trying-but-God-I-just-can’t-help-looking-amazing school of style. 
Maybe, if I peer into my underdeveloped fashionista soul, I should acknowledge 
that jeans, more than any other personal choice, do carry a subliminal “don’t 
write me off” message, a teeny scintilla of street cred that clings like a 
ghost of what one once imagined one was.

But the thing about jeans is that, just like bodies, they come in an infinite 
variety of shapes and styles. For each pair that makes some bold statement 
about the wearer there are a thousand others that just happen to be the nearest 
clean thing in the wardrobe. And the more ancient and decrepit I get, the more 
pleasure I shall have from the one thing that looks mildly in touch with 
fashion, while also being machine washable and never in need of the iron. I 
wonder if they make them baggy enough for wearers of continence pads?
 