
It was a dreary February day and I was thinking about my diagnosis of 
borderline personality disorder. At work and miserable, I turned over the 
possibility of using my negative experience for good.

Some of the best writers in history have found inspiration on their darkest 
nights. In this world, where the media are always encouraging young people to 
strive to look better and improve themselves, the beauty of who they are is 
often overlooked.

Even in one’s professional life, discrimination towards those with mental ill 
health is a huge problem, especially when it comes to borderline personality 
disorder. So, while browsing the web on my break, I was surprised to findTime 
to Change Wales <http://www.timetochangewales.org.uk/en/>, the Welsh campaign 
for ending the stigma and discrimination surrounding mental health.

Express yourself: how a charity is using dance to improve mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/18/charity-dance-mental-health-young-people>
Its website provided information about how to get involved. The idea of 
becoming a “volunteer champion” stood out to me. The charity offered training 
that would allow you to talk to colleagues and employers about your mental 
health, culminating in a talk to a roomful of people. I found the idea of being 
able to tell my story exciting, but also nerve-wracking. I am a shy, awkward 
person and I was afraid to let people in on my experience with this disorder. 
Nevertheless, I took the plunge and signed up.

The training took place over the summer and before I knew it, I was ready to 
tell my story. I didn’t think the charity would find me a place to speak so 
quickly, but just a month later it had a request from a local service user 
group.

However, the day before I was due to speak my disorder reared its ugly head 
again and I wound up in A&E after a suicide attempt. I couldn’t do this, could 
I?

My mother had to accompany me to the venue or I wouldn’t have gone. I didn’t 
think my talk was going to have any impact. I was trembling and the words came 
tumbling out rather too quickly, like water boiling over in a pan – but I did 
it. I managed to make it to the end without losing my audience’s attention.

Parts of my experience were particularly painful to talk about. Hallucinations 
are a pretty taboo subject, but I knew I had to convey that this was n0t a case 
of attention-seeking or playing games, as some professionals so kindly put it.

Breaking my silence about having been sectioned was a tough step too. But 
perhaps the most frightening part was revealing my suicide attempts.

I found that speaking openly about the times I had nearly killed myself 
brought a greater appreciation of the life I still have. I was able to 
re-evaluate my life through the eyes of my listeners, and realised that I could 
help those who might be considering suicide.

Volunteering + social impact = mental health improvement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/jun/02/research-shows-volunteering-improves-mental-health>
By the end of the talk I felt drained, but I could see that I had made a 
difference to those listeners who had also struggled with mental ill health. 
They – and I – had realised that honesty is not always something to be feared, 
that by opening up, those of us who were struggling alone with mental ill 
health could begin to heal. They knew I could say, “I understand”, and mean it. 
My talk even inspired an audience member to sign up to be a champion.

I am only a tiny way into my recovery, but I made a difference to the people 
in that room by sharing my story. By telling them that I was rediscovering a 
life worth living, despite my daily struggles with my disorder. That there was 
hope for all of us.

Louisa Tanner is a Time to Change Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> 
champion

In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 