
I deactivated my Twitter account <https://twitter.com/thelindywest?lang=en-gb> 
today. It was more of a spontaneous impulse than a New Year resolution, 
although it does feel like a juice cleanse, a moulting, a polar-bear plunge, a 
clean slate (except the opposite – like throwing your slate into a volcano and 
running). One moment I was brains-deep in the usual way, half-heartedly arguing 
with strangers about whether or not it’s “OK” to suggest toSteve Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-martin> that calling Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> a “beautiful creature” 
<http://time.com/4619461/steve-martin-carrie-fisher-tribute/> who “turned out” 
to be “witty and bright as well” veered just a hair beyond Fisher’s stated 
boundaries regarding objectification (if you have opinions on this, don’t tweet 
me – oh, wait, you can’t); and the next moment the US president-elect was using 
the selfsame platform totaunt North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/trump-says-us-safe-from-north-korean-nuclear-strike-no-thanks-to-china>
 about the size and tumescence of its nuclear program. And I realised: eh, I’m 
done. I could be swimming right now. Or flossing. Or digging a big, pointless 
pit. Anything else.

Twitter, for the past five years, has been a machine where I put in unpaid 
work and tension headaches come out. I write jokes there for free. I post 
political commentary for free. I answer questions for free. I teach feminism 
101 for free. Off Twitter, these are all things by which I make my living – in 
fact, they comprise the totality of my income. But onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, I do them pro bono and, in 
return, I am micromanaged in real time by strangers; neo-Nazis mine my personal 
life for vulnerabilities to exploit; and men enjoy unfettered, direct access to 
my brain so they can inform me, for the thousandth time, that they would gladly 
rape me if I weren’t so fat.

I talk back and I am “feeding the trolls”. I say nothing and the harassment 
escalates. I report threats and I am a “censor”. I use mass-blocking tools to 
curb abuse and I am abused further for blocking “unfairly”. I have to conclude, 
after half a decade of troubleshooting, that it may simply be impossible to 
make this platform usable for anyone but trolls, robots and dictators.

Trump says US safe from North Korean nuclear strike – no thanks to China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/trump-says-us-safe-from-north-korean-nuclear-strike-no-thanks-to-china>
Surprisingly, none of that is the reason I left. I still loved Twitter – the 
speed of information, the breadth of analysis, the jokes, the gifs, the 
fortifying albeit intermittent solidarity, the chance to vet your instincts 
against those of people much smarter and better informed than you. Every day, 
people on Twitter – particularly people of colour, trans activists, disabled 
activists and sex workers – taught me how to be a better person and a better 
neighbour, a gift they persisted in dispensing even (always) at great personal 
cost. I still believe, at least in the rear-view mirror, in Twitter’s 
importance as a democratising force – facilitating direct, transparent access 
between the disempowered and the powerful, the marginalised and the ignorant. 
But I’m leaving anyway, for a while.

I hate to disappoint anyone, but the breaking point for me wasn’t the trolls 
themselves (if I have learned anything from the dark side of Twitter, it is how 
to feel nothing when a frog calls you a cunt) – it was the global repercussions 
of Twitter’s refusal to stop them. The white supremacist, anti-feminist, 
isolationist, transphobic “alt-right” movement has been beta-testing its 
propaganda and intimidation machine on marginalised Twitter communities for 
years now – how much hate speech will bystanders ignore? When will Twitter 
intervene and start protecting its users? – and discovered, to its leering 
delight, that the limit did not exist. No one cared. Twitter abuse was a 
grand-scale normalisation project, disseminating libel and disinformation, 
muddying long-held cultural givens such as “racism is bad” and “sexual assault 
is bad” and “lying is bad” and “authoritarianism is bad”, and ultimately 
greasing the wheels forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s ascendance to the US 
presidency. Twitter executives did nothing.

On 29 December, Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jack/status/814537990366228480>: “What’s the most 
important thing you want to see Twitter improve or create in 2017?” One user 
responded: “Comprehensive plan for getting rid of the Nazis.”

“We’ve been working on our policies and controls,” Dorsey replied. “What’s the 
next most critical thing?” Oh, what’s our second-highest priority after Nazis? 
I’d say No 2 is also Nazis. And No 3. In fact, you can just go ahead and slide 
“Nazis” into the top 100 spots. Get back to me when your website isn’t a 
roiling rat-king of Nazis. Nazis are bad, you see?

Trump uses his Twitter account to set hate mobs on private citizens, attempt 
to silence journalists who write unfavourably about him, lie to the American 
people and bulldoze complex diplomatic relationships with other world powers. I 
quit Twitter because it feels unconscionable to be a part of it – to generate 
revenue for it, participate in its profoundly broken culture and lend my name 
to its legitimacy. Twitter is home to a wealth of fantastic anti-Trump 
organising, as well, but I’m personally weary of feeling hostage to a platform 
that has treated me and the people I care about so poorly. We can do good work 
elsewhere.

I’m pretty sure “ushered in kleptocracy” would be a dealbreaker for any other 
company that wanted my business. If my gynaecologist regularly hosted neo-Nazi 
rallies in the exam room, I would find someone else to swab my cervix. If I 
found out my favourite coffee shop was even remotely complicit in the third 
world war, I would – bare minimum – switch coffee shops; I might give up coffee 
altogether.

Apparently that sentiment is in the air because, as I was writing this column, 
I came across a post by my friend Lauren Hoffman, a writer for Vulture and 
Cosmopolitan: “I’ve made many real/good friends on Twitter but I guess if I met 
all my friends working at, like, the mall and the mall became a tacit 
endorsement of fascism I would keep the friends but stop going to the mall.”

Keep the friends. Ditch the mall.
 