
If the Football League’s new chairman, Ian Lenagan, had hoped to slip quietly 
into his role he has chosen the wrong time to start.

The revamped EFL Trophy format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/premier-league-academy-teams-english-football-league-trophy-efl>
, with the introduction of academy sides from Premier League and Championship 
clubs, hasprovoked anger and derision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/new-efl-trophy-premier-league-academy-teams-fans>
. Meanwhile, attempts to get on the front foot in negotiations with the Premier 
League and the Football Association over fixture congestion – resulting ina 
proposal to expand the league to 80 teams across four divisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/football-league-shakeup-four-divisions-extra-teams>
 – sparked questions and concern among clubs and fans.

New EFL Trophy sparks withdrawals, anger and apathy before a ball is kicked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/new-efl-trophy-premier-league-academy-teams-fans>
Not that Lenagan, a quietly effective presence on the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> and FA boards for some 
time, appears remotely fazed by the fuss. The former Oxford United owner, who 
also owns the rugby league club Wigan Warriors, is instead rather proud of the 
way in which the rebranded EFL has grasped the nettle.

“The best place we’re in is the place of innovation. Controlled, sensible 
innovation. The whole game solution and, to a lesser extent, the EFL Trophy are 
examples of that,” says Lenagan, who grew with up rugby league in Wigan but 
forged his love of football standing on the Kop as a student in Liverpool in 
the late 1960s and has decades of experience in the grassroots game, and as a 
club owner to draw on.

The rather sinister sounding “whole game solution” is a manifestation of that 
desire to be at the centre of the debate, he said.

The proposal for four divisions of 20 teams has prompted concern from some but 
Lenagan insists it is important for the Football League to contribute to the 
wider debate on fixture congestion with the FA and the Premier League, which is
pointing towards a winter break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/25/winter-break-current-tv-deal-fa-martin-glenn>
. Besides, any changes will need the agreement of 90% of clubs, he says.

As part of that discussion, the Football League is likely to come under 
pressure at some stage to drop two-leg League Cup ties – and it is a 
manifestation of the tricky sponsorship market that its flagship knockout 
competition remains without a sponsor for the first time since the Milk 
Marketing Board came calling in the 1980s.

“If we don’t suggest solutions, the FA or the Premier League will be forced to 
suggest solutions that will not necessarily be in the complete interests of the 
Football League’s 72 clubs,” Lenagan says. “By being at the forefront of the 
discussion we at least have a seat at the table – and that hasn’t always been 
the case.”

League Two 2016-17 season preview | Michael Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/league-two-2016-17-season-preview-portsmouth-morecambe>
Yet the changes to what was once the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy have provoked 
derision and outrage from some quarters and shrugs of indifference from others.

Even after the Premier League executive chairman, Richard Scudamore, again 
insistedit was not a precursor to B-teams in the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/top-flight-football-league-richard-scudamore-premier-league>
, many fans remain suspicious. For the Football League clubs involved some have 
complained the new competition is not quite as advertised.

The absence of several of the biggest Premier League names 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/arsenal-premier-league-clubs-absent-from-efl-trophy-group-stage-draw>
 from a draw that has Cheltenham Town included in a northern pool and seems to 
require fans to travel huge distances on week nights adds up to an 
underwhelming whole.

Lenagan, pointing out that the addition of category one academy sides is 
“strictly a one-year trial”, says it was now or never to try something new with 
the competition – then hints it could disappear altogether if the revamp does 
not work. “With the trophy being at the end of its 10 years with Johnstone’s 
Paint and the need to do something to make it a more attractive competition, we 
felt we had to do something,” he says. “It’s been a disappointment some of the 
major Premier League teams have not submitted teams but the nature of football 
is that these are 92 individual clubs. They can make their own decisions. It 
may be the Premier League thought everybody would go in. We don’t feel let 
down, we feel disappointment.”

Taking a defiantly glass-half-full approach, Lenagan even suggests the absence 
of the biggest Premier League academy teams may be a good thing because it will 
allay fears the competition will be dominated by the newcomers.

The quietly spoken but no-nonsense Lenagan appears rather proud of a new 
working relationship with a Premier League with which his predecessors often 
found themselves at odds. “Shaun Harvey [the former Leeds United chief 
executive who holds the same role at the EFL] has been heavily influential in 
developing a professional relationship with Richard Scudamore and the Premier 
League,” he says. “The response to that has been excellent from the Premier 
League and you start to get like-minded cooperation. The Football League has 
finally reached a high level of professionalism and pride, stemming from the 
fact we’re good at what we do.”

Lenagan will not hear a bad word against the Premier League, insisting the 
Elite Player Performance Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-conn-inside-sport-blog/2012/aug/29/under-21-league-everton-west-ham>
, the wholesale restructuring of youth development introduced with some 
controversy four years ago, has been “a great investment”. He says: “I think it 
has worked and continues to work.”

The fact is so many fans do stand up at games and it’s indicative of what the 
mood is

On another topical issue, Lenagan reveals he would be open to reconsidering 
the case for safe standing in light ofthe introduction of rail seats at Celtic 
Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/celtic-safe-standing-next-season>
 and the conclusion of the Hillsborough inquests. As things stand, the law 
prohibits their introduction in the top two divisions but there is a 
groundswell of support among fans for a fresh look.

“The fact is so many of them do stand up at games and it’s indicative of what 
the mood is,” Lenagan says. “We recognise it’s a difficult issue but fans 
clearly want it and our clubs have given us a mandate to ask the government for 
change. With the Hillsborough inquest concluded there’s a chance to look at the 
issue again. I quite like the idea, personally, although I’m not an expert on 
the matter.”

As we move on to broader issues, Lenagan points out the EFL’s 72 clubs are in 
better financial health than at any point since the Premier League schism in 
1992. At the same time, in the wake of the Premier League’s blockbuster £8.3bn 
TV deal, the gulf between the two seems greater than ever. Yet clubs have 
stopped tipping into administration with quite such depressing regularity, with 
none having suffered that fate for more than three years.

The painful introduction of financial fair play rules, since relaxed amid 
controversy, and a new long-term financial settlement with the Premier League 
over parachute and so-called “solidarity” payments have helped. However, 
Lenagan concedes the Championship remains football’s most perilous rung.

“There is a split between the teams at the top – many of them with foreign 
owners – who have got lots of money to throw and don’t want to be constrained 
by FFP. They want to throw £50m at it to give themselves a chance of being in 
the Premier League, which is why they’re at it. You’ve got other owners with 
the rightful view that they want to sustain and if they get the chance, once 
every five years or so, to get into the Premier League then that’s great.”

Lenagan, who sold his stake in Oxford United when he took on his new role, 
adds: “The average loss within the Championship is £13m. If I was an owner of a 
Championship club and was being asked to pay £13m a year to sit mid-table I’d 
wonder what I was doing it for. So that’s a debate we need to have this year 
with the Championship owners.”

The Football League deserves credit for some of its forward thinking in recent 
years – not least a well-thought-out policy on encouraging more ethnic 
diversity among coaches – but fans remain wary of its new zeal for being at the 
cutting edge.

As ever, some of those concerns coalesce around ownership issues. At Blackpool 
andCharlton Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> 
fans are at war with their owners for different reasons and there are worrying 
questions over the prospective owners of Nottingham Forest.

Lenagan will not comment on specifics but seeks to reassure on the 
generalities. “From a general view, the amount of time, money and expertise 
that goes into these questions is significant,” he says. “It’s never easy when 
you’re looking at whether a director is a fit and proper person; it’s never 
easy when you’re looking at source of funds. We’re good at investigating, we 
have excellent people. We’ve got very good consultants and external lawyers we 
work with all of the time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fian-lenagan-football-league-fa-premier-league-chairman-efl-trophy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624eceba2ae506f7f7199108518e40bb50ffa146%2F34_171_3832_2299%2F3832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20Lenagan%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20the%20Football%20League%20does%20not%20suggest%20solutions%20the%20FA%20or%20Premier%20League%20will%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fian-lenagan-football-league-fa-premier-league-chairman-efl-trophy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20Lenagan%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20the%20Football%20League%20does%20not%20suggest%20solutions%20the%20FA%20or%20Premier%20League%20will%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fian-lenagan-football-league-fa-premier-league-chairman-efl-trophy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F624eceba2ae506f7f7199108518e40bb50ffa146%2F34_171_3832_2299%2F3832.jpg>
 Ian Lenagan says the Football League ‘has finally reached a high level of 
professionalism and pride, stemming from the fact that we’re good at what we 
do.’ Photograph: Richard Calver/Rex/Shutterstock 
It was Lenagan, who made his money in computing, who presented Greg Dyke’s 
ill-fatedreforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/greg-dyke-fa-chairman-reform> 
to bring the FA’s governance into the 21st century to a resistant FA Council. 
He believes that under the more consensual Greg Clarke, who preceded him as the 
Football League chairman and will now take the same job at the FA, the reforms 
have more chance of succeeding.

Aside from his sporting interests, which take up the majority of his time 
since he sold his main business in 2011, Lenagan has also produced more than 
100 theatre shows. He has less time for that now but remains proud of his 
biggest West End hit – One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest starring Christian 
Slater. Given the dysfunctional state of English football governance, it is 
tempting to wonder at the parallels.

However, Lenagan insists the future is rosy; waxing lyrical about the 
deep-rooted links Football League clubs have with their communities and their 
increasing influence on the global stage, both in terms of overseas viewers and 
the growing number of players they provide for international sides.

“Nothing I’m suggesting points to all-out innovation and no ‘steady as she 
goes’,” he says. “The Football League is a key plank of football in England and 
we must never forget that. That means the whole gamut – from simple and local 
to ambitious international owners in the Championship. We have to cater for all 
of that.”
 