
Seabirds swoop over the three divers standing chest-deep in Wastwater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/03/lake-district-delectable-mountains>
, adjusting their masks. A fourth hoists a garden gnome dressed as Santa from 
his pickup. “Is he diving?” I call. Apparently he is. “There’s a gnome 
community about 150ft down. Maybe 15, with a table plus Christmas tree with 
baubles.” “Can I make out shapes from here?” The diver shakes his 
neoprene-hooded head. “Pitch-black deep in Wastwater, pal.”


On the ice-rimmed pebble shore a coughing sheep moves aside as the diver 
stoops to strap on rubber fins before joining his companions in the water. They 
buddy-check each other’s equipment, then disappear under the surface of 
England’s deepest lake.

Forty minutes later, at Wastwater’s north-eastern end, I see another four 
adventurous souls embarking from a van, loaded up with trekking poles, ropes, 
ice axes and crampons. Their goal is the ice-tinselled buttresses topping 
Scafell. First, however, they must tackle lower slopes striped black and white 
with streaks of snow. Overhead, ravens perform mid-air tumbling tricks.

Mountain rescue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/09/country-diary-sheep-mountain-rescue>
I pause and pull from my rucksack Nowt But a Fleein’ Thing 
<http://www.climbers-shop.com/10907644/products/nowt-but-a-fleein-thing--the-history-of-climbing-scafell.aspx>
, a bookrecently published by the Fell and Rock Climbing Club. Mostly 
photographed and written by Barrow craggie Al Phizacklea, with research by 
fellow climber Mike Cocker, this covers the 200-year history of rock climbing 
on Scafell. Coleridge’sBroad Stand descent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,3604,333692,00.html> (1802), 
Siegfried Herford’sCentral Buttress ascent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/20/climber-fear-flake-lake-district-scafell>
 (1914),local hero Dave Birkett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/09/country-diary-sheep-mountain-rescue>
’s super-routes: there are diagrams and maps for these and many other climbs.

Resting this magnificent volume on a boulder, I turn pages to better suss out 
scale. Across the dale head, sunbeams highlightGreat Gable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/28/lake-district-great-gable-memorial-climbers>
’s barcoded hillside like a supermarket scanner at work.

“Nowt but a fleein’ thing cud git up t’crags on t’Wasdale Head side,” said the 
innkeeper Will Ritson, when told of the ascent of Scafell Crag in 1847. Nearby 
a shepherd is imploring a collie to “Gitawayoot!” and round up strayHerdwicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/16/country-diary-herdwick-sheep-home-lambing>
 in the same broad Cumbrian, rooted in the Old English of the Anglo Saxons.

“Tak care, ol’ fella,” I can hear Ritson warning me. “Divn’t drop yon beeuk on 
thi feutt.” Phizacklea’s book weighs half a stone.
 