
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink admitted the 2-1 win over Fulham – his side’s first 
win at Craven Cottage since 1980 – was the perfect tonic after a tough week in 
which he feels he has been “fighting everybody”. It came in a week where the 
Dutchmanhad been caught up in the Daily Telegraph’s investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/30/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-full-disclosure>
 into alleged corruption in football.

QPR won it via Idrissa Sylla’s 87th-minute header in a west London derby in 
which near neighboursFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> paid 
the price for missing two penalties – including after a stoppage-time award 
Hasselbaink labelled “ridiculous”.

“It’s been a very difficult few days, I must say,” said Hasselbaink. “My 
lawyers are waiting for the transcripts to help with the investigation of the 
club. We want a result as quickly as possible. But I must say that the support 
that I’ve had from the club, from family, from friends, from people around me 
has been immense. I have to thank them for that. Also the players, and the 
support of them. In the last couple of days we have been able to concentrate on 
the game and that has been a good outlet.

On the game itself, the former striker said: “I’ve not seen the first penalty, 
if it was a tangle or a pull. But then in the second half, that penalty in the 
last couple of minutes is just ridiculous. It’s just ridiculous. The player 
[Nedum Onuoha] did not even touch [Jozabed], not even close. So at the moment, 
it feels like I’m fighting everybody.”

Fulham saw Tom Cairney’s fifth-minute penalty, awarded after Steven Caulker 
hauled down Ragnar Sigurdsson at a corner, saved by Alex Smithies. It set the 
tone for the hosts, who fell behind to Conor Washington’s deflected 20th-minute 
strike. Fulham were wasteful and though they finally netted via Tim Ream in the 
47th minute, chances continued to go begging before Sylla headed home. There 
was still time for Sone Aluko to miss a last-gasp spot-kick as Fulham were 
booed off following their seventh game without a win.

“It’s very frustrating, we couldn’t be clinical in the opposite box, we 
weren’t solid in our box,” said the Fulham manager, Slavisa Jokanovic. “It was 
a strange game. At the end of the game only the result is important. I accept 
my responsibility as we didn’t win any points.

“Generally it is a little bit confusing and strange for us. We have to stick 
together, stay solid in defence and in the end offer more quality, more 
personality, and find the end product. Our solution is stick together, be 
organised, disciplined, still more solid in defence because we didn’t 
concentrate that solidly, and in the end play with confidence and believe we 
will find the goal.

“There are many new players, they need to take part of the responsibility and 
understand. If you [miss] two penalties you can lose the game. With the ball we 
played with enough confidence. But we want to sort this situation.”

QPR’s Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink denies wrongdoing after £55,000 fee allegation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-denies-55000-fee-allegation>
Roberto Di Matteo under increasing pressure after Aston Villa defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/match-report-preston-north-end-aston-villa-championship> 