
Speaking shortly before the re-coronation of Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, one Labour MP gloomily 
remarked of Owen Smith’s failed challenge: “It was always a kamikaze mission.”

Oh no, it has turned out much more desperate than that for Labour’s 
parliamentarians. Back in July, when the challenge was launched off the back of 
a no-confidence vote by MPs and mass resignations from the frontbench, few of 
his colleagues thought Mr Smith could win. The purpose of the exercise, or so 
they calculated, was not to install a new leader but to take the shine off the 
incumbent. Mr Smith was designed, and in more than one sense, to be the 
anti-Momentum candidate. If Mr Corbyn could be run reasonably close, so backers 
of the challenge hoped, it would diminish the “mandate” that he and his 
supporters have spent the last 12 months brandishing in the face ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs.

When the result was announced from the conference stage in Liverpool, it was 
instantly clear that the reverse has happened. Jeremy Corbyn has not only been 
reanointed as leader, he won by a larger margin than last year, he won in all 
three segments of the selectorate and he won on a higher rate of participation. 
The challenge has not diminished him; it has swollen the size of his 
congregation. The immediate fear of Labour MPs is that this will now be 
self-reinforcing. Mr Corbyn will further consolidate his grip on the commanding 
heights of Labour if centre-left members who have stuck with the party despite 
all the ugliness of the past year are so demoralised by his victory that they 
give up and quit.

Jeremy Corbyn sweeps to victory increasing his mandate as Labour leader - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/24/labour-leadership-election-result-jeremy-corbyn-owen-smith-appeals-for-unity-politics-live>
Examining the entrails of defeat, many who originally backed it now 
acknowledge that this was the wrong challenge at the wrong time with the wrong 
candidate. Mr Smith ended up as the anti-Corbyn standard bearer on the grounds 
that a relative unknown from the soft left – “a clean skin” – had the best 
chance of getting a hearing from Labour activists. His first handicap was that 
he spent the beginning of the campaign having to say who he was. He had barely 
started to introduce himself before a ruthlessly efficient effort by Team 
Corbyn had already defined him as a former employee of big pharma and a “Trojan 
horse” for Blairite revanchism. He largely positioned himself in the same 
ideological zone as the incumbent in the belief that this would be the best way 
to appeal to Corbynistas. That strategy would have been no more effective had 
he also put on a fake beard. For this invited and received an understandable 
response from that constituency: why vote for an imitation when you can 
re-elect the real thing?

His claims that he would make a more credible and competent leader were 
undermined by his propensity to gaffe. One hundred and sixty-two of his 
parliamentary colleagues nominated Mr Smith. The more conventionally minded of 
us might think that, in a parliamentary democracy, it is quite important for a 
party leader to command the confidence of his MPs. Yet for those to whom Mr 
Corbyn is an appealing figure, it is one of his virtues that his parliamentary 
party are so hostile to him. Being the MPs’ candidate was not an asset for the 
challenger – it was massive liability. I have talked to a lot of Labour MPs who 
spent time canvassing members. They universally report that many activists 
blamed the party’s predicament and Mr Corbyn’s abysmal personal poll ratings 
not on the leader, but on the mutinous behaviour of Labour parliamentarians. 
The depiction of the challenge as a “coup” and the framing of the contest as 
Members v MPs, Grassroots v Westminster was toxic.

So Labour is back to where it was at the beginning of the summer, with a vast 
chasm between a leader with a mandate from the members and MPs claiming a rival 
mandate from their voters. With this difference. Those divisions are now more 
starkly exposed, more deeply entrenched and more poisonously bitter. One MP 
speaks about “taking bodyguards” to protect him at the conference. Another 
expresses genuine fear that fist fights – or worse – will break out in 
Liverpool.

If there can’t be a genuine peace between the two sides, could there at least 
be some form of truce? In his victory speech, a much crisper and more polished 
performance than 12 months ago, Mr Corbyn made magnanimous-sounding noises 
about wiping the slate clean. His campaign manager and shadow chancellor, John 
McDonnell, tells us that the party can move on from the venom that has flowed 
over the summer. “What is said on tour, stays on tour.” Even some of Mr 
Corbyn’s most implacable critics know that it would sound churlish to snipe 
this weekend and have largely fallen silent for the moment.

Beneath the surface, though, it is already evident that the party is as riven 
as ever. There will now be a struggle for control of the party machinery at 
both national and local levels. There is also the question, of importance to 
the country as well as to the Labour party, of whether it can become at least 
semi-functional as an opposition to the Tories in parliament. I can find some 
MPs willing to unresign and return to take on a frontbench role. Some will do 
so for fear of retribution in their constituencies or for careerist reasons. 
Some argue that the parliamentary party now has to make at least a show of 
being co-operative or the membership will carry on blaming the MPs, rather than 
the leader, when things go wrong. One of this tendency says: “We have to stop 
being an excuse for his failings.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-leadership-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20wins%20Labour%20leadership%20election%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-leadership-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20wins%20Labour%20leadership%20election%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-leadership-election-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn wins Labour leadership election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/24/jeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-leadership-election-video>
Others are prepared to return to the frontbench on the grounds that it is 
their duty to be a voice for the 9 million people who voted Labour at the last 
election and to provide an opposition to the Tories. Yet many say they will 
only do so if the parliamentary party is allowed to elect at least some of the 
frontbench. That would give them a way of returning on their terms and with at 
least some shreds of dignity. Mr Corbyn’s circle sound extremely resistant to 
that. From their point of view, they have good reasons not to accept the 
demand. They don’t see why he should agree to elections that would surround him 
with hostiles in his top team.

Nor do they see why he should concede to the demands of the parliamentary 
party when he has just seen off its attempt to unseat him. The general 
emollience of his victory speech had a streak of menace when he warned Labour 
MPs “to respect the democratic choice that has been made”.

Corbyn leadership win shows Labour is now a changed party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/24/jeremy-corbyn-leadership-win-shows-labour-is-now-a-changed-party>
With or without shadow cabinet elections, a lot of senior Labour figures will 
not serve in his team anyway. They say they cannot bite their tongues for long 
when, as they see it, the Labour party they love is being destroyed. They ask 
how it is possible to sit on Mr Corbyn’s frontbench when 172 of them have
publicly declared him unfit to be leader of the opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
.

One thing they will now have time to ponder on is why their advice was 
rejected by the party. It might be convenient for moderate Labour MPs to blame 
the failure of the challenge entirely on the flaws of the challenger, but it 
would also be wrong. What the last three months have exposed again are 
fundamental weaknesses on the centre-left. Labour MPs often express dismay at 
Mr Corbyn’s claims to be building a “social movement” superior to his 
parliamentary party. They mock it as the politics of protest and a betrayal of 
Labour’s founding purpose, set out in Clause I of the party constitution, to 
aim for power. The former frontbencher Tristram Hunt wittily despairs that his 
party is becoming “the political wing of the Stop the War coalition”. They are 
right to say that there is a big difference between rousing rallies of the 
already converted and the harder challenge of moving enough of the wider 
population into your column to win a general election.

Sound as that analysis might be, you can see why Team Corbyn are not receptive 
to lectures about electability from critics who can’t win – can’t get anywhere 
near winning – an election in the Labour party. Comprehensively out-organised 
by Team Corbyn and their union backers in last year’s contest, the 
anti-Corbynites vowed to do much better this time. They have developed some 
infrastructure in the form of the groupsLabour Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/21/anti-corbyn-group-funded-tony-blair-spin-doctor-benjamin-wegg-prosser>
 andSaving Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/anti-corbyn-labour-mps-plan-breakaway-group-in-parliament>
. The latter claims to have signed up 120,000 new members. But the result 
speaks for itself. Momentum out-recruited and out-organised them. Labour has 
now become the largest political party in western Europe. That may say nothing 
about its capacity to win a general election under its current leadership, but 
it does say something.

Love him or loathe him, Mr Corbyn – or what he represents – is capable of 
attracting and enthusing support. If they are ever to get their party back, his 
opponents will have to do the same. And they will have to offer a more enticing 
prospectus than begging people to join Labour to save the party from itself. 
They have again failed to beat Jeremy Corbyn. Perhaps the best thing Labour 
moderates could do now, strange as this may seem, is to try to learn from him.
 