
Halfway into Warcraft: the Beginning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/25/world-of-warcraft-the-beginning-review-end-already-nigh>
, the video game adapted by Duncan Jones into a wannabe sci-fi franchise, Glenn 
Close appears as some kind of oracle. Swathed in a black cloak and with 
CGI-enhanced black orbs for eyes, she spouts some foreboding nonsense and then 
she’s off.

Warcraft: The Beginning review – end already nigh for gaming franchise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/25/world-of-warcraft-the-beginning-review-end-already-nigh>
The blink-and-you-miss-it role is quite a comedown for a six-time Oscar 
nominee, but at least Close got a part at all. This year, Hollywood seems to 
have largely shunned more seasoned actors, along with older moviegoers.

Out of the many releases by major studios to have opened this year, only one 
was headlined by an actor over the age of 60:Dirty Grandpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/dirty-grandpa-review-robert-de-niro-plumbs-the-comedy-depths>
, which stars Robert De Niro and of which the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/dirty-grandpa-review-robert-de-niro-plumbs-the-comedy-depths>
: “This gross-out comedy takes De Niro fans into a new emotional phase that I 
can only call “post-despair”. However, the film wasn’t aimed at De Niro’s 
fellow baby boomers, but at the youthful fans of his ripped co-star, former 
High School Musical heartthrob Zac Efron.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe949bbf27b74a16f97560803ee83a36e62d967f9%2F0_95_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe949bbf27b74a16f97560803ee83a36e62d967f9%2F0_95_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
 Meryl Streep as Florence Foster Jenkins. Photograph: Nick Wall/PR 
Another exception is Meryl Streep, who stars in Florence Foster Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/florence-foster-jenkins>, a period drama from 
director Stephen Frears about the world’s worst opera singer. The film was well 
received by critics when it was released in Europe in the spring; viewers in 
the US will have to wait until August.

Faced with such few worthwhile options in the multiplex, older moviegoers have 
opted to flock to the arthouse theaters instead, making their presence known in 
a big way. Ofthe top 10 most profitable independent films  
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/06/the-20-highest-grossing-indies-of-2016-a-running-list-21839/>
to play in cinemas in 2016 so far, seven are aimed strictly at adults, many of 
them centered on characters age 60 and over.

The drone warfare thriller Eye in the Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/eye-in-the-sky-review-helen-mirren-gavin-hood-drones-tiff>
, which stars Helen Mirren, rules the roost with a domestic gross of $18.5m. 
It’s followed closely by Hello, My Name is Doris, a surprise smash for Sally 
Field, who hasn’t had a big screen lead role in decades. The comedy has so far 
amassed $14.3m, making it the highest-grossing film to have ever premiered 
without distribution at the SXSW film festival. Even better: it was only made 
for $1m.

At 81, Maggie Smith is meanwhile the oldest Dame in the top 10, thanks to the 
success ofThe Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/the-lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-nicholas-hytner>
, currently the fourth-biggest indie hit of the year. Susan Sarandon also 
features, with her widow dramaThe Meddler  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/15/the-meddler-susan-sarandon-rose-byrne-review>
doing robust business, putting the film in ninth place on the list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd45e4f1d1b96476dbe85c9a42f841eb5f34fcc38%2F0_10_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd45e4f1d1b96476dbe85c9a42f841eb5f34fcc38%2F0_10_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
 Maggie Smith’s The Lady in the Van is a hit for Sony Pictures Classics. 
Photograph: Nicola Dove/NDOVE 
This phenomenon is not new: older audiences, starved for Hollywood content 
that speaks to them, have been making the arthouse their entertainment go-to 
destination for years. They’re the reason Mirren topped the 2015 specialty box 
office withWoman in Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woman-in-gold>, a 
Holocaust drama. The year before, they madeSt Vincent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/st-vincent> a hit for Bill Murray.

Tellingly, both films were tepidly received by critics, leading to the 
conclusion that their target demographic are likely to flock in droves simply 
because they exist. They don’t even have to be that good.

How older viewers are rescuing cinema
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/08/older-viewers-rescuing-cinema> 
“The older audience is an audience that really likes to go to movies and 
continues to go to movies on a regular basis,” explains Michael Barker, 
co-president of Sony Pictures Classics, the independent distribution company 
behind The Lady in the Van and The Meddler, as well as last year’s Grandma, 
which starsLily Tomlin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lily-tomlin>. 
“Older audiences tend to have more time on their hands to be a habitual 
moviegoer.”

“In all the change we’ve had in the movie business, the fact that the older 
audience still likes to go to the movies, is solid ground,” adds Eric 
d’Arbeloff, co-president of Roadside Attractions, responsible for distributing 
Hello, My Name is Doris. “There’s definitely an audience for [older-skewing] 
movies.”

Despite these assertions, d’Arbeloff says the independent arena often faces 
the same kind of prejudice that keeps Hollywood from catering to older viewers.

“When we bought Hello, My Name is Doris, there were people saying it’s cute 
but it doesn’t have commercial legs,” says d’Arbeloff. “That kind of cynicism 
you face all the time. There’s a lot of resistance to kind of embrace the 
success of these movies.”

And yet it’s impossible to ignore their popularity. The grosses, when compared 
to those of studio releases, are of course paltry. Indies, however, rarely come 
close to playing in as many nationwide cinemas as Hollywood fare. Plus the 
marketing spends are far lower. In short: they hardly stand the chance of 
matching their studio cousins. The fact that many have even come close, and 
that they star actors like Field, Smith and Sarandon, is a big deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a40a913753838e3c923e66431fffacebfdd436%2F120_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ignored%20by%20youth-obsessed%20Hollywood%2C%20older%20audiences%20flock%20to%20indie%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fyouth-focused-blockbusters-older-audiences-independent-films-arthouses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a40a913753838e3c923e66431fffacebfdd436%2F120_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Susan Sarandon in The Meddler. Photograph: PR 
Surely a film tailored for an older market is bound to perform even stronger 
than its arthouse counterparts, when backed by Hollywood’s bells and whistles. 
So why aren’t major studios following suit?

“Because if they don’t get it right, then the audience can be very small,” 
arguesAnne Thompson <http://www.indiewire.com/v/thompsononhollywood/>, 
Indiewire’s editor-at-large, who’s been covering the business side of the 
industry for more than 20 years in Los Angeles. “Those types of movies are 
execution dependent, and [studios] hate that. They’d rather have a franchise, a 
film that is for men and women, young and old. They’re going to get a bigger 
audience in theory – and that’s what they aim for, especially in the 
summertime.”

Getting on: how the Manic Pixie Dream Grans conquered Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/29/manic-pixie-dream-gran-film-lily-tomlin-grandma-sally-field>
Adds d’Arbeloff: “All of these projects get green-lit based purely on 
economics, and so often they have to do with what’s selling at Walmart, how are 
they doing in China, etc. What fits into these models is really tricky. I’m not 
saying there’s no room for change, but it’s probably not an accident that you 
see the choices being made that you do.”

D’Arbeloff is predictably unconcerned by Hollywood’s tendency to aim wide 
rather than old, considering the market the independent arena has cornered.

“I think it’s exciting that there’s now a niche here for us,” he says. “I like 
that we found our space.”

Hollywood doesn’t appear too eager to invade that territory any time soon. 
Apart from Bad Santa 2, which sees Billy Bob Thornton returning as a crusty 
Santa Claus impersonator, and Inferno, the third film in The Da Vinci Code 
franchise headlined by Tom Hanks, studios are largely betting on younger actors 
and more youth-centric storylines to bring in the masses through to the end of 
the year.

One glimmer of hope: it was recently announced that Mirren will be featured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/15/helen-mirren-charlize-theron-fast-and-furious-8-cast>
 in the eighth Fast and the Furious film next summer. Will an older audience, 
likely unfamiliar with the franchise, even turn out? That’s a whole other story.

 * This article was amended on Monday 4 July 2016. We mistakenly called My 
Name is Doris the highest-grossing film to have premiered at SXSW while it’s 
actually the highest-grossing film to have premiered at SXSW without 
distribution. This has been corrected.  