
The latest IMF world economic outlook 
<http://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2016/10/04/AM16-TR100416-Transcript-of-October-2016-World-Economic-Outlook>
 released on Wednesday suggests stagnant growth for the year ahead, and warns 
that unless nations take efforts to shift their economies out of the rut, 
political movements against trade will continue to thrive and will also likely 
lead to lower growth in the future.

Since the GFC, the IMF world economic outlook reports have made for pretty 
depressing reading. Titles such of “Too Slow for Too Long”, from April this 
year, are about as cheery as it gets. This time the title “Subdued demand: 
Symptoms and Remedies” reflects the continuation of this generally downcast 
outlook.

IMF urges governments to tackle record global debt of $152tn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/world-debt-has-hit-record-high-of-152tn-says-imf>
It says something that the bright aspect of the report is the suggestion that 
while things are not really getting better for the world economy, neither are 
they getting worse. Instead the IMF finds that the world economy is “moving 
sideways”.

Woohoo!

This has meant for the first time in a long while there was no significant 
downgrade in the projection for world GDP growth.

The 3.1% growth that was predicted in July remains in place. That’s good news 
(of sorts) but a long way below the IMF’s highest estimate back in September 
2011 of 4.9%:

But while the world GDP growth prediction remains steady, the outlook for 
advanced economies has been revised down yet again – from the 1.8% in July to 
just 1.6%, and massively down on the 2.2% predicted a year ago.

The two big reasons for the slow-down in the advanced economies is a weaker 
than expected growth in the USA and the fallout from the Brexit vote.

This time last year, the IMF was expecting the UK economy to be growing by 
2.2%. The uncertainty of the Brexit vote saw them downgrade that to 1.9% in 
April and 1.7% in July. The good news is the IMF now expects the UK to grow by 
1.8%.

But when asked if this showed that the IMF had overestimated the impact of the 
Brexit vote, Maurice Obstfeld, the director of the IMF research department 
argued the sharp devaluing of the UK pound had helped keep the UK’s economy 
growing better than would be expected (as it made its exports) but that the 
long term issues remained.

For Australia, the situation is better in the short-term as well. The IMF has 
upgraded our forecast growth for this year from 2.5% to 2.9%:

Alas the upgrades for Australia and the UK don’t continue into next year. 

The IMF downgraded the growth projection for Australia in 2017 from 2.5% to 
2.2%, while the projection for UK growth has been halved in the past 12 months. 
Last year the IMF anticipated the UK’s economy growing by 2.2% in 2017; now it 
expects a pitiful 1.1%:

The slowdown in the USA, where the IMF has downgraded growth projections for 
this year from the 2.2% in July to now just 1.6% is due mostly to falling 
business investment and “diminishing pace of stockpiles of goods”.

That such a slowdown appears not to have affected the likely chances of 
Hillary Clinton winning the election highlights how much better the chances for 
the Republican Party would have been had they not picked Donald Trump as its 
candidate.

The IMF does note that the continued “subdued” growth is having political 
impacts. It says that the slow recovery after the GFC has been “especially 
damaging in those countries where the distribution of income has continued to 
skew sharply toward the highest earners”. In short, the IMF argues, “growth has 
been too low for too long, and in many countries its benefits have reached too 
few.”

They suggest the impact of inequality has been a driver of a “political 
movement that blames globalisation for all woes and seeks somehow to wall off 
the economy from global trends rather than engage cooperatively with foreign 
nations.”

The IMF argues that because international trade is a key driver of economic 
growth, the movement to increase trade barriers will “likely to depress global 
growth further.”

The IMF could have called their latest report 'The New Normal: Yep, it Still 
Sucks' | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/14/the-imf-could-have-called-their-latest-report-the-new-normal-yep-it-still-sucks>
Instead it argues that nations need to work together. On this score the IMF 
remains praising of the efforts by Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott when hosting the 
G20 conference in Brisbane in 2014 to co-ordinate a growth target.

The IMF argues that to spur stronger growth, economic policies must be 
comprehensive – pointedly arguing against relying on low interest rates, and 
instead arguing for more fiscal stimulus.

Here the IMF points to the stimulus provided this year by the Canadian 
government and in the United States.

The data shows that the Australian government remains more focused on reducing 
the deficit and leaving the work of stimulating the economy mostly on the 
shoulders of the Reserve Bank:

The good news for Australia is that we look to be well past the peak of our 
unemployment. Concerns the unemployment rate might remain above 6% this year 
and into 2017 have been replaced with predictions of it being down to around 
5.3% by the end of the decade:

Australia’s economy also continues to do well among its economic peers.

The IMF estimates Australia will continue to grow stronger than most 
non-developing nations in the G20:

It also continues to estimate that India will be the fastest growing economy 
out to 2021.

But China continues to be engine for world economic growth. While the USA’s 
economy will remain the largest in the world, China will drive significantly 
more of the growth of world GDP than the USA and a great deal more than India:

In the new normal of the post-GFC world, sideways is the new up. 

The lack of major downgrades to growth projections makes a nice change, but 
shows that keeping on with the policies of the pre-GFC world, where monetary 
policy was considered to be the best way to stimulate the economy, is not up to 
the task.

Australia’s growth continues to do well compared with other nations, but below 
what was once considered average. And so long as the government is more 
concerned about budget “repair”, that is likely to be the case.
 