
Despite being six months until the first bounce, the National Women’s League 
has already had some teeth knocked out. Were this not a hackneyed metaphor for 
the low starting salaries announced by theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> last week, most of the women who will 
pull on the boots in February could probably deal with it – well, only if 
they’d blown half their wage on private health insurance. Under the AFL’s 
proposal, the vast majority of players will receive $5,000 for a 22-week 
contract – inclusive of superannuation and exclusive of private health cover.

As a marquee signing, the Crows’ Chelsea Randall will be better off than most 
of her team-mates, earning $25,000. Currently based in the Pilbara, Randall is 
a development officer for Swan Districts. Her commitment to the sport is 
emphasised by a regular 13-hour drive to play the game. She is moving to 
Adelaide to chase her football dream. After relocation expenses, she may have 
to skip dental.

Moana Hope leads Western Bulldogs to AFL women's All-Stars win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/moana-hope-western-bulldogs-afl-womens-all-stars>
Randall was one of a number of women footballer profiles that last week seemed 
to be everywhere, from the ABC’s Australian Story to double-page spreads that 
demonstrated the women are not just physical and fanatical footballers, but 
also the rarest of commodities in the modern game – knowable.

Saturday night’s free-to-air telecast of the All-Star game also confirmed that 
it is a first-rate product, enjoying a peak audience of 1.05m viewers on 
Channel 7 and 7mate and drawing an average Melbourne television audience of 
387,000, besting the season’s previous benchmark Saturday night figure by 
40,000. All of it is positive exposure for a sport that has spent most of the 
past few years attracting black clouds.

Elly Hewitt, managing director at Alt/Shift communications agency, has 
extensive experience in sponsorship management and leverage on behalf of brands 
and believes the women players are building a compelling argument to increase 
their pay to a more acceptable level.

“There’s no doubt that the pay deal falls short for the National Women’s 
League,” she says. “However, the female league will continue to mature rapidly 
and I expect the economic argument for equal pay will strengthen considerably 
as broadcast rights value and sponsorship dollars escalate.”

From a sponsorship perspective, Hewitt believes it’s an exciting time for 
brands to jump on board as founding partners. “Those who do will benefit 
greatly from signing on for the inaugural season for a few reasons,” she says.

“Firstly, the clubs will be working hard to demonstrate value to them. They 
will be more flexible with what the brands can and can’t do and will be more 
collaborative when developing sponsorship leverage programs. Secondly, it will 
be a less cluttered landscape than in future years when the league has matured 
and increased in popularity and certainly less cluttered than the men’s league 
where the sponsors battle it out for share of voice.”

Sponsors will also be more likely to support a sport that has strong, 
interesting sportswomen that female consumers can identify with. It is 
something that AFL CEO Gillion McLachlan recognised earlier this year when 
speaking at a women in football breakfast hosted by the Western Bulldogs 
vice-president, Susan Alberti.

 “I think that, actually, people are going to surprised about how many 
companies [are interested] who ordinarily wouldn’t want to be involved with our 
game, or who haven’t been historically,” he said. “Because they support women’s 
sport and women’s participation, they’re going to become involved.”

And become involved they have. Last week, the Bulldogs announced national 
brands Priceline Pharmacy and Bob Jane T-Marts as co-major partners of its 
women’s team. Melbourne announced iSelect and GWS Giants Harvey Norman as their 
inaugural major sponsors.

 Hewitt believes that in addition to club sponsors, the potential exists for 
the women to increase their total earnings through individual sponsorship. “The 
league has fantastic ambassadors in Daisy Pearce, Katie Brennan and Saturday’s 
best player, Moana Hope,” she said. “They’re exciting on the field and strong – 
and more importantly likeable spokespeople off the field.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fimpressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6957f42d67103caa2621971df12bc3693d06830e%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Impressive%20viewing%20figures%20for%20exhibition%20match%20at%20odds%20to%20paltry%20women's%20AFL%20pay%20%7C%20Craig%20Little&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fimpressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Impressive%20viewing%20figures%20for%20exhibition%20match%20at%20odds%20to%20paltry%20women%27s%20AFL%20pay%20%7C%20Craig%20Little&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fimpressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6957f42d67103caa2621971df12bc3693d06830e%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
 Moana Hope of the Bulldogs competes for the ball with Ceceila MacIntosh of the 
Demons at Whitten Oval on Saturday night. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images
 Sponsorship and broadcast opportunities aside, Hewitt says the AFL’s level of 
investment to build the league will be the most significant driver to evolve 
the league to a full-time professional sport where their players are 
remunerated accordingly. “Currently, that investment falls well short and sadly 
for the players and fans out there the league may never reach its true 
potential.”

To emphasise just how far short this investment falls, the total player 
payments for next year’s seven-week season will be about $1.6 million – a sum 
half-a-dozen women footballers would have earned the AFL in positive publicity… 
in a week.

 It was AFL game development manager Simon Lethlean who last week provided the 
low starting salary debate with its exclamation point by confirming that 
private health insurance wouldn’t be included as part of the proposal put to 
players.

“Individuals paying their own health insurance is common practice across other 
sports, as is the case with male AFL players,” he said in a comment that 
suggested a lack of awareness in the difference in purchasing power of $5,000 
compared to that of $300,000. His lapse into comparative financial incompetence 
can perhaps be excused when you take a calculator into the payroll department 
at AFL House.

Carlton to complain to police over alleged women's AFL recruitment leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/carlton-to-complain-to-police-over-alleged-womens-afl-recruitment-leak>
McLachlan, whose own remuneration eclipses that of the women’s total player 
payments by a couple of luxury cars, attempted to sell the starting salaries as 
a good deal during a Twitter Q&A on Friday.

“We’re on a journey,” he said, trying not to sound like the guy on the 
used-car lot whose job it is to dial back the odometers. “But I tell you what 
we are going to be a long way down the path to being very much like the men in 
five years’ time.”

If Paul Marsh and the AFL Players Association have their way, that day may 
arrive even sooner. Before he left his role as the Australian Cricketers’ 
Association CEO for the AFLPA, Marsh was instrumental in professionalising 
women’s cricket, helping to negotiate a pay rise for women whose salaries were 
initially reflective of those on offer for the NWL.

The new contracting system announced by Cricket Australia in 2013 saw the top 
player retainer increase from $15,000 to $52,000 and the minimum retainer 
increase from $5,000 to $25,000. Ironically, it was widely regarded that the 
AFL’s foray into a women’s league upped the ante for Cricket Australia, who 
responded by again increasing its salary pool for elite women in 2016.

Speaking to Fairfax Media last year 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/afl-cba-revolition-women-in-mix-for-push-over-pay-deals-20150819-gj34aq.html>
, Marsh said he believed “a really key part of this journey is first of all 
making the female players feel as though they are valued by the sport”. In this 
context, it is not hard to understand why the AFLPA is likely to reject the 
league’s female pay proposal, insisting the $5,000 rate for most of its talent 
is too low. For this they are required to undertake 20 hours of appearances and 
marketing duties for the AFL, which is yet to return the favour by committing 
to the three free pairs of boots that is part of the men’s “tools of the trade” 
conditions.

Women's game well placed to produce the AFL's next great entertainer | Craig 
Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/womens-game-well-placed-to-produce-the-afls-next-great-entertainer>
 In a statement provided to Guardian Australia on Friday, Marsh said: “We are 
still negotiating the standard playing contract with the AFL and at this point 
we are some distance apart.

 “Having just reached agreement with the AFL on the ambassador contract for 
the marquee players, we are confident that a fair and reasonable outcome will 
be achieved. These athletes have worked incredibly hard to get to this level 
and we strongly believe they should be provided with the same opportunities to 
thrive in the game as the men do.”

 While the AFLPA is conscious of not negotiating through the media, it is 
naïve to suggest that the AFL, whose keenest sense is brand awareness, will not 
be influenced by it.

 Speaking in the lead-up to Saturday night’s All-Star game, the Bulldogs 
captain, Steph Chiocci, said: “I know that the media are speaking about it a 
lot but we’ve got the AFLPA who are going to be looking after us. The beauty of 
it is they’re actually talking about these things, which is great for women’s 
football.”

Media interest in the women’s game is supported by an imposing set of numbers. 
Last year female participation in Australian football soared by 46% – 163 new 
female football teams helping swell the number of women taking part in the game 
to more than 284,000. You don’t exactly need to be a charter member of Mensa to 
understand that the numbers are likely to increase at an even greater rate in 
2016, as the women’s game carves out a territory all its own.

Aasta O’Connor, the Darebin Falcons’ ruck who is likely to be drafted into the 
NWL, expressed this sentiment when she joined McLachlan during the Twitter Q&A. 
“I think the whole point is we are not men. We are women and we are creating 
our own space and that’s an amazing opportunity.”

Hopefully it will also be one that is recognised at full market value, because 
right now that’s further away than a 13-hour drive through the Pilbara.
 