
Wayne Coyne and I are in bed. Or, at least, on one. We’re ensconced in a 
pavilion behind the Museum of Old and New Art (Mona), David Walsh’s treasury of 
sex and death. Fittingly, these also happen to be the twin concerns of Coyne’s 
long-running band the Flaming Lips.


Today the grey-streaked Coyne still looks boyish, if frazzled. Perhaps he’s 
still recovering from the stress of having his band’s gear for tonight’s Mofo 
festival performance delayed on the Spirit of Tasmania, which was severely 
damaged during awild Melbourne storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/14/spirit-of-tasmania-ferry-damaged-as-storm-rips-it-from-melbourne-moorings>
 and arrived only hours before soundcheck. Or perhaps it’s collateral from his 
recent birthday party, which may or may not have involved psychedelics and a 
night dancing at a Hobart club.

Whatever lurks inside, Coyne’s packaging remains upbeat: a smiley-face sticker 
grins from his temple among rainbows and gemstones. Glitter rests on the 
shoulders of his coat like cosmic dandruff and the crotch of his jeans is 
studded with colourful plastic beads. Coyne looks moreMona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mona> exhibit than guest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fin-bed-with-the-flaming-lips-wayne-coyne-at-mona-this-is-a-badass-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55eaeabe414466fd4da5a87eaa1ee41e1b2a715%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20bed%20with%20the%20Flaming%20Lips'%20Wayne%20Coyne%20at%20Mona%3A%20'This%20is%20a%20badass%20museum'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fin-bed-with-the-flaming-lips-wayne-coyne-at-mona-this-is-a-badass-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20bed%20with%20the%20Flaming%20Lips%27%20Wayne%20Coyne%20at%20Mona%3A%20%27This%20is%20a%20badass%20museum%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fin-bed-with-the-flaming-lips-wayne-coyne-at-mona-this-is-a-badass-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55eaeabe414466fd4da5a87eaa1ee41e1b2a715%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
 The Flaming Lips’ performance at the Domain on 9 January, during the 2016 
Sydney festival. Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
“This is a badass museum,” he says. “There’s not many museums in the world 
this cool. It’s a gift to humanity. It has an atmosphere where everyone’s 
curious about the things around them.”

One piece Coyne himself is curious about is conceptual artist Stephen J 
Shanabrook’s suicide bomber sculpted from chocolate; for a man who once 
released a 24-hour song encased ina real human skull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/31/flaming-lips-nick-cave-collaborate>
, it seems a conventional choice. But Coyne’s favourite is Gregory Barsamian’s 
Artifact, a giant bronze head that uses a zoetrope-like strobe effect to evoke 
an animated dream world. “It’s just insane,” Coyne says. “You can look at a 
painting and know how they do it but sometimes you look at something and think, 
‘How the fuck would you even make that?’”


Coyne likes process, believing art comes from practice rather than divine 
inspiration. “I know for sure that nothing happens unless you’re doing it.” The 
Lips have been doing it since 1983, becoming a live draw with their 
kaleidoscopic pantomime of costumes, confetti and ad hoc props, often all made 
by Coyne himself.

“I don’t think people want to come see us just play guitar,” says the singer, 
who also refers to live shows as “masturbation”.

“When our songs are at their best they’re penetrating. We want them to get in 
us and the show is designed so that if it all works it gets in you. If that 
happens the whole atmosphere blossoms. Blammo. It can just obliterate anything, 
you’re so overwhelmed.”

Antonio Sanchez's Birdman live score review – New York's volatile tempos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/antonio-sanchezs-birdman-live-score-review-new-yorks-volatile-tempos>
Coyne felt it last night at Mofo’s screening of Alejandro González Iñárritu’s 
<https://www.google.com.au/search?espv=2&biw=1593&bih=952&q=alejandro+gonz%C3%A1lez+i%C3%B1%C3%A1rritu&stick=H4sIAAAAAAAAAOPgE-LSz9U3KCsoScsoVuIEsY2zTS0rtMSyk6300zJzcsGEVUpmUWpySX4RAFT9g1wxAAAA&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjFqK6QpbbKAhVHVZQKHVA-Dx4QmxMImwEoATAV>
 2014 film, Birdman, at the Odeon Theatre, which featured a live score from 
drummer Antonio Sanchez. “It was great because it was loud,” Coyne says. “No 
one could talk, which I love. When everyone pays attention to the same thing at 
the same time, it gives it more power. That’s what we want.”


This week has been a weird one for the Flaming Lips. They’re at the final stop 
of their Australian tour. David Bowie, a touchstone for the band, died earlier 
in the week at the age of 69. Two days later Coyne turned 55, an unusual 
milestone for a man who wears lightning bolt nail polish, has a 20-something 
girlfriend, has recently been mentoring 23-year-old pop starMiley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/04/miley-cyrus-and-flaming-lips-record-an-album-together>
 and will at one point tonight don a neon jellyfish headdress and perch on the 
shoulders of a werewolf to sing about love at the museum of sex and death.


But what is age to the creator of his own universe. “I think all this stuff 
requires having energy and being open to the world,” Coyne says. “But those 
aren’t qualities of being young. You have to hope you have them. Some people 
don’t. Some people get older and say, ‘Oh I’ve seen it all, I’ve done this a 
billion times.’ I don’t feel that way. It’s your own task to see the sunset 
every day and say ‘it’s amazing’. Instead of ‘who gives a fuck’.”


Birdman, a movie that blurs the line between ego, real and constructed, opens 
with a quote from Raymond Carver: “Did you get what you wanted from this life?” 
Has Coyne?


The Flaming Lips review – sound issues fail to burst Wayne Coyne’s bubble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/10/the-flaming-lips-review-sound-issues-fail-to-burst-wayne-coynes-bubble>
“I’ve gotten a couple lives now,” says the singer with consideration. “You 
don’t always have to live by what you thought you were going to do when you 
were 20. When you’re young, what you think things mean holds so much power. 
But, when you’re older, they don’t have to mean that much. It matters more what 
you’re doing.”


It all comes back to process again. “If you see the sunset and you go towards 
it, you’ll never be at the sunset,” he says. “You can only behold it. Yesterday 
we were on the ferry going away from the museum and there was a rainbow at the 
other end where we were going to land. But the closer we got, the illusion 
became unavailable. It’s a stupid metaphor, but what you think life is from a 
distance is not the same as when you’re in it.

“The Flaming Lips are lucky in that we have to reinvent what we’re about.

“We have to rethink things all the time and it never settles. Once you get 
used to that, it probably helps you a lot.

“So I would say I got what I wanted, in that I got to the point where I 
thought, ‘Oh fuck, why did I care about all that stuff? Now I’m free.’”
 