
Scotch whisky exports rose by 3.1% in the first six months of 2016, driven by 
booming demand inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, a market that 
should be a top trade priority for Britain as it prepares to leave the EU, 
according to the whisky trade body.

Demand in India, where the market grew by 41% by volume and 28% by value, 
helped bring total global sales to 533m bottles equivalent. That was the first 
increase in global whisky sales volumes in three years, the ScotchWhisky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/whisky> Association (SWA) said on 
Friday.

 In value terms, total scotch exports fell by 1%, still an improvement on the 
near 3% decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/01/scotch-whisky-exports-decline-sales>
 it recorded in the first half of 2015.

 Global demand for scotch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/27/scotch-whisky-industry-scotland-tax>
 appears to be strengthening thanks to “an emphasis on craftsmanship and 
provenance, backed by investment,” the association’s chief executive, David 
Frost, said in a statement.

 Indian tariffs of 150% are a hurdle for exporters, but the country’s spirits 
market is set to expand by 3% in 2016, according to industry data provider 
IWSR, and scotch distillers are keen to capitalise. The SWA is calling for a 
trade agreement with India to be top of the list as Britain reshapes its global 
relationships.

 The industry said it will face no tariffs to the EU, which made up nearly 
one-third of the £3.86bn in whisky exports last year. But it remains concerned 
about Brexit, because scotch may no longer benefit from being under the wing of 
the EU for trade with countries outside the bloc.

 The weakness of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
, whichfell against major currencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/pound-hits-31-year-low-after-service-sector-data>
 after the Brexit vote on 23 June, would boost revenues in sterling from 
exports in the short term, the SWA predicted. But it called on the government 
to provide clarity as soon as possible on thefuture trade relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/13/david-davis-admits-possibility-of-uk-exiting-eu-without-trade-deal>
 with the EU.

 Scotch whisky accounts for nearly one-quarter of all British food and drink 
exports on an annual basis, and about one-third of scotch exports are destined 
for the EU. France is the biggest scotch drinking country in the world, having 
got through 91m bottles in the first half of 2016.
 