
The British economy is beginning to fire on all cylinders, with a revival in 
industry boosting strong demand in the dominant services sector, says a key 
business survey published yesterday.

Analysts said the quarterly British Chambers of Commerce survey put chancellor 
Gordon Brown on course to achieve easily his forecast of 1.5% growth for GDP 
this year.

But they added that it also increased the chances of further interest rate 
rises to keep inflation under control.

"Against this backdrop, the monetary policy committee can afford to reverse 
more of the rate cuts of late 1998 and early 1999," said Michael Saunders, UK 
economist at Salomon Smith Barney Citibank.

"Based on current data, it is starting to look as if a 50 basis point hike in 
November is more likely than a 25 basis points one... We have been thinking 
that rates will head to 6%, with risks that the eventual peak will be higher," 
he said.

The survey, covering almost 1,000 firms, showed manufacturers enjoying their 
first rise in export sales for nearly two years, a pick-up in employment and 
business confidence at its highest level since Labour came to power in May 1997.

Meanwhile, the services sector, which accounts for two thirds of national 
output, reported sales growth for the 28th consecutive quarter.

Ian Peters, BCC deputy director general, appealed to the MPC not to panic 
about the threat of inflation. He said the recovery was uneven, with 
manufacturing only just beginning to get up off the floor after a prolonged 
period of weakness.

Richard Iley, of Abn-Amro, the Dutch bank, drew some comfort from the degree 
of labour market tightness shown by the survey. The number of firms 
experiencing recruitment difficulties was still below the levels seen last year 
in both manufacturing and services sectors, he said.

"But this is unlikely to prevent the MPC taking out some further inflation 
'insurance' at its November meeting."
 