
Over the past couple of months, the apps team at the Guardian have been 
discussing, designing, experimenting, testing, and building a new experience:
Moments from the Guardian App. Crafted specially for Apple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch>, it’s a new, personal, and 
delightful way to discover our journalism. As a team we wanted to take a bit of 
time to describe it.

Timely, simple, glanceable - Tom Grinsted

Moments is a simple, glanceable, and instantly personal experience. Instead of 
generic lists of content that aren’t well suited to a watch, it recommends a 
single moment: a tailored experience at any given time. Combining insight from 
our editorial teams with the customisable homepage of the Guardian app, 
recommendations delivered to Apple Watch make any moment in the day richer.

We’ve created moments that are tailored for the time of day, and day of week. 
So in the morning you can expect a quick briefing to catch up with the news, a 
beautiful gallery to distract you while the kettle boils for your afternoon 
tea, a match update if your favourite football (soccer) team is playing, or a 
reminder in the evening for an article you saved to read later. Moments are 
always fresh, compelling, and useful. Combined with our breaking news alerts - 
now optimised for Apple Watch with actionable notifications -Moments keep you 
up to date with serendipitous and delightful content.

Editorial on your wrist - Subhajit Banerjee

We wanted the editorial offering to be informative, delightful and to span 
across multiple formats to showcase the breadth of the journalism we produce. 
Along with the top news story of the moment and push alerts for breaking news, 
you will also see the best photos of the day chosen by our experts, glimpses of 
our well loved feature content such as recipes, life and relationship advice, 
music and film reviews, science and technology podcasts and a lot more. The 
tone for the weekend will be different from the week, matching the pace and 
variations of the two. Of course, this is our first pass at a content 
proposition for an entirely new platform, and based on feedback we receive we 
hope to make changes and improvements as we go along.
 Guardian Moments: from a glance to more information 
Reading on your wrist - Helene Sears

We know our readers have core needs around getting fast updates, extending 
their knowledge and discovering new content. So we designed for three key 
aspects: notifications, glances and a full Watch app experience. Notifications 
are a richer version of alerts giving our readers updates on breaking news - or 
anything else they follow in the app. The glance feature offers a snapshot of 
the Moment available, with the option to tap through for more on the Watch app 
itself. At any time the reader can handoff to their phone for the full iPhone 
app experience of what they were looking at, ensuring a seamless reading 
experience optimised for the users context and behaviour.

If a reader wants more, they can turn to our phone app to get the full story.
Frank Hulley-Jones 
Design on your wrist - Frank Hulley-Jones

We wanted to stick to the principle of keeping interactions light and focused. 
Reviews are a great example of this, as the headline and star rating tell you 
the minimum you need to know. If a reader wants more, they can turn to our 
phone app to get the full story. We used this to influence the look and feel of 
the watch app whilst keeping it consistent with the tones and branding used 
across the Guardian. It’s important that readers instantly recognise that 
they’re reading Guardian content, no matter what device they’re using.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fintroducing-moments-from-the-guardian-app-built-for-apple-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425910800799%2F1379ac28-4d8e-4563-8e29-4c2a7f4980ef-1020x574.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Introducing%20Moments%20from%20the%20Guardian%20App%2C%20built%20for%20Apple%20Watch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fintroducing-moments-from-the-guardian-app-built-for-apple-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Introducing%20Moments%20from%20the%20Guardian%20App%2C%20built%20for%20Apple%20Watch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fintroducing-moments-from-the-guardian-app-built-for-apple-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425910800799%2F1379ac28-4d8e-4563-8e29-4c2a7f4980ef-1020x574.jpeg>
 Examples of how different content types will look on Apple Watch Photograph: 
The Guardian 
Engineering on your wrist - Petr Krojzl


With wearables, there’s the challenge that you won’t be able to do much more 
than breaking news alerts. But after spending time experimenting, we were 
excited to be able to achieve so much from the launch of Apple Watch. To give 
our readers the best possible experience, we’ve very much made use of all the 
technology available and tried to push it right to the limit.

What now?

We’re constantly looking for new and interesting ways to bring our content to 
readers and our work on Apple Watch is another exciting example of this. We’ll 
be updating the Guardian app soon to includeMoments. So simply download it from 
the App Store <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/the-guardian/id409128287?mt=8> 
and make sure to keep it up to date.

As always, we’d love to hear your thoughts. So tweet us @guardianmobile or 
leave a comment below.
 