
There is a point every summer where the pastoral dream of the English 
countryside turns feverish, almost psychedelic. The most prolific plants spring 
up to monstrous heights and otherwise orderly places become twisted and 
tangled. In Yorkshire’s gritstone country, these individual takeovers feel like 
a conspiracy, as if the armies of entropy are silently massing, taking up 
positions ready for some coordinated coup of the countryside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fmonster-plants-invasive-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa592bbc1fbf7227dbed7ceb7f6e7e60502e74c7d%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Invasion%20of%20the%20monster%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fmonster-plants-invasive-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Invasion%20of%20the%20monster%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fmonster-plants-invasive-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa592bbc1fbf7227dbed7ceb7f6e7e60502e74c7d%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 Pollen-dusted honeybee harvesting Himalayan balsam. Photograph: Carey Davies 
On the slopes of the Chevin 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/view/attractions/otley/chevin-forest-park-125227>, 
the summer has given rise to thousands of quiet usurpations. Reefs of bracken 
blockade the way; the clustered yellow heads ofragwort 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/ragwort> sprout tall in horseless 
pastures; burlesque-bright pink spires ofrosebay willowherb 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/rosebay-willowherb> outshine everything 
else in the verges;white trumpet-shaped bindweed 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/hedge-bindweed> flowers blare out from 
hedgerows. Some Frankenstein fusion of hawthorn, buddleia and bramble reaches 
as tall as a telegraph pole.Russian vine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2009/sep/24/gardens1> 
has obliterated any evidence of the structures that once surrounded an old 
allotment with a mass of overflowing foliage in the shape ofCousin Itt 
<http://addamsfamily.wikia.com/wiki/Itt>’s hair.

Around the dark boulders of Caley Crags, the exquisitely lurid, orchid-like 
pink flowers ofHimalayan balsam 
<http://www.plantlife.org.uk/wild_plants/plant_species/indian_himalayan_balsam> 
are gathered in their thousands, looking out from the bracken like alien 
periscopes. A workforce of honeybees, turned a ghostly pale with pollen, still 
flit between the extraterrestrial eyes, assiduously harvesting their abundant 
nectar. The protruding backsides of larger bumblebees wiggle as they rummage 
around inside; one gets briefly stuck, Tinkerbell-style, before freeing itself 
with a frenzy of buzzing.

Insects find lifeline in the busiest of busy lizzies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/09/country-diary-wenlock-edge-himalayan-balsam-busy-lizzies-insects>
These spaces were the stomping grounds of my school holidays; their overgrown 
state is how I feel they “should” be, taking me back to the restless expansive 
days of childhood. Knotty dreads of “sticky buds” (the name we knewcleavers 
<http://www.plantlife.org.uk/wild_plants/plant_species/cleavers> by) cling to 
the branches of an elderly elder; to this day I can’t see them without an urge 
to fling them at someone.

As we nudge into September, kids trudge back through the gates and the air 
hints at the season that will soon end most of these outlandish visions. But 
the warming climate is expected to benefit many of our most prolific plants. 
These interlopers may have missed their moment this year, but in the long term 
they may yet inherit the landscape.
 