
The British middleweight Anthony Fowler, along with the Irish fighters Michael 
Conlan and Steven Donnelly, have been severely reprimanded by theInternational 
Olympic Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/international-olympic-committee> for betting 
on the boxing competition during Rio 2016. All three escaped without bans but 
they have been told by the IOC that they must take part in “integrity education 
programmes”.

There were also reprimands for the British Olympic Association and Olympic 
Council of Ireland for failing to educate their athletes that they are not 
allowed to gamble on Olympic events and a reminder to boxing’s governing body, 
AIBA, to check that its rules comply with the IOC’s and that it has sufficient 
education programmes in place.

Olympic boxing corruption alive and well, says official as rows continue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
The 25-year-old Fowler, who lost his only contest in Rio, was punished for 
betting between £30 and £300 on a number of bouts. The IOC’s Integrity Betting 
Intelligence System (Ibis) identified that on at least one occasion he bet on 
an event when a British boxer took part, although he did not bet on his own 
bout.

Donnelly was found to have placed a large number of accumulators – eight 
altogether – on various boxing events at the Olympics, two of which were on his 
own welterweight match against Tuvshinbat Byamba. Donnelly, 27, had bet that 
his opponent would win, but after losing the first round of the fight he came 
back to win a decision. The IOC said: “As a consequence, none of the bets 
placed by Mr Donnelly was successful.”

Michael Conlan farce leaves amateur boxing nursing a black eye in Rio | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/michael-conlan-boxing-black-eye-rio-olympic-games>
Conlan, a bantamweight bronze medallist at London 2012 and world champion in 
2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/14/michael-conlan-ireland-aiba-world-champion>
, accepted that he placed a number of bets on fights, including two in his 
weight class. The Irish press reported that Conlan told the IOC disciplinary 
hearing that he was not aware of the ban on athletes’ betting as he had signed 
the various documents without reading them. The 24-year-old,who was 
controversially beaten in the quarter-finals by Russian Vladimir Nikitin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/michael-conlan-boxing-black-eye-rio-olympic-games>
 in a fight he looked to have clearly won, said he was betting because he was 
bored.

Many will regard the IOC’s stipulations as moot as Conlan has now turned 
professional, while Donnelly and Fowler are also expected to join the paid 
ranks.
 