
The International Olympic Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/international-olympic-committee> has opened 
disciplinary proceedings against 28 Russian athletes who competed at the Winter 
Olympics in Sochi. Evidence emerged in the final version of the McLaren report 
published on 9 December of manipulation of one or more of the athletes’ urine 
tests during the 2014 Games.

An IOC statement read: “At this point in time, these 28 new cases are not AAFs 
[adverse analytical findings], like a positive doping test. However, the 
manipulation of the samples themselves could lead to an anti-doping rule 
violation and sanctions.”

Professor Richard McLaren found evidence that more than 1,000 Russian athletes 
in more than 30 Olympic and Paralympic sports were involved in a doping 
conspiracy that began at least as early as 2011 and ran until 2015.

Second McLaren report: five questions on the Russian doping scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/second-mclaren-report-questions-russian-doping>
McLaren’s interim report in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics>
 led to Russian athletes being banned from several events at the Rio Olympics, 
including athletics, and from the whole of the Paralympics.

In his final report, he detailed evidence of 12 medal-winning competitors from 
Sochi being implicated. He was given 95 samples of Russian athletes by the IOC, 
leading to these 28 being identified. Re-analysis of the samples has begun at 
the Lausanne Anti-Doping Laboratory.

The IOC president, Thomas Bach, said: “This is the immediate follow-up to 
Professor McLaren’s report. The IOC will go beyond the findings of the report 
by re-analysing all the samples of all the Russian athletes who participated in 
the Winter Games Sochi 2014 as well as all those who participated in the 
Olympic Games London 2012.”

Twenty-seven Russian athletes have already been sanctioned following 
re-analysis of samples from the Olympic Games in Beijing and London.

The IOC will also reanalyse all samples from Russian athletes given at the 
Winter Games in Vancouver in 2010.
 