
The world of football paid tribute to one of the mercurial stars of the 
Premier League’s early years after former Aston Villa strikerDalian Atkinson 
died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/15/man-dies-taser-shooting-by-police-in-telford-west-mercia>
after being Tasered by police.

The 48-year-old died around 90 minutes after being Tasered in an incident with 
two officers in the Trench area of Telford, Shropshire, where he grew up and 
lived, at around 1.30am on Monday outside his father’s home.

The officers were responding to reports of a row and his father Ernest said 
his son had been “in a real state” when he arrived at the house. He was said by 
his family to have been battling kidney problems and had a weak heart.

Dalian Atkinson death shines spotlight on police | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/16/dalian-atkinson-death-shines-spotlight-on-police>
“He was very agitated and his mind was upset,” Ernest Atkinson told the 
Shropshire Star. “The last thing he said to me was ‘don’t move’ when the police 
came to the door. He was threatening and very upset. I didn’t call the police 
but someone else did. He got Tasered in the street outside in the road. I 
didn’t see him but I saw a flash.”

Neighbour Paula Quinn said: “The police officers shouting at Dalian - they 
told him to stop and warned they would Taser him, but he carried on stumbling. 
That’s when they Tasered him … once he’d hit the ground I heard the Taser go 
off another four or five times.”

The incident brought to a tragic end the life of a celebrated player who in 
the early 1990s looked like he was heading for great sporting heights, and who 
will be remembered for scoring the goal of the 1992-3 season.

Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> tweeted that he 
would “never be forgotten” while his former manager Ron Atkinson said it was 
“an out-and-out tragedy”. He said: “He always had a smile on his face – and 
played football with a smile on his face. He was popular in the dressing room, 
had terrific ability and did it in the big games. He did very well for me. I 
signed him at Sheffield Wednesday and when I joined Villa he was one of the 
first players I wanted to bring in. It’s tragic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fipcc-investigation-launched-into-death-of-dalian-atikinson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a5c8f05ccf0a648396a799e070035fe8a431db%2F0_162_2870_1723%2F2870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=IPCC%20investigation%20launched%20into%20death%20of%20Dalian%20Atkinson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fipcc-investigation-launched-into-death-of-dalian-atikinson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=IPCC%20investigation%20launched%20into%20death%20of%20Dalian%20Atkinson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fipcc-investigation-launched-into-death-of-dalian-atikinson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a5c8f05ccf0a648396a799e070035fe8a431db%2F0_162_2870_1723%2F2870.jpg>
 Dalian Atkinson with Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson celebrating League Cup 
win in 1994. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
An inquiry has been launched by the Independent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc>. The death is the latest linked to 
Taser use by police.

There were reports that he was agitated before he was Tasered, and neighbour 
Paula Quinn said that he appeared to be “almost staggering” in the street. He 
was said to have gone into cardiac arrest in an ambulance on his way to 
hospital and medics were unable to save him.

His former friend and team-mate Carlton Palmer said he had struggled after his 
sporting career ended. “It can be difficult for players when they finish and I 
know Dalian found it difficult,” Palmer told PA Sport. “Footballers don’t know 
anything else. Dalian would not have finished his career financially secure and 
he was scratching around doing stuff. “When you finish as a footballer, all of 
a sudden at 34 or 35 you have no routine and no structure to your life, and 
that can be a major problem. It can be a very dangerous spiral and 
unfortunately that’s what it was for Dalian.”

The IPCC said “a Taser was used on the man before he became ill,” indicating 
the initial focus of their investigation is whether the use of Taser directly 
contributed to the death of the former Aston Villa star. Central to its inquiry 
will be whether police were justified in firing the Taser and whether it was 
used correctly.


The police watchdog investigation into the death will include whether Atkinson 
was intoxicated or not and whether officers believed he was. No other weapon 
was recovered from the scene and the two officers present when the Taser was 
fired, and two who later attended, are understood to be unharmed.

Atkinson made his debut as a teenager at Ipswich in 1985, ultimately earning a 
transfer to Ron Atkinson’s Sheffield Wednesday in 1989. Wednesday were 
relegated but Atkinson had burnished his reputation enough to earn a move to
Real Sociedad <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> where he 
became the first black player to play for the Spanish club. After scoring 12 
league goals in his sole season in the Basque country, Atkinson returned to 
England to work again with his namesake, this time at Aston Villa.

Built around the Irish stars of Ray Houghton, Andy Townsend and Paul McGrath, 
the team were an experienced side. Atkinson provided youthful flair and 
exuberant pace. These talents were displayed no more clearly than on the pitch 
at Plough Lane in October 1992, when Atkinson scored a goal that would come to 
be a symbol of the renascent national game and define his career.

Picking up the ball in his own half, Atkinson accelerated away from three 
defenders, apparently gliding over the cut-up pitch. He then beat a fourth 
defender twice, before opting to swap power for grace and chipping the ball 
over a stranded Hans Segers. The ground went crazy and a fan came on to the 
rain-strewn pitch to cover Atkinson with an umbrella. His strike was later 
named goal of the season.

Atkinson the manager has always said that, had Atkinson the player not been 
injured shortly after this game, Villa would have gone on to win the league 
that season (they eventually finished second). The pair won the League Cup 
together the following year, Dalian Atkinson scoring in the final. Soon he was 
on the move again, first to Turkish football and then further afield, to South 
Korea and Saudi Arabia. After retiring from the game, Atkinson ventured into 
becoming an agent for other players. But his company, Players Come First, was 
wound down in 2013.
Paul McGrath (@Paulmcgrath5) 
Don't feel to gud at the moment , Dalian Atkinson was a huge part of the Villa 
family I played with lovely kid and friend R.I.P pal Xx.
 <https://twitter.com/Paulmcgrath5/status/765140137344917505> August 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Paulmcgrath5/status/765140137344917505> Jack Grealish 
(@JackGrealish1) 
RIP Dalian Atkinson. Loved watching videos of him & always remember his great 
goal vs Wimbledon. My thoughts are with his family & friends.
 <https://twitter.com/JackGrealish1/status/765139362048794624> August 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JackGrealish1/status/765139362048794624> Gary Lineker 
(@GaryLineker) 
Terrible news about Dalian Atkinson. Losing his life after being tasered by 
police. Thoughts are with this fine footballer's family.#RIP 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RIP?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/765152109037772800> August 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/765152109037772800> 
The IPCC’s deputy chair Rachel Cerfontyne said: “I would like to assure people 
that we have begun a full and thorough investigation into police contact with 
Dalian Atkinson prior to his death, including the level and type of force used.

Tasers have been linked to at least 10 deaths in England and Wales over the 
past decade. Official figures show that black people are more likely than white 
people to be Tasered.Tasers <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tasers> deliver 
a 50,000 volts shock to incapacitate people and critics say the weapon is too 
often lethal.

Deborah Coles from Inquest, which supports families who have lost loved ones 
after contact with the state, said: “There is increased arming of the police 
around the country with Taser. The danger is they are being used as a first 
resort rather than a last resort. We know that black men are disproportionately 
represented in terms of people who are Tasered.’

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> officers believe Tasers help 
protect them and maintain the tradition of British officers not carrying 
firearms. In a recent knife rampage by a man in central London which left one 
person dead, and five injured, Taser meant the suspect was arrested and 
detained alive, whilst in other jurisdictions he may have been shot and killed.

In a statement, the IPCC said: “Two police officers initially attended the 
address and whilst in contact with Mr Atkinson outside the property one of the 
officers discharged a Taser. Further police officers then arrived. Mr Atkinson 
became unwell and an ambulance was called. He was treated at the scene and 
taken to hospital where he was later pronounced dead.”

The IPCC added: “IPCC investigators have been conducting house-to-house 
enquiries in the immediate area and gathering available information. Police 
logs and radio transmissions are being obtained. The police officers involved 
and independent witnesses will be interviewed by IPCC investigators. Initial 
data from the Taser has been downloaded and it is being sent for further 
testing.”

Additional reporting: Matthew Weaver
 