
Ireland has said it is hopeful that the common travel area allowing freedom of 
movement betweenNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Republic will survive 
Brexit talks.

The country’s ambassador to the UK, Daniel Mulhall, told a House of Lords 
select committee on Tuesday that he was satisfied the country’s EU partners 
would “not want to create unnecessary problems for Ireland” because they 
recognise the “unique circumstances” involved in the region.

Brexit secretary: no return to 'hard' border in Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/brexit-secretary-no-return-to-hard-border-in-ireland>
Irish and British citizens currently have special status in each other’s 
countries with full rights to live, work and vote without abandoning 
citizenship of their country of birth. But fears have been expressed thatthis 
arrangement would be at risk post-Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/brexit-threat-northern-ireland-border-communities>
 as the Northern Ireland border would automatically become an external EU 
border.

Mulhall, a former ambassador to Germany and first secretary in Brussels, told 
the Lords’ select committee on the European Union: “I have experienced from EU 
colleagues over the years a considerable understanding of the unique 
circumstances in Northern Ireland; there will be willingness on the part of our 
EU partners to be sensitive to any concerns that arise in relation to Northern
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.”

He also said he hoped that cross-border trade would remain customs-free.

Britain is Ireland’s largest trading partner and two-way trade between the 
countries stands at about £1bn a week, with an equal trading balance in imports 
and exports.

Mulhall said that economic ties to Northern Ireland had improved since the 
Good Friday agreement brought peace, but that there was still a long way to go.

In normal circumstances, trading partners on one island would have an 
“intense” relationship, and while trade has improved between the Republic and 
Northern Ireland, “there was still a long way to go” he said.

“I believe our EU partners … would be very slow to do anything that would in 
any way cut across or create difficulties for north/south relations as they 
develop as part of our peace process.”

Northern Ireland’s greatest fear from a Brexit is the return to conflict | 
Kathryn Gaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-fear-brexit-conflict-good-friday-agreement-eu>
Mulhall said that anything that got in the way of the potential economic 
development would be unwelcome. He hinted that Ireland would be lobbying for 
closest possible relationship between Britain and the EU in negotiations, but 
said it could not act as a “broker” as Ireland remained, and wished to remain, 
part of the EU. “Our interests are in the future evolution of the EU,” he said.

Separately, legal experts called on the government to introduce new 
legislation that would ensure “stage by stage” scrutiny of Brexit talks by 
parliament.

Derrick Wyatt QC, emeritus professor of law at Oxford University, told the 
committee that current rules under the Constitutional Reform and Government Act 
2010, did not allow for scrutiny of the process as it took place.

It was “just not right” for negotiations to be presented “as a fait accompli” 
to parliament after being negotiated behind closed doors, he said.

Wyatt said scrutiny should be used to encourage the government to “think 
outside the box” and to “test their own internal advice”.
 