
The Isle of Man has staged its annual international open for some 20 years but 
the 2016 version at Douglas was by far the strongest of the series. America’s 
trio of Olympiad gold medallists, all ranked in the world top 10, faced a tough 
field including the England No1, Michael Adams, China’s world woman champion, 
Hou Yifan, Hungary’s former world title challenger Peter Leko and Ukraine’s 
Pavel Eljanov, who took the trophy. The Manxmen can now justifiably claim their 
event belongs in the major league of elite opens alongside Tradewise Gibraltar, 
Aeroflot Moscow and Qatar.

Fabiano Caruana tied with Eljanov and expressed disappointment that there was 
no speed play-off. But the 24-year-old US champion shared the prize money and, 
most important for him, gained a haul of rating points which made him the clear 
world No2, only 30 points behind Magnus Carlsen.

Adams looked ready to follow up his impressive results in the British 
Championship and the Olympiad with another solid performance until he lost to 
Caruana in the final round. It was unlucky for the Cornishman, who conjured up 
winning chances as Black but then miscalculated a key variation.

There was still a significant English success. David Howell, who did badly in 
the Baku Olympiad, recovered form and finished fourth, winning a miniature 
where he trapped his opponent’s errant queen in 21 moves.

This made it an excellent week for England’s two youngest grandmasters. Gawain 
Jones went to Atlantic City for the grandly named MillionaireChess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> where the first prize was $30,000. 
Jones’s resilient play scored points in dubious or drawn positions and he 
reached the final where he outplayed Poland’s Dariusz Swiercz and reached a won 
ending. The time limit was fast, they were both down to five seconds a move, 
Jones missed a simple two-move tactic to queen a pawn, blundered again and was 
checkmated. He still collected the second prize of $15,000.

Jones and Howell both gained enough rating points to jump into the world top 
100 so that England now has six GMs there – Adams, Matthew Sadler, Luke McShane 
and Nigel Short are the others – though this situation is rather precarious as 
three of the slots are between 91 and 100.

Short is next up. He takes on Hou Yifan in an interesting six-game series at 
Hoogeveen, Netherlands, starting on Sunday at 2pm with all games live and free 
to watch online. There is little between them on ratings and a close match is 
likely.

Howell’s ultra-quick win stemmed from his Indian opponent’s rash advance 15 
c4? where 15 e4 would have kept equality. Trying to justify his plan, White 
avoided 19 Bxc6 Nxc6 20 Be3 when Black is a safe pawn up, and made the fatal 
capture 19 Qxa7?? Howell’s reply 20...e5! was already crushing as White can 
only save his queen by giving up a piece by 21 Nxc4.

Kidambi Sundarajan v David Howell

1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 g6 3 g3 c6 4 Bg2 d5 5 cxd5 cxd5 6 Nc3 Bg7 7 Nf3 O-O 8 O-O Ne4 9 
Qb3 Nc610 Bf4 Nxc3 11 bxc3 Na5 12 Qb5 b6 13 Rac1 Bb7 14 Nd2 Rc8 15 c4? Bc6 16 
Qa6 Bb717 Qb5 Bc6 18 Qa6 dxc4 19 Qxa7?? Bxg2 20 Kxg2 e5! 21 dxe5 Ra8 0-1

3464 1 Qg7+! Rxg7 2 fxg7+ Kxg7 3 Rxb7+! Rf7 (if Kf6 4 Rh6 mate) 4 Rxh7+ Kg8 5 
Rhxf7 Qxf7 6 Rxf7 Kxf7 7 Bxd3 and White wins easily with his extra pawns.
 