
Of what use to us, we Glasgow state secondary pupils, was a ticket to the 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> v England rugby 
international at Murrayfield? The free tickets, provided by a naive, young, 
rugby-loving PE teacher, were part of his losing battle to persuade us to play 
this alien sport so beloved of private school games masters everywhere.

There was only one solution: a first-ever journey to Edinburgh where the 
streets were paved with shortbread and where, we had been told, the locals, 
never normally eager to part with hard poppy, would none the less pay over the 
odds for the tickets we possessed.

The trip was a resounding success. The prices we secured were enough to get us 
into Celtic Park for the rest of the season and we found that Edinburgh store 
detectives had all been trained by Inspector Clouseau.

Fifteen summers more were to elapse ere next I visited Auld Reekie, but this 
lovely old city had found favour with me. As we made our merry way back west, 
exulting in our good fortune and joyously dodging the train fare by jouking in 
and out of the lavatories, we had the warm glow you get when you have just been 
to your severe but kindly maiden auntie's. The one with a past whispered about 
only when the sherries flowed at yet another family christening.

And though she had admonished you again for your slovenliness and checked that 
you had washed behind your ears, nevertheless she had that glint in her eye as 
she slipped a pound note into your hand and you just knew that once upon a time 
she had travelled with a native man-servant.

I harbour yet that same secret thrill whenever I sally forth along the M8, but 
recently it has become evident that my Edinburgh is hurting and the reasons why 
are not hard to fathom.

The hand-wringing and introspection started when the Royal Bank of Scotland 
and the Bank of Scotland began their swift and catastrophic collapses, 
revealing a core rotting with the sort of risky financial adventurism Edinburgh 
would normally disdainfully associate with we spendthrift and reckless 
Glaswegians. Until the last weeks of 2008, RBS and HBOS had stood like 
sentinels guarding all those values that Edinburgh held to be sacrosanct: 
thrift, caution and temperance.

Now they could not have been more mortified if they had found that grandfather 
had sold the big house in Bruntsfield and had been found blowing hashish rings 
into the sweaty armpits of a Turkish rent boy in a souk in Istanbul.

Yet the anger and recrimination over Sir Fred's folly is as nothing compared 
with the civic war that has been raging over the city's Â£100m tram system. It's 
unnecessary, it costs too much, it'll be a year late and Princes Street will be 
like a building site while the work takes place. Anyone who has seen what
Edinburgh City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/edinburgh-city> Council 
has allowed to happen to their main street over the last 30 years may conclude, 
though, that a building site would be an improvement.

Is there any other main capital thoroughfare in the world where such a 
divinely appointed vista of Castle, Mound and Royal Mile is faced with a 
scowling road of shops that resembles Bucharest High Street before the 
revolution?

When the Edinburgh latterati are not enduring a dark night of the soul over 
their banks and their trams, they can usually be heard clucking over the plight 
of the grand old Scotsman newspaper. And it's true, the old girl is having a 
torrid time of it. The circulation has collapsed and last week their financial 
masters refused to bear the cost of sending a football writer to Amsterdam to 
cover Scotland's most important match in years.

It is not difficult to lampoon the douce citizenry of Edinburgh when they get 
like this. Indeed, it is not difficult to have fun at their expense on most 
occasions. As when you ask whose turn it is to purchase the next round of 
drinks and suddenly find that a terrible silence has descended, broken only by 
Craig and Charlie of the Proclaimers on the jukebox. Or when you discover that 
most have never been to Glasgow because they get nosebleeds at the Harthill 
services.

Yet in the 10 years when I laboured on their newspaper presses, I grew to love 
the natural reserve, the refusal to rush to judgment and the Presbyterian 
rectitude. These did not spring from an absence of warmth or affection, but 
simply a natural wisdom in Edinburghers' dealings with people as they assessed 
your fitness for their friendship. And when my Glaswegian "How's it gaun'?" 
gallusness required occasionally to be punctured, then there was never a 
shortage of kind volunteers.

So it pains me to see my beloved capital so vexed. For once, not so very long 
ago, this beautiful old city took me in, gave me sanctuary, listened to my 
woes, took pity on me and set me on my path again. And now it is my turn to 
return the kindness.

The douce citizens of Edinburgh must not worry about the trams, they will be a 
resounding success. More people will be inclined to travel on them rather than 
buses because their special routes will bear them to their offices much more 
quickly. Traffic congestion will be cut and with it pollution. They will be 
pleasing to the eyes. Just ask the people of Nottingham and Dublin, who are now 
clamouring for expanded routes, when once they were aghast at the very idea.

Nor should they be concerned about their newspapers; they have stood for nigh 
on 200 years and, like the foundation garments of a Morningside matron, they 
will not be down for long. And they must not fash themselves over their banks 
for they simply cannot have everything. Already they have the brilliant 
Scottish parliament building, every one of our national art galleries and the 
world's best music, art and books festivals.

There are some things, though, that it would not be worth their while to 
covet. And so they must leave style to Glasgow, for we simply do it better.
 