
The robin has uncorked its spring song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/29/country-diary-sandy-bedfordshire-winter-robin-bird-song-pair-bonds>
. This one – a male, I suspect, giving it some welly in the upper reaches of a 
bare horse chestnut – is the loudest, the fullest, I’ve heard so far.


David Lack, the author of the landmark 1943 study The Life of the Robin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-of-the-robin.html>, wrote that its 
autumn song was “thinner and less rich” than its spring reprise. In autumn, 
robins are more likely to mutter, to essay half-hearted impersonations of other 
birds, to engage in circling, absent-minded vocalisations known as sub-song, 
like a man whistling idly to himself as he walks in the woods.


Related: At sundown, the Sussex skies come alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/13/sundown-sussex-skies-come-alive-country-diary>

The full-blooded “spring” song is actually often broken out before the advent 
calendar is half-opened, and, like now, sung when January is biting deep and 
the weather could hardly feel less spring-like. It’s a reminder that spring is 
not so much a moveable feast as a drawn-out process of many stages, many steps.


I have a bird-book from a century ago that tells me when I should expect to 
hear the “spring” songs of each common songbird. Bird Life Throughout the Year 
is precise right down to the day (not quite as silly as it sounds: the author, 
John H Salter, points out that the dates are averages calculated from dozens of 
observations).

Spring birdsong, by Salter’s calendar, reaches right back to early October, 
when thedunnocks 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/d/dunnock/>
 strike up their fast, sibilant song (a bit like a robin played back at the 
wrong speed). He has the robin chiming in on 3 January, theblackbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/the-northerner/2012/may/01/wenlock-edge-blackbirds-singing-rain>
 on the 12th, the great tit on the 18th. The 25th, he says, will see “rooks 
coquetting”.

We have more magpies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/22/wenlock-edge-a-foundling-magpie>
 than rooks around here; of these – raucous, iridescent, bandit-masked – Salter 
says that they will gather noisily together in February, “the subject under 
discussion being evidently connected with matters matrimonial”.


Our magpies are ahead of schedule: we’ve already seen them in pairs, visiting 
their scruffy old nests, derelict since May: fixer-uppers, yes, but with a bit 
of work they’ll be good for another spring. Whenever spring is.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>

 * The main picture caption was amended on 14 January 2017.
 