
Does your New Year consist of traipsing into the office every morning with a 
sinking heart? Do you sit counting the hours until the end of each day? If so, 
it's clearly time you moved on. And no time could be better than January. The 
problem is, many employees just won't take the risk, says business psychologist 
Sue Ryan.

 'Employees are too scared to go for promotion or for a position in a 
different company, despite the fact that their jobs bore them silly,' says 
Ryan. 'Often, it's due to lack of confidence or because these are uncertain 
times and you never know how secure the new position will be. But it is more 
likely to be due to hidden concerns, such as a fear of making friends or 
travelling further to work.' So what makes these worries hidden? 'Because 
they're concealed from conscious thought,' says Ryan. In fact, she continues, 
when employees disc#over their anxieties are of this nature, they are more 
likely to be able to face up to, and overcome, them.

 'Fear of interviews is very common. Last week, I met a secretary who couldn't 
understand what stopped her trying for another job. We went through all the 
possibilities of why she couldn't bring herself to fill in application forms, 
and eventually discovered that she has a fear of trembling in interviews. That 
alone prevented her from moving on - even within the same company. But because 
she hadn't realised this until we spoke, she hadn't been able to conquer it.'

 Ryan maintains that this process of uncovering hidden fears can be 
fundamental, if only because unhappiness at work can cause frustration and 
stress, and lead to depression and physical problems such as heart disease. 
'The best method is to make a list of all the changes that could occur in your 
life, and then tick or cross them according to whether you think they'd be 
positive or negative. People are usually surprised by what they've crossed.'

 Debra Allcock, head of campaigning at the Industrial Society, says that 
people may fail to make ambitious moves for reasons of gender. 'Research shows 
that women will consider all the things they can't do when applying for a new 
position, whereas men will think about all they can do. When women are made 
aware of this, it's often enough to make them consciously try to become more 
positive.' Cary Cooper, professor of organisational psychology at University of 
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, adds: 'Some people are 
security-oriented and need stability more than others. But low-risk takers in 
the late nineties are showing they can change this behaviour to a certain 
extent, if only due to the current climate in which downsizing and short-term 
contracts are the norm.

 Ten years ago, low-risk takers could have survived in the working world 
easily at secretary and PA level. But today, they need to be flexible to 
survive.' The greatest way to achieve this, claims Cooper, is to apply for as 
many interviews as possible. 'You will realise they are not as scary as you 
thought, and over time you will gain confidence because you will be used to 
selling yourself. In addition, you'll realise which aspects of the jobs appeal 
to you and the reasons why.

 Then, when a job comes along that you might want, you'll be as well prepared 
as you can be.' Careers advisor Charlotte Ashby claims that this advice applies 
to those employees who want a change from secretarial or PA work altogether. 
Alternatively, a career break may be an option. 'Career breaks provide the 
opportunity for staff to take unpaid leave for several months at a time, giving 
them an excellent chance to try out a new career path.' Risk-taking need not be 
hazardous, says Ashby.

 'I see so many staff shake their heads when I suggest applying for a 
different job. They claim it's too much of a gamble. But gamblers are unable to 
control the situations they bet on, whereas effective risk-takers think through 
the steps they are about to take, and have some influence over the changes that 
are about to happen.'

Change for the good

  Uncover your hidden fears. It is possible it's the procedure of making a 
change, rather than the change itself, that is putting you off.

  List every change that is likely to occur in your life as a result of a 
move.

  Weigh up whether it's worth it.

  Remember that change is likely to make you more flexible.

  Apply for as many interviews as possible. It will give you practice, 
confidence and a great opportunity to consider everything available.

  Consider a career break. It's a good way of taking a risk without burning 
all your bridges.
 