
Jürgen Klopp paid tribute to Daniel Sturridge as Liverpool’s rejuvenated 
striker took the club to a first European final since 2007. Sturridge scored 
the second goal inLiverpool’s convincing 3-0 win over Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/liverpool-reach-europa-league-final-villarreal>
 and was closely involved in the other two, but it was not only his finishing 
that caught the eye. The England striker put in a superb all-round performance 
after being kept out of the team in recent weeks, and either by accident or 
design Klopp appears to have worked out how to bring the best from him.

Liverpool push past 10-man Villarreal and into Europa League final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/liverpool-reach-europa-league-final-villarreal>
“Daniel had a great game. When he is fit he is an unbelievable player,” the 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager said. “He 
was outstanding for us but even he needs the other players alongside him to 
play well too. That is what happened tonight, the performance exceeded all my 
expectations. I have no words to describe it, particularly the power we showed 
in the first half. It was nice to watch, great to be a part of a night like 
that.

“At half time I told the players to keep going with the emotional football but 
maybe use their brains a bit more. I wanted my players to be both emotional and 
smart, if that makes any sense, and they were.”

Liverpool had other excellent performers in James Milner and Roberto Firmino, 
though it was the manager’s name the supporters were chanting at the end. 
“Maybe when I am 50 I will get to like that,” Klopp said. “Until then the fans 
do not have to sing my name. I am just part of the team, we are all parts of 
the same team. It was a brilliant display from my boys.”

Liverpool 3-0 Villarreal (agg 3-1): five Europa League talking points | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/liverpool-villarreal-europa-league-talking-points>
The Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> coach, 
Marcelino, accepted Liverpool had been the better side and deserved to go 
through, though he felt their intensity and physicality at times bordered on 
the illegal. “They pressed us so much it was hard for us to impose ourselves,” 
he said. “The biggest difference between the two teams was Liverpool’s 
intensity. They played with such a high tempo, and on the edge of the rules at 
times, but it was allowed. But they were better than us, I admit. Liverpool are 
a great side and we have been unlucky enough to catch them in their best moment 
of the season. There’s not a lot more you can say.”

Sturridge, whose contribution surely answered any lingering questions Roy 
Hodgson might have had about taking him to France this summer, said he was 
thrilled to reach a final. “We had to work our socks off and that’s what we 
did,” he said. “Tonight was about soaking up the atmosphere and putting in a 
performance. It’s a great feeling to get through to a final like that.”

Adam Lallana, scorer of the third goal to set up a meeting with Sevilla  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/sevilla-shakhtar-donetsk-europa-league-match-report>
in Basel later this month, said if Liverpool could reproduce that level of 
performance they need not fear anyone. “We always knew Villarreal could have 
got the away goal and made things difficult but credit to the lads, they showed 
great guts,” Lallana said. “It was a brilliant performance, we are reaping the 
rewards now for hard work earlier in the season. It’s great to be in a final 
and we fancy ourselves against anyone if we play like that and press like that.”
 