
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> is believed 
to be willing to loan Mamadou Sakho out before the end of the transfer window 
after a chequered few months for the French centre-back.

Reports suggest that Sakho, who was banned in April for failing a drugs test 
beforeUefa dropped the case in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/mamadou-sakho-liverpool-uefa-doping>
, will be allowed to restore his match sharpness elsewhere, having not played 
in a competitive game sincethe 4-0 win over Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/liverpool-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 on 20 April. Sakho scored in that game but his suspension stunted his progress 
and then he angered Klopp sufficiently to besent home from the pre-season tour 
of the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/28/jurgen-klopp-respect-mamadou-sakho-liverpool-us-tour>
 after a series of minor disciplinary breaches.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fliverpool-manager-jurgen-klopp-says-media-is-obsessed-with-transfer-window-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20manager%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20says%20media%20is%20'obsessed'%20with%20transfer%20window%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fliverpool-manager-jurgen-klopp-says-media-is-obsessed-with-transfer-window-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20manager%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20says%20media%20is%20%27obsessed%27%20with%20transfer%20window%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fliverpool-manager-jurgen-klopp-says-media-is-obsessed-with-transfer-window-video&media=>
Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp says media is ‘obsessed’ with transfer window – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/23/liverpool-manager-jurgen-klopp-says-media-is-obsessed-with-transfer-window-video>
A heel injury has further hampered any attempts to re-establish himself in 
Klopp’s early-season thinking. Any loan move would not signal the end of the 
26-year-old’sLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> career, 
with the intention being that he would return ready to reproduce the 
performances that made him a favourite at Anfield last season. Sakho joined 
from Paris Saint-Germain in September 2013 and became a key member of Klopp’s 
side after starting 2015-16 on the bench.

Meanwhile Klopp has warned others among his Liverpool players to expect to be 
disappointed as he does not intend to use cup competitions to give those on the 
fringes of his squad a run out. With no European football this season there is 
less pressure on the squad than there was during the 63 matches they were 
involved in on their run to the Capital One Cup and Europa League finals in the 
previous campaign.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-weekend-action>
Klopp is keen to establish some rhythm, having seen his side fire blanks in 
losing at Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/burnley-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 a week afterbeating Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, but he wants his players to fight for their places.

It means changes will be kept to a minimum for Tuesday’s EFL Cup tie at the 
Championship sideBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>, leaving some players 
frustrated. “We will make changes but not big changes. It is not really likely 
we change seven or eight positions,” he said.

“I cannot give all players together the opportunity to play. Sometimes we have 
to work longer to change the situation. Of course each week in which they can’t 
or didn’t play it is not too good for a player but that is how it is in 
football. You accept this when you start playing the game. The only thing a 
player can do is work as hard as possible, to perform in each session and then 
the manager has to make a decision.”

Liverpool had 81% possession against Burnley and, despite having 26 shots, 
managed only five on target and rarely troubled Tom Heaton. “There was not 
enough desire in the last third,” said Klopp, who is likely to give Divock 
Origi and the new centre-back Joël Matip their first starts of the season at 
Burton. “We had so many moments around the box where we could have made better 
decisions.

“When we were ready for crossing we had no one in the box and that makes 0.0% 
sense. That is what I mean when I speak about desire. We had so many shots from 
outside [the box] and sometimes you have to try but it looked too early and 
kind of desperate.

“To create something like a real mentality you need time. The first game was 
very good, the second game not, so what’s the truth now? There is no pressure 
in this moment. It is more a chance to bring the Liverpool train in the right 
direction and that is what we want to do.”

Burton’s manager, Nigel Clough, meanwhile, insists the Brewers’ forthcoming 
matches against Liverpool and Derby are nowhere near as daunting as a 
“torturous” trip to Doncaster last season. Burton – a non-league side seven 
years ago – have experienced arapid rise to compete at Championship level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/burton-albion-promotion-championship-doncaster-rovers-relegated>
 for the first time in their history. Clough’s team needed to avoid defeat 
against Doncaster at the Keepmoat Stadium in their final match of last term in 
order to clinch automatic promotion. With their nearest rivals, Walsall, 
leading 5-0 at Port Vale, the tension and pressure was intense, but Burton got 
the point they required courtesy of a goalless draw.

Sunderland have that sinking feeling again – Football Weekly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/aug/22/sunderland-have-that-sinking-feeling-again-football-weekly>
Clough views the visits of his former club and Derby as something everyone 
associated with the club should relish. “Obviously there’s no such thing as a 
free game because you want to win and get through but this is as close as it 
gets for us,” said Clough, who spent two and a half years with the Anfield club 
between 1993 and 1996. “Playing Liverpool and Derby this week is not pressure 
for us. Having to get a point away at Doncaster to win promotion – that is 
pressure. It was torturous. This is a brilliant week for the club, not a 
crucial week. “It’s 10 years since we played Manchester United in the FA Cup, 
so these games don’t come around very often for us. Ask our supporters. Never 
in their wildest dreams did they believe they’d be playing teams like this, 
never mind who we now play in the league week in, week out.

“It’s been an incredible 10 years for the club. Seven years in the Football 
League and we are competing in the Championship. The chairman keeps saying we 
have to keep pinching ourselves and he’s right. We are riding the crest of a 
wave and we’re loving every minute of it.”
 