
Rousing recoveries against St Etienne, Olympiakos and Milan all led to 
European titles for Liverpool but Jürgen Klopp has claimed Borussia Dortmund 
will count for nothing unless his players deliver againstVillarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>. “For a small city in Spain 
it is great what they have done,” he said. “They have made a lot of good 
decisions to be here and we shouldn’t hope for the wrong decisions tomorrow.”

Klopp was not in the mood to wallow in that remarkable quarter-final victory  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
when he appeared at El Madrigal Stadium on Wednesday. Losing Emre Can, Divock 
Origi andMamadou Sakho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/27/mamadou-sakho-liverpool-drug-test>
 for varying reasons since that 5-4 aggregate defeat of his former club, plus
Jordan Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/jordan-henderson-likely-miss-euro-2016>
 in the first leg in Germany, may have had something to do with it. History 
indicates Liverpool do not squander the momentum of a memorable European 
fightback – with the exception of Auxerre in the 1992 Uefa Cup – but momentum 
alone will not carry Klopp’s team through against the Yellow Submarine. That 
was the message he was keen to impart in Spain.

Liverpool’s Lovren sinks Borussia Dortmund in remarkable comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
“Now is not the moment to think that the experience against Dortmund in the 
quarter-final is the experience we need. It is not about this,” the Liverpool 
manager said. “It is the only chance in 2015-16, in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, to go as far as 
possible. That is all. When I came in October, Basel [where the final will be 
played] was not a real thing to think about but now it is not that far away so 
we could.

“Experience is nothing to talk about, it is not to buy, it is not to talk 
about. It is only to collect and use. So we will see what happens. Each game 
you win, each difficult game you win, is the best thing you can do in your 
career and you can take the benefit from it. If you go out, it could be an 
important experience. If you go through, it could be experience but, if you use 
the experience in the wrong way, then it is bullshit. I’m sorry.”

Liverpool will be welcomed warmly by Villarreal on Thursday before their first 
game since a two-year inquest into the Hillsborough disaster concluded thatthe 
96 who died were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
 and supporters were not to blame. A banner bearing the Villarreal crest, “96” 
and You’ll Never Walk Alone will appear inside the 25,000-capacity stadium, 
20,000 scarves featuring yellow submarines will be distributed before the game 
and the club’s usual anthem will be replaced by their original song of choice, 
the Beatles’ number that reflects their nickname.

Klopp does not expect the reception to continue after kick-off. “What 
Villarreal have shown each week, being fourth in the Spanish league, is the 
highest level of football,” he warned. “They are unbelievably strong with 
really good balance. Really good structure in their game – good defending, very 
disciplined, good counterattacks. If you let them, they play football, they 
have everything you need to be a good team.

“They’re a good club in a small city in Spain. They have made a lot of good 
decisions to be here. And we should not hope that they will only make wrong 
decisions tomorrow. We have to be prepared for our best game and that’s what we 
will try to do.”

He added: “We saw Villarreal maybe six times. To play against them is really 
special. They are really confident in the things they do. They defend in an 
organised way. They are patient enough to wait for your mistakes, then using 
these mistakes. We have to play the game Villarreal don’t like. That is what we 
have to do.”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> are unbeaten in 12 
Europa League games and have Christian Benteke in the squad for the first time 
since he damaged knee ligaments last month. “It is not the moment to think if 
he is in the best shape but he is in good shape,” said Klopp. “We only have 
players here who are ready to be a part. There are no tourists.”

Villarreal are on course to qualify for the Champions League through La Liga – 
they sit fourth and four points above fifth-placed Celta Vigo – and have won 
all six Europa League fixtures at El Madrigal this season. No club have scored 
more goals or won more games in the re-formatted Europa League but their three 
appearances in the semi-finals of European competition have all ended in 
defeat. Arsenal, or rather Juan Román Riquelme’s missed penalty, denied them a 
place in the 2006 Champions League final.

“Liverpool might be the favourite,” claimed the coach, Marcelino. “The club, 
their history and the fact that they knocked out Borussia Dortmund all add up. 
But we don’t consider ourselves to be less than them. We are going to give 
everything from our side to eliminate this legendary team. We don’t have any 
pressure on us. We are privileged to be able to play in this semi-final. I felt 
more pressure in the previous knockout ties. We have the chance to make history 
at this club now. If we manage to enjoy the match and do the things we know how 
to do, I think they’re going to suffer a lot at our ground.”
 