
Jürgen Klopp has said there are similarities between the team spirit at 
Liverpool and that at theBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> side he guided to two 
Bundesliga titles and a Champions League final.

Liverpool’s attacking prowess has been behind their emergence as Premier 
League contenders but Klopp believes the camaraderie that has developed on his 
watch is another factor. He says the atmosphere is reminiscent of Dortmund, 
whom he led to five titles during a successful seven-year spell in charge.

Jürgen Klopp: Christmas programme can make or break Liverpool title bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/25/jurgen-klopp-christmas-can-make-or-break-liverpool-title-challenge>
Klopp, who begins a run of three league games in seven days at home to Stoke 
City on Tuesday, said: “I am still in contact with a lot of the Dortmund 
players and hopefully I will be in contact after my time atLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> with these players because 
they are nice lads. That is first of all. But they are not here because they 
are nice lads; they are outstanding footballers and I love working with them 
and really appreciate them.

“We have an atmosphere which is as good as it should be because of all the 
people working here. We had our Christmas party last week and it was really 
nice having all the people around. It was a big difference after one year 
because you know all of them. After three months I still had no idea the name 
of certain staff. We have a completely different situation to last year. It is 
not the same but similar to what we had at Dortmund.”

Klopp could have Joël Matip available against Stoke having omitted the 
Cameroon international from thewin over Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 to allow a persistent ankle problem to settle. The defender also missed games 
against Bournemouth and Middlesbrough because of the injury, which Liverpool 
hope will improve through rest, but the team have kept two consecutive clean 
sheets with his replacement, Ragnar Klavan, impressing in both matches.

The Liverpool manager said Klavan has begun to settle in the Premier League 
following his £4.2m summer transfer from Augsburg. “We were never in doubt 
about him,” he said. “That is how we always work. We always decide for the 
player, not against the other one.

“We saw the good moment Ragnar and Lucas Leiva were in. Joe Gomez is in a good 
way too. It was clear there is no reason for rushing Joël back even though 
everyone outside thought that without Matip we could not get anything. That was 
good and I said a few times before that timing is very important. A few weeks 
ago Ragnar was not struggling but he was not that player he is now because he 
still needed to adapt a little bit to all the circumstances. Now he is in a 
really good moment and we should use it.”
 