
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> blamed 
inexperience for the defensive lapse that condemned Liverpool to defeat against 
Villarreal but the manager warned the Spanish side they would face a different 
proposition at Anfield next week.

Liverpool were on course for a valuable goalless draw in the first leg of the 
Europa League semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
 when they were caught on the counterattack and the substitute Adrián López 
scored a 92nd-minute winner. The defeat was Liverpool’s first in Europe this 
season and leaves Klopp’s team requiring another Anfield comeback to reach the 
final in Basel on 18 May.

Liverpool’s Daniel Sturridge has point to make after being stranded on the 
bench | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/29/liverpool-daniel-sturridge-europa-league-villarreal-bench>
Klopp, who left Daniel Sturridge on the bench throughout the tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/29/liverpool-daniel-sturridge-europa-league-villarreal-bench>
, said: “I am pleased with the performance, a lot of parts we did really well. 
Villarreal are a good side but Liverpool are a good side, too. To control a 
game like this in most parts of the game is good. To concede from a 92nd-minute 
counterattack, it sounds like it is – not too good. Everyone knows it and it 
should not happen.

“We had a great moment with Alberto [Moreno] and then we had a header from 
Christian [Benteke]. Maybe the youth came through at that point. Until then it 
was really a professional performance. To be honest it is the first leg. My 
first thought as everyone around me was celebrating was: ‘Sorry, but it is not 
over, you have to come to Anfield too and we will be ready.’”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> lost Philippe 
Coutinho to illness at half-time and Klopp opted for Jordon Ibe, and later 
Christian Benteke, as his substitutes rather than Sturridge. The England 
international was left out of Klopp’s starting line-up for the third European 
game in succession but the manager defended his selection.

“There were one or two situations with set pieces defensively that Christian 
could help us with. It [the substitution] was not really for attacking. We had 
no luck. I was really, really disappointed when I came in the dressing room and 
everyone told me Lallana was not offside. In big games you need right decisions 
but it is like it is.”

Villarreal 1-0 Liverpool: five Europa League semi-final talking points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-talking-points>
Klopp insisted that Villarreal’s late winner had not altered the complexion of 
the tie and Liverpool would enter the home leg high on confidence. “This 
tournament is two legs and, if you win today 1-0, what would happen? Now we 
have to find solutions to a few things but I saw we are in a good way. I saw a 
lot of things that showed me we can do it.

“With the help of Anfield we can do it but please don’t compare it with 
Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
. Things are possible with 1-0, it is not the biggest result in the world. 
Villarreal know a lot more about us and they will respect us. When the team 
does not play better you think they want to play like this. Of course they 
would have been satisfied 0-0, we would have been satisfied.

“They are strong in counterattacks and we have to score at home. I am 
expecting a completely different game. I am looking forward to Anfield.”
 