
“They won’t know what’s hit them” was Jürgen Klopp’s promise via the front 
page of the Liverpool Echo, something of a hostage to fortune perhaps 
consideringBorussia Dortmund raced into a two-goal lead here in the last round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
 and it was stoppage time before Dejan Lovren was finally able to tilt the tie 
the home side’s way.

Liverpool 3-0 Villarreal (agg 3-1): five Europa League talking points | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/liverpool-villarreal-europa-league-talking-points>
The Liverpool manager was careful not to take anything for granted – “great 
moments and great nights don’t just happen at Anfield because you step off a 
bus and touch the sign, great things happen here because players and supporters 
make them happen” – though it seemed to be a given that England’s last 
representatives in Europe would not slide out of contention as meeklyas 
Manchester City did in Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/real-madrid-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
, and Villarreal probably knew that as well as everyone else.

Klopp also noted that Villarreal’s current status in La Liga should not be 
underestimated. They have just confirmed Champions League qualification for 
next season, they have only Barcelona, Atlético and Real Madrid ahead of them, 
and they have recorded victories this season over both the 2016 Champions 
League finalists. In the light of that, Klopp’s decision to bring Emre Can 
straight back into action was a bold one, possibly based on the German 
midfielder’s immense performance in the last round against Dortmund.

During that match, just before Can succumbed to the ankle injury that kept him 
out of four subsequent league games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/liverpool-emre-can-ankle-injury-out-for-premier-league-season>
, he trotted across to the bench to reassure his manager – wrongly as it turned 
out – that he would be fine to play on. That showed his commitment and 
determination. Klopp responded with a playful shoulder charge, the sort of 
thing you normally see on the sidelines of a rugby pitch. That showed he 
appreciated his player’s commitment, as well as his contribution. Can was 
supposed to be out for much longer but if the player believes he is ready to 
return, Klopp is evidently not one to argue.

The manager’s faith in his player was vindicated after a mere six minutes. 
Villarreal had already had two decent attempts on goal by that stage, so Can 
stepped up to impose himself on proceedings, carrying the ball across the 
halfway line and spreading it first left then right, eventually providing the 
diagonal pass that allowed Nathaniel Clyne to send in the cross that led to the 
first goal. Klopp’s point about the Spanish club’s slightly over-enthusiastic 
celebration oftheir advantage from the first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
, when it had arrived only courtesy of a last-minute goal, seemed valid at that 
point.

It had taken Liverpool almost no time to wipe it out, and the feverish nature 
of the home side’s early pressing meant Villarreal briefly did look as if they 
didn’t know what had hit them. Another goal might have hit them only a few 
minutes after the first had Adam Lallana been able to make any sort of 
connection to James Milner’s perfectly weighted ball into the box, butVillarreal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> were reprieved and the match 
settled into a sort of fractious midfield parity.

It was not quite Chelsea v Spurs on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 fractious but the Hungarian referee certainly had his work cut out, with Denis 
Suárez in particular aggrieved at every incident, Roberto Soldado losing his 
temper and the fourth official frequently having to interrupt a simmering row 
between Klopp and Marcelino on the touchline. Soldado was booed off when he was 
substituted before the end. Hardly recognisable as the inoffensive and 
frequently anonymous striker who once played for Spurs, he had made himself 
thoroughly unpopular. As had Víctor Ruiz, who did well to last 71 minutes 
before seeing a red card.

Liverpool push past 10-man Villarreal and into Europa League final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/liverpool-reach-europa-league-final-villarreal>
By the time the interval arrived with no break to the parity two things were 
clear: Villarreal were indeed a sturdy and capable side, not about to lose 
their bearings because of a partisan crowd or a physical battle; and unlike the 
Dortmund goalfest the tie would probably go to the next side to score.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were enjoying more of the game 
but their opponents had chances too, such as when Cédric Bakambu had to be 
blocked by Lovren at the start of the second half, and Villarreal had the away 
goals rule in their favour. It is to Liverpool’s credit that they stayed strong 
enough to break their opponents down before Villarreal went down to 10 men.

Once Sevilla took a decisive lead in the other semi-final, it became clear 
that only Liverpool were standing in the way of Spanish domination of this 
year’s European finals. When Daniel Sturridge scored their second just past the 
hour, this time with a proper finish from Roberto Firmino’s pass, they all but 
denied Villarreal the chance to join Real Madrid, Atlético and Sevilla. Nothing 
has been won yet, and Liverpool still face the competition specialists in the 
final in Basel, but as Klopp might have said in his wholly justified 
appreciation of Spanish strengths, that is not bad company to be keeping.
 