
Jack Wilshere believes Bournemouth is the best place for him to develop this 
season aftercompleting a season-long loan deal from Arsenal on Wednesday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/arsenal-jack-wilshere-bournemouth-loan>
 Wilshere rejected offers from Crystal Palace, Milan and Roma to join Eddie 
Howe’s side, after beingallowed to leave Arsenal on loan by Arsène Wenger. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/jack-wilshere-set-to-leave-arsenal-on-loan-before-end-of-transfer-window>

His availability had sparked interest from more than 20 clubs from England and 
across Europe. Wilshere met Howe and the Palace manager, Alan Pardew, on 
Tuesday, and spoke with the former Tottenham Hotspur director of football, 
Franco Baldini, about a move to Italy with Roma.

Premier League 2016 summer transfer window: club-by-club verdicts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/premier-league-2016-summer-transfer-window-club-by-club-verdicts>
But the 24-year-old agreed to move to Bournemouth, who will pay the 
midfielder’s £90,000-a-week wage in full and a £2m loan fee. Wilshere, who was 
left out of Sam Allardyce’s first England squad, has been impressed with Howe 
and is believed to be have been persuaded to join the club by Benik Afobe, his 
best friend and former Arsenal team-mate, also atBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>.

“I had a good chat with the manager and feel sure this is the best place for 
me to play and develop this season,” said Wilshere in a statement on Twitter. 
“I would like to thank everyone at the club for making me feel so welcome. I am 
looking forward to working hard every day with the coaching staff and my new 
team-mates to help the club achieve success on the pitch.”

Wilshere became Bournemouth’s eighth summer signing and Howe said the player 
could prove to be the missing piece of the jigsaw. “We had a good talk about 
football, about Bournemouth the place and the club, thankfully he chose us,” 
the manager said. “We talked about the club and various different things, 
obviously we’re delighted he’s chosen us and I feel he will do really well in 
the team. Jack is obviously out there on his own with his profile and what 
we’ve attracted before, it’s a good deal and one that can work for both sides. 
He can complement our style of play and maybe add that missing piece to the 
jigsaw.”

Bournemouth play Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> on 
Saturday in a testimonial for the club’s former defender Warren Cummings and 
return to league action at home to West Bromwich Albion the following weekend. 
Wilshere trained with his new team-mates for the first time on Thursday but 
Howe is reluctant to say when the midfielder would first play. “We’ll wait and 
see, hopefully as soon as possible but I don’t want to set any targets. We’ll 
see how everything works in training.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2F13-players-who-broke-club-transfer-records-premier-league-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2013%20players%20who%20broke%20club%20transfer%20records%20in%20the%20Premier%20League%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2F13-players-who-broke-club-transfer-records-premier-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2013%20players%20who%20broke%20club%20transfer%20records%20in%20the%20Premier%20League%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2F13-players-who-broke-club-transfer-records-premier-league-video&media=>
The 13 players who broke club transfer records in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/01/13-players-who-broke-club-transfer-records-premier-league-video> 