
Persistent knee problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/30/jack-collinson-west-ham-wales>
 have forced the former West Ham United and Wales midfielder Jack Collison to 
retire from football at the age 27. After making 121 appearances during an 
injury-hit time at West Ham, the midfielder moved to Peterborough in the summer 
hoping to kickstart his career. Collison made 12 appearances for the League One 
side but has now decided to call time on his playing career.

The midfielder, capped 17 times by Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, dislocated a kneecap playing for 
West Ham in 2009 and will now focus on a coaching and media career.

“The nights I wake up in pain, or the mornings where I struggle to walk, will 
be a constant reminder I was lucky enough to play the game I love,” he told the 
Sun. “I still wake up some mornings feeling good and think: ‘One more try.’ But 
that would be unfair on myself, my fellow pros and my family. I want to bow out 
with some pride intact.”

In a statement, Collison added: “I have had plenty of time to mull this over 
and have not acted hastily in this decision and I must say thatPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United have acted with 
class throughout. They have allowed me to make the easy transition from playing 
to coaching without any issues and I now intend to repay their faith by helping 
the next generation make the step from young up and coming, to first-team 
superstar.

“My passion for playing is slowly dying out but my passion for football is 
burning ever so strong and I intend to stay within the game and make my mark in 
other areas. I am currently completing my coaching badges whilst managing the 
Posh U18s, and I love watching my own soccer school flourish.

“I have other interests as well, including a university degree in sports 
writing and a Miami venture which I am also very excited about. Although 
football has made me the man I am today it doesn’t define me and I am very 
optimistic about the future.”
 