
“It’s kind of like a painting within a painting,” said the child, in an 
American twang, as she stood in front ofManet’s Olympia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olympia_%28Manet%29> in the Musée d’Orsay in 
Paris last week. “No it bloody isn’t,” I thought. “It’s nothing like a painting 
inside a painting. She’s just trying to sound clever.” But no one corrected 
her. Her mother looked extremely proud. The guide grimaced, but wasn’t about to 
lose her tip for contradicting a precocious eight-year-old.

“There are elements of this painting,” said the guide, “that could have been 
painted by a child.” She gestured towards the bunch of flowers. “See? You could 
have done that.” She had obviously not yet got round to readingWhy Your Five 
Year Old Could Not Have Done That: Modern Art Explained 
<http://www.thamesandhudson.com/Why_Your_Five_Year_Old_Could_Not_Have_Done_That/9780500290477>
 (an actual book).

“My child could have painted that” is probably one of the most enraging things 
that you could say to an artist, or an art historian, and is, I think, the kind 
of attitude thatJake Chapman was getting at 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/news/a-gallery-visit-leave-the-children-at-home-says-top-artist-9644678.html>
 when he said that taking children to art galleries is an insult to the greats. 
“It’s like saying … it’s as moronic as a child,” he said, of plonking your kid 
in front of a Pollock. “Children are not human yet.”

Yet I was disappointed that Chapman – a member of the Arts Emergency service 
<http://www.arts-emergency.org/about-us/>, a charity working with 
underprivileged young people from diverse backgrounds – thinks appreciating art 
boils down to education. Presumably, father-of-three Chapman lives by his word 
and does not take any of his non-human children to art galleries, including his 
own exhibitions, believing them to be incapable of understanding the art. I do 
not believe that the rest of the country should follow suit.

Viewing art is not about being able to place the work within an art historical 
context, or being able to loudly spout post-structuralist soundbites as you 
meander around the gallery (it’s just this kind of attitude that puts people 
off going in the first place, even though many are free). Instead it is about 
how it makes you feel. And if it makes you feel angry, or baffled, or as though 
your kid could have done better, then that’s fine. At least you’re feeling 
something. AsAntony Gormley said, in response to Chapman 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-28639242>, art is not about 
understanding, it’s about experience.

In Anglo-Saxon nations, there is an inverse snobbery about parents taking 
children to galleries that does not seem to exist in France, where there is no 
shame in expressing a desire to learn. In Paris, I watched a mother gently 
explain a Monet to her three fascinated children in a way that, in the UK, 
would have seen her dismissed as pretentious. By contrast, when I was in New 
York recently, children in the Museum of Modern Art were encouraged to stand 
next toVan Gogh’s Starry Night 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=79802> and have their 
photograph taken, barely even glancing at it. It saddened me that this 
incredible picture was being ignored, that these parents did not encourage 
their children to look, or think. Cameras should be banned from galleries but 
not children.

I was taken to art galleries from a young age and barely understood anything I 
saw, but it instilled in me a passion for art that has lasted into adulthood. I 
lovedCornelia Parker’s exploding shed 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/cornelia-parker-2358>, and the weirdness of 
Magritte <http://www.renemagritte.org/>. I didn’t quite grasp the Situationists 
at the ICA, but then I was three. Having just discovered capitalism, I opted to 
humiliate my oh-so-liberal parents by lying on the ground and screaming “give 
me all of your money” repeatedly.Guy Debord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/14/guy-debord-society-spectacle-will-self>
 would not have approved, or perhaps he would: the situation I created was 
certainly disruptive, not least to the bourgeoisie.

And although this may land me in Pseuds corner 
<http://www.private-eye.co.uk/sections.php?section_link=pseuds_corner>, I do 
not care. Access to art has made my life better, and you have only to see a 
child engaging with a painting to realise that it is the same for many. Chapman 
has it that you must be human to understand art, and would exclude children 
from that category, but he has got it the wrong way round. Art teaches us what 
it means to be human, and children should be allowed to get in on that, lest 
they end up a generation of robotic culture secretaries who believe that art is 
a luxury for the chattering classes, not, in fact, for everyone. And, above 
all: a necessity.
 