
“This could be a £10m year for me,” says James DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> soon after he has ambled 
downstairs wearing nothing but his underpants. At home in Hertfordshire, DeGale 
is so confident that an hour later he’s still just in his skimpy briefs as he 
polishes off a bowl of porridge whipped up by his mum, Diane. The IBF world 
super‑middleweight champion puffs out his bare chest and counts off his 
possible world title fights this year, snapping a finger at each name.

“Badou Jack … Callum Smith … George Groves … that could make me 10 million,” 
DeGale says as his eyes widen. DeGale steps back into the ring on Saturday 
night when he and the WBC world champion, Jack,meet in an intriguing title 
unification fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/james-degale-ibf-badou-jack-wbc->
 in New York. Jack, who is promoted by Floyd Mayweather, beat Groves, DeGale’s 
arch-rival, in 2015 and he represents another serious test. It also marks the 
fourth successive world title fight in north America for DeGale, who last 
fought at home, in England, more than two years ago.

He became world champion in May 2015, when he defeated the accomplished 
American Andre Dirrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/23/james-degale-ibf-title-andre-dirrell>
 in Boston. DeGale then defended his title in Quebec,defeating the former world 
champion Lucian Bute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/james-degale-ibf-title-lucien-bute>
 in his own backyard. His most recent title bout was another clear victory
against the mediocre Rogelio Medina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/james-degale-beats-rogelio-medina-retain-ibf-super-middleweight-title-on-points>
 in Washington. Jack, a tough Gambian who grew up in Sweden but now fights out 
of Mayweather’s camp in Las Vegas, is much more dangerous. If DeGale wins, as 
he should, his credibility will be as secure as his bank balance.

I've never been in the ring with anyone better than me yet
James DeGale 
“Even my haters and doubters have to give me respect now,” DeGale says. “I’ve 
been on the road a long time and this next fight is another battle. It makes me 
think of Dirrell. I had the fear going into that fight. It was a genuine 50-50 
and I knew if I wasn’t on my game I was going to get beat. He was a confident 
American and him and his brothers were talking trash. So I had that fear 
factor. I didn’t have it the last two fights. I knew I was the champ. I knew I 
was better than them. But against Dirrell I was the most edgy I’d ever felt. 
Same with this fight.”

DeGale fought beautifully against Dirrell, knocking him down in the second 
round and then outpointing the American with some style. “I know,” he grins. 
“Dirrell was very skilful. He’d only lost once before me – toCarl Froch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carl-froch> in Nottingham – and he gave 
Froch so many problems. So I was very nervous before that one.”

As befits a man bold enough to complete a long interview wearing so little, 
DeGale is willing to bare the secret fear all fighters carry into the ring. 
“The fear is very real,” he says quietly. “I remember Joe Calzaghe saying: ‘The 
walk to the ring is all an act because I’m shitting myself inside.’ But on the 
outside he looked so confident. It’s exactly the same with me. I’m scared of 
disappointing everyone. I’m scared of failing. I’m scared to lose.

“After the first round it gets better. Against Dirrell I was thinking: ‘Hold 
up, he’s not as fast as me.’ I can hit him with my left hand. It’s a wonderful 
feeling. I’ve never been in the ring with anyone better than me yet. I’ve been 
with guys who are almost as good, and very competitive, but no one in sparring 
or a fight has been better than me. But I need that fear to inspire me.

“Jim McDonnell [his trainer] always worries when I don’t have it. This camp is 
different. Jim knows I’ve got that fear, that edge. He says: ‘I see it in your 
eyes, James.’ Everything is on the line. If I win I become the first British 
super‑middleweight to unify the division abroad. It’s history, so it feels like 
a big fight. New York, Barclays Center, Mayweather promoting it. On Showtime 
and Sky Sports. This is the kind of night I dreamed of as a kid.”

DeGale is 30 now and he can read how fighters really feel on the inside. When 
he looks into Jack’s face does he see a man who believes he can win? “He’s 
definitely confident. Listen, he’s much improved. When he won that world title 
he wasn’t expected to beat Anthony Dirrell [Andre’s brother] but he put in a 
fantastic performance and came out as WBC world champion [in April 2015]. His 
last two fights [beating Groves on a split decision and retaining his title 
after a draw against Bute] show his quality. He looks like a guy who believes 
this is his time.”

Related: James DeGale is the best fighter I've ever signed, says Frank Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/dec/12/james-degale-super-middleweight-title>

Could DeGale lose to Jack? “Only if I’m not switched on. If the James DeGale 
from my last fight, against Medina, turns up, I could lose. But you’re going to 
see the guy that beat Dirrell. As Eddie Hearn says, I’m a buzz fighter. The 
bright lights, big stadium, big occasion inspire me. This is a New York 
unification fight for the most prestigious belts. I’m buzzing.

“Badou Jack ain’t a trash-talker. He’s very respectful. But at the last press 
conference they gave me a tiara which said ‘Diva DeGale’. My mum asked why Diva 
and they told her it was because it took so long to make the fight. But I would 
fight this guy for free. People don’t realise I’m willing to go to the darkest 
places to win.”

DeGale is still a slick stylist – more in thrall to Mayweather than Mike 
Tyson. How has his hero reacted to him during this promotion? “Floyd’s been 
good. Every time I see him he embraces me and speaks to me. When we first met 
and he embraced me and said my name I was taken aback.This is Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/12/floyd-mayweather-victor-ortiz> 
who, for me, is the best ever. Apart from Muhammad Ali he’s No1. He’s a 
modern-day legend, the first billionaire boxer. And now he’s promoting and it’s 
important for him that Jack wins. Jack is his main fighter. Floyd’s put a lot 
into him.”

We start chatting about Mayweather’s wry suggestion that he is more interested 
in DeGale’s sister, Eloise, when the doorbell rings. The boxer saunters over to 
open the door to show off his underpants to the next visitor. “Oh, man,” he 
rushes back to me, chuckling helplessly, “it’s my sister’s boyfriend.”

The boyfriend walks in, looking embarrassed. “It’s just banter, mate,” DeGale 
reassures him. “Floyd’s just selling the fight.”

Should he beat Jack, DeGale is enthused by the idea of fighting Callum Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/08/callum-smith-george-groves-rocky-fielding>
, the unbeaten big-hitter from Liverpool. “I love that fight,” DeGale says. 
“Smith is a homecoming fight – a huge world title fight in England. Eddie Hearn 
told me it’s going to be in May. Callum Smith is one of the toughest fights out 
there. But he’s had lots of hype and hasn’t been tested. He caught [Hadillah] 
Mohoumadi cold [stopping the Frenchman last April]. They’re giving Smith lots 
of credit becauseMohoumadi went 12 rounds with me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/14/james-degale-keeps-title-hadillah-mohoumadi>
 – but that was four years ago. That don’t mean shit.”

Who would win a fight between Smith and Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/george-groves-boxing-world-title-fights>
? “Hard to judge,” DeGale says after a pause. “Smith hasn’t fought the same 
calibre of opponents as Groves. But Smith looks sensational. I guess I’d go 
with Smith. Groves is struggling now.”

Related: James DeGale believes he will win IBF-WBC unifying fight with Badou 
Jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/james-degale-ibf-badou-jack-wbc->

In 2011 DeGale lost his only fight as a professional to Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/22/james-degale-george-groves-boxing>
 in a tight contest. Groves also beat DeGale,who won an Olympic gold medal in 
2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/24/jamesdegale.olympics2008>, 
when they were amateur rivals. “Yeah, but the cream always rises,” DeGale says. 
“When we met five years ago we were both 10-fight novices. There was a lot of 
bragging rights and he came out on top. It hurt me so bad. It took me a long 
while to get my mojo back.I went from being Olympic champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/06/james-degale-donald-mcrae-interview-boxing>
,signing with Frank Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/dec/12/james-degale-super-middleweight-title>
, being touted as the next big thing … and that Groves fight brought me down. 
It was the worst feeling ever.”

How did DeGale feel when, in November 2013, it looked as if Groves was about 
to knock out Carl Froch in a huge world title fight in Manchester? “He knocks 
Carl down and I’m thinking: ‘Oh my God, what’s going on here … it’s all gone 
wrong.’ I was fighting average American fighters who were just coming over for 
a pay day.Groves should have won that fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/24/carl-froch-retains-titles-george-groves>
 but he lost on a controversial stoppage. George was still on top then.

“My break was when I signed with Hearn. I was on the Froch-Groves rematch 
undercard in front of 80,000 at Wembley. I boxed brilliantlyagainst an unbeaten 
American, Brandon Gonzales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/31/james-degale-brandon-gonzales-boxing>
, and knocked him out. I became Froch’s mandatory challenger and it was all 
downhill for Groves. He got knocked out by Froch, who retired. I won the title 
against Dirrell. Groves got another chance against Jack and blew it. He’s got 
his fourth world title chance coming up soon against [Fedor] Chudinov. If he 
can’t win that he’s in trouble.”

DeGale, surely, wants Groves to win so that they can stage their rematch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/george-groves-world-title-james-degale-boxing>
 later this year? “Of course. I’d love that third big-money fight of the year 
for me.”

Boxing is also scarred by devastation, and even death. DeGale looks sombre 
when remembering the death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/01/mike-towells-partner-and-promoter-pay-tribute-to-boxer-following-his-death-video-report>
 of Mike Towell and the coma sufferedby Nick Blackwell last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/gary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr>
. “Of course, it shakes you. It was terrible. There were also bad injures in 
America. EvenGroves’ last opponent [Eduard Gutknecht] was in hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/eduard-gutknecht-undergoes-surgery-after-george-groves-fight>
 a long time. But look at Nick Blackwell. He recovered and then, unbelievably, 
he had a sparring session.Another [induced] coma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/boxing-nick-blackwell-regain-consciousness-coma>
. I couldn’t understand it. You can only say boxing is an addiction.”

Does DeGale also feel like a boxing junkie? “If I’m in camp for a tough fight 
like this one I moan and tell my mum I can’t wait to retire. But I will miss 
the training, and getting respect and everyone knowing me. I fight and have a 
week off and I want to go back to the gym. Maybe I’m also addicted.”

DeGale smiles sadly. “I ain’t met a boxer who don’t have issues, who ain’t a 
bit bipolar, especially in camp, when you’re up and down. But I’ve been 
fighting since I was 10. Twenty years. Can you believe it, Mum?”

Diane DeGale looks at me. “He loves it,” she says of his passion for boxing. 
“Once he gives it up he’ll understand how much he misses the focus, the 
discipline …”

DeGale stands up. He begins to shadow-box, as if in Brooklyn rather than 
Bricket Wood. He keeps talking while he fights an imaginary Badou Jack. “I get 
asked if boxing is in danger from UFC? No way. Boxing is a science, and an art. 
UFC will never take over from boxing. It’s bit like WWE – only barbaric. Boxing 
is different.Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> is a classy art.”

The boxing artist in his classy underpants grins and throws a few more jabs 
and uppercuts. “Nothing beats a great fight in a boxing ring. I think we’re 
going to see one with me and Badou Jack. It’s going to be a career-best 
performance – at least until I come home and fight Smith and Groves. It’s going 
to be some year. I promise you.”
 James DeGale: shadowboxing. Photograph: John Walton/PA Archive/PA Images  