
The Lost City of Z, the latest from writer/director James Gray (The Immigrant, 
Two Lovers), has been announced as the closing film for the 54th New York film 
festival. The film, starring Charlie Hunnam,Sienna Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sienna-miller> and Robert Pattinson, will be 
making its world premiere at the event.

Based on the journalist David Grann’s non-fiction book of the same name, The 
Lost City of Z centers on Lt Col Percy Fawcett (Hunnam), a British military man 
who embarks on a decades-long search for a lost city deep in the Amazon during 
the 1920s.

Mike Mills' 20th Century Women to world premiere at New York film fest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/27/mike-mills-20th-century-women-premiere-new-york-film-festival>
Fawcett is said to have been one of George Lucas’s inspirations for Indiana 
Jones and was also a friend of the authors H Rider Haggard and Arthur Conan 
Doyle; the latter’s The Lost World was inspired by the explorer.

The mystery of what happened to the adventurer remains one of the 20th 
century’s enduring puzzles: 13 expeditions (one as recently as 1996) have been 
sent to uncover Fawcett’s fate.

In a statement, the festival said the film “represents a form of epic 
storytelling that has all but vanished from the landscape of modern cinema, and 
a rare level of artistry”.

Gray’s previous film, The Immigrant, starring Marion Cotillard, played at the 
51st edition of the festival, in 2013, following its world premiere at Cannes.

Bratt Pitt was first attached to play Fawcett in Gray’s film. He was then 
replaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/05/beneditch-cumberbatch-lost-city-z>
 by Benedict Cumberbatch, before the role eventually landed with Hunnam, who 
plays the titular character in Guy Ritchie’s upcoming blockbuster King Arthur: 
Legend of the Sword.

As previously announced, The 13th, Ava DuVernay’s documentary on race and 
prison, willopen the event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
, while 20th Century Women, the new film fromBeginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/21/beginners-review> writer-director 
Mike Mills, will haveits world premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/27/mike-mills-20th-century-women-premiere-new-york-film-festival>
 as the centerpiece screening.
 