
No fighter was ever able to beat Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> Jr in the ring but James 
DeGale can do the next best thing when he faces Badou Jack in a super 
middleweight title unification fight on Saturday night in Brooklyn.

DeGale, the 30-year-old from London who holds the IBF championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/23/james-degale-ibf-title-andre-dirrell>
 at 168lbs, is expected to beat Jack, the WBC belt-holder, in one of the best 
fights that can be made in the division today.

Related: Floyd Mayweather offers new terms to fight UFC star Conor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/floyd-mayweather-conor-mcgregor-fight-ufc>

A victory in the main event of a stacked card at the Barclays Center would not 
only help DeGale consolidate power at super‑middleweight and build anticipation 
for a blockbuster outdoor homecoming fight back home in the spring but it could 
dethrone the lone world champion in Mayweather’s nascent promotional stable.

Mayweather, who retired  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/floyd-mayweather-finishes-up-unbeaten-after-one-sided-victory-over-andre-berto>
more than 16 months ago, was back in the headlines this week when he 
resurrected talk of a three fight showdown with the UFC superstar Conor 
McGregor, one that would generate stupefying amounts of revenue but ultimately 
carry no greater significance than the celebrity fight Breezy v Soulja Boy.

However, as he spoke on Thursday behind designer sunglasses during the press 
conference at the Highline Ballroom in Manhattan’s Chelsea neighbourhood, 
Mayweather’s promotional hat appeared snugly fit. “Am I coming back? Absolutely 
not,” he said. “I want to live through these fighters.”

DeGale could deliver a setback to those plans on Saturday should he prevail, 
leaving the Mayweather Promotions stable of a little more than a dozen fighters 
without a world champion for the first time since Ishe Smith captured a light 
middleweight strap to win the company’s maiden title in February 2013.

Eddie Hearn, who promotes DeGale, is confident his fighter can pull it off. 
“Badou Jack is a great fighter, an underrated fighter, but this guy here is a 
whole other level,” Hearn said. “Styles make fights but there isn’t really a 
style to beatJames DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale>. He 
adapts to anything.”

Related: Manny Pacquiao in Australia would be a blow to sport's push against 
homophobia | James Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/manny-pacquiao-in-australia-would-be-a-blow-to-sports-push-against-homophobia>

Should the 30-year-old southpaw known as Chunky get through next Saturday’s 
challenge and emerge as the No1 name in the super-middleweight division, there 
will be no shortage of options. That could include a showdown with Andre Ward, 
the longtime 168lb champion who in November won the unified light-heavyweight 
title from Sergey Kovalev by a razor-thin decision.

Hearn said a more likely scenario is an outdoor stadium fight against 
stablemate Callum Smith, perhaps at the Emirates or Anfield. Saturday’s fight 
will mark DeGale’s fourth straight on foreign soil, a run he started when he 
outpointed Andre Dirrell in Boston to capture the IBF super-middleweight title, 
making him the first British fighter to win both an Olympic gold medal and a 
world championship. That was followed by decisivepoints wins over Lucian Bute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/james-degale-ibf-title-lucien-bute>
 in Quebec andRogelio Medina in Washington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/james-degale-beats-rogelio-medina-retain-ibf-super-middleweight-title-on-points>
.

DeGale, who arrived in New York on Monday after a “wicked” camp in London, 
kept his remarks brief at the event on Thursday, which ended with the 
traditional stare-down between the fighters. “Believe it or not, I don’t have 
much to say for once. Don’t be surprised when you see a good fight on Saturday 
night.”
 