
James DeGale will sign with Matchroom Boxing on Thursday, shortening the odds 
of a rematch with his long-time rival George Groves. That could be in a world 
title fight if Grovesbeats the WBA and IBF champion Carl Froch at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/15/boxing-george-groves> Stadium on 
31 May. DeGale will fight on the undercard.

Eddie Hearn announced on Wednesday morning "a major new signing" would be 
unveiled in London on Thursday. Within hours, DeGale's promoter, Mick Hennessy, 
confirmed the fighter had terminated their agreement. "We are extremely 
surprised and disappointed," Hennessy said. "The agreement had several years to 
run and we had put him into an excellent position on the world 
super-middleweight stage. Unfortunately the company has been given no 
alternative but to put the matter into the hands of its lawyers and we are 
currently considering our legal options against DeGale.

"We are also extremely concerned about the possible involvement of any other 
parties in DeGale's decision to terminate our contract and if necessary we will 
take the appropriate legal action against any other promoter, broadcaster or 
sanctioning body that is found to have been involved in this decision."

DeGale was a member of Dale Youth ABC boxing club alongside Groves – who is 
self-managed but who could sign a long-term promotional deal with Matchroom – 
and lost to him in a close contestover 12 rounds for the British and 
Commonwealth titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/22/james-degale-george-groves-boxing>
 in May 2011 under Frank Warren's Queensberry Promotions banner. Two fights and 
16 months later, hesigned with Hennessy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/18/james-degale-2014-world-title-shot>
. DeGale was unbeaten in six fights for Hennessy, shown live on Channel 5, but 
expressed frustration that his career was not moving more quickly.

Hennessy argued he had brought him to the brink of a world title shot, as he 
had recently been made mandatory challenger for the WBC world belt and was 
named in a final eliminator to become mandatory challenger for the IBF title. 
It is that version of the championship, Hennessy contended, that would have led 
to a domestic super fight against the winner of Groves-Froch.
 