
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> hopes to win over 
his doubters among the British public by beating Andre Dirrell in their IBF 
super-middleweight fight, admitting his path from defeat against George Groves 
to world title contender has been a humbling one.

DeGale and Dirrell meet in Boston on 23 May with the British fighter 
attempting an 11th successive victorysince he was beaten by Groves on points in 
2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/22/james-degale-george-groves-boxing>
. Dirrell, 31, stands in the way of the London fighter and the vacant title and 
the American has lost only one of 25 fights –against Carl Froch in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/18/carl-froch-beats-andre-dirrell>.

DeGale is confident of a win that could endear him to the British public. 
After his first professional fight six years ago the 29-year-old was booed, 
while he also received a hostile reception during his ring entrance for the 
Groves contest.

“I’m more of a pro now. Do you remember my first professional fight? I got 
booed – a bit embarrassing and a bit stupid. It was a little bit mad.. But look 
who has been on top now. Believe it or not, I do get a lot of love on the 
streets,” said DeGale,the 2008 Olympic champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/23/olympics.boxing>.

“I think once I win this fight against Andre Dirrell I will get a lot more 
respect. Andre Dirrell is known to be a good fighter and he’s only lost once, 
against Carl Froch when he should have won. I think after this fight, winning 
over there, is going to make a difference.”

Asked if the process of losing to Groves and rebuilding had been humbling, 
DeGale added: “Humbling, yes, a little bit definitely. It’s all a part of the 
journey, it’s all a part of the story.”

If DeGale prevails in the US he will become the first British fighter to have 
won an Olympic gold medal and a world title. His promoter, Eddie Hearn, said: 
“People ask me about the Groves fight but this is a different person. Not just 
a different fighter but a different person. He was just a kid then, what was 
important to him as well as the boxing was going out and being jack the lad. 
But then you grow up and realise what you want in your life.

“His popularity in the last 12 months has gone through the roof not just 
because of his performances at Wembley and Liverpool but because people have 
got to know him. Now people are seeing his desire and he’s going to smash Andre 
Dirrell from pillar to post and stop him within 10 rounds.”
 