
James Hird’s father Allan says there were no signs his son was on a path to 
ill health despite accusing AFL andEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> administrators of pursuing him as 
a scapegoat.


Allan Hird said AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> officials were 
“thugs” and “bullies” without a “moral compass” for their treatment of his son 
in the aftermath of Essendon’s supplement scandal.


Essendon says club will continue to show support for James Hird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/essendon-says-club-will-continue-to-show-support-for-james-hird>
Hird would not reveal his son’s whereabouts amid reports he is receiving 
treatment at an undisclosed health facility. But he said Hird was recovering 
well after being taken to hospital aftera “major” health scare last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/james-hird-former-essendon-coach-taken-to-hospital-after-major-health-scare>
.

“He’s fine. My daughter’s been keeping me regularly informed,” Hird told 
Melbourne radio station 3AW on Tuesday. “I’m in Brisbane and I’m coming down 
shortly to see him.”

The 43-year-old James Hird <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-hird>, a 
father of four, has kept a low public profile since he left his job as Essendon 
coach in August 2015. His reputation was damaged severely amid investigations 
into the club’s 2012 supplements program that left 34 past and present Bombers 
banned last season.

His wife Tania has requested their family be granted privacy.


Allan Hird said he had no suspicions his son’s health was under a cloud but 
believes he had been let down by people he had trusted. He said leaks to media 
from the Essendon board while James was coach worked against him.

“I had no inkling. [It came] just out of the blue,” he said. “Right from the 
start, I believed Jim trusted people too much. He put too much trust in the 
club doing the right thing. He put too much trust in the AFL. He put too much 
trust in our system of government. If he had his time again, he would have done 
it differently.”

Hird called for a top-level inquiry to look into the supplements scandal where 
people who handled the matter – including former federal government ministers 
and AFL and Essendon officials – would give evidence under oath.


He accused administrators of conspiring to make Hird the scapegoat for the 
ill-fated supplement program, protesting his son’s innocence.

“A ‘conspiracy’ is probably the wrong word in a legal sense, but in the 
general public’s eye, I’d say a conspiracy between the Gillard government, the 
AFL and elements of the Essendon board, plus the Australian Anti-Doping 
Authority to get a result for something to get everyone out of a hole.


“The Gillard government had got itself into a hole ... overblew that crime 
commission report enormously and they needed something and they did that for 
political reasons. Both his employers were gunning for him but there was 
nothing specific he had ever done and there still isn’t.”

The AFL has refused to comment.
 