
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> is no stranger to 
winning in an opponent’s backyard. Now the southpaw known as Chunky is looking 
to play the road warrior once more with his eyes on a triumphant homecoming 
this year.

DeGale, who holds the IBF’s version of the super middleweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> title, is out to unify belts 
against the WBC holder Badou Jack in the main event of a stacked card at 
Brooklyn’s Barclays Center on 14 January.

Related: Sport calendar 2017: your essential guide to the next 12 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/sport-calendar-2017-your-essential-guide-to-the-next-12-months>

The bout will mark DeGale’s fourth successive outing on foreign soil, a run 
that has vaulted him from domestic standout to the pinnacle of the super 
middleweight division. The first came in 2015, when heoutpointed Andre Dirrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/23/james-degale-v-andre-dirrell-ibf-super-middleweight-championship-live>
 in Boston to secure the IBF super middleweight title, making him the first 
British fighter to win both an Olympic gold medal and a world championship. 
That was followed by decisive points wins against Lucian Bute in Quebec and 
Rogelio Medina in Washington DC.

“I actually like boxing away from home,” DeGale said on Wednesday in a 
conference call with reporters. “It takes the pressure off you a little bit. 
Listen, I’m living the American dream. I went to America.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> is fantastic in the States. I got a 
fantastic opportunity from [adviser] Al Haymon. But this one is the big one. 
New York, Barclays Center, unifying the division. You can’t beat it.”

The itinerant 30-year-old said that he believes a title-unifying win against 
Jack – a match that has been in the works for well over a year – will set the 
stage for a massive homecoming fight in England this spring. “That’s the plan, 
to go back home,” he said.

“Touch wood, everything goes to plan, I beat Badou Jack, then I’m going home 
in May and I’m having a big fight at home. Everyone’s calling for the champ to 
come home. That’s next in line.”

But the charismatic Londoner refuses to overlook Jack, the Stockholm native 
and Las Vegas transplant who upset Anthony Dirrell for the WBC super 
middleweight title in 2015 and has since retained it with asplit-decision win 
against George Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/george-groves-loses-third-world-title-fight-this-time-to-badou-jack>
 and a controversial majority draw against Bute. On Wednesday, DeGale offered a 
sober if occasionally backhanded assessment of Jack’s skills.

“He’s pretty basic but he’s good at everything,” said DeGale, whom the 
bookmakers have installed as favourite. “He’s a basic fighter, really, but he’s 
good at everything he does. He ain’t got no special effects, nothing fancy. 
Everything’s just straightforward but very, very good. And in the ring I can 
imagine it to be very hard when you’re standing in front of him, because he’s 
very technical and he’s got a good jab. He works the body well, got a good 
defence.”

Related: Muirfield members face their demons again: is it time to let the 
ladies in? | Marina Hyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/04/muirfield-men-only-vote-the-open-golf-club>

DeGale, who is near the end of a 10-week training camp in preparation for the 
bout, believes his road show has built up anticipation for a homecoming fight.

“I’ve become a bit more exclusive because I ain’t been at home. People can’t 
wait for me to come back home, obviously, with my belts. What I’ve done in 
America over the past year and a half has been really good. I’m proud of 
myself. But I’m looking forward to coming home and boxing in front of my own 
people, because the atmosphere is second to none. You’ve got the best fans in 
the world.”

Should DeGale get through next Saturday’s challenge and emerge as the No1 name 
in the super middleweight division, there were will be no shortage of options. 
That could include, DeGale insisted, a showdown with Andre Ward, the longtime 
168lb champion who in November won the unified light heavyweight title from 
Sergey Kovalev by a razor-thin decision.

“I want the biggest fights, the biggest risks, the biggest money. All the 
titles. That’s what I want,” DeGale said. “I come through this, I’m willing to 
fight anyone, including Andre Ward. The weight is no problem. I want to be 
challenged. I want to be in the fights where I’m the underdog for once.”
 