
The Birmingham-born duo of Lloyd Dyer and Jamie Ward sank their hometown side 
to secure a second successive home win for Burton, 2-0 over Gary Rowett’s 
Blues. Much was made beforehand about Rowett’s return to the club where his 
managerial career started but he endured a miserable night. Albion put five 
points between themselves and the bottom three and sit 13th in the table. It 
was also a third clean sheet in four games for Nigel Clough’s side, who are 
starting to look more resilient. Dyer opened the scoring on 32 minutes. Ward 
was the architect with a sharp turn and run to the edge of the box before 
resisting the urge to shoot and sliding Dyer in for an excellent finish with 
the outside of his foot. Birmingham’s winger Jacques Maghoma, who was booked in 
the first period for a clumsy foul on Lucas Akins, spurned a good chance from a 
25-yard free-kick before clattering into Jackson Irvine but avoiding a second 
booking. In between, Ward had givenBurton breathing space with his second goal 
for the team. This time it was more direct, John Brayford sending the ball over 
the Birmingham defence for Ward to run on to and calmly slot past Adam Legzdins 
in the visiting goal. Birmingham tried to get back into the game but skipper 
Michael Morrison was guilty of putting a free header wide of the post from a 
corner after substitute Che Adams had seen a shot deflected just over the bar.

Chris O’Grady almost made it three, firing a left-foot shot wide of the target 
from the edge of the box after more good work from Ward, who left to a standing 
ovation for his excellent effort.

Although Birmingham worked hard in the closing stages there was to be no 
comeback for Rowett or his promotion-chasing side.

Kodjia and Costa trade penalties as Wolves spoil Steve Bruce’s Aston Villa bow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/aston-villa-wolves-championship-match-report> 