
It was evident from the beginning that the Washington DC establishment had no 
idea what was coming this election year. The Republicans, who had vowed to 
block President Obama at every turn in 2008, were so deep into their own echo 
chamber that they thought their strategy had been a success. The Democrats 
seemed just as blind – that is, blind-sided, by the popularity and strength of 
Bernie Sanders’ campaign. I was a Sanders supporter from the beginning, and I 
have to admit that it was with increasing glee that I watched the collapse of 
(in order of despicability, not downfall) Ted Cruz, Scott Walker, Rick 
Santorum, Chris Christie, Mike Huckabee, Carly Fiorina, Ben Carson and Jeb Bush.

But it was with increasing dismay that I watched my favourite newspapers 
overlook Sanders, and even demean him. There was a fleeting moment when I 
thought Sanders might win, or at least be the vice-presidential choice. But as 
Clinton and Sanders continued to spar and debate, I saw something positive 
happening – he was easing her to the left, introducing her to the possibility 
of getting rid of Wall Street deregulation, of theTrans-Pacific Trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/tpp-or-not-tpp-whats-the-trans-pacific-partnership-and-should-we-support-it>
 agreement, of the lethal deregulation of guns, or at least, weapons in the 
hands of children.

I thought the important issues for 2016 were climate change, racist profiling 
and police killings, guns, infrastructure funding, the supreme court, chaos in 
the Middle East and migrants in Europe, Putin the Unpredictable and shifting 
the US away from its embrace of war as the answer to everything. Or not war, in 
fact, but runaway military spending.

I did not expect the election to be about women’s issues – stupid me. But then 
along came The Donald. Trump is hiding a lot of embarrassing allegations – of 
unpaid workers and contractors, avoided taxes, unreconciled grudges, 
uncontrolled impulse behaviour, sexual bullying, and so these had to be the 
issues for the Democrats; and the issues for the Trump supporters were whatever 
Clinton must be hiding, must have been hiding, could be hiding in order to 
cover up her criminal past.

Clinton doesn’t have a criminal past. But now the election is over, it is 
evident that she does have a past, and that her past, whatever it is, was 
unbearable to the right, because the right has been smearing her for 25 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1013fe3b3ff147748de89408b8d030e4058d81dd%2F0_305_2292_1375%2F2292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Smiley%3A%20'I%20did%20not%20expect%20the%20US%20election%20to%20be%20about%20women%E2%80%99s%20issues%20%E2%80%93%20stupid%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Smiley%3A%20%27I%20did%20not%20expect%20the%20US%20election%20to%20be%20about%20women%E2%80%99s%20issues%20%E2%80%93%20stupid%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1013fe3b3ff147748de89408b8d030e4058d81dd%2F0_305_2292_1375%2F2292.jpg>
 Smooth and successful… former president Bill Clinton in 2006. Photograph: 
Chris Wattie/Reuters 
Bill Clinton was not my favourite president, but I understood where he was 
coming from. He was smooth and he was successful, and he decided when he was in 
the White House not exactly to edge rightward, but to accommodate and 
manipulate. He enraged the Reagan Remnants anyway, gave them practice in 
snapping at his ankles, trying to bring him down. When George W Bush entered 
the White House, what had the Democrats learned? To accommodate (evidence, Al 
Gore conceding the 2000 election), though not to manipulate.

In the meantime, the thin end of the wedge was deeply inserted – the rightwing 
wedge of the axe that is labelled “money and power”. In Bush’s case, power was 
to be exercised over Saddam Hussein (thereby threatening anyone else who might 
shake a fist at the US) and money was to be made in doing so. That was 
practice, too – practice for Americans to feel both heroic and slighted, 
because war is hell and those who suffer get nothing and those who profit keep 
everything, practice for the people to become crazed with “patriotic” beliefs 
about who should support whom, who was in charge, who caused the catastrophe, 
and who had to pay.

Sixteen years of practice, and then along came President Obama, younger than 
Clinton or Bush by 15 years or so, smart, thoughtful and naive. Having honed 
their weapons during the Clinton administration, the rightwing rattled them 
constantly during the Obama administration – shut down, don’t pay, don’t let 
him do anything, shrink state department funding, then blame Benghazi on 
Hillary Clinton, dive deep into the country’s history of racist violence and 
drag it to the surface. The more successful Obama has been, the more violent 
the language; the cooler he is, the more determined the resistance; the more 
virtuous he is, the hotter the conspiracy theories. Thank you, Rupert Murdoch 
and Roger Ailes.

And what is Trump in it for? Maybe for the money, but clearly for the vanity. 
This is a man who evidently does not think for one moment about anything other 
than his own status. He will say anything, do anything, threaten anyone just to 
feel that he has won – not to feel that he is a better person, but to feel that 
he is a more important person. On the day of the election, Trump said that if 
he didn’t win, all the money and effort he spent running would have turned out 
to be a waste of time. He means his, not ours. Trump was the shallowest 
presidential candidate in the history of the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048d6072eae86aa5eaefc9ec6a9823945fec4d89%2F0_775_2470_1481%2F2470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Smiley%3A%20'I%20did%20not%20expect%20the%20US%20election%20to%20be%20about%20women%E2%80%99s%20issues%20%E2%80%93%20stupid%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Smiley%3A%20%27I%20did%20not%20expect%20the%20US%20election%20to%20be%20about%20women%E2%80%99s%20issues%20%E2%80%93%20stupid%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fjane-smiley-us-election-womens-issues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048d6072eae86aa5eaefc9ec6a9823945fec4d89%2F0_775_2470_1481%2F2470.jpg>
 Smart, thoughtful and naive … President Barack Obama and his wife Michelle 
dance at an inauguration ball in January 2009. Photograph: Stan Honda/AFP/Getty 
Images 
But we have what we have. The rightwing has been weaponised and fired up until 
they just can’t take it any more. Once FBI director James Comey stuck his nose 
into the process, all hope of a peaceful outcome was lost, even though a few 
days later, he pulled his nose (surely now out of joint) out again. Trump has 
not and will not prevent or condemn violence on the part of his supporters – he 
has empowered them all along. As the winner, he will sit by while they wreak 
their revenge.

I am reminded of the election of Abraham Lincoln, the secession of South 
Carolina, the feeling that the southerners had of reaching the breaking point. 
But the US wasn’t the power then that it is now – it was a partially settled 
landscape where the Native American population could fool themselves into 
thinking that they had a chance. Are democracies doomed to fail? It would 
appear that they are, but only after they become imperialist war machines, 
because once a country starts trying to rule the world, or at least trying to 
tell the world what to do, that country starts making moral compromises for the 
sake of control. At first, these compromises seem small and justified (taking 
in Nazi scientists because otherwise they might go to the Russians); then they 
come to seem natural, automatic (embracing Saddam Hussein, then going after 
him).

Here we are now, in the midst of international chaos. Because a supremely vain 
and selfish man decided to rebrand his hollow and rotten commercial 
enterprises, the US has dived into a wreck of its own making. Like all 
devolutions, this one has been a long time coming – let’s say since Nixon – and 
every so often we thought we could fix it. But the hillside got steeper, the 
drivers got stupider, and the acceleration toward the bottom got uncontrollable.
 