
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is likely to face 
international criticism at a whaling summit this week for killing whales in the 
Southern Ocean in defiance of a court ruling.

Japanese fleets killed more than 300 minke whales 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/03/160325-Japan-whaling-minke-whales-Antarctica/>
, many of them pregnant, when they resumed so-called scientific whaling in 
2015-16 after a hiatus the year before because theinternational court of 
justice decided the hunts were not scientific and should cease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
.

Pro-conservation countries at the International Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Commission’s (IWC) biennial 
conference, which opens in Slovenia on Thursday, will step up pressure on 
Japan. The meeting comes during the 30th anniversary of the commission’s 
whaling ban, which is estimated to have saved more than 100,000 whales despite 
Japan, Norway and Iceland killing whales via loopholes.

Australia has put forward a resolution 
<http://uk.whales.org/sites/default/files/iwc6611_dr_on_improving_the_review_process_for_whaling_under_special_permit.pdf>
 to the conference that would require Japan to get approval from the IWC for 
its “scientific” quotas. Countries may also formally rebuke Japan for flouting 
the court ruling.

“Japan’s unilateral resumption of its so-called ‘scientific’ hunt in the 
Southern Ocean last year is a slap in the face not just for the International 
Whaling Commission but also for the rule of law, as the international court of 
justice clearly ruled Japan’s previous Antarctic ‘research’ programme to be 
illegal,” said Kitty Block, vice-president of the Humane Society International.


But Japan will fire back with its own proposal 
<http://uk.whales.org/sites/default/files/iwc6616_discussion_paper_on_ways_forward_on_stcw.pdf>
 to allow small-scale hunting of whales in its territorial waters, a plan which 
it has doggedly pushed for decades despite beingdefeated 17 times at previous 
IWC meetings 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmars.2016.00121/full>. 
Japanese officials argue such “coastal whaling” could be done without harming 
whale stocks.

Ghana, Ivory Coast and Guinea have put forward a separate draft resolution 
calling for whale meat to address food shortages in developing countries, a 
move which would help Japan, which has stores of frozen whale meat. The sale of 
whale meat internationally is banned, with a few exceptions. But earlier this 
week a UK-based wildlife charity, Whale and Dolphin Conservation,revealed that 
a Japanese website had been illegally selling whale meat overseas 
<http://us.whales.org/news/2016/10/illegal-sale-of-japanese-whale-meat-exposed-by-wdc-on-eve-of-international-whaling-0>
.

A plan to create a whale sanctuary is also on the agenda of the whaling 
conference, though it requires three-quarters of countries voting to support it.
Japan has previously led opposition to the sanctuary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/16/japan-opposes-marine-sanctuary-whales-international-whaling-commission>
 and is expected to be successful at doing so again at the meeting, which runs 
until 28 October.

The UK government is strongly opposed to whaling and the so-called scientific 
whaling that Japan undertakes, but is not opposed to the exemptions granted for 
indigenous people for subsistence.

A spokeswoman for the environment department said: “The UK has a strong track 
record in global wildlife conservation and we fully support the existing ban on 
commercial whaling. We will continue to champion the protection and welfare of 
whales and other cetaceans, both here and overseas.”

 