
Japan’s prime minister Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> has unveiled a new 
multi-trillion yen programme of higher spending on welfare and infrastructure 
in the latest attempt to steer the country’s struggling economy away from 
deflation.

Tokyo announced a package of largely unspecified tax and spending measures  
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-02/yen-surges-to-three-week-high-as-japan-stimulus-underwhelms>
 designed to boost activity at a time when exports have been hit by the rising 
yen and Brexit has dented business confidence.

Abe said: “We compiled today a strong economic package draft aimed at carrying 
out investment for the future.

“With this package, we’ll proceed to not just stimulate demand but also 
achieve sustainable economic growth led by private demand.”

But the package has failed to impress financial markets, which said the 
additional boost to demand would be much smaller than the 28tn yen (£207bn) 
announced by Abe.

Analysts said the additional government spending would be 6tn yen (£44bn), 
only three-quarters of which would be spent in the current fiscal year.

Yields on Japanese bonds rose after Abe announced details of his fiscal plan 
because investors were fearful that it marked a change of policy in Tokyo.

The Bank of Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bank-of-japan> has 
been using aggressive monetary policy – including negative interest rates and 
large tranches of quantitative easing – as the main weapon in its fight against 
deflation, but Abe’s fiscal package was seen as a sign that monetary policy has 
lost its potency.

The measures include 2.5tn yen for welfare, including help for poor pensioners 
and childcare subsidies, 1.7tn yen on infrastructure and 0.6tn yen for small 
and medium sized companies adversely affected by the UK’s decision to leave the 
EU.

The Bank of Japan surprised financial markets last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/bank-of-japan-blames-brexit-as-it-unleashes-more-monetary-stimulus>
 when it failed to buy more bonds under its QE programme and added to 
nervousness by saying it would re-evaluate policy in September.



Governor Haruhiko Kuroda declined to comment on the upward move in yields (the 
interest rate) on Japanese government bonds, JGBs, but said the planned review 
would not lead the Bank ofJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> to 
weaken its stimulus.

“I don’t think that would happen,” Kuroda told reporters, when asked whether 
the promised “comprehensive review” might lead to reduced stimulus.

Abe announced a three-arrow strategy in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> designed to reinvigorate Japan’s 
economy after a prolonged period of slow growth and sporadic deflation during 
the previous two decades. Monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural reform 
were intended to work alongside each other, but the Bank of Japan has carried 
most of the burden of boosting growth over the past four years.
 