
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has confirmed that more than 
300 whales, including 200 pregnant females, were slaughtered in the country’s 
latest whaling mission in the Southern Ocean.

The kill was confirmed by Japan’s Institute of Cetacean Research as its ships 
returned from their “scientific” expedition in the Antarctic region on Thursday.

Four ships were sent to the Antarctic region over a period of 115 days from 1 
December last year and killed 333 minke whales.

 Japan’s actions are in defiance of international criticism and despite a 2014 
UN legal decision that ruled so-called scientific whaling activity in the 
Southern Ocean was a front for commercial hunts.

Darren Kindleysides, the director of the Australian Marine Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society, said the 
2014/15 summer was the first time in 70 years Japan had stopped its whaling 
program – but the break was short-lived.

Japan confirms whales killed during 'scientific' expedition to Antarctica
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/24/japan-confirms-whales-killed-during-scientific-expedition-to-antarctica>
He said Australia’s leading international experts had examined Japan’s new 
so-called scientific research program this year and found it was also a guise 
for killing whales and a breach of international law.

“That puts the onus on the Australian government to make sure this is the 
first and the last season of Japan’s new so-called scientific program,” he said.

The Australian government in December described Japan’s decision to resume 
whaling over the summer as “deeply disappointing” and insisted it raised 
concerns at the highest level of the Japanese government.

It had said it would consider sending a customs patrol vessel to the Southern 
Ocean and explore options for legal action.

But the conservation group Sea Shepherd in February said the Japanese fleet 
had faced little or no scrutiny over the summer and Australia and New Zealand 
seemed unwilling to send a ship to intercept them.

Sea Shepherd Australia’s managing director, Jeff Hansen, said: “Once again 
false promises from the Australian and New Zealand governments have resulted in 
whales being killed illegally in the Australian Whale Sanctuary.

“The majority of Australians wanted the Australian government to send a vessel 
to oppose the slaughter. They did not.”

The Australian Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson said the government had 
turned its back on Japan’s “sickening” illegal activity.

“Not in 40 years has an Australian government done so little to prevent 
whaling on our watch and in our waters,” he said.

The government has repeatedly refused to confirm whether it undertook any 
monitoring missions in the Southern Ocean this summer.

Greg Hunt, the Australian environment minister, said the Australian government 
opposes whaling “clearly, absolutely and categorically”.

No fin whales to be hunted in Iceland this summer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/25/no-fin-whales-to-be-hunted-in-iceland-this-summer>
“It is in my view abhorrent and a throwback to an earlier age,” he said. 
“There is no scientific justification for lethal research.”

Hunt criticised Japan for going ahead with the killings “in spite of a 
resolution by the [International Whaling] commission calling on it not to go 
whaling”.

Tokyo claims it is trying to prove the whale population is large enough to 
sustain a return to commercial hunting but the meat still ends up on dinner 
tables and is served up in school lunches.

Some experts say that Japan’s refusal to give up the Antarctic mission despite 
censure by the international court is largely due to a small group of powerful 
politicians.

• Australian Associated Press and Agence France-Presse contributed to this 
report


 
<http://www.seashepherd.org.au/images/news/2016/news-160324-1-2-Nisshin-Maru-Bloody-Deck-0024190-1000w.jpg>

 