
Hackers have claimed to have disabled the website of the Japanese prime 
minister,Shinzo Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, in protest 
at his country’s decision to resuming itswhaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> programme in the Southern 
ocean, in defiance of international opinion.


A tweet <https://twitter.com/_RektFaggot_/status/674658462857625601/photo/1>, 
purportedly from a member of the loose collective of hacktivists,Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous>, and addressed to Abe’s 
Twitter account <https://twitter.com/AbeShinzo>, said: “Whaling is not cultural 
right! Your website is #TangoDown!”

The tweet was accompanied by a screenshot showing that connections to the site 
were not working. Thewebsite <http://www.s-abe.or.jp> appeared to have returned 
to normal late on Thursday afternoon.
Anonymous (@_RektFaggot_) 
#Anonymous <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Anonymous?src=hash> #OpWhales 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpWhales?src=hash> #OpKillingBay 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpKillingBay?src=hash> .@AbeShinzo 
<https://twitter.com/AbeShinzo> Whaling IS NOT Cultural Right! Your website is 
#TangoDown <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TangoDown?src=hash>! #RektIt 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RektIt?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/cYnDqyt01c 
<https://t.co/cYnDqyt01c>
 <https://twitter.com/_RektFaggot_/status/674658462857625601> December 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/_RektFaggot_/status/674658462857625601> 
The government’s top spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, acknowledged that the site had 
been inaccessible since early in the day.

Another Anonymous Twitter account <https://twitter.com/GroupAnon> said the 
group had not been responsible for the attack on Abe’s site. Instead, the 
action appears to have been taken by a sympathiser, operating under the 
Anonymous umbrella, angered by Japan’s slaughter of whales and dolphins.

Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> has, however, 
claimed responsibility for previous attacks on Japanese websites in protest at 
the country’s whaling programme. The group was also linked to recent hacks 
against five government websites in Iceland, including those of the prime 
minister and the environment ministry, in protest at its whaling activities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjapanese-pms-website-hacked-whaling-protesters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdea177de965ebfea19dc1fd271993b03edb097fb%2F0_0_2698_1618%2F2698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japanese%20PM's%20website%20hacked%20by%20whaling%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjapanese-pms-website-hacked-whaling-protesters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japanese%20PM%27s%20website%20hacked%20by%20whaling%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjapanese-pms-website-hacked-whaling-protesters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdea177de965ebfea19dc1fd271993b03edb097fb%2F0_0_2698_1618%2F2698.jpg>
 Hackers claim to have crashed Shinzo Abe’s official website in protest against 
Japan’s plans to hunt whales. Photograph: Shuji Kajiyama/AP 
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> prompted anger last week when 
its whaling fleet left port for the Antarctic, where it plans to kill hundreds 
of whales over the next few months for what it claims is scientific research.

Japan’s fisheries agency said the fleet would conduct “lethal research”, 
despite aUN court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 last year that the hunts were a cover for commercial whaling and have no 
proven scientific merit. The UN called for the hunts to be stopped immediately.

This week Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news> and New 
Zealand led an international protest against the resumption of the slaughter in 
the Southern ocean that Canberra regards as a whale sanctuary. Japan, however, 
does not recognise the area’s sanctuary status.

Japan likens anti-whaling campaign to attempt to ban kimono
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/27/australia-whaling-campaign-likened-to-ban-japan-kimono>
The New Zealand prime minister, John Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/key-john>, said a “strong” letter of protest 
had been delivered to Japan’s government signed by 33 countries, including the 
US and European Union member states.

In a statement, Key said: “We consider that there is no scientific basis for 
the slaughter of whales and strongly urge the government ofJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> not to allow it to go ahead.”

The Australian foreign minister, Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, said Canberra would 
continue to put pressure on Japan to end the hunts. “We are working with other 
like-minded nations to build international consensus against Japanese whaling,” 
Bishop said in a statement. “We are also exploring options for furtherlegal 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/07/australia-considers-legal-action-against-japans-decision-to-resume-whaling>
.

“The science is clear: all information necessary for management and 
conservation of whales can be obtained through non-lethal methods.”

 The fleet plans to kill 333 minke whales a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/17/campaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight>
 in the Antarctic for the next 12 years. The fisheries agency said its revised 
whaling programme took into account the concerns and recommendations of the 
International Whaling Commission (IWC) and the international court of justice 
in The Hague.

The IWC banned commercial whale slaughter in 1986 but allowed Japan to kill 
just under 1,000 whales a year for scientific research. The meat from the 
expeditions is sold legally in Japanese supermarkets and restaurants.

Joji Morishita, Tokyo’s ambassador to the IWC, insisted Japan had the right to 
resume its pursuit of whales after a year-long suspension.

Morishita said: “We did our best to try to meet the criteria established by 
the international court of justice and we have decided to implement our 
research plan, because we are confident that we completed the scientific 
homework as well as meeting the ICJ judgment requirement.”

Morishita acknowledged that whaling would continue to divide international 
opinion, but said Japan would not back down. “The solution is that we have to 
agree to disagree. However, this does not mean we will take all whales – 
exactly because we’d like to have sustainable whaling. We’d like to have a 
healthy whale population.”
 