
Shinzo Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> will later this 
month become the first Japanese prime minister to visit Pearl Harbor, the scene 
of a devastating attack by Japanese planes 75 years ago that killed more than 
2,400 US servicemen and civilians and triggered America’s entry into the second 
world war.

Abe, who has been considering a visit to the site for more than a year, will 
hold talks withBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
in his home state of Hawaii on 26-27 December, seven months after he became the
first sitting US president to visit Hiroshima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/barack-obama-first-us-president-to-visit-hiroshima-japan>
.

On Monday, Abe said he and Obama would visit Pearl Harbor together to “console 
the souls of the victims”. “I would like to show to the world the resolve that 
horrors of war should never be repeated,” he added.

The White House confirmed the meeting, saying the two leaders’ visit would 
“showcase the power of reconciliation that has turned former adversaries into 
the closest of allies, united by common interests and shared values”.

Abe praised Obama’s Hiroshima address in late May before a cenotaph to the 
140,000 victims of the US nuclear attack on 6 August 1945. Obama metsurvivors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/31/japan-atomic-bomb-survivors-nuclear-weapons-hiroshima-70th-anniversary>
 of the attack andvisited the city’s peace museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/hiroshima-open-horrors-barack-obama-historic-visit-japan>
, but did not offer an apology or comment on the decision to bomb Hiroshima or 
Nagasaki three days later.

Obama’s words remained “etched into Japanese hearts”, Abe said, adding that he 
intended to use their meeting “to send a message to the world that we will 
further strengthen and maintain our alliance towards the future”.

He added: “At the same time, I want to use it as an opportunity to signal the 
value ofJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>-US reconciliation.”

Speculation that Abe would go to Pearl Harbor rose after his wife, Akie, 
visited the site in August and posted on Facebook that she had offered flowers 
and prayers at the USS Arizona memorial.

Abe said he and Obama had taken the decision to visit the site together during 
a meeting on the sidelines of last month’s Apec summit in Lima, Peru.

Japan’s surprise attack on the US Pacific fleet anchored at Pearl Harbor on 
the morning of 7 December 1941 prompted the US entry into the European and 
Pacific theatres of thesecond world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>. By the end of the two-hour 
bombardment, Japanese torpedo planes, bombers and fighters had sunk 20 ships 
and destroyed 164 aircraft.

Abe’s visit will be deeply symbolic. Described by former president Franklin D 
Roosevelt as “a date which will live in infamy”, Pearl Harbor arouses the same 
strong emotions among many Americans as the country’s costlier battles of 
Okinawa and Iwo Jima.

The significance of Pearl Harbour to America and the second world war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/07/pearl-harbour-america-at-war> 
Abe’s gesture is likely to anger fellow conservatives at home who believe 
Japan should stop apologising for its actions during the war. Abe, though 
widely regarded as a nationalist, has adopted a more conciliatory approach. 
Last year, on the 70th anniversary of Japan’s defeat, he expressed“deepest 
remorse” and “sincere condolences” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/shinzo-abe-japan-no-new-apology-second-world-war-anniversary-speech>
 to the country’s wartime victims, but stopped short of issuing a fresh apology.

Some Japanese social media users reacted positively to Abe’s surprise 
announcement on Monday. “I think it’s a good thing,” said @CNBLUE—6569 on 
Twitter. “After seeing President Obama’s visit to Hiroshima, I felt strongly 
that I wanted a Japanese prime minister to visit Pearl Harbor.”

Another Twitter user wrote: “President Obama came to Hiroshima so prime 
minister Abe should go to Pearl Harbor. I think Abe made a really good 
decision.”

The US will mark the Pearl Harbor anniversary on Wednesday with a remembrance 
ceremony and a moment of silence at 7:55am, the time Japanese planes struck 
their first target.
 