
The smell of beef stew wafts from a kitchen as a brigade of volunteers put 
their cooking skills to use on a recent Saturday evening in Tokyo’s commuter 
belt.

In an adjoining room, children chat and make paper cutouts while they await 
the arrival of what, for some, will be their only proper meal of the day.

Kawaguchi children’s cafeteria is one of hundreds to have sprouted up in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> in recent years in response to a 
problem few associate with the world’s third biggest economy: child poverty.

An estimated 3.5 million Japanese children – or one in six of those aged up to 
17 – are from households classed as experiencing relative poverty, defined by 
the OECD as those with incomes at or below half the median national disposable 
income.

Related: Japan's deflationary spiral worsens as 'Abenomics' falters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/japans-deflationary-spiral-worsens-as-abenomics-falters>

Japan’s relative rate of poverty has risen over the past three decades to 
16.3%, while the rate in the US, though higher at 17.3%, has fallen.

Few of the 20 or so children eating dinner in Kawaguchi, a city of just over 
500,000 north of the capital, are living in abject poverty. Several, though, 
come from families who cannot afford to feed them properly, according to the 
cafeteria’s founder, Masashi Sato.

“The global economic turmoil sparked by the Lehman shock in 2008 hit women in 
their 20s and 30s particularly hard,” said Sato, who opened the cafeteria in 
March 2016.

“Those in full-time work were forced to take irregular or part-time jobs with 
low pay and no bonuses or annual pay rises. In some cases, these women have to 
borrow money, sometimes from loan sharks, and then end up working in the 
commercial sex industry to pay off their debts. It’s easy for them to get 
trapped in a negative cycle.”

It’s not right that in a country like Japan there are still children who have 
to go to bed with an empty stomach.

Their plight is a rarely seen consequence of Japan’s struggle to steer its 
economy out of the doldrums after more than two decades of stagnation and 
deflation. Four years after Shinzo Abe became prime minister for a second time, 
campaigners say the rise in poverty is evidence that his grand plan for growth 
– known asAbenomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/japans-deflationary-spiral-worsens-as-abenomics-falters>
 – has failed to deliver for many families.

Japan now has some of the worst wealth inequality and highest rates of child 
poverty in the developed world, according to a Unicef report released in April 
that ranked Japan 34th out of 41 industrialised countries.


Of the 3.5 million children who are eligible for state support, only 200,000 
actually receive any – a low take-up rate that campaigners blame on the stigma 
attached to living on social security.

“The poverty rate that we see today demonstrates just how difficult life has 
become for children in Japan over the last 25 years,” said Yasushi Aoto, 
chairman of the Japan Association of ChildPoverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> and Education Support 
Organisations. “The poverty issue in Japan is completely neglected. We are a 
long way behind countries in the west in the way we tackle it.”
 Hisako Yoshida and her daughter wait for dinner to be served at a children’s 
cafeteria in Kawaguchi. Yoshida has struggled to provide for her three teenage 
children since a cancer diagnosis forced her to quit her job two years ago. 
Photograph: Justin McCurry for the Guardian 
The popularity of children’s cafeterias reflects a wider problem that Japanese 
policy makers are struggling to address. Although the government passed a child 
poverty law in 2013, experts say programmes to help needy children are 
underfunded and held back by bureaucratic inefficiency and political apathy.

“I do not believe that Abe has any interest in child poverty, or poverty in 
general … for the simple reason that it’s not a vote winner,” Aoto said. 
“Politicians only seem to think about the short-term. They’re unable to think 
about the lives of children today and the people they will become in 40 or 50 
years from now.”

More than 300 children’s cafeterias have opened around Japan in the past four 
years, more than half of them in the past 12 months. In 2013, there were just 
21. About half of the cafeterias feed children for free, while others typically 
charge between 100 yen [70 pence] and 300 yen, with parents paying slightly 
more than their children.

The Kawaguchi cafeteria survives on cash donations from local businesses and 
food provided by farmers and some of the families themselves. Of the 50 or so 
children who eat here every month, about a third come from single-parent 
families.


Hisako Yoshida and two of her three children were among those eating dinner at 
the cafeteria. The divorcee started struggling financially after a cancer 
diagnosis two years ago forced her to quit her job at an estate agency.

Yoshida, 43, says most of her monthly benefits go on her children, who are all 
in their early teens. “I don’t mind admitting that I’m poor, but a lot of 
people would never describe themselves that way because of the stigma Japanese 
society attaches to poverty,” she said.

“I’ve got two daughters and a son, and they’re at that age when they have 
growing appetites. I cook at home but I can’t give them much. If we didn’t have 
this place to come to life would be much harder.”

Chieko Kuribayashi, chief director of the non-profit WakuWaku children’s 
cafeteria network in the Toshima area of Tokyo, decided to take action after 
coming across children who were getting by on one small meal a day.

“I even met children in my neighbourhood who hadn’t eaten all day,” 
Kuribayashi said. “Others have about 500 yen (US$4.20) to buy a bento lunchbox, 
and that’s all they have for the whole day.

“The government should be doing far more to alleviate poverty. But at least 
people are now discussing the problem and acknowledging that it exists. This is 
an opportunity to think properly about our children’s futures.”

Fear of being seen as disadvantaged in a society that values the appearance of 
financial security means poverty in Japan is largely hidden from view.

Related: Why have young people in Japan stopped having sex? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/20/young-people-japan-stopped-having-sex>

Struggling families go to extraordinary lengths to ensure their children are 
properly dressed and able to take part in expensive school excursions, but have 
to cut down on food and other essentials to make ends meet. The situation is 
particularly hard for single-parent households, about half of which are living 
below the poverty line.

For single mothers such as Yoshida, whose name has been changed at her 
request, the Kawaguchi cafeteria, though currently open just once a month, 
offers her children a vital lifeline, and a reminder that they are not alone.

“My children have to eat,” she said. “I brought them here for the first time a 
while ago, and they loved it. They’re not at all embarrassed about coming here 
and eating until they’re full. It’s not right that in a country like Japan 
there are still children who have to go to bed with an empty stomach.”
 