
Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, will seek reassurances about the US’s 
commitment to his country’s security when he becomes the first foreign leader 
to meetDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on 
Thursday.


Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> were rattled by comments the 
president-elect made during his campaign, when hehinted at a withdrawal of 
American troops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/an-epochal-change-what-a-trump-presidency-means-for-the-asia-pacific-region>
 from the Asia-Pacific unless the two US allies paid more towards the cost of 
their security.

Officials in Tokyo and Seoul were also disturbed by Trump’s suggestion – which 
he has since denied – that the two countries could end decades of dependence on 
their US nuclear umbrella and develop their own nuclear deterrents.

Either move would redraw the Asia-Pacific security map and usher in a new era 
of instability, according to a recent report by the Asia Foundation. The report 
said the withdrawal of US forces, and the subsequent pressure onJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and South Korea to go nuclear, would 
“trigger massive destabilisation of the regional order”.

Trump transition team in disarray after key adviser 'purged'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
It added: “A precipitous reduction of engagement in Asia would be detrimental 
to the interests of most Asian countries as well as the United States.”

In his congratulatory message last Tuesday, Abe reminded Trump of the 
importance of the Japan-US security alliance to peace and stability in the 
region. His message was more fulsome than most, citing Trump’s “extraordinary 
talents” as a businessman, and adding: “I very much look forward to closely 
cooperating with you to further strengthen the bond of the Japan-US alliance.”

Abe will be looking for evidence of Trump’s commitment to bilateral security 
ties when he meets him in New York on Thursday on his way to theAsia Pacific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> Economic Cooperation (Apec) 
summit in Peru.

“As it will be their first direct meeting, the talks will focus on building a 
relationship of personal trust,” said Yoshihide Suga, Japan’s chief cabinet 
secretary. “Their relationship has got off to a great start. They held 
telephone talks at an extremely early time, shortly after [Trump] was elected.”

In the days since his election victory, Trump has shown signs of shifting away 
from hardline comments made during his campaign, in which he said Tokyo did not 
contribute enough to the security offered by the 47,000 US troops based on 
Japanese soil.

Japan pays nearly 200bn yen (£1.5bn) annually in host-nation support, a sum 
the country’s defence minister, Tomomi Inada, described as “enough”.

In a telephone call last week, Trump told Abe he wanted to strengthen the 
“special partnership” between Japan and the US. He struck a similar tone in a 
brief conversation with theembattled South Korean president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/tens-of-thousands-march-demanding-south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-resign>
, Park Geun-hye, telling her he would retain existing security arrangements, 
which include the presence of 28,500 US troops south of the heavily armed 
border dividing the Korean peninsula.

But Jeffrey Kingston, the director of Asian studies at Temple University in 
Tokyo, said anxiety remained high in Tokyo following Trump’s “decidedly 
unreassuring” comments on security.

Ex-Nato leaders call for extraordinary meeting with Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/ex-nato-leaders-extraordinary-meeting-donald-trump>
“Abe will politely try to explain why the alliance is so important and that 
Trump needs to retreat from some of his assertive rhetoric,” Kingston told 
Reuters.

US state department officials moved quickly to reassure Japan that the 
bilateral relationship would remain at the heart of Washington’s policy towards 
the Asia-Pacific, where Chinese military activity in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> and North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>’s nuclear weapons programme 
have significantly raised tensions.

“My message would be one of reassurance to the Japanese people that that 
relationship is of … core foreign policy interest to the United States,” Mark 
Toner, the department’s spokesman, told reporters when asked how ties might 
change under a Trump administration. “That relationship is going to remain, 
regardless of the administration, a cornerstone for the United States.”

 Japan will have to wait for Trump to take office before it can fully gauge 
how serious he is about maintaining the current security arrangements, 
according to Tetsuya Otsuru, a senior foreign ministry official.

“Trump may take longer than usual to build his administration as he searches 
for people to fill key policy positions,” Otsuru said in a speech in Tokyo. “We 
want to safeguard our alliance with the United States during the transition.”

Abe could receive disappointing news on trade, having invested considerable 
political capital at home with his support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP) free trade pact,now abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
 by the Obama administration.

Many observers believe that Trump’s protectionist, “America first” stance – 
one he is unlikely to revise – has in effect brought the 12-nation trade pact 
to its knees.

Trump and China: fears that deal-making will consign human rights to political 
'roadkill'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/trump-and-china-fears-deal-making-consign-human-rights-to-political-roadkill>
On Monday, Trump’s advisers Peter Navarro and Alexander Gray said in a 
newspaper op-ed piece that he would “never again sacrifice the US economy on 
the altar of foreign policy by entering into bad trade deals like the North 
American Free Trade Agreement, allowing China into the World Trade 
Organisation, and passing the proposed TPP”.

Whatever disagreements they have about trade and security, Trump and Abe will 
find it easier to establish common ground when it comes to dealing withVladimir 
Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

Trump has made no secret of his admiration for the Russian leader, while Abe 
has been pushing for closer ties with Russia in the run-up to Putin’s visit to 
Tokyo next month.

Russia is seeking more Japanese investment in its underdeveloped far east 
region, while Japan is hoping to resolve a long-running dispute over ownership 
of theKuril islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/09/russia-build-southern-kuril-islands-seized-moscow-tokyo-abe>
 – known in Japan as the Northern Territories – four islands that belonged to 
Japan until they were invaded by Soviet forces at the end of the second world 
war.
 