
A small Japanese town kicked off its controversial dolphin hunt on Thursday 
after bad weather delayed the start, according to a local fisheries official, 
while a separate whaling hunt was due to start at the weekend.


But the dolphin-hunt boats returned to Taiji’s port – thrust into the global 
spotlight in the Oscar-winning 2009 documentaryThe Cove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/25/the-cove-dolphin-documentary> – 
having failed to trap any of the mammals.

“Twelve boats set out for the hunt, but they returned with no catch,” a Taiji 
fisheries spokeswoman told AFP.

They will set sail again on Friday if the weather allows, she added.

The six-month season was due to start Tuesday.

In the annual hunt, people from the southwestern town corral hundreds of 
dolphins into a secluded bay and butcher them, turning the water crimson red.

The scene was featured in The Cove <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-cove> 
documentary, drawing unwanted attention to the little coastal community.

Environmental campaigners visit the town every year to watch the gruesome 
event and authorities have boosted their presence to prevent any clashes 
between locals and activists.

Some of the dolphins are sold to aquariums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/24/worlds-top-zoo-organisation-accused-of-links-to-taiji-dolphin-slaughter-in-japan>
.

Dolphin slaughter turns sea red as Japan hunting season returns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/14/dolphin-slaughter-hunting-japan-taiji>
Defenders of the hunt say it is a tradition and point out that the animals are 
not endangered, a position echoed by the Japanese government.

On Wednesday, Japanese police said that they had released US animal rights 
activist Ric O’Barry, who trained dolphins for the TV show Flipper, after he 
was arrested near Taiji for not carrying his passport.

Separately, Japanese fisheries officials have announced they would start an 
annual coastal whaling hunt with plans to catch 51 minke whales over the next 
two months, part of what Tokyo says is research but which has attracted strong 
criticism abroad.

Four ships will operate within a 50km (30-mile) radius off Kushiro in Japan’s 
northernmost Hokkaido island, the fisheries agency said.

Tokyo argues that the programme is permitted under the International 
Convention for the Regulation ofWhaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling>, and is aimed at better 
understanding whale behaviour.

But Japan’s whaling programme – including another hunt in the Southern Ocean – 
has angered Western conservationists and many of its friendly nations, 
including the US.

Japan asked to prove its whaling is for scientific research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/19/japan-asked-to-prove-whaling-for-scientific-research>
In June, Japan’s chief whaling negotiator said ships would return to the 
Antarctic this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/20/japan-plans-unilateral-restart-to-antarctic-whaling-in-2015-says-official>
, despite a call by global regulators to provide more evidence that the hunt 
has a scientific purpose.

Despite international disapproval, Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has hunted whales in the Southern 
Ocean under an exemption in the global whaling moratorium that allows for 
lethal research.

Last year, the highest court of the United Nations, the International Court of 
Justice,ruled that the annual Southern Ocean expedition was a commercial hunt 
masquerading as science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 to skirt the international moratorium.
 