
Japan’s consumer prices have dropped for the fifth month in a row in July 
dealing another blow to prime minister Shinzo Abe’s attempts to fight deflation 
and revive the world’s third-biggest economy.


Figures released on Friday showed a 0.5% drop in July – worse than a 0.4% fall 
in June - and marks the biggest annual fall in consumer prices for more than 
three years.

The disappointing data comes as Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>
 looks to the Federal Reserve chair, Janet Yellen, for signs that the America 
is preparing to increase interest rates amid more upbeat assessments for the US 
economy.

The monthly decline in Japan’s consumer prices was the biggest fall since 
March 2013, a month before the Bank ofJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> (BoJ) began its massive monetary 
easing programme in an attempt to reach Abe’s so far elusive 2% inflation 
target.

Any indication from the Fed that it is preparing to raise rates could push the 
yen down and bring relief to Japanese exporters, whose overseas profits have 
been ravaged by the currency’s recent rise against the greenback and other 
major currencies.

The dollar stayed flat in the mid-100 yen range on Friday morning, having 
strengthened significantly against the Japanese currency after Abe was elected 
in late 2012 on a promiseto rein in the yen and boost export earnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/20/japan-new-prime-minister-rising-hopes-economy>
.

Comments by some Fed policymakers, including its vice chair, Stanley Fischer, 
have raised expectations that Yellen will signal a readiness to raise rates 
gradually in the near future when she addressesa meeting of the world’s central 
banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/jackson-hole-2016-five-big-problems-facing-central-bankers>
 in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, later on Friday.

Some analysts, however, believe Yellen will strike a more cautious note, 
saying only that rate hikes are possible.

“The anticipation is a bit too much. She is one of the more pragmatic and 
balanced speakers,” said Jennifer Vail, head of fixed income research at US 
Bank Wealth Management in Portland, Oregon. “I think she will leave the door 
open for a rate hike sometime this year, but I don’t see the Fed actually 
moving until December.”

The unwillingness among Japanese consumers and businesses to spend the country 
out of stagnation will reinforce criticism that Abe’s three-pronged approach to 
recovery – monetary easing, fiscal stimulus and structural reform – known as 
Abenomics, has failed to lift the economy’s fortunes, despite apromising start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/mar/25/civil-service-reform-abenomics-uk-japan-public-ethos>
.

Japan’s exports suffered their biggest monthly fall for seven years in July, 
and data on consumer spending due out next week are expected to add todisquiet 
over the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/23/-sp-tokyo-sake-bars-japan-snap-election-shinzo-abe>
.

The turmoil unleashed in international financial markets by Britain’s voted to 
leave the European Union in June prompted Abe to unveil a 28 trillion yen 
spending programme to spur growth.

The Brexit vote sparked a surge by the yen, which is seen as a safe haven for 
investors in times ofglobal economic uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/global-economy>. A strong yen, however, 
eats into profits earned overseas by Japanese exporters.

The BoJ is expected to come under pressure to introduce more stimulus measures 
in light of Friday’s figures, after recently deciding to leave its 80 trillion 
yen ($796 bn) annual bond-buying programme - a pillar of Abenomics - unchanged.

Its next two-day policy meeting begins on 21 September.
 