
 The threat posed by North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> after its multiple missile and 
nuclear tests this year is “substantially more serious” than it was in the past 
and demands an “entirely distinct” response, the Japanese prime ministerShinzo 
Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> said on Wednesday.

In an address to the annual United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> general assembly, Abe said 
the world needed to thwart North Korea’s plans and it was time for the UN 
security council to “indicate an unmistakable attitude to this threat”.

Abe said North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> had 
launched a total of 21 ballistic missiles this year and had conducted two 
nuclear tests, the most recent on 9 September.

 “The threat has now reached a dimension altogether different from what has 
transpired until now,” Abe said, adding that it was “substantially more serious 
than before”.

He said Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> would lead security 
council discussions on the issue. “We must respond to this in a manner entirely 
distinct from our responses thus far. We must concentrate our strengths and 
thwart North Korea’s plans,” he said.

North Korea accused of 'maniacal recklessness' after nuclear test triggers 
earthquake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
UN diplomats say discussions are under way on a possible new sanctions 
resolution against North Korea after itslatest nuclear test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
. Analysts and diplomats say much depends on the attitude of China, which is 
its main ally but has been angered by its repeated missile and nuclear tests 
and backed tough UN sanctions on Pyongyang in March. China has repeatedly 
called for a return to international talks to resolve the issue, despite 
scepticism of other world powers.

The Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, told the general assembly on Wednesday that 
countries must remain committed to the denuclearisation of the Korean 
peninsula, while seeking a solution to the North Korean nuclear issue through 
dialogue.

 The United States said Li and Barack Obama agreed in New York on Monday to 
step up cooperation in the UN security council and in law enforcement channels

According to the Wall Street Journal, China and the United States are also 
targeting the finances of Liaoning Hongxiang Industrial, a Chinese conglomerate 
headed by a Communist party cadre that the Obama administration believes has a 
role in assisting North Korea’s nuclear programme.

 China’s foreign ministry said the Liaoning Hongxiang Group was under 
investigation under the provisions of UN resolution 2270, which imposed tighter 
sanctions on North Korea in March.
 