
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is set to resume whaling early 
next year, after a break of more than 12 months, in defiance of an 
international court of justice ruling that it cease the practice.

The Japanese government says it has taken into account the court ruling and 
its “scientific” whaling programme will catch only a third of the minke whales 
it caught under its previous programme – 333 instead of 1,000 – which it halted 
in March last year.

Japan’s international whaling commissioner, Joji Morishita, said in a letter 
that his government had “sincerely taken into account” recommendations of the 
InternationalWhaling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> 
Commission’s scientific committee. He said Japan’s new programme “does not 
require any substantial changes” and confirmed whaling would resume.

However, the announcement has been condemned by environmental groups and the 
Australian and UK governments. A spokesperson for theDepartment for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-environment-food-rural-affairs>
 said: “We are deeply disappointed with Japan’s decision to restart whaling in 
the Southern Ocean. This undermines the global ban on commercial whaling which 
the UK strongly supports.”

The International Fund for Animal Welfare 
<http://www.ifaw.org/united-states/our-work/defending-whales> said Japan’s new 
programme would result in the slaughter of nearly 4,000 whales over the next 12 
years in an expanded Antarctic killing zone. The charity is urging supporters 
to write to Foreign Office minister James Duddridge to ask the British 
government to challenge Japan’s plan “and lack of regard for international law”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fjapan-to-resume-whaling-programme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28fb056d2ae922bf8124124a3a3b8e08d37d42ed%2F1055_0_1603_2406%2F1603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20under%20fire%20over%20decision%20to%20resume%20whaling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fjapan-to-resume-whaling-programme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20under%20fire%20over%20decision%20to%20resume%20whaling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fjapan-to-resume-whaling-programme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28fb056d2ae922bf8124124a3a3b8e08d37d42ed%2F1055_0_1603_2406%2F1603.jpg>
 Australian environment minister Greg Hunt says Australia ‘strongly opposes’ 
the new plan. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
Greg Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/greg-hunt>, Australia’s 
environment minister, said Japan cannot unilaterally decide to start whaling in 
the Antarctic Ocean again against the advice of scientists. The Japanese 
Fisheries Agency has notified the IWC that it will resume whaling in the 
2015-16 season under a revised plan. The commission is reviewing the science 
behind the plan and has raised serious concerns.

“Australia strongly opposes the decision by Japan to resuming whaling in the 
Southern Ocean this summer,” Hunt said on Saturday. “It cannot unilaterally 
decide whether it has adequately addressed the scientific committee’s 
questions.”

Hunt said Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> and foreign 
minister Julie Bishop have also directly told Japan that Australia does not 
support whaling. “[We] will continue to pursue the issue through the IWC and in 
direct discussions with Japan,” he said.

Conservation group Sea Shepherd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/05/sea-shepherd-whale-wars-animal-planet>
, which annually sent boats to disrupt the Japanese whaling fleet, warned any 
return to whaling by Japan would be illegal.

“We would like to remind the Japanese government that the whales of the 
Southern Ocean are protected by international law, by Australian law and by Sea 
Shepherd,” chief executive Alex Cornelissen said.

“As such, any violation of the sanctity of the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary 
or the Australian Whale Sanctuary will be regarded as a criminal act.”

Sea Shepherd’s main ship, the Steve Irwin, is docked in Melbourne, but the 
group did not say whether it would trail the Japanese whalers on any new hunts.

Australia won a case against Japan last year in the international court of 
justice. The court ruled that Japan’s “scientific” whaling programme was not 
scientific at all and ordered Tokyo to recall its fleet.

Japan started its whaling programme in 1987, a year after an international 
moratorium was enacted. It accuses critics of sentimentality and disregarding 
scientific evidence about sustainability. Japan also maintains that most 
species are not endangered and that eating whale is part of its food culture.

The ICJ says Japan has caught some 3,600 minke whales since its current 
programme began in 2005. In April 2013, Japan announced its whaling haul from 
the Southern Ocean was at a record low because of “unforgivable sabotage” by 
activists from the environmental group Sea Shepherd.
 