
Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has condemned North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> after it reportedly test-fired 
a ballistic missile from a submarine on Saturday morning, raising international 
concern over progress in the regime’s ability to launch a nuclear missile.

The missile was fired from waters near the town of Sinpo on North Korea’s east 
coast, where analysts have previously detected efforts by the North to develop 
submarine-launched ballistic missile systems, said an official from South 
Korea’s defence ministry, who did not want to be named, citing office rules. He 
could not immediately confirm how far the missile travelled and where it landed.

South Korea and US agree to deploy THAAD missile defence system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/south-korea-and-us-agree-to-deploy-thaad-missile-defence-system>
South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said in a statement that it presumed the 
missile successfully ejected from the submarine’s launch tube, but failed in 
its early stage of flight. The Yonhap news agency said that the missile likely 
flew only a few kilometres before exploding midair, but the defence ministry 
official could not confirm the report.

Abe said the missile launch had not posed an immediate threat to Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>. “We don’t consider the missile 
launch to be anything that would immediately affect Japan’s national security 
directly,” he told public broadcaster NHK. “We have to cooperate with the 
international community and condemn North Korea.”

The US said it was monitoring the situation in cooperation with its allies in 
the region. “We strongly condemn North Korea’s missile test in violation of UN 
security council resolutions, which explicitly prohibit North Korea’s use of 
ballistic missile technology,” said Gabrielle Price, a state department 
spokeswoman.

“These actions, and North Korea’s continued pursuit of ballistic missile and 
nuclear weapons capabilities, pose a significant threat to the United States, 
our allies, and to the stability of the greater Asia-Pacific,” she added.

The timing of the launch is significant, coming a day after South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> and the US agreed to deploy an 
advanced missile defence system in the South to counter the growing nuclear 
threat from the North.

Saturday’s test-launch may also have been a show of defiance in response to 
the US treasury department’s decision earlier this week to blacklist the North 
Korean leader,Kim Jong-un <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kim-jong-un>, and 
10 other officials for human rights abuses. Pyongyang denounced the move as “a 
declaration of war”.

China is critical of North Korea’s missile and nuclear tests, but condemned 
Washington and Seoul for pushing ahead with the deployment of Terminal 
High-Altitude Area Defence (THAAD), saying it would bring instability to the 
regional security balance and do nothing to halt Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons 
programme.

South Korea’s defence ministry said THAAD could be operational by the end of 
next year, adding that its sole purpose was “to protect alliance military 
forces”, including the 28,500 troops based in South Korea.

“It will be focused solely on North Korean nuclear and missile threats and 
would not be directed towards any third-party nations,” the ministry statement 
said.


North Korea claims successful engine test for ballistic missile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/09/north-korea-claims-successful-engine-test-for-ballistic-missile>
A North Korean ability to launch missiles from submarines would be an alarming 
development for its neighbours, as missiles from submerged vessels are harder 
to detect in advance. While security experts say it is unlikely that North 
Korea possesses an operational submarine capable of firing missiles, they 
acknowledge that the North is making progress on such technology.


A report on 38 North, a website run by the US-Korea Institute at Johns Hopkins 
University in the US, said in May that North Korea’s submarine-launched 
ballistic missile programme is making progress, but it appeared that the first 
ballistic missile submarine and operational missiles are unlikely to become 
operational before 2020.

North Korea already has a considerable arsenal of land-based ballistic 
missiles and is believed to be advancing its efforts to miniaturise nuclear 
warheads mounted on missiles through nuclear and rocket tests.

North Korea last test-fired a submarine-launched ballistic missile in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/09/north-korea-claims-successful-engine-test-for-ballistic-missile>
, calling it a success that strengthened its ability to attack enemies with a 
“dagger of destruction”. South Korean defence officials then said that the 
missile flew about 30 kilometres (19 miles) before exploding in midair.

That was one of a string of military tests that began in January with North 
Korea’s fourth nuclear test and the launch of a long-range rocket the following 
month.

Late last month, Kim boasted of North Korea’s “sure capability” to strike US 
targets in the Pacific after his military carried out anapparently successful 
test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/north-korea-kim-jong-un-missile-strike-us-targets-pacific>
 of its Musudan medium-range missile.
 