
A Japanese cabinet minister and dozens of members of parliament have visited 
the Yasukuni shrine for war dead, seen in China and the two Koreas as a symbol 
of Japan’s past militarism.

 Kyodo news agency said Yasuhisa Shiozaki, minister for health, labour and 
welfare, was among about 80 lawmakers who visited the shrine on Tuesday to mark 
an autumn festival.

China protests at Japanese PM’s latest WW2 shrine tribute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/17/china-protests-japan-shinzo-abe-yasukuni-shrine>
The group visit came a day after Japan’s prime minister Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> sent a ritual offering to the 
shrine, prompting a sharp rejoinder from China and a reminder from Tokyo’s 
close ally Washington of the importance of reconciliation over the past.

Visits by Japanese leaders to Yasukuni have outraged China and South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> because the shrine honours 14 
Japanese leaders convicted by an Allied tribunal as war criminals, along with 
other war dead.

 South Korea expressed “deep concern and disappointment” over the shrine visit 
and offering by Japanese political leaders.

 “[We] urge Japanese politicians to gain trust from neighbouring countries and 
the international community by showing an act of humble introspection and 
sincere self-reflection on the foundation of the correct perception of 
history,” the foreign ministry said in a statement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjapanese-politicians-south-korea-visit-yasukuni-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62805c0c2677fd1af06924756cd1c026b0e69d8%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japanese%20politicians%20upset%20South%20Korea%20with%20visit%20to%20Yasukuni%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjapanese-politicians-south-korea-visit-yasukuni-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japanese%20politicians%20upset%20South%20Korea%20with%20visit%20to%20Yasukuni%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjapanese-politicians-south-korea-visit-yasukuni-shrine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62805c0c2677fd1af06924756cd1c026b0e69d8%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The Yasukuni shrine honours 14 Japanese leaders convicted as war criminals, 
alongside other war dead. Photograph: Toru Hanai/Reuters 
 Abe has visited the shrine in person only once 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/26/japan-shinzo-abe-tension-neighbours-shrine>
, in December 2013, since becoming premier the previous year. Eager to improve 
ties with China and South Korea, strained by territorial and other disputes, he 
has instead opted to send ritual offerings on several occasions.

 There was no sign that defence minister Tomomi Inada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/japanese-opposition-party-elects-first-female-leader>
, who has been accused by China of recklessly misrepresenting wartime history, 
had visited or made an offering at the shrine.

 On the previous customary occasion for high-profile Yasukuni visits, the 15 
August anniversary of Japan’s second world war surrender, the newly appointed 
Inada was visiting troops in Djibouti and unable to go to the shrine.
 