
Japan’s prime minister has responded to the shock of Brexit on the country’s 
already struggling economy by announcing that his government will deliver an 
economic stimulus package worth more than ￥28tn (£200bn).

In the latest attempt to boost growth and steer the world’s third largest 
economy away from deflation,Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe> promised a range of as yet 
unspecified tax and spending measures to lift the economy out of the doldrums.

Abe has admitted that Britain’s decision to leave the EU last month threatens 
to have a negative impact onJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> 
because anxious investors have been buying large quantities of yen in an 
attempt to find a safe haven for their cash.

The rising Japanese currency risks choking off exports, leading to the 
continuation of a period slow growth and weak inflation that stretches back a 
quarter of a century.

Some analysts said the lack of any detail from Abe suggested that the package 
would prove to be less impressive than expected when the details are published 
next week.

Marcel Thieliant of Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said the emergency budget 
would be the biggest in Japan’s history, dwarfing the support provided after 
the Asian financial crisis in 1998, the 2009 recession and the 2011 Tōhoku 
earthquake and tsunami, which killed almost 16,000 people and led to the 
meltdown of the Fukushima nuclear plant.

“The absence of a major crisis at the moment already raises some question 
marks on whether policymakers really will press ahead with such large amounts 
of spending”, Thieliant said. Abe had hinted that the amount of additional 
public spending in the current financial year was going to be relatively small, 
he added.

Abe announced a so-called “three arrow strategy” for Japan – dubbed Abenomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/economics-blog/2016/feb/12/abenomics-shinzo-abe-japan-poor-health-nikkei-slide-terminal>
 – in December 2012, which included action by the Bank of Japan to increase the 
money supply and weaken the yen, tax cuts and public spending to boost growth, 
and structural reform.

Since taking the helm more than three years ago, Japan’s central bank 
governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, has overseen a huge asset-buying plan that now 
stands at an unprecedented ￥80tn annually but has failed to lift inflation to 
the government’s 2% target.

The latest intervention by the prime minister came as financial markets 
speculated that the Bank of Japan was running out of ammunition to stimulate 
growth and might be forced to resort to so-called“helicopter money”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/apr/07/helicopter-money-is-closer-than-you-think>
– turning on the printing presses to pay for tax cuts or higher public 
spending. James Smith, an economist at ING bank, said Japan could be the first 
country to try this radical option.

Kuroda has publicly ruled out helicopter money, but is expected to come up 
with new initiatives for increasing the supply of credit when the Bank of Japan 
announces its latest policy decisions later this week.

 “Friday’s Bank of Japan meeting will surely be a bigger driver for Japan’s 
stock market and currency over the coming weeks, as it has been in the past,” 
Thieliant said. “Today’s announcement reduces the chances of further monetary 
stimulus being introduced this week, but we still think it more likely than 
not.”
 