
Four NRL clubs have publicly declared their interest in luring Jarryd Hayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jarryd-hayne> back to rugby league once his 
Olympic Games commitments are over. However none of them are Parramatta or the 
Sydney Roosters, both of whom were the only two clubs to decline commenting on 
whether they would pursue the code-hopping superstar.

Jarryd Hayne rubbishes reports of 'secret deals' during time at Parramatta Eels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/jarryd-hayne-rubbishes-reports-of-secret-deals-during-time-at-parramatta-eels>
While Hayne has yet to even confirm whether he would return to the 13-man 
game, the Roosters have firmed as favourites for the former Eels No1, 
particularly with the Eels closing in on re-signing Corey Norman. But Gold 
Coast, St George Illawarra and the Wests Tigers made no attempt to hide their 
interest on Tuesday, joining Newcastle in the race for the recently retired San 
Francisco 49er. Coincidentally, all four clubs are currently financially backed 
by the governing body.

Dragons coach Paul McGregor made no bones of their want for the former Eels 
No1. “He’s an exceptional talent. I’ve had a little bit to do with him through 
Fiji and NSW and we’re always after quality players and he is at the top level 
of that,” McGregor told reporters in Wollongong. “If he was on the market we 
would like to be in the mix.”

Wests Tigers boss Justin Pascoe told AAP the club is “always interested in 
talent”, while Gold Coast counterpart Graham Annesley is “open to discussions” 
with Hayne. “AnyNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> club would jump at 
the chance,” Annesley said.

The three clubs voiced their interest in Hayne one day after Knights CEO Matt 
Gidley said he would book a date with Hayne’s manager Wayne Beavis. “We’ll 
definitely meet with his management and have a discussion,” he told the 
Newcastle Herald. “We can and will look at bringing in a marquee player, if we 
feel that’s going to help our squad.”

Melbourne football director Frank Ponissi said they would only be able sign 
Hayne “if we got him on a cheap deal”, and the remaining nine clubs ruled out 
making a bid.

Hayne, who sensationally quit the NFL in an attempt to play rugby sevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/jarryd-hayne-retires-nfl-olympics-sevens-fiji-san-francisco-49ers>
 with Fiji in Rio later this year, has previously said he would only return to 
Parramatta. Eels officials declined to comment on Hayne’s potential return to 
the NRL.
 