
The Warriors spoiled Jarryd Hayne’s NRL return party, defeating Gold Coast 
24-10 in Sunday’s crucialNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clash at 
Robina. In front of a bumper 25,109 crowd keen to catch their first glimpse of 
the Titans’ star recruit, it was Warriors’ playmaker Shaun Johnson who stole 
the show.

Johnson set up two second-half tries to break a 10-all half-time deadlock, as 
the Warriors (24pts) leapfrog the Titans (23) into seventh on the competition 
ladder. Solomone Kata’s intercept try, his second four-pointer of the match – 
and 12th of the season, sealed the match for the visitors.

Cameron Smith seals golden point win as Storm leapfrog Sharks at top of NRL
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/knights-pick-up-unwanted-record-in-latest-nrl-defeat-to-bulldogs>
Hayne showed glimpses of his game-breaking talent, with the multi-million 
dollar recruit coming off the interchange bench to a huge cheer in the 28th 
minute. The Titans’ investment in Hayne paid instant dividends to the club’s 
bank balance, with the attendance easily surpassing this year’s previous best 
home crowd of 21,080 against Brisbane in round five.

It’s the best Titans’ crowd at Robina – where they’ve averaged just under 
12,000 this season – since 27,026 attended a qualifying final against the 
Warriors in 2010. Such was the interest in the Titans’ new man that television 
broadcaster Fox Sports dedicated a channel to subscribers solely to following 
Hayne, including the opening minutes of the match when he was sat on the bench.

Hayne made an impact on his first play as a Titan, nailing Warriors’ backrower 
Bodene Thompson in a crunching ball-and-all tackle when he seemed destined to 
score. The dual Dally M Medallist then outjumped two Warriors players to snare 
a bomb at the other end of the field, his efforts nearly ending in a try for 
his new team.

Early in the second half Hayne drove Warriors’ star Johnson onto his back in a 
big one-on-one tackle, the Kiwi international spilling the ball from the 
impact. But Johnson had the last laugh, first sending Simon Mannering over with 
a clever short pass before then feeding Kata after David Fusitu’a had run 
almost the length of the field following an intercept off that man Hayne.

The ex-San Francisco 49er did finish the game with a try assist, Hayne’s 20m 
grubber resulting in the final try of the match to winger Anthony Don. The 
Warriors host South Sydney next weekend while the Titans will be in Hayne’s old 
stomping grounds of western Sydney to take onWests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> at Campbelltown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fjarryd-hayne-returns-to-nrl-but-titans-fall-to-defeat-against-warriors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64f2031ce9bee547611772b369d35cec0551bfb%2F729_0_2391_1434%2F2391.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jarryd%20Hayne%20returns%20to%20NRL%20but%20Titans%20fall%20to%20defeat%20against%20Warriors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fjarryd-hayne-returns-to-nrl-but-titans-fall-to-defeat-against-warriors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jarryd%20Hayne%20returns%20to%20NRL%20but%20Titans%20fall%20to%20defeat%20against%20Warriors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fjarryd-hayne-returns-to-nrl-but-titans-fall-to-defeat-against-warriors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64f2031ce9bee547611772b369d35cec0551bfb%2F729_0_2391_1434%2F2391.jpg>
 Mitchell Moses led the Tigers brilliantly in attack and was stoic in defence 
during the victory over the Cowboys. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
Later on Sunday, Wests Tigers produced one of the upsets of the season, with 
Mitchell Moses leading the joint venture to a memorable 26-14 win over North 
Queensland at Leichhardt Oval. Minus halfback Luke Brooks against a Cowboys 
side boosted by the return of superstar Johnathan Thurston from a hamstring 
injury, the Tigers were deserved four-tries-to-two winners.

Sauaso Sue crashed over seven minutes from full-time to seemingly give the 
Tigers the win before Ethan Lowe hit back for the visitors. James Tedesco then 
scored one of the individual tries of the season, beating at least six 
defenders on his way to the line in the final minute to push the Tigers into 
the top eight for the first time since early in the season.

The loss tips premiers the Cowboys out of the top four with four rounds to 
play until the finals.


Thurston was a late inclusion for the round-22 clash and while he tried hard 
to spark his side, he was well below his usual sparkling form. In comparision, 
Moses led the Tigers brilliantly in attack and was stoic in defence as the 
Robbie Farah-less Wests claimed their best win of the season to stay in finals 
contention.

The home side opened the scoring in the sixth minute when Kevin Naiqama 
pounced on a Moses kick that was deflected off Cowboys fullback Lachlan Coote. 
A 19th-minute Moses penalty goal put the Tigers further ahead before the 
Cowboys opened their account as Thurston grubbered behind Wests’ defensive line 
for Kane Linnett.

David Nofoaluma put the Tigers ahead again in the 31st minute when he forced 
his way through three Cowboys defenders and another Moses penalty goal two 
minutes from the break gave the home side a six-point buffer at half-time.

For most of the bruising second half, the only points were from penalty goals 
through Moses in the 62nd minute and Thurston in the 67th minute but then the 
Tigers forced a late dropout and after the visitors went short with the 
restart, giving the home side great field position, Sue crashed over.

Lowe kept the Cowboys in the hunt before Tedesco sealed the win. North 
Queensland are now 1-9 at Leichhardt. The Cowboys have won three from 10 away 
from home this year. Thurston is winless from five games at the suburban venue 
and 0-12 at Sydney venues against the Tigers.
 