


Jason Day <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jason-day> has pulled out of the 
Olympics because of fears over the Zika virus, costing golf its No1 player as 
it returns from a century-long absence at the Games.

The sport has lost two of its biggest stars in the past week after Rory 
McIlroy, a four-times major champion, also saidZika will keep him from 
competing in Rio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/22/rory-mcilroy-pulls-out-olympics-golf>
.

Day said his only reason for not going is concern over the transmission of the 
mosquito-borne virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/21/zika-virus-cdc-symptoms-mosquitos-united-states-pregnant-women-microcephaly>
, which has been linked to severe birth defects. The 28-year-old Australian 
said while the risk is slight, it is not one he is willing to take because he 
plans to have more children.

“It is with deep regret I announce that I will not be competing in the 2016 
SummerOlympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> this 
coming August in Rio de Janeiro,” Day said in a statement. “The reason for my 
decision is my concerns about the possible transmission of the Zika virus and 
the potential risks that it may present to my wife’s future pregnancies and to 
future members of our family.”

McIlroy, who was due to represent Ireland in August, issued a statement last 
week announcing that he would make himself unavailable for selection because of 
the virus. He is planning to start a family with his fiancee, Erica Stoll.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjason-day-zika-virus-rio-olympics-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6120ae102eee62a28d28f38a39b818fea958d75b%2F0_167_1986_1191%2F1986.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Day%20pulls%20out%20of%20Rio%20Olympics%20over%20Zika%20virus%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjason-day-zika-virus-rio-olympics-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Day%20pulls%20out%20of%20Rio%20Olympics%20over%20Zika%20virus%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fjason-day-zika-virus-rio-olympics-golf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6120ae102eee62a28d28f38a39b818fea958d75b%2F0_167_1986_1191%2F1986.jpg>
 Rory McIlroy became another high-profile withdrawal. Photograph: Andrew 
Redington/Getty Images 
The world No2, Jordan Spieth, is understood to be considering his position, 
whilethe Masters champion Danny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
 and Rickie Fowler have publicly expressed doubt about their Olympic 
participation.

Day and McIlroy follow in the wake of Adam Scott, Marc Leishman, Vijay Singh, 
Louis Oosthuizen and Charl Schwartzel in pulling out.

Graeme McDowell, who was in line to replace McIlroy, withdrew late last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/graeme-mcdowell-ireland-olympics-golf-rory-mcilroy-zika-virus>
 because his wife is due to have their second child a few weeks after the 
Olympics and he did not want to be out of the country in the lead-up to the 
birth.

Then, several hours after Day’s withdrawal from Australia’s team on Tuesday, 
another member of the Ireland team, Shane Lowry, also announced he was pulling 
out because of the virus.

“I have always placed my family in front of everything else in my life,” Day 
added. “Medical experts have confirmed that while perhaps slight, a decision to 
compete in Rio absolutely comes with health risks to me and to my family.

“My wife Ellie and I have been blessed with two wonderful and healthy children 
and our plan is to have more.

“While it has always been a major goal to compete in the Olympics on behalf of 
my country, playing golf cannot take precedent over the safety of our family.

“I will not place them at risk. I hope all golf and Olympics fans respect and 
understand my position.”

The continuing withdrawals are depriving the competition of its most 
high-profile players and is likely to have an impact on the vote next year 
considering whether to retain golf beyond the Tokyo Games in four years’ time.
 