
Australian welterweight Jeff Horn will fight the legendary Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> in April but his promoter 
Duco Events is now on a mission to ensure the bout takes place on home soil.

Horn has been locked in to face Pacquiao on Sunday, 23 April, Duco confirmed 
on Wednesday. But the venue for the fight is up in the air, with Australia’s 
major cities and even the Middle East and United States under consideration – 
depending on who can come up with the funding.

Related: Former world champion Floyd Mayweather to train Soulja Boy for fight 
with Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/floyd-mayweather-train-soulja-boy-fight-chris-brown>

Suncorp Stadium in Horn’s hometown of Brisbane is the clear preference but 
unless sponsors and the Queensland state government come to the table, it could 
move interstate or overseas.


Duco was unable to provide a figure for the total funding required, but 
meetings with potential backers – among them Queensland premier Annastacia 
Palaszczuk and sports minister Curtis Pitt – will take place over the coming 
weeks.


“The preference for all parties is for the fight to be held in Australia, and 
we are working towards this outcome,” said Duco director Dean Lonergan, who met 
with influential Top Rank boxing supremo Bob Arum this week to broker the deal.


Arum said he wants the fight to take place at an outdoor stadium.


It would be beamed into 159 different countries, including the US, where it 
would be shown in a primetime Saturday night timeslot on free-to-air TV.


“I would expect 3-4000 Filipinos to fly from the Philippines for this fight 
down under,” Arum said. “It will be the biggest fight in Australian history 
but, until the money is secured, we have to keep our options open, including 
looking at the Middle East and USA.”

Horn (16-0-1) is a former schoolteacher who first took up fighting to protect 
himself from bullies. He fought at the 2012 Olympic Games in London and has 
quickly risen through the ranks as a professional, sitting at No2 in the WBO’s 
welterweight rankings.

Pacquiao, 38, is the WBO champion in that division and has a 59-6-2 record, 
while also juggling a career as a senator in the Philippines.


Horn – who is a decade younger – has already been installed as a rank outsider 
by bookmakers but believes he has what it takes to beat Pacquiao. His trainer, 
Glenn Rushton, said it would be a “tragedy” if the fight happened anywhere 
other than Brisbane.

“We really hope the Queensland government and so forth will feel the same 
way,” he said. “It just makes sense, but also for the future. This can 
reinvigorate boxing in Australia.”
 