
A Green peer has called on the police watchdog to investigate claims that a 
secretive Scotland Yard intelligence unit improperly destroyed files it had 
compiled on her.

Jenny Jones has written to the Independent Police Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> asking for an inquiry into what she 
says appears to be “serious misconduct”.

Her call follows claims by a whistleblower who worked for the Metropolitan 
police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> intelligence unit 
tasked with spying on alleged extremists.


Sgt David Williams alleged that the unit – which has been compiling records on 
thousands of political campaigners – destroyed the files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/08/officer-claims-met-police-improperly-destroyed-files-on-green-party-peer>
 to prevent Lady Jones from finding out the scale of the police’s monitoring of 
her political movements.

His claims of what he called a “highly irregular” cover-up were 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/08/officer-claims-met-police-improperly-destroyed-files-on-green-party-peer>
 disclosed by the Guardian in January.

As a London councillor, Jones, a former candidate for the capital’s mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/mar/21/greens-pick-jenny-jones-candidate-london-mayor>
, had been the deputy chair of the official committee that oversaw Scotland 
Yard.

In a letter to the IPCC, lawyers from Bindmans, who represent Jones, have 
complained of alleged misconduct by officers who, according to the 
whistleblower, shredded or deleted police records relating to her.

Why did the police have files on my ‘domestic extremism’ in the first place? | 
Jenny Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/08/police-spy-thought-crime-met-jenny-jones-deomestic-extremist>
She said: “This appears to be an example of gross misconduct by the police 
officers who not only monitored an elected politician who was part of a body 
overseeing the police, but then allegedly tried to destroy the evidence.”

She said an IPCC inquiry was needed as she believed the Met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> failed to investigate the 
whistleblower’s allegations properly.


Last year, Williams outlined his claims in a four-page letter to the peer, 
saying he had not become a police officer to monitor politicians.


In his letter, he claimed that in June 2014, he witnessed three officers 
shredding more than 30 reports relating to Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/08/officer-claims-met-police-improperly-destroyed-files-on-green-party-peer>
, and two other officers deleting records from a police database.


Soon afterwards, he reported his concerns to the Met department responsible 
for looking at alleged misconduct. It concluded there had been no wrongdoing.


The Met has said there was evidence that documents had been destroyed on the 
day alleged by Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/police-refuse-release-report-destroyed-files-green-party-peer-jenny-jones>
 but the force could not establish if they related to Jones.

According to the force, documents were destroyed as a part of a legitimate 
programme to improve record-keeping. The Met has said the unit had been told to 
regularly remove data that was “either too old, inappropriate or irrelevant” 
following criticisms that too much information was being held.

Police anti-extremism unit monitoring senior Green party figures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/police-anti-extremism-unit-monitoring-green-party-caroline-lucas-sian-berry>
The unit monitors protesters as it says some of them may commit crime to 
further their cause or have already done so. But it has beencriticised for 
keeping files on protesters, such as Jones, who have no criminal record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/protester-91-goes-to-european-court-over-secret-police-files>
. The unit hasbeen revealed to have monitored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/police-anti-extremism-unit-monitoring-green-party-caroline-lucas-sian-berry>
 leading members of theGreen party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party>, including the MP Caroline 
Lucas <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolinelucas>.

Meanwhile, it has emerged that the judge-led public inquiry into the 
undercover infiltration of political groups since 1968 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/21/police-request-secrecy-undercover-officers-inquiry>
 has been examining the alleged destruction of records about Jones.

The inquiry – led by Lord Justice Pitchford <https://www.ucpi.org.uk/> – has 
formally asked the Met to submit evidence about the alleged destruction.

The existence of the request was disclosed in an official statement 
<https://www.ucpi.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/160729-WS-of-Neil-Hutchison-R98-and-R12-pt-1-of-2.pdf>
 sent to the inquiry by Scotland Yard officer DS Neil Hutchison, who added that 
if the allegation was substantiated, “this may lead to criminal or misconduct 
proceedings”.

The public inquiry <https://www.ucpi.org.uk/> was set up in 2014 by Theresa May
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> when she was home secretary 
followingrevelations of misconduct by the undercover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/21/police-request-secrecy-undercover-officers-inquiry>
 officers sent to infiltrate political groups. It is expected to start its 
substantive hearings next year.


• If you would like to pass on any confidential information, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/05/guardian-launches-securedrop-whistleblowers-documents>
).
 