
Hostilities resumed in the battle for the soul of the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party at its conference in 
Liverpool on Sunday as Jeremy Corbyn’s critics insisted they would not be 
silenced, just a day after he won a convincing victory over leadership 
challenger, Owen Smith.

Corbyn has repeatedly called for unity but has infuriated some MPs by refusing 
to sign up to proposals for elections to the shadow cabinet, which some believe 
would give them a mandate to return to the frontline.

Corbyn wants to postpone discussion of the plans until a “democracy day” in 
November, which will also consider how to open up policymaking to members. He 
also refused to rule out deselection for dissenting MPs, telling the BBC’s 
Andrew Marr that the “vast majority” of MPs had nothing to fear.

Centrist MPs packed into a rally for the group Progress near the conference 
centre and, to cheers, told the room that they would protect MPs and 
councillors against the threat of deselection. Some claimed that Corbyn’s 
repeated calls for unity were actually a demand for “silence”.

Wes Streeting, the MP for Ilford North, said: “Labour cannot transform lives 
in opposition and we cannot surrender to the political tradition that would 
keep us there for generations to come. That would be the gross betrayal of the 
Labour party and our people.”

Ian Murray MP, who resigned as shadow Scottish secretary in June, read out the 
successes of New Labour including “winning three general elections”, devolution 
and Northern Irish peace.

Some Corbyn supporters shouted “Iraq” and heckled other speakers with 
“rubbish”.

John Hannett, the general secretary of USDAW, said his union would fiercely 
oppose any deselection attempts. “Call me a rightwinger but I will fight for 
any MP who faces deselection on the basis of having a different philosophy and 
I pledge USDAW’s support to them. Because that is bullying, that is harassment, 
just because they don’t toe the line.”

At a separate rally, organised by Labour First, Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the former leadership 
candidate and minister, accused Corbyn’s supporters of allowing a culture of 
abuse of MPs and Labour party staff which could lead to a form of “populist 
authoritarian rule”.



A succession of speakers at the Labour First fringe meeting, including Hilary 
Benn, Ruth Smeeth andYvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>, promised to oppose the 
policies and practices of supporters of Corbyn just a day after the Labour 
leader was re-elected.

Eagle said: “The people who have run the narratives in the Labour party in the 
last year have decided that the problem with the party is its MPs and the 
people who work selflessly, our Labour staff. They have turned one part of the 
party against another in a huge blame game. We have all been subject to massive 
amounts of disgusting and disgraceful vile abuse.”

How Labour becomes relevant and future-facing once again | Chuka Umunna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/the-need-to-be-relevant-is-now>
In a rare intervention since being sacked by Corbyn as shadow foreign secretary
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/hilary-benn-revolt-jeremy-corbyn>
, Benn urged Labour First supporters not to rise to abuse on social media from 
their opponents.

“I listen to the advice of my grandfather who said you should never wrestle 
with a chimney sweep because you will also end up covered in soot. We should 
not stoop to that level,” he said.

He criticised Corbyn’s reluctance to support airstrikes against Isis in Iraq. 
“When people who are fascists – and I use that word deliberately – are 
committing genocide, as the UN has now said, against Yazidis and other 
minorities in Iraq and elsewhere, I think it is the duty of an internationalist 
Labour party to say we are prepared to help against the fascists … We have got 
to be, and remain, an internationalist, outward-looking party that will play 
its part,” he said.

Pat McFadden, the former minister, called for the party to seek inspiration 
from its “three great postwar leaders”, who he named as Clement Attlee, Harold 
Wilson and Tony Blair.

“They always reached out from their core supporters. It isn’t treachery, it 
isn’t ‘Tory lite’. It is an essential task of a party that is serious about 
political change,” he said.

Corbyn, however, who won a convincing victory in the leadership battle with 
62% of the vote, will seek to consolidate his grip on Labour policymaking.


Jeremy Corbyn's new consensus: everyone do as you are told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/jeremy-corbyn-new-consensus-labour-everyone-doing-as-they-are-told>
He hopes to persuade the party’s ruling national executive committee – and 
then the whole conference – to ratify the 10 policy principles that formed the 
centrepiece of his re-election campaign, to assert his mandate over Labour and 
entrench his anti-austerity position.

An ally of Corbyn said he wanted to prepare a policy platform that could form 
the basis of a manifesto in the event of a snap general election. “We may not 
have the luxury of another conference before a general election,” one Corbyn 
ally said.

Rebel Labour MPs are mulling whether to return to the front bench; though many 
are waiting to see if the party agrees to elections to the shadow cabinet.


Former leader Ed Miliband, who called for Corbyn to step down earlier in the 
summer, became the latest Labour big beast to hint that he could consider a 
frontline role. He told a fringe event that he anticipated staying a 
backbencher “but these are matters for Jeremy and for discussion”. Dan Jarvis, 
Nia Griffiths and Jonathan Reynolds are also known to be considering returning.

Cooper has said she is not opposed to the idea of serving Corbyn although she 
is running to become chair of the home affairs select committee at the moment.

The issue is critical because of the need to fill more than 60 empty posts in 
order to operate a functioning parliamentary operation, although sources have 
suggested some positions are not thought necessary by the leader’s team.

Bringing in elections would make many more MPs likely to put themselves 
forward, including female MPs such as Lucy Powell, Luciana Berger and Seema 
Malhotra. Otherwise, Corbyn could struggle to secure a decent gender balance on 
his front bench.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fjeremy-corbyn-vast-majority-mps-deselection-labour-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20says%20%E2%80%98vast%20majority%E2%80%99%20of%20MPs%20will%20not%20face%20deselection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fjeremy-corbyn-vast-majority-mps-deselection-labour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20says%20%E2%80%98vast%20majority%E2%80%99%20of%20MPs%20will%20not%20face%20deselection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fjeremy-corbyn-vast-majority-mps-deselection-labour-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn says ‘vast majority’ of MPs will not face deselection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/25/jeremy-corbyn-vast-majority-mps-deselection-labour-video>
Appearing on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, he was asked about 
deselection, which is being openly advocated by some of his backers, with the 
Unite general secretary, Len McCluskey, saying disloyal MPs were “asking for 
it”. Corbyn saidLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs across 
the country would have to stand for selection as constituency boundaries change.

He said: “My message is: concentrate on policies, concentrate on campaigning, 
concentrate on what we’ve got to put out there as a message.”

But he added: “We are going through, unfortunately, a boundary change, every 
constituency boundary is going to change. Therefore a new selection will have 
to take place in every single constituency. Where the sitting MP has a 
substantial geographic coverage in the new area, they will automatically be 
shortlisted.


“I wish them well. The relationship between an MP and their constituency is a 
complex one,” Corbyn said. “The vast majority of MPs will have no problem 
whatsoever.”

He surprised members of the party’s ruling NEC by tabling his 10-point policy 
plan at its meeting on Saturday night. He hopes to win agreement for the 
policies at an early morning meeting on Monday, which would allow them to be 
put before the full conference.
 