
At the last general election, 9.3 million people voted Labour. That number 
should represent the foundation on which a successful challenge might be built 
for next time. It looks more likea resource for other parties to plunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/labour-would-save-the-nhs-but-the-nhs-wont-save-labour>
. According to one recent poll, only 69% of those who last year endorsed Ed 
Miliband back Labour now.

In a byelection in the Lincolnshire seat of Sleaford and North Hykeham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/labour-can-close-gap-in-polls-says-diane-abbott>
 last week, Labour slipped from second to fourth place. In Richmond Park the 
previous week, the Labour candidate lost his deposit.

My hopes for Momentum have been dashed by the toxic debate at the top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/my-hopes-for-momentum-have-been-dashed>
Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership campaigns promised to create a dynamic social 
movement, shoring up traditional support while mobilising battalions of eager 
converts. Instead, Britain’s main opposition party resembles a dilapidated 
warehouse storing heaps of votes behind rusted gates, guarded by a drowsy night 
watchman. With a modicum of ingenuity, other parties can break in and help 
themselves.

It would be unfair to heap all of the blame on Corbyn. Those of us who were 
hostile to his candidacy from the start have to accept that our instincts were 
wildly out of tune with the mood among a majority ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members. There was no prospect of 
a revival down the route of haughtily dismissing their beliefs as naive or 
plain wrong. In the summer of 2015, Corbyn himself was taken aback by the surge 
in support for his message. Forces bigger than any individual, forces that have 
broken timid centre-left politics across Europe, were manifest in his landslide 
victory.

Corbyn’s critics were especially slow on the uptake in thinking that the 
vagueness of his programme, the primary-coloured sketch ofback-to-basics 
socialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/labour-needs-to-address-the-issues-of-the-present-before-it-becomes-the-retro-party>
, was self-evidently a problem. For an older generation of left stalwarts and a 
new generation of radical dreamers the problem was just as self-evidently 
located in the world-weary, eye-rolling arrogance of the New Labour ancien 
regime, which insisted the choice be limited to a menu of uninspiring 
compromises.

There is no obvious leader-in-waiting who might sustain the exuberance of the 
Corbyn revolution among the faithful while winning the trust of less engaged 
voters unmoved by the radical spirit. While the Labour “moderates” acknowledge 
the paltriness of their platform, many of the leader’s backers are quietly 
realising the limits to his magnetism. It attracts too few voters in seats that 
are needed to win a majority, and repels many more. Labour’s privately 
commissioned research tells the same story as the published polling: failure to 
make advances among Tory voters; vulnerability to Ukip in areas that strongly 
rejected Britain’s EU membership, and to aLib Dem recovery among those who most 
grieve at the referendum result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/labour-lib-dems-hard-brexit-tim-farron-witney-richmond-park>
; a flatline in Scotland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8425f2b12b4354089e442e5d02a87ff6d1df646c%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20may%20be%20unassailable%2C%20but%20he%20is%20not%20leading%20Labour%20%7C%20Rafael%20Behr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20may%20be%20unassailable%2C%20but%20he%20is%20not%20leading%20Labour%20%7C%20Rafael%20Behr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8425f2b12b4354089e442e5d02a87ff6d1df646c%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 ‘Owen Smith’s incoherent challenge proved that Corbyn thrives on attacks from 
within his party.’ Photograph: Robert Perry/EPA 
One point of consensus is that the second leadership contest, this summer, was 
a waste of everyone’s time. Owen Smith’s incoherent challenge proved that 
Corbyn thrives on attacks from within his party. He cannot be accused of 
lacking potency in an internal campaign, but it is a defensive kind of 
charisma. It is as if he wears a protective shell made from reflective material 
that looks more brilliant in the eyes of his fans when a harsh light is trained 
on it. When the political beam falls elsewhere – on the Tories and Brexit – 
Corbyn is invisible. He seems to have no inner source of radiant energy.

Corbyn’s supporters complain that he is traduced by partisan media and that 
his poor ratings express the fallout from months of sniping by backbench MPs. 
But the parliamentary party has been relatively well-behaved since September’s 
re-coronation and difficulty turning press releases into favourable news 
stories is hardly a new conundrum for Labour.

In conversation with Corbyn’s allies I have been struck by how much their 
dilemmas replay problems confronted by Miliband’s team. They know there is an 
issue with the leader’s image. He isnot taken seriously as a potential prime 
minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/election-labour-jeremy-corbyn>
. They know they need a strategy for turning things around but they can’t say 
what it looks like.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Jones%20at%20Labour%20conference%3A%20can%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Jones%20at%20Labour%20conference%3A%20can%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&media=>
Owen Jones at Labour conference: can Corbyn unite the party? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/28/can-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
They hope voters can be persuaded to embrace an unorthodox concept of 
leadership. They highlight the way their candidate connects with individuals on 
the campaign trail. They propose that Labour’s offer to run the country be 
considered as a collective endeavour, not some glitzy presidential bid. But 
they don’t know how to make that happen.

The last line of defence is that recent electoral upsets – the EU referendum, 
Donald Trump’s US victory – prove the fallibility of conventional wisdom (and 
polling). Perhaps the discontent with mainstream politics could be channelled 
into a renaissance for the radical left. But again, there is no known method 
for effecting this diversion. In the absence of a plan, the belief that an 
upswing in reactionary nativism is a veiled opportunity for Corbynism, with its 
embrace of open borders and awkwardness around symbols of national identity, is 
fanciful to say the least. It sounds like self-congratulation for disbelieving 
incorrect forecasts of rain, then proudly stepping into a hailstorm without an 
umbrella.

Labour is marooned between a discredited past and an unimagined future. Many 
of the obstacles to recovery predate the current leader. The difficulty in 
articulating a clear response to Brexit, for example, stems from the absence of 
common instincts on the best approach to immigration, free trade, markets, and 
on protecting people from the economic vagaries of globalisation without 
retreating into bitter rejection of the modern world.

Labour is marooned between a discredited past and an unimagined future

Miliband grappled unsuccessfully with that conundrum. So now does Theresa May. 
Corbyn seems untroubled by it. His position as a moral figurehead on the left, 
representing defiance of an intellectually bankrupt old guard, is fixed. Those 
who disagree have learned that resistance without a credible counter-offer 
makes their position worse. But even the leader’s allies see the gap between 
his symbolic status and the lack of practical ability to move the project 
forwards. He is neither setting a direction nor resolving dilemmas.

So a slow-motion race is under way for the succession involving pretty much 
any frontbencher with a high profile – John McDonnell, Clive Lewis, Keir 
Starmer, Emily Thornberry among others. None dares eye the crown in public. All 
recognise that the contest, when it comes, will probably be won by someone who 
can show the membership a record of loyalty – of having at least tried to make 
things work under Corbyn.

Meanwhile, the incumbent gets to be just “Jeremy” – a rallying cry, an icon, a 
standard to hold aloft when enemies approach. He has won the battle to decide 
what Labour no longer wants to be, but he has no answers to the question of 
what it does next. He is unassailable at the top of the party, but he is not 
leading it.

• Catch up on the discussion about this article in the Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/your-opinions-jeremy-corbys-leadership-and-investors-profiting-from-climate-change>
.
 