
I am not and never have been a member of the Labour party so wouldn’t presume 
to offer a prescription for its current malaise of hyperactive navel-gazing. 
But Gary Younge’s diagnosis is spot on (Now Labour’s two sides can start to 
bridge the great divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/labour-two-sides-bridge-divide-jeremy-corbyn-left-right-principles>
, 26 September).

Opposition is an honourable estate and not just a fallow preparation for being 
acceptable at the next election. It is a time to argue a party’s distinctive 
case, with or against the tide of public opinion. It requires engagement with 
movements that are not tied to parliamentary arithmetic, such as the current 
ones about the iniquities of housing provision, against the privatisation of 
the NHS and many more.

The government is currently motivated by matters of Tory party management, be 
that the demonisation of the disadvantaged and dispossessed, the Brexit fiasco 
or the grammar schools diversion. The need for a tribune to voice the 
principled alternatives is urgent regardless of immediate electoral calculation.
Nik Wood
London

• Gary Younge states that the Labour right needs to “present a credible 
alternative candidate or programme” to replaceJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. I have only contempt for 
the Labour right, but I recognise that it must be difficult for it to formulate 
a programmatic alternative, given the paucity of concrete policy generated by 
Corbyn and his shadow cabinet in their first year.

The Labour left was so ill prepared and lacking in ambition when it put up 
Corbyn as a leadership candidate that it now has no idea what to do with the 
positions it has captured. The reality is that many people outside the party 
experience Labour as a landlord or a debt collector, in its local authority 
role, rather than as a “progressive” political party. It is this as much as 
anything that has alienated working-class people fromLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

If Labour under Corbyn is to serve any useful purpose it has to stop 
pretending that Momentum is anything other than a simulacrum of a social 
movement, and begin to deal with real ways in which Labour councils can change 
their roles, from being enforcement officers, threatening eviction or removal 
of property, to instead setting no-cuts budgets, and refusing to put up 
rents/send in bailiffs/carry out evictions. Anything else is just posturing. If 
Labour in local office cannot, under Corbyn, be a shield for working-class 
communities, then the Labour left will prove itself as useless to its core 
support as its Blairite opponents have been.
Nick Moss
London

• May I refer Don Macdonald (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/can-the-centre-hold-in-corbyns-new-model-labour-army>
, 26 September) to Ronan Bennett’s article “You want leadership? … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/jeremy-corbyn-leadership-david-cameron-libya-labour>
” (Opinion, 17 September) in which he provides evidence that Corbyn has been on 
the right side of history for 30 years. I suspect that a good proportion of the 
172 who signed the motion against Corbyn in June are on the wrong side of 
history.
Kathleen O’Neill
Hayling Island, Hampshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 