
A four-year-old girl whose portrait came to symbolise the “darkness that is 
childhood cancer” has died after a year-long battle with the disease.

Jessica Whelan, from Oswaldtwistle in Lancashire, died on Sunday from 
neuroblastoma, an aggressivecancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
of the nervous system that mostly affects babies and young children.

Her father, Andrew, highlighted his daughter’s struggle when he posted a 
photograph of her writhing in agony ona Facebook page  
<https://www.facebook.com/Afightagainstneuroblastoma/>set up to document her 
story in October.


“I feel both sadness and relief in informing you all that Jessica finally 
found peace at seven o’clock this morning,” wrote her father on the Facebook 
page on Sunday. “No longer does she suffer, no longer does she feel the pain of 
the physical constraints of her body.”

Jessica’s family started a fundraising page on 7 October to raise money to 
help give Jessica “as much happiness and enjoyment as possible” in the short 
time she had left.

The page had raised more than £75,000 when it was closed earlier this month 
because of the little girl’s worsening condition. The family said the money 
would be donated to childhood cancer research.


Writing about his decision to publish the upsetting image of his daughter, 
Andrew Whelan said that, as a photographer, it was important to capture “the 
truth and the reality of a situation” and that it showed “the true face of 
cancer”.

“A few days ago she was given what is most likely only a few weeks to live 
after a battle against cancer that has been waged for over 12 months,” he 
wrote. “This photograph was made in a moment that we as parents could offer her 
no comfort, her pushing us away whilst she rode out this searing pain in 
solitude.”

A mother’s battle with neuroblastoma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/15/a-mothers-battle-with-neuroblastoma>
He added that he did not mean to offend or upset anybody by publishing the 
photograph. “I do mean however to educate and shock those that see it in its 
context,” he said.

“Perhaps by seeing this photo people not in our position will be made aware of 
the darkness that is childhood cancer, perhaps these same people may be able to 
do something about it so that in the future no child has to suffer this pain, 
so that no parent has to bear witness to their own flesh and blood 
deteriorating daily.”

A petition <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/162934> set up by 
Jessica’s family calling for child cancer to be put at the forefront ofNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and government funding schemes had 
received 114,000 signatures on Sunday evening, passing the 100,000 threshold 
for the subject to be debated in parliament. A debate has been scheduled for 28 
November.

Neuroblastoma is a rare type of cancer that affects children, mostly under the 
age of five. The disease develops from particular types of nerve cells called 
neuroblasts and there are about 100 diagnoses of the cancer each year in the UK.
 