
It was all about jetlag for Magnus Carlsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen> at the world rapid 
championship in Doha this week. The Norwegian won the 2014 and 2015 versions of 
the title, which was decided by 15 rounds of 15-minute games with 10 seconds 
per move increment, but for 2016 he had to settle for the bronze medal on 
tie-break behind Vassily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Alex Grischuk of Russia.

Carlsen flew in from Australia, where he had been on holiday since retaining 
his classical crown against Sergey Karjakin in New York last month. At Doha 
there were five rounds a day and all three of his defeats, plus a lucky escape 
featured in this week’s puzzle, came early in the session.

In the first two rounds of each day combined he scored 2.5/6, in the last 
three daily rounds 8.5/9. “I didn’t feel I was ready for the first game. I just 
didn’t feel fit for the fight,” he said afterwards.

The beneficiary from Carlsen’s lapses was Ivanchuk, at 47 one of the 
tournament veterans. The eccentric Ukrainian has scored wins over Garry 
Kasparov and Carlsen but he is inconsistent and unpredictable; last month he 
turned down top board for his country in the Olympiad in favour of a draughts 
tournament. At Doha Ivanchuk hit a rich vein of form and trounced Carlsen 
convincingly along with several other impressive wins. It was a highly popular 
success.

England’s lone player among the elite in Qatar was David Howell, who scored 
8.5/15 against a strong field, drew with several elite GMs including Vishy 
Anand and played an elegant queen sacrifice.

Immediately after the world rapid came the world blitz, 21 rounds spread over 
two days, with a time limit of three minutes per game plus a two seconds per 
move increment.

Karjakin won the world blitz title on tiebreak from Carlsen, defeating him in 
their individual game (the one-to-one game was not the official tiebreak 
decider). The pair led throughout and scored 16.5/21, two points clear of their 
nearest rivals.

Carlsen’s Argentinian opponent below held his own for 23 moves, then collapsed 
with 24 Rxc6? (Qc2) and 25 Qc2? (Qf3) giving Black a chance for a neat finish.

Diego Flores v Magnus Carlsen

1 c4 c6 2 Nf3 d5 3 d4 Nf6 4 Nc3 e6 5 e3 a6 6 b3 Bb4 7 Bd2 O-O 8 Bd3 Nbd7 9 O-O 
Bd610 Rc1 h6 11 Qc2 Re8 12 h3 Qe7 13 c5 Bc7 14 e4 e5 15 Rfe1 Qd8 16 exd5 cxd5 17
 dxe5 Nxe518 Nxe5 Rxe5 19 Rxe5 Bxe5 20 Na4 Be6 21 Qd1 Ne4 22 Be3 Qh4 23 c6 bxc6 
24 Rxc6? d4! 25 Qc2? dxe3! 26 Bxe4 Rd8 27 Rxa6 Qxe4! 0-1

The 92nd Hastings international congress is under way and the games can be 
viewed free and live online every afternoon (2.15pm start) until 5 January. The 
field of nearly 100 for the top event includes 11 grandmasters.

3475 1...Rg4+! 2 Kxg4 Qg2+ 3 Kh5 Qf3 mate.
 