
Jimmy Hill’s proudest boast was that he had done absolutely everything in 
football, and he had. In addition to being a modestly successful player, with 
more than 300 appearances for Fulham, he was also a union leader at the time 
when the maximum wage was fought against and finally scrapped in 1961 to allow 
his team-mate Johnny Haynes to become the country’s first £100-a-week player.

That achievement in itself would guarantee Hill a place in football history, 
even if the enormous modernisation he helped bring about now seems quaintly 
ineffective next to the gamechanging consequences of the Bosman ruling three 
decades later. But for the first the second would never have happened in the 
same way, however, and Hill, like Jean-Marc Bosman, is owed a debt not only by 
the thousands of footballers whose earning power he substantially improved but 
also by followers of a game that needed to be dragged into the 20th century.

Not content with that amount of renown, Hill went on to be a coach, manager, 
director and chairman atCoventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry>, where he was also credited 
with coining the nickname Sky Blues after changing the kit, writing a new club 
song and introducing the first modern match programme.

Jimmy Hill obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill> 
He won two promotions but never managed Coventry at the highest level, leaving 
instead to become head of sport at London WeekendTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>. In that capacity he found 
himself in charge of coverage of the 1970 World Cup and when challenged by the 
necessity of making studio sequences more interesting he came up with the then 
revolutionary idea of a panel of pundits. Clearly a TV natural, Hill 
subsequently switched channels to the BBC and made more than 600 appearances as 
presenter ofMatch of the Day. That turned him into something of a national 
treasure and, though frequently caricatured, he clearly enjoyed the 
recognition, even beginning to describe himself as a journalist. In 1999, 10 
years after covering the Hillsborough disaster as part of hisMotD duties, Hill 
turned up on Sky Sports chairing a Sunday morning discussion with three 
football journalists that, with minor modifications, is still running.

In the mid-seventies he returned to Coventry as chairman, this time overseeing 
a period in the top flight, and a statue of him now stands outside the Ricoh 
Stadium. He was always outspoken and direct, perhaps a little bit too much so 
when unwisely attempting to defend Ron Atkinson’s racist remarks in 2004. His 
attempted defence, that it was merely the language of the football field, did 
not go down well with anti‑racism groups and for the first time since he rose 
to public prominence it began to appear Hill might be out of touch and out of 
date.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fjimmy-hill-the-former-football-player-and-presenter-has-died-aged-87-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jimmy%20Hill%2C%20the%20former%20football%20player%20and%20presenter%2C%20has%20died%20aged%2087%20-%20video%20obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fjimmy-hill-the-former-football-player-and-presenter-has-died-aged-87-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jimmy%20Hill%2C%20the%20former%20football%20player%20and%20presenter%2C%20has%20died%20aged%2087%20-%20video%20obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fjimmy-hill-the-former-football-player-and-presenter-has-died-aged-87-video-obituary&media=>
Jimmy Hill, the former football player and presenter, has died aged 87 - video 
obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-the-former-football-player-and-presenter-has-died-aged-87-video-obituary>
He undoubtedly deserves to be remembered for his very real achievements rather 
than a late and untypical lapse of judgment and fans of a certain age will 
always retain the fond memory of him emerging from the crowd at Highbury in 
September 1972 to run the line when one of the officials was injured. In what 
even now sounds like something from schoolboy fiction of the time, an 
announcement was made that the game between Arsenal and Liverpool could not 
continue unless a qualified referee could be found to help out and in next to 
no time Hill was donning a tracksuit. He was at the game as a spectator, but 
needless to say he was a qualified referee.

Jimmy Hill: a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-a-life-in-pictures>
Some of his other claimed legacies, such as all-seat stadiums, electronic 
scoreboards and the introduction of three points for a win, all seem a little 
unlikely to have come from one individual, and perhaps some of them are, though 
there was never an individual in football quite like Hill.

The BBC’s top man has just said his influence lives on in the way we enjoy 
football today and that is certainly true and not just on television. Hill was 
an innovator and an enthusiast, both an important historical figure and a 
familiar presence in living rooms. He changed the game and managed to do far 
more besides. Most of all, through times when football was not always as 
popular or viewer-friendly as it is at the moment, he thoroughly enjoyed the 
game.
 