
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink has been sacked as manager of QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> after less than a year in charge.

Hasselbaink, who was appointed in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-new-manager>
 and oversaw 47 matches, was dismissed shortly after 10-man QPR earned a late 
point at Nottingham Forest.

Speaking after the game, Hasselbaink had denied his wild celebration was in 
response to speculation over his future, with Tim Sherwood linked with his job.

Championship your thoughts: Newcastle remain on top spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/05/championship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot>
“If they [the QPR board] are going to do something, that is the nature of the 
game,” he said. “I was not celebrating because of that, I was celebrating 
because we had 10 men but we still got a point.

“Because of the manner we played, we deserved to get a goal. That is why I was 
celebrating. That was my emotion at the time, I was celebrating us getting 
goal. The rest, whatever happens, is just football. We have some young players 
we are trying to develop. We have foreign players we are trying to bed into the 
team. They will get better. All these things take time.”

Announcing his dismissal, QPR said: “The club appreciates Jimmy’s efforts 
during his time in charge and wishes him all the best for the future. Owing to 
the international break, the first-team squad will return to training on 
Wednesday. A further update regarding the club’s managerial situation will be 
made in due course.”

Britt Assombalonga had put Forest in front after 39 minutes, four minutes 
after Karl Henry was sent off. He collected his second booking of the game for 
a foul on Henri Lansbury following a previous one for dissent.

But Forest missed several good chances to seal the win before they had 
Hildeberto Pereira sent off – for the third time this season – after he too 
collected two bookings. His first was for dissent, the second for a foul on 
Conor Washington.

The substitute Idrissa Sylla then denied Forest three points and a first clean 
sheet of the season when he headed home at the near post in the 85th minute.
 