
Queens Park Rangers are close to appointing Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink as their 
new manager having been granted permission to speak to the former Dutch 
international striker by Burton Albion, whom he has taken to thetop of League 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>.

“QPR have approached us asking for permission to speak to Jimmy and we have 
agreed to that,” said the Burton chairman, Ben Robinson, in astatement on the 
club’s website 
<http://www.burtonalbionfc.co.uk/news/article/hasselbaink-qpr-2831364.aspx>. 
“He will be interviewed shortly for the vacant manager’s job.”

Talks are now underway aimed at smoothing the 43-year-old’s move to Loftus 
Road, where Neil Warnock has been in interim charge sinceChris Ramsey was 
sacked in the first week of November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/qpr-chris-ramsey-neil-warnock>
. The Championship club, currently five points off the play-offs in 12th place, 
had spoken to Chris Powell and Paul Lambert, but the director of football, Les 
Ferdinand, and chief executive, Lee Hoos, have always regarded Hasselbaink 
highly and are keen to bring the former Chelsea forward back to west London.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Burton Albion 20 8 41 
2 Coventry 20 17 39 
3 Walsall 20 16 39 
4 Gillingham 20 14 38 
5 Wigan 20 10 34 
The Dutchman, who spent a season in charge of Royal Antwerp in the Belgian 
Second Division in 2013-14, won League Two with Burton last season having been
appointed on a two-and-a-half-year contract in November 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/12/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-burton-albion>
 to succeedBirmingham City-bound Gary Rowett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/27/gary-rowett-birmingham-new-manager>
 at the Pirelli Stadium. Tuesday’s win against Millwall was his 33rd in 54 
games in charge and established the Brewers two points clear at the top of the 
division.

Burton, who have indicated they will not stand in Hasselbaink’s way if a club 
from a higher league made an official approach for his services, will be due 
compensation if he agrees to move to Loftus Road. The former Leeds, 
Middlesbrough, Atlético Madrid, Charlton and Cardiff striker was non-committal 
when addressing the media after Tuesday’s win. “People can speculate, but I 
can’t control that,” said Hasselbaink. “The only thing I can do is make my 
players work as hard as possible and work with them. I make sure I give them 
everything I have got and they give everything they have got for this club. 
That is what we will keep on doing.”

QPR, who were relegated from the Premier League in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/10/manchester-city-qpr-premier-league-match-report>
, have mustered four points from Warnock’s three games in interim charge, and 
play Reading on Thursday night. The 67-year-old had initially rejoined the club 
in an advisory role in October.
 