
Late morning at St George’s Park, the autumnal chill having pursued him from 
northern Italy, and Joe Hart is offering a recap on life to date outside the 
Premier League bubble. The previous dispatch from Turin had been disconcerting, 
headlined bya flap at a cross on debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
 as his new side, Torino, were beaten in Bergamo. That error might have been 
considered evidence of fragile form, an extension of high-profile traumas at 
Euro 2016, though it was probably more reflective of recent upheaval. Three 
weeks on, with basic communication skills established and surroundings already 
less alien, the upturn has been instigated on the quiet.

Pep Guardiola: ‘I would not be here without Johan Cruyff. He was unique’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/pep-guardiola-exclusive-interview-johan-cruyff-unique>
There have been victories against Fiorentina and, for the first time in a home 
fixture since 1990, Roma withHart smartly denying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/torino-roma-joe-hart-match-report-serie-a>
 his former Manchester City team-mate Edin Dzeko a goal at the Stadio Olimpico 
Grande Torino. “Both fantastic results,” he says. “And, previous to that, we’d 
gone down to nine men at Pescara and nicked a 0-0 draw. That’s not big news to 
anyone outside Torino, but it was big for us. We needed it. We brought in a lot 
of new players this summer, myself included, and a new manager [Sinisa 
Mihajlovic], so it is going to take time. But we’ve scrapped and the manager 
feels strongly about what we’re doing. We’re building, we’re together. And I am 
enjoying it.”

It may be early days but Torino are seventh in Serie A and the goalkeeper they 
were delighted to secure from Manchester City has been accepted into a new 
family. The loanee has met with the head of one of Torino’s ultras groups, 
tantamount to receiving official blessing from the terraces, and had hisname 
bellowed at home games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZKKlvEGUXM>. He has 
even seen a banner, sent over by members of City’s 1894 Group and depicting his 
image,unfurled by the club’s most fervent support on the Curva Maratona 
<http://www.mcfcwatch.com/2016/09/25/torino-supporters-display-manchester-city-banner-for-joe-hart/>
.

It may still seem odd to hear him bemoan the absence of Cristian Molinaro 
rather than Vincent Kompany, or gush about the influence of “big players” like 
Adem Ljajic and Andrea Belotti as opposed to Yaya Touré and Sergio Agüero. But 
this is a player making the best of an awkward situation.

A sense of disappointment at his divorce from City, rushed through as the 
transfer deadline loomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/joe-hart-torino-manchester-city-loan>
, clearly lingers. All that talk of Pep Guardiola’s preference for a 
sweeper-keeper, a ball-playing goalie capable of operating as an auxiliary 
centre-half, still grates as implied criticism. The recently appointed manager, 
empowered by City’s long-standing pursuit of his services as well as his 
glittering reputation, was not convinced Hart could play that role. That 
curtailed six seasons as first-choice overnight and, while his arrangement in 
Italy is only for 12 months, the 29-year-old talks like a player who has 
accepted his time in Manchester, at a club he “cares deeply for”, is probably 
up.

“Football is a game of opinions: some people have a great opinion of me, 
others probably think I’m absolutely useless,” he says. “Unfortunately, the 
opinion of one of the guy’s in charge of my club wasn’t as strong as it needed 
to be. I don’t know. I have to think selfishly about the whole thing and try to 
be what I’m capable of being. People will make statements on how things are, 
and what they are. They might be right. They might be bang on. Some people you 
struggle to argue with. They’ve got a lot of strong backing to what they say 
and what they do. But I can only really look after me. I had a situation at 
City where my playing time was going to be limited, full stop. So I had to look 
elsewhere. I needed to find someone who thought I could help his team. The move 
was what it was.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9b821eb727c03187a45c42b5b01cf8e110feb4%2F0_0_2480_1616%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Hart%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20people%20probably%20do%20think%20I%E2%80%99m%20absolutely%20useless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Hart%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20people%20probably%20do%20think%20I%E2%80%99m%20absolutely%20useless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9b821eb727c03187a45c42b5b01cf8e110feb4%2F0_0_2480_1616%2F2480.jpg>
 Joe Hart joins his Torino team-mates in celebration after the win over 
Fiorentina. Photograph: Alessandro Di Marco/EPA 
“It’s not about making brave decisions. I’m not going to lie, I wasn’t sat 
there with 25 options, and I wasn’t given much time [to make a decision]. It 
all happened pretty quickly. ButTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> was a really good option for me 
and it excited me to play in Serie A. Mihajlovic made it clear he did actually 
want me to play in the team, so that was enough.

“The fit, in the situation I was in, made it a good decision. I was 
comfortable with it. How this season plays out, and what comes of it all, we’ll 
see. But I was really grateful for the chance. I’m at Torino now with a huge 
commitment to the club, a huge commitment to this season, to the culture of the 
club, to the football, and I’m giving it my all. I don’t know [if City are 
monitoring his progress]. I’d imagine that, upstairs, they talk a lot, but my 
focus is playing for Torino and where we finish.”

It’s not about making brave decisions. I’m not going to lie, I wasn’t sat 
there with 25 options
Joe Hart 
But is he driven by a desire to change people’s opinion and, as a natural 
progression, convince Guardiola of his capabilities? “Not really. I’ve got 
quite a few people who I hold close to my heart, people I trust and whose 
opinions I care about. But it’s hard to please everyone. I learned quite early 
that’s never going to happen. Whether I’m right or wrong can be debated but, in 
terms of changing everyone’s opinions and making everyone think I’m great, 
you’re not going to win. You can’t win.

“I need to improve all the time because I’m still learning and the game is 
changing all the time. I love trying to improve – I love that challenge. I want 
to keep developing until, physically, I can’t do any more.

“So, whether I’m playing Sunday league or playing abroad in Serie A, I’ll look 
to improve. We’re all striving for perfection, but we’ve all got to be 
realistic about our goals. I want to be the best given my capabilities and, 
when I finish a game – win, lose or draw – be comfortable with how I’ve applied 
myself. Regardless of how I want to play, I need to play to what my team’s 
strengths are. I’ll do what my manager asks of me.”

Mihajlovic was quickly convinced even if the language was the obvious barrier 
to making the move an instant success given the level of communication a 
goalkeeper must enjoy with his backline. He is already au fait with basic 
on-field parlance, and the lessons will continue to offer a greater 
understanding.

“Being in the City dressing room, I wasn’t able to talk at the kind of speed I 
would do normally [given the number of foreign team-mates at the club], so 
communication is something I’ve been able to do with foreign speaking players 
in the last eight years,” he says. “Obviously it’s to a different level now. 
And I’m in Italy, so I need to be bending over backwards rather than expecting 
people to do that for me. We’re finding ways, and they’re appreciating my 
efforts.”

The hope is Gareth Southgate and the England setup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/gareth-southgate-england-manager-reluctant-redeemer>
 continue to monitor his progress at club level from afar with a view to 
retaining him as No1. Euro 2016, where Hart seemed to whip himself up into such 
a frenzy pre-match that it rendered his own game jittery, was blighted by errors
against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 andIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
, when goals were shipped where he would normally have summoned saves. His 
sense of shock at the failure in France was as profound as any of his 
team-mates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a696617b63aca040609624da73d921c4fd1b10e%2F0_0_2944_1963%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Hart%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20people%20probably%20do%20think%20I%E2%80%99m%20absolutely%20useless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Hart%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20people%20probably%20do%20think%20I%E2%80%99m%20absolutely%20useless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjoe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a696617b63aca040609624da73d921c4fd1b10e%2F0_0_2944_1963%2F2944.jpg>
 Joe Hart allows Kolbeinn Sigthorsson’s shot squeeze past him in Nice. 
Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
Fraser Forster and, once fully fit after his ankle injury, Jack Butland will 
challenge for his starting role with the national team. “There’s always been a 
threat to my place, ever since I was playing under-14s at Shrewsbury Town,” he 
says. But, for now, life under Southgate is about rekindling a positive mindset 
and establishing an easily identifiable philosophy, to help exorcise a dismal 
few months.

“It’s definitely down to us to create an identity of the team, to show what we 
are trying to be,” adds Hart. “We need an identity to be able to explain why we 
won, why we lost, why it didn’t go very well. That’s a big thing for me. It’s 
easier to move on if you know why things have happened. As a group, our 
intention is always to win. That is a given. But what we also need is a 
structure and a reasoning, a way of playing and a comfortable way of knowing 
what we’re doing.

“You can see that in other international and club teams. When Germany were in 
a dip they were brave, they were strong, and they are [now] world champions. It 
might also help the country buy into what we are trying to do, if everyone 
knows what is expected of people.

“Gareth is in charge now. He’s our manager. From what I’ve seen, I am excited 
to work with him. I don’t think anyone could have planned for what’s happened, 
but you’ve got to make the best of any situation, and Gareth is very calm, 
articulate, very clear. He’s clear in what his plans are. So we’ll work 
together and try and steer ourselves in the right direction. Slovenia will be 
tough. I played one of their players, Josip Illicic, against Fiorentina and he 
was a strong player with a good left foot. That will not be easy.”

Nothing about Hart’s season to date has been simple, but at least he is 
finding his feet.
 