
At least somebody loves Joe Hart. Whereas he was frozen out of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> at a speed that would 
surprise even gelato manufacturers, the England international was met by 
rapturous crowds on his arrival in Turin on Tuesday. The new Torino goalkeeper 
wore sunglasses that Marcello Mastroianni would have been proud of and posed, 
perhaps inadvisedly, with a T-shirt celebrating the club’s Granata Ultras. 
Welcome to Serie A, Joe.

In choosing to join Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/joe-hart-torino-loan-manchester-city>
 Hart becomes part of a select, if not always successful, group. The 34th 
British player to sign for an Italian club since the second world war, Hart 
follows in the footsteps of not just John Charles but also Jay Bothroyd. While 
David Platt made his reputation in Serie A, Des Walker almost contrived to blow 
it. And for every cult hero – a Trevor Francis or Paul Ince – there is at least 
one who has left with a good riddance. And yes, that includes Paul Gascoigne, 
described by one Italian journalist as “one of the worst buys since the war”.

Jack Wilshere beats Joe Hart in transfer tales of woe table this summer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/jack-wilshere-joe-hart-manchester-city-arsenal>
Before making the decision to move Hart consulted his friend and former City 
team-mate Micah Richards. The Aston Villa defender spent a season at Fiorentina 
two years ago and loved it. “He asked me about Italy and I told him it’s 
probably the best country you can go to,” Richards told the Guardian. “It was 
one of the best experiences in my life. Obviously I got to live in Florence, an 
amazing city, but the people were really welcoming, really nice, and made me 
feel right at home.”

One of the biggest things Hart will have to contend with, says Richards, is 
the change in footballing culture. “It’s a lot different to England,” he says. 
“It is much more tactical – everyone knows their jobs. In Italy they will 
always play an older player who has more experience than a younger one who 
wants to express themselves. Every day in training you work on tactics, you 
work on shape. On the other hand it’s not so physical. It helped my game, 
though. I like to get up and down but they helped me to know when to hold my 
position.”

The former England international Tony Dorigo, who played for Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> in the 1997-98 season, knows 
better than most what Hart is getting into. He says it is not just the culture 
on the pitch that Hart will have to adjust to. “It’s really intense, extremely 
intense, it’s absolutely crazy,” he says. “I remember once when we lost a match 
at home and the following day the fans stormed the training ground. We had to 
fly somewhere else to train and then stay there for the entire week. The fans 
give you great power when they get behind you, but you feel the pressure all 
the time.”

Dorigo, now a pundit for BT Sport’s Serie A coverage, believes that Hart will 
be busy in his new role. Although Torino competed in the Europa League last 
season they finished a disappointing 12th inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. This summer the manager, 
Giampero Ventura, left to replace Antonio Conte as the Italy coach, with Sinisa 
Mijhailovic replacing him. “It looks as if they will end up getting rid of 
three of their four best defenders this summer,” says Dorigo. “So Hart will get 
plenty of work. Torino are a club that have to change a lot. They get good 
players but they have to sell them too.”

Torino’s association with British football runs longer than most, dating back 
to the 1960s and the signing of Joe Baker and Denis Law. Two of the most 
promising forwards in Britain, Baker and Law were also only 21 years old. The 
pair acquired a reputation as young men about town. Constantly followed by 
paparazzi, Baker famously assaulted one then, on another fateful night, crashed 
his Aston Martin into a statue of Garibaldi. He and Law survived the crash but 
their careers in Italy were soon over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fjoe-hart-torino-serie-a-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a15de3e782923a3cbd699bab6384b7bd9b9202%2F72_0_2205_1323%2F2205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Hart%20heads%20for%20Torino%20but%20is%20not%20the%20first%20to%20seek%20Italian%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fjoe-hart-torino-serie-a-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Hart%20heads%20for%20Torino%20but%20is%20not%20the%20first%20to%20seek%20Italian%20renaissance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fjoe-hart-torino-serie-a-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a15de3e782923a3cbd699bab6384b7bd9b9202%2F72_0_2205_1323%2F2205.jpg>
 Joe Hart arrives to a rapturous reception in Turin after confirming his 
season’s loan move to Torino from Manchester City. Photograph: Alessandro Di 
Marco/EPA 
John Foot, in his history of Italian football, Calcio, describes the careers 
of British footballers that went a similar way, from Jimmy Greaves to 
Gascoigne. Greaves had gone to Italy only because of England’s maximum wage 
and, as soon as the rule was overturned, felt homesick. Gazza, meanwhile, was 
known not only for his drinking and tendency towards injury but also for his 
bad manners, notoriously answering one journalist’s question with a big burp.

The problem, as Foot sees it, was with the fact that such high standards had 
been set by British football’s first great export, John Charles. The Gentle 
Giant who played for Juventus for six years from 1957-63 is still remembered 
fondly in Turin.

“John Charles remains the model against which all foreign players – and 
especially British players – have been measured,” says Foot. “He was an 
exemplary figure on the field and off the field where he was known for being 
modest, generous and ‘good’. No other British player has come close.” Foot adds 
a coda, observing that another well-mannered export also left a good 
impression. “My advice to British players in Italy is don’t get drunk. It’s bad 
publicity and conforms to stereotypes. One person who was quite good there was 
David Beckham.”

But Hart is part of a mini-revival of Britons looking for an Italian job. 
Ashley Cole, Nathaniel Chalobah and Richards have played in Serie A in the past 
three seasons and, at the time of writing, Ravel Morrison remains on Lazio’s 
books. For Richards this trend will continue. “It’s not that people don’t want 
to go away,” he says. “But you’re in your comfort zone in the Premier League. 
But now that more Champions League places are going to be guaranteed [from 
2018-19] I think loads of players will want to give it a go.”

Dorigo, meanwhile, has one final piece of advice for England’s number one as 
he embarks on a new chapter in his career. “Move to Moncalieri,” he says. “It’s 
a beautiful village 10 miles outside the city. And when you wake up, the first 
things you see are the Alps.”
 