
Joe Hart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-hart> insists he has 
already brushed off the mistake that marred his debut for Torino and is 
determined to prove a success in Serie A.

The England goalkeeper, on a season-long loan with Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/joe-hart-torino-loan-manchester-city>
 after finding himself out-of-favour with Pep Guardiola,was at fault for 
Atalanta’s equaliser on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
 when he failed to claim a corner, but he impressed on his first press 
conference with his new club, speaking in Italian at the start, telling the 
media the words he had already learned and vowing to get to grips with the 
language.

“I’m studying Italian, I’m learning some important words to communicate with 
my team,” he said.

Hart, whose new side play at home to Empoli on Sunday, will be out to bounce 
back from his difficult debut and feels ready to do so. “Mistakes can happen,” 
he said. “In Bergamo I was fine, I made a mistake, but my team-mates and the 
public have received me very well and I want to keep them happy.

“The president and the coaching staff have made me feel at home right away. 
[Coach Sinisa] Mihajlovic and I have a good relationship. This new experience 
excites me very much and I want to improve every day.”

The 29-year-old long has been a fan of Italian football – “I grew up watching 
Serie A on TV on Sundays,” – and explained he was aware of the history of 
Torino, seven-times league champions, before moving. “I know there is also 
Juventus in town, butTorino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> are 
one of the best clubs in Italy,” said Hart. “I am very happy, this will be a 
great season.”

Claudio Bravo, Joe Hart and why keepers need familiarity to be consistent | 
David Preece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/13/claudio-bravo-joe-hart-mistakes-new-teams-manchester-city-torino>
Hart enjoyed a decade at City and said moving to another county was not easy. 
“But it’s part of my career and I want to take this opportunity,” he said. 
Asked about a possible return to Manchester, he said: “Right now I’m at Torino 
and I will work for Torino.”

On Guardiola, he said: “Everyone has their own opinions. Now I’m focused on 
Torino.”
 