
Joe Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-cole> insisted he is not 
interested in Coventry’s money and joined the Sky Blues because he is desperate 
to play again.

The former England midfielder made a surprising loan move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/16/joe-cole-coventry-loan> to 
the Ricoh Arena from Aston Villa on Friday. He is expected to make his Coventry 
debut in their League One game at Rochdale on Tuesday.

Aston Villa’s Joe Cole joins League One Coventry on short-term loan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/16/joe-cole-coventry-loan> 
Villa are subsidising Cole’s wages during his 35-day spell and the player said 
money was not an issue.

Cole, 33, said: “If I was coming here for the money I wouldn’t be here. I’ve 
been playing in an era where we are very lucky and we appreciate that as 
footballers.

“Most of us come from council estates and are working class. You have an 
opportunity to lead a good life and finances are not going to be a problem for 
me. That wasn’t an issue for me coming here.”

Cole has played just once for Villa this season and has made just three league 
starts in 16 appearances since joining from West Ham United on a two-year deal 
in 2014.

Cole, who became a father for a third time on Sunday, revealed he dropped down 
to the third tier because he wants to play again.

“I just want to play football, regardless of the level, proper football, 
competitive football. I want to play for the right time and the right manager 
who plays the right way. I’m just excited to play a game,” he said.

“I’m sure once I get the cobwebs off I’ll be back to myself and looking 
forward to it. I’ve not really thought about the ideal scenario. One thing I 
have learnt is you only think of the next game.

“I know it’s boring but anything could happen. I’m just excited I’ve got a 
game to play tomorrow. There’s seven games in the 35 days and we’ll review it 
after then.”

The Coventry manager Tony Mowbray added: “He came to us, it’s not something I 
went chasing. The boy wants to play football and he still has part of his 
illustrious career to go.”
 