
Joe Hart admits he is expecting to be made available for transfer again by 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> when his 
loan spell at Torino finishes.

The England goalkeeper is on a season-long loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/joe-hart-torino-excited-test-serie-a-transfer-window-manchester-city>
 with the Italian outfit after slipping down the pecking order at City 
following Pep Guardiola’s appointment as manager.

Joe Hart: ‘Some people probably do think I’m absolutely useless’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/joe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition>
In an interview with Sky Sports this week, the 29-year-old said about next 
summer: “I don’t think City are going to be standing in the way – if somebody 
really wants me, then I’m probably going to be made available. So it will be 
about talking and working out what is next and what the best move is for 
whichever club that might be and for myself.

“I’ve not been sent here to see how I do or see if I improve. I’ve been sent 
out because I wasn’t wanted. I’m not here to prove what I can do, I’m here 
because I need to look elsewhere and I didn’t have a chance to sort anything 
permanently.”

Regarding Guardiola, Hart added: “I came in after the other players because of 
the Euros, and when we first had a conversation he said he had his reservations 
about me. I shook his hand, I said it was professionally honest, but not what I 
wanted to hear. I said I wanted to work for him and see what happens but I got 
the impression that it wasn’t really going anywhere. I got the feeling I wasn’t 
going to play.

“I spoke to the chief executive [Ferran Soriano] and said: ‘You want me to go 
don’t you?’ He didn’t stop me with what I was saying. I’m up for a fight but 
you’ve got to be clever and pick your battle. It was the opinion of a guy who 
has got a lot of power at the club and I wasn’t on the right side of it.The 
goalkeeper he signed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/manchester-city-confirm-signing-of-claudio-bravo-from-barcelona>
 [Claudio Bravo] was a good goalkeeper. He liked Willy [Cabellero] as well, he 
liked Angus [Gunn] and I wouldn’t say there was an awful lot coming in my 
direction so I thought I needed to go elsewhere and I’m really grateful to 
Torino for giving me the opportunity.

“I would have backed myself but I prefer thinking about how I can help Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> now rather than ‘what if’ or ‘I 
could have done that’.”

Hart insists he feels no bitterness towards City over the situation. “It’s 
football,” he said. “I’ve seen loads of mad stuff happen. I’ve seen people 
leave that I didn’t think were worthy of leaving and people staying that maybe 
shouldn’t. It just moves along and there is no point getting wrapped up in it. 
My feelings towards City will never change. I feel really strongly towards them 
as a club and I really want them to do well.”

Meanwhile, one of City’s major summer signings, Gabriel Jesus, has arrived in 
Manchester for a brief visit before the completion of his move in January.

The 19-year-old Brazil forward committed to a five-year contract with City 
after the club agreed a dealworth an intial £27m with Palmeiras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/manchester-city-sign-gabriel-jesus-palmeiras>
.

Jesus was allowed to remain with Palmeiras until the end of their domestic 
season, a campaign which has ended with title success.

He is expected to spend a few days in Manchester touring City’s facilities, 
meeting his new team-mates and watching Saturday’s Premier League clash with 
Chelsea. He will move permanently early in January when the transfer window 
opens and he can be formally registered.

Jesus did not speak to media as he arrived at Manchester Airport but had 
posted a picture on Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/p/BNdCzK1D-CQ/?hl=en> 
prior to flying, with the message: “Manchester here I come.”
 