
Joe Hart’s loan agreement with Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> does not include a clause that 
allows him to accept a permanent move in January so the 29-year-old is likely 
to play at the Italian club for the rest of the season.

Transfer window live: Hart's agent confirms Torino move, Wilshere, Berahino 
and more!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/30/transfer-window-live-wilshere-hart-chambers-berahino-and-more>
Hart flew to Turin on Tuesday morning before undergoing a medical and his 
expected completion of the loan fromManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>. Both City and Torino 
will contribute to the 29-year-old’s salary of around £135,000 a-week. However 
it is understood that his contract has no stipulation in it he can be 
transferred in the winter window should a club wish to bid for him.

There is an outside possibility Hart could be recalled by City. But this 
appears remote given Pep Guardiola’s demotion of him as the City No1. Claudio 
Bravo’s arrival for around £17m means Hart would be at least the No3, given 
Willy Caballero replaced him as first-choice before Bravo was signed.

Hart could actually be as low as fourth in line due to Angus Gunn’s emergence. 
So it would require an unprecedented series of injuries for the manager to 
consider that Hart might be recalled.

Changes to the loan rules by Fifa means there are no longer emergency deals 
for clubs, and so Hart could only return if an extraordinary scenario occurred 
before or during the January window.

Hart’s agent, Jonathan Barnett, confirmed the goalkeeper is set to join, 
telling Tuttosport: “Yes,Joe Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-hart> will play at Torino. It’s done. 
He has said ‘yes’ to the club and now Manchester City have given the OK. It’s 
all true, it’s certain.”
 