
Joel Monaghan has urged Castleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> to be on their guard as they 
prepare to face the backlash from Wigan’s heaviest defeat in more than a decade.

Comprehensive losses are few and far between for a club such as Wigan, so it 
is hard to know what to expect from them on Friday night. However, following 
their62-0 whitewash at Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/wakefield-wigan-super-league-match-report>
 last weekend – the Warriors’ biggest defeat since their75-0 loss against St 
Helens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jun/27/rugbyleague.wiganwarriors>
 in 2005 – Monaghan is anticipating a stern response as Castleford aim to move 
within a point of the top four with victory.

Former Castleford player Ryan McGoldrick puts himself on eBay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/13/castleford-rugby-league-ryan-mcgoldrick-ebay>
“People have been hearing about it all week, about how that game ended up, but 
when you go to Wigan on a Friday night at their ground it doesn’t matter what 
happened the week before – you’re going to be in for a tough game,” the wing 
said.

“We’ve got a fair bit to improve on ourselves and we know it’s not going to be 
easy, despite what happened to them. You’re not going to see a Wigan side as 
bad as that two weeks in a row, so it’s got the makings of a great game. I’ve 
played in some great games against them and I know that it’s a tough place to 
go to.”

Monaghan has found himself in and out of the Castleford team with a recurring 
back problem since joining from Warrington but with that issue now resolved and 
the Tigers winning three of their past four games, he believes the best is yet 
to come from both himself and his team‑mates as they look to scale theSuper 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> table, where eight sides 
are separated by only four points.

He said: “There’s so much more to come from this group this year. I believe 
there are some good times coming for this club and it’s only going to make the 
boys tougher, the way we’ve battled to get some wins. I’ve never seen it as 
tight as this since I arrived in England and if we can perform over the next 
month we’ll put ourselves in a good spot come the end of the year.”

A sickness bug and a plethora of long- and short-term injuries meant the 
Warriors were without as many as 10 frontline players for that defeat at 
Wakefield last weekend and the Wigan coach, Shaun Wane, has warned he is still 
expecting his side to be below par on Friday night as injuries and illness 
continue to plague the club.

“There were some sick players who shouldn’t have played at Wakefield but we 
had nobody else,” Wane said.

“To that end, I take my hat off to those guys – they really performed tough. 
There’s a few who are still not great but I’m hoping over the next few days 
they’ll get better – but we won’t be at our absolute best, given what we’ve 
been through.”

The defending champions, Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/huddersfield-leeds-super-league-match-report>
, will aim for only their third win of the season on Friday as they face 
Hull FC but the hooker Beau Falloon believes an upturn in form is imminent. “We 
haven’t been getting too many wins and I think as soon as we get that first win 
we will gain a bit of confidence and kick on from there,” he said.

The Rhinos lost 14-10 to Salford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/salford-leeds-super-league-match-report>
 last weekend, although their performance suggested to some that they may be 
turning the corner. Falloon said: “Everyone is a bit low on confidence at the 
moment but I feel it’s not too far away.”

Falloon’s team-mate Liam Sutcliffe said: “There were many positives, 
especially from where we’ve been at the last couple of weeks. We’re not 
panicking. We know we’re not in a great position but everyone is still 
confident in the team’s ability and what we can do.”

Leeds will be without their captain, Danny McGuire, because of a quad problem, 
while Hull, who are aiming for a sixth win in succession, could welcome back 
Leon Pryce and Danny Washbrook from injury lay-offs.
 