
John Still has left his position as manager of League Two side Dagenham & 
Redbridge to take up the vacancy at non-leagueLuton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown>.

Still was the fourth longest serving manager in England behind only Sir Alex 
Ferguson, Arsène Wenger and David Moyes. But his nine-year spell in what was 
his second stint at Victoria Road has on Tuesday come to an end with two and a 
half years remaining on his contract.

A statement on the club's website read: "Dagenham & Redbridge manager John 
Still has decided the time is right to end his nine year stay at the London 
Borough of Barking & Dagenham Stadium and will take over this afternoon as 
manager of Luton Town

"John had two offers on the table for his services and was given permission by 
the Board of Directors to talk to Luton Town at the weekend. He has thought 
over the proposal from the Blue Square Premier side and has decided to take up 
the new challenge.

"Under the terms of his contract Dagenham & Redbridge FC were entitled to a 
large compensation fee from the Hatters but that would have stopped John from 
being able to make the move.

"In light of the fantastic job he has done for the Daggers Luton will instead 
pay a nominal amount up front with further nominal payments depending on their 
success with John at the helm. The club will also be sending a side to play a 
pre-season friendly at Kenilworth Road

"John Still returned to the Daggers in 2004 and built a side which won 
promotion to the Football League in 2007 and promotion toLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> in 2010. Along the way 
he has brought in just over £2m in transfer fees."

"For continuity, and in recognition of tremendous work he has already shown, 
the club have today appointed assistant manager Wayne Burnett as the interim 
manager until the end of the season."

Still has been lured to Luton with unconfirmed reports suggesting he was 
offered a bumper £200,000 per year deal to replace Paul Buckle,who left 
Kenilworth Road last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/19/luton-town-paul-buckle-leaves>
 by mutual consent for unspecified personal reasons.
 