
I first rang John Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-art-critic-and-author-dies-aged-90>
 more than a year ago – I had been given his number by his publisher to arrange 
a date tomeet him in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/john-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller>
. I mentioned that November was a busy month, to which he responded in a warm, 
conspiratorial tone: that was good – because he would be away throughout the 
month and could not say when next he would be free. The sense was – charming, 
if not helpful in professional terms – that we would agree not to meet unless 
or until it suited us. The clear subtext was: let the bosses go hang. I put the 
phone down – amused but then anxious that I had missed my opportunity to meet 
the great man – storyteller, art critic, artist. Months passed and then 
Berger’s 90th birthday was on the horizon – a new excuse to meet. I still had 
his mobile number and, this time, we made our date without fuss.

John Berger: ‘If I’m a storyteller it’s because I listen’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/john-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller>
The trouble was – and typical that this should happen en route to meeting a 
man I admired so much – his address. There is more than one Avenue du Onze 
Novembre and they exist in distinct, far-flung areas of Paris. I was on a 
suburban train when Berger rang to check my progress and we ascertained I was 
heading at speed in completely the wrong direction (my slapdash approach to 
Google maps to blame). When I eventually arrived, a flustered cab ride later, 
he and his companion, Nella Bielski, must have been staring at the lunch Nella 
had prepared for almost an hour. They could not have been nicer, Berger 
smilingly making light of all my apologies with what I would discover to be his 
defining quality: kindness.

In their company, the procedure of an interview seemed bad form. How much more 
agreeable to talk over lunch through the ebbing Parisian afternoon. And that, 
with huge enjoyment on my part, is what we mainly did. As to any sense that 
Berger himself was ebbing, only his painful back seemed to insist he was 
mortal. He planned to get back on his motorbike and swim again (as soon as his 
back obliged). Even allowing for the frailty of being 90, there was fire in 
him. We talked about art, politics and literature and, above all, his love of 
family and friends. He told me he was intending to give only one major 
pre-birthday interview – this was it. Neither of us knew it would be his last. 
“Come and see us again next time you are in Paris,” he said.
 