
ARL Commission chairman John Grant has saved his job after striking a peace 
deal with disgruntledNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clubs during 
marathon talks on Tuesday.

Grant was able to negotiate a resolution on the club funding impasse with the 
16 club chairwomen and chairmen after seven hours of talks at Rugby League 
Central at Moore Park in Sydney.

The clubs called the emergency general meeting after Grant last month pulled 
from the table a club funding deal which had been agreed in principle 12 months 
ago.

The commission on Tuesday agreed to a deal which went close to matching the 
original offer of funding clubs at 130% of the salary cap.

Related: High noon for John Grant but a bloody showdown is the last thing the 
NRL needs | Nick Tedeschi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/high-noon-for-john-grant-but-a-bloody-showdown-is-the-last-thing-the-nrl-needs>

NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg said it wasn’t yet known how much the clubs 
would receive because a collective bargaining agreement for the 2018 season had 
not yet been struck.

The NRL was light on details and it’s unclear if the clubs would receive the 
$1bn over five years they had been seeking.

The grassroots of the game will receive a 65% funding increase.

“Clubs will be funded more than they’ve ever been and the grassroots will 
receive more funding than in the clubs’ history,” Greenberg said.

“It’s a good outcome for everyone across the game. It took some time to get 
there but we got there. What I can tell you is the clubs will have a margin 
above the salary cap.”

Greenberg said they would also consider the club’s demand that they be given 
two seats on the nine-member commission. In exchange, the clubs have agreed to 
a sinking fund to prop up struggling clubs.

It appeared the game’s top administrator was a dead man walking going into the 
meeting, with the clubs boasting the numbers to oust him.

It was touted that Grant – who refused to speak to waiting media – would be 
able to stay in the job for the next 12 months before being forced to step 
down, however Greenberg said no end date had been decided.

“John’s in a position where’s he got to put the game’s best interests at 
heart,” Greenberg said. “He’s come under some personal criticism but that’s 
okay, that’s the way the game works.

“But John, the clubs, the commission, they handled themselves with a great 
deal of professionalism.”
 