
Oldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> have appointed John 
Sheridan as manager for a second time. Sheridan, who held the job there between 
2006 and 2009, has returned as David Dunn’s successor after an agreement was 
reached with Newport.

The Welsh side, in League Two, granted Oldham permission to holds talks on 
Tuesday with Sheridan, who took over as Newport’s manageronly in early October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/02/newport-county-appoint-john-sheridan-manager>
.

“John has always been high up on my list whenever we have appointed managers,” 
said the Latics chairman Simon Corney. “If you look at his record, he got us 
into the play-offs when he was here and he has won the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
and promotion with Chesterfield, plus he took Plymouth into the play-offs last 
season.

“Wherever he has been he has done really well. It was time to make a change 
and we feel we’ve got the right man here to make a difference, get the crowd 
going, get the players going and keep us in League One. I would also like to 
take this opportunity to add my thanks toNewport County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newport-county> who have dealt with this 
situation in a professional manner.”

After Newport’s FA Cup match against Blackburn was postponed on Saturday when 
heavy rain made the Rodney Parade pitch unplayable,Sheridan criticised his then 
club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/11/fa-cup-talking-points-third-round>
 for not doing enough to ensure the game went ahead. The ground’s head of 
operations, Mark Jones, called his comments “very unprofessional 
<https://twitter.com/_MarkJones/status/685838249076649985?lang=en-gb>” and 
later accepted an apology from him.

Oldham sacked Dunn this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/12/oldham-part-manager-david-dunn>
 just four months into his tenure, after he secured only three wins. Sheridan 
replaced Terry Butcher as the Newport manager in October and has led the club 
to five victories from his 17 matches in charge. The 51-year-old made more than 
150 appearances for Oldham during his playing career. The Newport assistant 
manager, Warren Feeney, and the first-team coach, Mike Flynn, will be in charge 
of the side for Saturday’s trip to York.
 