
Sunderland’s hopes of avoiding relegation appear to have been dealt a 
significant blow after the goalkeeper Jordan Pickford sustained a serious 
looking knee injury duringthe team’s Boxing Day defeat at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
.

Pickford’s precise prognosis will be confirmed by a specialist but initial 
assessments from Sunderland’s medical staff indicate the England Under-21 
goalkeeper, who has undergone scans, could be sidelined for at least three 
months.

It remains unclear whether the 22-year-old will require surgery but David 
Moyes will be alarmed at losing a player who has been in outstanding form for 
the struggling side this season.

David Moyes may not have taken Sunderland job if he had known cash woes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/david-moyes-may-not-have-taken-sunderland-job-if-known-cash-woes>
Pickford is likely to be replaced by his understudy, Vito Mannone, at Burnley 
on New Year’s Eve and at home to Liverpool on Monday but his injury may 
disappoint Arsenal, Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester United. They have all been 
watching Sunderland’s young goalkeeper and may have been prepared to bid for 
him during the January transfer window.

Although Pickford – who took over from Mannone in August after the Italian 
fractured an elbow – is contracted toSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> until 2020, Moyes was 
believed to be open to selling him in January, providing he could be loaned 
back to them for the remainder of the season.

With Sunderland £140m in debt and their £73m wage bill leaving them perilously 
close to breaching Premier League wage cap rules, Moyes will need to sell 
before he can buy next month and there is little doubt the squad needs 
strengthening.

A spate of injuries – the majority affecting knees – have not helped his 
cause. Duncan Watmore and Paddy McNair are already ruled out until next season 
while Jan Kirchhoff, Lee Cattermole and Lynden Gooch will not return until 
mid-March at the very earliest.
 