
José Mourinho is on the verge of making his first signing at Old Trafford 
after the Villarreal defender Eric Bailly underwent a medical atManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic: ‘Mourinho is cool – the older coaches get, the cooler they 
get’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/07/zlatan-ibrahimovic-mourinho-cool-older-coaches-sportswear>
The clubs have agreed a fee of around £25m plus add-ons for Bailly, who can 
play across the back four and looks to have the physical prowess to prosper in 
the Premier League. Mourinho saw his priority as strengthening the defence and 
Bailly quickly became his primary target, nothwithstanding theovertures to 
Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/04/manchester-united-zlatan-ibrahimovic-agrees-personal-terms>
. The United manager has seen enough to believe Bailly can be a long‑term 
centre-half for United and has seen off a host of interested clubs for the 
Ivory Coast international.

Leicester City and Arsenal also registered interest in signing Bailly though 
Manchester City have turned their attentions to Athletic Bilbao and the French 
defender Aymeric Laporte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-city-aymeric-laporte-athletic-bilbao>
.

Bailly, 22, joined Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>
 for around £4m in January 2015 as a replacement for Gabriel, who had signed 
for Arsenal.

He moved to Spain at the age of 17 after being spotted at a youth tournament 
in Burkina Faso and came through Espanyol’s youth team. He played five times in 
La Liga for the first team before joining Villarreal but quickly became a 
regular in the side who finished fourth last season to qualify for the 
Champions League and also reached the Europa League semi-final. Bailly was in 
the side who defeated Liverpool in the first leg of the semi-final at El 
Madrigal.

The defender was also named in the squad for the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations as 
an uncapped player, and made his international debut in a friendly against 
Nigeria in January 2015. He started all six games in the tournament and they 
went on to becrowned champions. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/feb/08/africa-cup-of-nations-final-ivory-coast-v-ghana-live>
 