
The advantage José Mourinho demanded from this first leg became far more 
comfortable when Marouane Fellaini doubled Manchester United’s margin of 
victory late on. As is the custom now the Portuguese’s side dominated their 
opponents and with the Belgian’s headed finish on 87 minutes now take a 
two-goal lead to the KCom Stadium for theEFL Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> semi-final second leg in a 
fortnight’s time.

Here was yet another win for a United side that are starting to purr on 
virtually every matchday. On this showing the club have every chance of 
reaching next month’s final and seeking a fifth triumph in the competition.

Wayne Rooney’s supporting cast grow tired of chasing records up blind alleys | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/10/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-bobby-charlton-hull-city-efl-cup>
United went full tilt at Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> instantly. Matteo Darmian raced 
along the left and pinged the ball into Juan Mata whose instant shot was saved 
well by Eldin Jakupovic to the goalkeeper’s right. This was indicative of the 
strut Mourinho has put into his side’s play. Each time they take the field now 
there is an expectancy they will emerge on top, the effect of a run that has 
now extended to nine consecutive victories and an unbeaten sequence of 15 games.

To underline that mood the home side came close to the opener just a few 
moments later. Marcus Rashford, who scored twice inSaturday’s 4-0 FA Cup win 
over Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
, scuffed an attempt and Wayne Rooney nearly connected for a record 250th 
United goal.

Mourinho had made seven changes from Saturday’s win over Reading with only 
Mata, Chris Smalling, Rashford and Rooney retained. For his second game as 
Hull’s manager, Marco Silva kept nine of his first XI thatknocked Swansea City 
out of the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/hull-city-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
, with only Harry Maguire and Josh Tymon drafted in. This was due to the 
restricted resources available to the Portuguese and was the same reason only 
six replacements were named after Jake Livermore fell ill.

These restrictions were compounded when Markus Henriksen was forced off after 
a 50-50 challenge with Paul Pogba and meant one of the manager’s six 
substitutes, Abel Hernández, was on by the 19th minute.

Just before this, slick interplay between Rooney, Darmian and Mata created a 
clear chance for Henrikh Mkhitaryan, and when he missed Mourinho turned to his 
bench to show his disappointment.

With Zlatan Ibrahimovic absent due to an illness, Mourinho had outlined what 
he hoped for from the first leg. “I’m happy with a small step to Wembley,” the 
53-year-old said. “If we win the match, I’m happy. I think it’s very difficult 
against a Premier League team to have a fat result. I think they will come very 
well organised, to defend and try something in counter.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb66afe58de18203a741f22da5cd923ccf29c2d5%2F0_53_1968_1181%2F1968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juan%20Mata%20and%20Marouane%20Fellaini%20put%20Manchester%20United%20on%20top%20against%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juan%20Mata%20and%20Marouane%20Fellaini%20put%20Manchester%20United%20on%20top%20against%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb66afe58de18203a741f22da5cd923ccf29c2d5%2F0_53_1968_1181%2F1968.jpg>
 Marouane Fellaini celebrates with with Anthony Martial after scoring 
Manchester United’s second goal. Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Mourinho will have been pleased his side did all the pressing in the first 
half but less happy the match was goalless at the break. On 27 minutes the 
ever-improving Paul Pogba warmed Jakupovic’s hands with a dipping 25-yarder 
that the keeper tipped over for a corner. Next Pogba’s strength held off a Hull 
man before he rolled the ball to Rashford. The centre-forward glanced up, then 
blazed at Jakupovic though this time the visiting No1 could watch the ball sail 
over.

As the break approached a Robert Snodgrass corner from the left was headed out 
by Pogba. The ball went back to the same Hull forward and his effort was 
gathered safely by David de Gea. Next Snodgrass, who is a class apart in this 
Hull side, put in Hernández but the shot was weak.

With 45 minutes virtually up Rashford and David Meyler engaged in a race for 
possession in which the former appeared favourite until the latter got a foot 
in just as the No10 went to shoot from close range.

If Mourinho told his team at the break to become more ruthless this went 
unheeded by Mkhitaryan in United’s opening attack of the second half. Pogba 
prodded the ball forward but the Armenian’s touch was clumsy and Jakupovic 
could collect. Then Old Trafford was treated to a gorgeous pass from the 
Frenchman. This was hit on a low parabola just above Hull heads to skid 
delightfully into Rooney’s path. Again, though, the captain was profligate when 
shooting.

José Mourinho urges Manchester United fans and team to step it up for Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-hull-city>
United were about to break the deadlock, though, via a five-man move. Rooney 
skipped inside and found Pogba. The midfielder fed Antonio Valencia on the 
right. He stood up the ball and the header from Mkhitaryan was turned home by 
Mata for his seventh this term. It proved to be Rooney’s last action as he was 
replaced by Anthony Martial, meaning the Liverpudlian could become United’s 
record scorer against Liverpool here on Sunday.

Replays suggested Mata was marginally offside though United will hardly care. 
They continued to coast through the contest. And Pogba, the game’s best 
performer just ahead of Mata, was about to offer the latest evidence why.

The 23-year-old controlled proceedings and when he stepped up and smacked a 
vicious free-kick against the right post he deserved more for his excellence .
 