
The teenager Jude Winchester completed a late comeback with his first career 
goal asKilmarnock secured seventh place in the Scottish Premier League with a 
2-1 win atDunfermline.

The home side looked like doubling their number of home wins having repelled a 
period of early second-half pressure after Paul Willis had given them a 
20th-minute lead. But Liam Kelly fired an equaliser with four minutes left and 
the 19-year-old substitute Winchester capped his second appearance with a cool 
finish in the 89th minute.

Earlier Kilmarnock had failed to capitalise on their early pressure and Willis 
gave the home side the lead. Joe Cardle's free-kick was headed back across goal 
by Liam Buchanan and was tapped home from close range by the midfielder. 
Dunfermline looked like holding out for a second successive home win but Kelly 
struck a 20-yard effort into the top corner after a Dean Shiels shot had been 
closed down by the Pars defence.Dunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> were made to pay when the 
right-back Lewis Toshney overlapped and crossed for Winchester to score from 
six yards.

Greg Tansey and Jonny Hayes scored from set-pieces in the second half as 
Inverness beat the Scottish Cup finalists Hibernian 2-0. Tansey opened the 
scoring against the much-changed visitors when he curled home a 25-yard 
free-kick just after the hour. Hayes sealed the victory 10 minutes later with a 
penalty after Matt Doherty handled in the area.

Hibs had the opportunity to claim 10th place and a five-figure cash boost in 
the process. With around Â£80,000 extra at stake per league place, it will be a 
welcome reward for Inverness.

Aberdeen's striker Darren Mackie missed out on the chance to end his Dons 
career with a goal as his final game for the club ended with a 0-0 draw at home 
toSt Mirren.

Steven Thompson had St Mirren's best chances and forced a late save from Jamie 
Langfield.Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> still looked 
the more positive side, and when Mark Reynolds found Scott Vernon in the 
penalty area, it took a timely last-ditch tackle from Jeroen Tesselaar to deny 
the striker.

A final Aberdeen change saw the impressive Jamie Masson replaced by Ryan 
Fraser and the winger immediately injected fresh life into the game, keen to 
take on his man at every opportunity. When Fraser was slid in by Mackie two 
minutes after coming on, his low cross was deflected towards goal, forcing 
Craig Samson to desperately palm away. The former Scotland striker Thompson 
came close again with a 12-yard strike, only denied by the legs of the Aberdeen 
goalkeeper Langfield.
 