
Uganda’s high court has ordered the closure of a chain of low-cost private 
schools backed by Bill Gates andMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, respectively the 
founders of Microsoft and Facebook.

Judge Patricia Basaza Wasswa ruled on Friday that the 63 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&ved=0ahUKEwj2xOmmrY_QAhWCOxoKHWMpDPYQFggtMAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bridgeinternationalacademies.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F08%2FBridge-Statement-On-Ugandan-Parliament-Discussion-09.08.16-1.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHaTaVdQW3CTcYROWJfu6USf-P23A&sig2=fUrahz-W-WlS5hfe-1WCGQ>
 Bridge International Academies 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&ved=0ahUKEwj2xOmmrY_QAhWCOxoKHWMpDPYQFggtMAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bridgeinternationalacademies.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F08%2FBridge-Statement-On-Ugandan-Parliament-Discussion-09.08.16-1.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHaTaVdQW3CTcYROWJfu6USf-P23A&sig2=fUrahz-W-WlS5hfe-1WCGQ>
 provided unsanitary learning conditions, used unqualified teachers and were 
not properly licensed.

The ruling is a blow to Bridge International 
<http://www.bridgeinternationalacademies.com/company/investors/>, which has 
expanded rapidly since its inception in 2008. The organisation offers cheap, 
standardised, technology-driven education in countries in Africa and Asia.

Uganda’s success in universal primary education falling apart | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/uganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe>
Under the Bridge International model, teachers read scripted lessons from a 
tablet computer that also records student attendance and assessments.

But Bridge International has courted controversy, with Liberian teachers 
threatening to strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/liberia-turns-to-private-sector-controversial-overhaul-failing-schools>
 earlier this year over government plans to outsource all primary education to 
the private US-owned company.

In Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, government inspectors 
said children were being taught in sub-standard facilities and unsanitary 
conditions.

But James Black, a parent who chose Bridge International for his six children, 
said he appreciated the low fees of about $28 (£22) a term – one-third of what 
he used to pay – and disagreed with the decision.

“The government says that the facilities are not clean but when I visit the 
school I look at the kitchen and latrines and they are fine,” he said.

“Bridge schools are mushrooming and many of the officials in the ministry own 
private schools, and I think that they are scared that they will lose pupils 
and their fees.”

Bridge International, which claims to have 12,000 students in Uganda, said it 
would challenge the high court ruling. “We are extremely disappointed for our 
pupils and disagree with this ruling,” said liaison officer Matsiko Godwin 
Muhwezi.

“We plan to appeal, on behalf of the more than 20,000 Ugandans who have 
decided to send their children to our schools.”
 