
The judge leading the public inquiry into undercover policing is deliberating 
on a crucial issue - just how “public” his inquiry is going to be?

Lord Justice Pitchford has been given the task of examining the undercover 
infiltration of political groups since 1968. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2015/jul/17/judge-leading-public-inquiry-into-undercover-police-to-speak-for-the-first-time>

This week, he held a two-day hearing to consider opposing arguments about how 
much of his inquiry should be held in private. He has now gone away to mull 
over this question and is due to publish a ruling on May 3.

Police accused of concealing role of undercover officers from judges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/21/police-concealed-role-undercover-officers-case-from-judges>
As we report here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/police-undercover-officers-inquiry-heard-in-secret>
, the police are arguing for large portions of the inquiry to be held behind 
closed doors. This is opposed by those who were spied upon by the police (read 
this here 
<https://policespiesoutoflives.org.uk/open-inquiry-open-justice-a-guide-to-submission-to-the-public-inquiry-into-undercover-policing/>
).

Peter Francis, the only undercover officer who has so far blown the whistle in 
public, has challenged the police’s attempt to hold much of the inquiry in 
secret (readthis here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2016/mar/23/police-attempt-to-hold-spies-inquiry-in-secret-challenged?CMP=share_btn_tw>
).


Transcripts of the hearing can be found here 
<https://www.ucpi.org.uk/hearings/>, with the submissions to the hearing here 
<https://www.ucpi.org.uk/witness-statements-and-submissions/>. 

Amid the intricate legal argument, there will be one moment that will perhaps 
linger most in the memory.

Undercover: The True Story of Britain's Secret Police Paul Lewis and Rob Evans 
– review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/29/undercover-secret-police-lewis-evans-review>
Helen Steel, the social justice campaigner who was deceived into a two-year 
relationship by undercover spy John Dines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/undercover-uk-police-spy-apologises-after-being-tracked-down-by-woman-he-deceived>
, argued for “maximum transparency and disclosure” to ensure that the police 
abuses do not happen again. She was the only person to address the hearing who 
was not a barrister.

When she finished, there was a spontaneous round of applause from those in 
public gallery and others in the courtroom. It was unclear whether clapping is 
allowed in the formal confines of the inquiry that is being held in the Royal 
Courts of Justice.

This from <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35864975> BBC home affairs 
correspondent Dominic Casciani is a judicious analysis of the issues facing 
Pitchford, drawing a particular parallel with another inquiry - into 
allegations of torture and rendition by the British state - in which many of 
the participants walked out.
 