
Julian Draxler scored two classy goals to lead Wolfsburg to a 3-2 away win over
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
newcomers Gent in their round of 16 first leg match. At 22, Draxler confirmed 
himself as the new creative force of a team that had been struggling, scoring 
just before and just after half-time. On the hour mark, Max Kruse finished off 
another smooth move with a goal that made it seem like the second leg would be 
little more than a formality.

Gent 2-3 Wolfsburg: Champions League – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/17/gent-wolfsburg-champions-league-live>
But Gent’s Sven Kums scored from 18 yards in the 80th minute and Kalifa 
Coulibaly, with a close-range header, made the game still closer nine minutes 
later – meaning that new life has been breathed into the Belgian side’s 
prospects of causing another big shock in the competition.

Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> defended high from 
the start and harried Gent’s midfield throughout, belying the host side’s 
robust home reputation. Draxler, though, made all the difference. In the 44th 
minute, he first swivelled around a defender and sprinted down the left 
sideline before working a perfect one-two with Vieirinha and finishing the move 
off with a low shot past Matz Sels.

His second goal, in the 54th minute, was perhaps even better. Latching on to a 
bad backpass, he beat the last defender, Stefan Mitrovic, with a ball through 
the legs before chipping over Sels into the empty net.

It was an important payoff from Wolfsburg’s most expensive player and also 
showed his promise for the German national team. Draxler was brought in after
Kevin De Bruyne moved to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/30/manchester-city-confirm-signing-kevin-de-bruyne-wolfsburg>
, but the German side has been struggling for much of this season and is 
currently eighth in the Bundesliga.

Cristiano Ronaldo on target as Real Madrid take control against Roma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/roma-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
Still, Draxler’s performance showed that a struggling team in the German 
league still presents a massive challenge for a Champions League newcomer like 
Gent. Regardless, Wolfsburg were frustrated with the late goals that left Gent 
still with an outside chance in the return game. “We shifted a gear back,” said 
Draxler. “That was our mistake.”

The Belgian champions were euphoric about reaching the knockout stage, but 
struggled from the kick-off. Gent, who won their first league title last year, 
have charmed everyone with open attacking play but, even though Wolfsburg’s 
defence was hit by suspension and injury, they were only able to thrill the 
home fans at the 20,000-capacity Ghelamco Arena in the last 10 minutes.
 