
Dr Nadia Masood’s public involvement in the junior doctors’ dispute began in a 
layby somewhere in north-east London on 11 January. “I was driving to Essex to 
see my mum, who was in hospital with sepsis after having chemotherapy for 
breast cancer. I was listening to LBC and James O’Brien was talking about the 
first junior doctors’ strike, which was due the next day,” she recalls. “I 
pulled over, phoned in and ended up on air, trying to explain to listeners why 
we were going on strike. I was feeling very emotional both because of my mum 
and because of the strike.”

It was unusual behaviour for the 35-year-old anaesthetic registrar. “I’m from 
a completely apolitical background. I didn’t have a political bone in my body 
until the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, decided to impose an unfair and unjust 
contract on 54,000 junior doctors,” Masood says. “At first I saw the contract 
as an ethical, not political, issue. It wasn’t right to impose a contract on a 
workforce who give up their entire lives and pour blood, sweat and tears into 
their jobs and have no choice but to work under the conditions theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> gives us, because that’s the only way 
we can become consultants, which is our goal. I was shocked Jeremy Hunt had the 
balls to do it.”

Junior doctors strike across England – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gallery/2016/jan/12/junior-doctors-strike-in-pictures>
The next day brought the first of what would be eight strikes between January 
and May. They pitted young medics renowned as workhorses of the NHS against a 
health secretary regarded with deep suspicion by the medical profession for his 
disparaging comments about GPs and consultants.Doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> in scrubs on picket duty outside 
their hospitals vied with Hunt for public sympathy over his insistence that 
juniors had to work more at weekends to deliver the government’s promised 
“truly seven-day NHS”.


Striking wasn’t easy for the doctors, who realise the uniqueness of their 
jobs, which they love, says Masood. On day one she was among the pickets 
outside Great Ormond Street hospital in London, where she worked at the time. 
“We were all feeling really bad about refusing to work that day. But parents 
brought their children outside from the wards to say hello and said they 
supported us, and our consultant colleagues kept everything running smoothly, 
which all helped.”


Did junior doctors expect to win? “Yes. That 98% of junior doctors who took 
part in a ballot organised by the British Medical Association backed strike 
action to oppose a contract we argued was unfair and unsafe – that made us 
realise that we all felt the same shock and horror at what Hunt was doing. We 
all felt justified in our resistance. Maybe I can call this naivety, but I 
think that the right thing – truth, honour, justice – always prevails in the 
end,” says Masood.

As walkouts, on-off negotiations and the war of words rolled on, opinion polls 
showed the medics were winning the battle for hearts and minds, even when they 
escalated their action to include withdrawal of cover from areas of 
life-or-death care, such as A&E and maternity units.

“The RMT give the impression that they don’t care [about the impact the rail 
strikes by their members has on the public], and people think they are being 
selfish and not handling things right,” Masood says. “But as junior doctors we 
felt that our motivation was really pure. We were genuinely concerned about the 
wellbeing of the NHS and genuinely believed that what we were doing was to 
protect it.


“It wasn’t about money, though Jeremy Hunt portrayed us as money-grabbers by 
constantly stressing that we’d be getting a pay rise. It was about patient 
safety and the sustainability of the NHS. Some people thought we were against a 
seven-day NHS, but most doctors – especially junior doctors – already work 
seven days a week.

“We spoke about how the NHS was already at breaking point, with too few staff 
and too little money to do its job properly. But no one took notice of us. But 
a year on, people like [the NHS England chief executive] Simon Stevens and [the 
NHS Providers chief executive] Chris Hopson, who distanced themselves from us a 
year ago, are now saying publicly what we were saying then, that the NHS is 
struggling with the lack of funding that it has.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjunior-doctor-nadia-masood-jeremy-hunt-driven-us-out-of-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F856e649377fc5058cca79c84aa9a33cdf659db25%2F1_0_4998_3000%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Junior%20doctor%20Nadia%20Masood%3A%20'Hunt's%20driven%20a%20lot%20of%20us%20out%20of%20the%20NHS'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjunior-doctor-nadia-masood-jeremy-hunt-driven-us-out-of-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Junior%20doctor%20Nadia%20Masood%3A%20%27Hunt%27s%20driven%20a%20lot%20of%20us%20out%20of%20the%20NHS%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fjunior-doctor-nadia-masood-jeremy-hunt-driven-us-out-of-nhs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F856e649377fc5058cca79c84aa9a33cdf659db25%2F1_0_4998_3000%2F4998.jpg>
 Posters made and carried by junior doctors during the strikes. Photograph: 
Photomontage/Roger Tooth 
Hunt has insisted hospitals have to be able to roster doctors to work more at 
weekends to enable the NHS to treat more patients on those days, though 
precisely what services he wants to be expanded remains unclear. Eight strikes 
did not force him to backtrack. Masood repeats what junior doctors argued 
repeatedly throughout the dispute: “There’s not enough doctors at the moment to 
staff the current service we’re trying to deliver over five days, so why has 
Jeremy Hunt brought in the new contract when he knows that? It’s madness to 
stretch a workforce that’s already too small across seven days.”


In May the then chair of the BMA’s junior doctors committee endorsed a revised 
version of the contract, but members rejected it by 58% to 42%. In August the 
union threatened a series of five-day walkouts between then and Christmas, but
abandoned the plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/05/bma-calls-off-september-junior-doctors-strike-after-scores-of-protests>
 in the face of huge opposition, both internal and external. Juniors began 
moving on to the contract in October.


So who won? “They did,” says Masood quietly, her voice trailing away. “The 
government have won in the short term and I’m worried that they will now do the 
same thing to nurses, consultants – to all NHS staff. But long term I fear that 
more junior doctors will decide not to train to be NHS consultants and quit, 
and that more people will be burned out mentally and physically.” She was one 
of five junior doctors who in September challenged in the high court the 
legality of Hunt’s decision to impose the contract. That action ended in defeat 
too.

The dispute has left junior doctors feeling miserable and demoralised, Masood 
says. She is still so outraged by Hunt’s behaviour that she stepped away from 
her training last month, even though she is close to becoming a consultant. Her 
decision means an understaffed NHS is one more medic short. She is taking a 
career break and now works as a locum in various London hospitals.


“There’s a big need for locums because there are rota gaps in every specialty 
in every hospital,” she says. “What Jeremy Hunt has done is driven a lot of us 
out of the NHS, either temporarily – like me – or permanently. He says he 
values us, but everything he has done has made us feel devalued. I just worry 
that he will do to other NHS workers what he did to us and if he does, that 
will kill us as a workforce, and that will kill the NHS, because there will be 
no one to work in it.”
 