
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> were denied a 16th 
successive Serie A win when they were held to a goalless draw at Bologna on 
Friday in a game marred by trouble when an object, possibly a firecracker, was 
hurled at their team bus as they arrived.

The draw means Napoli, who were displaced as leaders by Juve last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/juventus-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
, will return to the top if they beat Milan on Monday.

“It’s always a problem getting into Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna>, somebody threw a paper bomb or 
a firecracker, I don’t know which,” the Juventus chief executive, Giuseppe 
Moratta, said.

Simone Zaza completes Juventus’s rise, with a little help from Marco van 
Basten | Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/15/simone-zaza-juventus-napoli-marco-van-basten>
“It’s not an act of civility, it goes against what should be a positive spirit 
this evening. It’s an act of hooliganism and violence which has nothing to do 
with the real values of this match.”

Juve kept a ninth consecutive clean sheet in all competitions but failed to 
win a league game for the first time since losing 1-0 to Sassuolo on 28 October.

Bologna had the best chance of the first half when a powerful Mattia Destro 
effort was palmed away by Gianluigi Buffon and Godfred Donsah shot wide from 
the rebound.

Juve rested Paulo Dybala before Tuesday’s Champions League match against 
Bayern Munich and were uninspired until they created a flurry of chances in the 
final 10 minutes.

Paul Pogba fired one effort wide after Claudio Marchisio’s pass released him 
on the left and Álvaro Morata had an effort turned around the post by Antonio 
Mirante, the Bologna goalkeeper’s first serious save in the 86th minute. Pogba 
then forced a fine stop from Mirante with an angled drive and, although the 
ball flew across the face of the goal, Juan Cuadrado was unable to provide the 
finishing touch.

Juve, chasing a fifth successive title, have 58 points from 26 matches, two 
ahead of Napoli, with third-placed Fiorentina on 49.
 