
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> clocked up their 12th 
successive Serie A win on Sunday when they swept aside Chievo 4-0 away in a 
hopelessly one-sided encounter.

Álvaro Morata set Juventus on their way with two first-half goals before Alex 
Sandro and midfielder Paul Pogba added two more in the second half.

Juventus bringing the best out of Paulo Dybala to help fill boots of Tevez | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/25/paulo-dybala-juventus-fill-boots-carlos-tevez>
The win left Juventus, who are aiming for a fifth successive title, with 48 
points from 22 games, one ahead of Napoli who began the weekend as leaders and 
are at home to Empoli on Sunday. It also equalled their record number of 
consecutive league wins in a single season.

Juventus needed only six minutes to take the lead when Stephan Lichtsteiner’s 
low cross found Morata at the far post and the Spaniard tapped in from close 
range. Morata, who scored twice in the Wednesday’s 3-0 Italian Cup win over 
Inter Milan, took his tally to four in a week with another tap-in six minutes 
before the breakafter Paulo Dybala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/25/paulo-dybala-juventus-fill-boots-carlos-tevez>
 and Sami Khedira combined to carve open the Chievo defence.

Juve’s spluttering start to the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/14/juventus-feel-the-force-to-appease-talk-of-crisis-and-re-enter-scudetto-race>
, which included a 1-1 draw at home to Chievo, was a distant memory as they 
continued to dominate the game after the break.

They added a third in the 61st minute when Lichtsteiner played a one-two with 
Dybala and fed the ball to Pogba who in turn played it into the path of Alex 
Sandro, who rifled it home emphatically.

Pogba completed the rout when he collected the ball just outside the area, 
weaved his way past two defenders and side-footed a low shot past the 
exasperatedChievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> goalkeeper 
Albano Bizzarri.

The Frenchman was denied a second goal by the crossbar in stoppage time after 
a stunning piece of control to bring down a long pass out of defence
 