
Because I am a little early, and in true Paris fashion week tradition the 
morning’s schedule is already running a little late, I spend the first half 
hour of my visit toLoewe 
<http://www.loewe.com/eu_en/?countrynl=GB&gclid=CPaf1emKxsYCFSTmwgodtBwDHw>’s 
Parisian headquarters in the basement kitchen. This being Paris fashion week, 
however, this is a little better than it sounds: long, scrubbed, pale wood 
benches and a table piled with bowls of kumquats and slivers of lemon cake on a 
white platter. Fuchsia peonies in a glass urn are so artfully overblown that, 
when no one is looking, I stroke a petal to check they are real. (They are.) A 
charming French PR chats to me about how much she loves living in Dalston. A 
pair of male models, in dressing gowns and with alligator clips flattening 
their hair ready for the artless dirty-hair-don’t-­care look they will sport at 
the collection presentation later, spend 10 painstaking minutes trying to 
figure out the espresso machine; eventually, generous in triumph, they pass 
tiny paper cups of coffee around the room.


From the ground floor, the building blooms into grandeur: a double sweeping 
staircase, parquet floor, polished curlicue railings. Loewe occupies the lowest 
four floors of the building; someone confides, as we walk upstairs, that the 
sixth floor housesCatherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinedeneuve>’s apartment. On the first 
floor,LVMH <http://www.lvmh.com/> executives in elegant black suits are 
drinking more espressos, up here borne aloft by waiters with silver trays. We 
climb another level, past photographer’s assistants gaffer-taping lighting 
cabling to the floor and makeup artists powdering more boys, to the office of
Jonathan Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/sep/26/jonathan-jw-anderson-debut-loewe-paris-fashion-week>
, the 30-year-old designer from The Loup, County Derry, on whose talent LVMH is 
gambling the Loewe brand, the man at whose whim the parquet has been painted 
wenge-dark and the models’ hair creased flat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fabfb951a5d54abed5f6f8cd8df7f00d0acbbe8%2F0_0_908_1303%2F908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fabfb951a5d54abed5f6f8cd8df7f00d0acbbe8%2F0_0_908_1303%2F908.jpg>
 Turtleneck, £425, and sunglasses, £295

Photography: Andrew Woffinden 
Styling: Melanie Wilkinson Photograph: Andrew Woffinden for the Guardian 
All of this – building, mood, floor, flowers, pomp – is as much part of 
Anderson’s Loewe as the avant garde menswear collection (think: 
cartoon-embroidered silk pyjamas for Japanese astronauts) which the boys on the 
stairs will start modelling for editors once their hair is flat enough. 
Anderson enters the room from the Juliet balcony where he has been smoking a 
cigarette, and immediately launches into his game plan. “When I started at 
Loewe, I took a year out before we did a collection, because I felt we needed 
to work out all the fundamentals. The pencils, the door handles, the style of 
the press release, the stone of the buildings, the choice of photographer. All 
of these questions had to be asked, because ultimately, you need to make people 
forget what the brand looked like before, and get them to believe that the 
brand was always like this.”


There are two Andersons, differentiated by a middle initial. JW Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/14/jw-anderson-show-gentleness-replaces-trademark-shock-value>
, designer of London’s hottest label, leaves the W at home in Hackney when he 
gets on the Eurostar to become Jonathan Anderson, designer of Loewe. With or 
without the W, he doesn’t look or sound much like a fashion designer. He is 
handsome in a boy-next-door kind of way, with milky pale Northern Irish skin 
and sandy hair which he constantly scruffles in his hands. He is restless and 
fidgety. There is a full ashtray on the glass-topped table and a bumper pot of 
Extra mints. There are two empty espresso cups already, and he drinks another 
while I am there. He reminds me a little of the youngStephen Hawking as played 
by Eddie Redmayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/07/the-theory-of-everything-stephen-hawking-eddie-redmayne>
. It’s something in the way he blinks faster when he gets animated, in the 
twinkly good looks semi-subsumed by an intense, nail-biting intellect.

His ambitions for Loewe are both bold and daring. Bold, because the scale of 
what he wants Loewe to become is almost disarmingly grand. The off-white colour 
he chose for its redesigned packaging was based on Portland stone, the material 
used for the British Museum and the UN HQ in New York, a reference he chose 
because he “wants to make Loewe about culture. I want the stores to be public 
landmarks, where you see things you might see in a museum, I want that 
credibility.” (“It’s just my nature, to set the benchmark high,”Anderson told 
the New York Times 
<http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/14/the-boy-with-the-golden-touch/?_r=1>
 two years ago.) And daring, because he is cheekily dismissive of the theory on 
which most of the modern history of the luxury industry has been built. Brands 
founded in the 19th century (Loewe, 1846; Louis Vuitton, 1854; Burberry, 1856) 
have made big business out of dazzling modern customers with vignettes from 
their august heritage, namedropping history-book clients, pulling rank over 
newcomers.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F727ca9d7cae69a637d7b48d2f09ffd2efe1ab056%2F0_0_1777_2747%2F1777.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F727ca9d7cae69a637d7b48d2f09ffd2efe1ab056%2F0_0_1777_2747%2F1777.jpg>
 Dress, £1,875 Photograph: Andrew Woffinden for the Guardian 
“It’s like antibiotics,” Anderson says of the efficacy of this approach. 
“After a while, they stop working. I think people have become immune to that 
way of doing brands. To say, ‘We made things for the royal family’ – that’s not 
enough any more. It’s time for something new.” Anderson’s vision for Loewe is 
to “take a brand that operates in a luxury environment, and make it about 
culture. Make it a brand that articulates the period I am in now.” History is 
past its sell-by date in luxury, he believes. “Brands need to move at the speed 
the world does, and today that is fast. We live in the era of content. We put 
something on Instagram and it gets reposted and it’s everywhere and a minute 
later it’s gone, over. I don’t see that as a negative thing; it’s the way my 
mind works, too. It’s not just about consumers not getting bored of the brand, 
it’s about me not getting bored of it.”

Anderson is smart enough to hear how cocky this sounds. “People say to me 
sometimes that I’m too arrogant, too forceful,” he says – apropos of, I 
suspect, a reaction he reads on my face – “but that’s just how it is with me. I 
give 100% to whatever I’m doing. There is nothing held back.” He traces this to 
growing up in Northern Ireland in the 1990s. “It was a very difficult period. 
Car bombs, a town getting blown up. It was awful, and really confusing as a 
child to live through that, but it toughened me up. I don’t take anything for 
granted because I know that life is like a fuse.”


The now-you-see-it, now-you-don’t middle name comes from his father, Willie 
Anderson 
<http://www.irishrugby.ie/rugby/fixturesandresults/squads_ireland_player_search.php?player=23591&includeref=dynamic>
, a rugby international who was capped 27 times for Ireland in the 80s, then 
coached the national side. Willie did not pass on his rugby skills, but his son 
has inherited his fierce competitive instinct. “The other thing about my 
father’s job was that while I was growing up on a farm, surrounded by fields 
and cows, he was travelling and coming home with the treasures of the world. 
You know, a keyring, a koala bear teddy from Australia. I think in terms of 
drive and ambition, that was everything for me, the awareness that was all out 
there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0429d748e9faa0ecc6721580270ae3d5298ae96%2F0_0_965_1558%2F965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0429d748e9faa0ecc6721580270ae3d5298ae96%2F0_0_965_1558%2F965.jpg>
 Turtleneck, £425, jacket, £1,195, skirt, £1,195, boots, £990, and bag, £1,475. 
All clothes by Loewe (loewe.com <http://www.loewe.com/>) Photograph: Andrew 
Woffinden for the Guardian 
At 18, Anderson moved to America, to study acting. He had just come out as 
gay, and “partied, drank, smoked, had a great time. Except after a while I 
realised I didn’t enjoy the acting.” After a brief regroup in Dublin, where he 
worked atBrown Thomas 
<http://www.brownthomas.com/our-stores/brown-thomas-dublin/page/brown-thomas-dublin>
, he enrolled at theLondon College of Fashion <http://www.arts.ac.uk/fashion/> 
and found a job assisting legendary Prada stylistManuela Pavesi 
<http://www.style.com/trends/industry/2015/manuela-pavesi-obituary> as a window 
dresser. “The first time I worked with her was in Harrods, and she had just got 
off a flight, and she was dressed in a crocodile coat with pyjamas and a wedge, 
and a crocodile bag and two Tesco carriers, and diamond earrings and a 
headscarf. And I was just… obsessed. She had the most incredible taste, and 
never compromised on anything. That was when I transitioned into wanting to be 
a designer, because I wanted to be her. I wanted to operate like she did, 
creatively but in a commercial context.”


Anderson’s ascent has been dizzying. Three years after graduating, he launched 
JW Anderson as a menswear label; womenswear was added two years later, in 2010. 
By 2012, the buzz around him was such thatTopshop came calling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/jun/13/j-w-anderson-topshop>
; the resultingJW Anderson x Topshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2012/sep/04/jw-anderson-topshop-collection>
 collection was a sellout. A year later, Donatella Versace tapped him up to 
designa collection for Versus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/may/16/versace-versus-jw-anderson-new-york>
, the Versace diffusion line. By the end of 2013, he had inkeda deal with LVMH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/sep/26/jw-anderson-lvmh-deal-investment>
 for investment in his own label alongside the Loewe job.


His pitch for the Loewe job was a book of around 100 images, which he took 
along to his interview with LVMH’sDelphine Arnault 
<http://fortune.com/40-under-40/delphine-arnault-23/>. It opened with a beach 
scene photo <http://www.openingceremony.us/entry.asp?pid=10900> of model 
Kirsten Owen, taken by Steven Meisel for Italian Vogue in 1997. “I was like, I 
don’t have a collection, but I have this image. This person, this beach, right 
now.” The image became the basis for his first advertising campaign for Loewe. 
It was a brave move, when you consider the clothes in the shot aren’t by Loewe, 
and the photo is 18 years old. But it chimed with a fashion industry currently 
obsessed with regramming vintage references on to Instagram, and it helped 
reposition Loewe as a brand that could spring a surprise, which is crucial. 
“The minute you can be predicted, as a brand, you’ve got a problem,” Anderson 
notes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81c640cc753a5d989621a7dbe4df80748cea27dc%2F0_0_1945_2920%2F1945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81c640cc753a5d989621a7dbe4df80748cea27dc%2F0_0_1945_2920%2F1945.jpg>
 There are two Andersons – the first is designer of London’s hottest label, the 
second is Jonathan Anderson, designer of Loewe. Photograph: Andrew Woffinden 
for the Guardian 
The beach scene also reflected how he is relocating Loewe in the public 
imagination fromMadrid <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/madrid> to Ibiza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/ibiza>. The shift to the Balearics gives 
Loewe a personal connection to Anderson, who spent his childhood summers on the 
island, and still holidays there. (Two weeks in the village ofSan Carlos 
<http://www.ibiza-spotlight.com/villages/san_carlos_i.htm>, last summer.) I 
suspect, also, that Anderson is conscious that Madrid, for all its history and 
grandeur, gets very little airplay in the global cultural conversation these 
days compared with Ibiza. My theory would be that he has sidelined Madrid for 
Ibiza as a tactic to buy Loewe more pop cultural bandwidth without leaving 
Spain altogether.

Anderson’s first menswear show for Loewe featured a T-shirt made from two silk 
scarves. It was a muted reference to the provocative ideas of fused gender that 
have made JW Anderson such a hot ticket at London fashion week. Anderson has 
been driving a catwalk conversation about fluidity in gender which reflects how 
gender ambiguity has become a cultural issue on every level, fromCaitlyn Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caitlyn-jenner> to the rise of the 
unisex baby name (Taylor, Piper, Harper). That these are rapidly shifting sands 
is reflected by the fact that when JW Anderson showed lace shirts for men less 
than five years ago, the reviews were “so awful that the next day I was 
thinking, this is not working, I should give up fashion” – yet last month, at 
their blockbuster catwalk show watched bySamuel L Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/samuel-l-jackson> and David Gandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/oct/12/marksspencer-david-gandy>
,Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/15/christopher-bailey-lace-dandy-burberry-ss16-collection-lcm>
 made lace shirts a key element of their menswear collection.


“A few years ago, maybe society wasn’t ready,” Anderson reflects. “Or maybe my 
concept was too hardcore and not refined enough. Or maybe both. But when I look 
back, that show was probably the most important one I will ever do. It was 
about gender confusion, because that’s an issue that’s around us, and I believe 
as a designer you have to reflect what’s going on. It’s fascinating to ask, how 
does this reflect into clothing? What does lace or silk mean, on a man or a 
woman?” Some of this, he says, is about the impact our hypervisual digital age 
has had on masculinity. “Facebook and Instagram have created these forums in 
which men are putting photos of themselves out there, and cultivating an 
audience and a response, and that’s something new.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ff8a4290611aaaf778dc8ef2064a57877460be%2F0_0_1779_2420%2F1779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20minute%20your%20brand%20can%20be%20predicted%2C%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20problem%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjw-anderson-loewe-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ff8a4290611aaaf778dc8ef2064a57877460be%2F0_0_1779_2420%2F1779.jpg>
 Turtleneck, £425, cardigan, £850, skirt, £1,625, belt, £425, boots, £990, bag, 
£1,525, small earring, £225, and long earring, £295

Hair Ernesto Montenovo at Phamous using Kerastase
Makeup Akgun at the London Style Agency using 
 Chanel S 2015 and Chanel Body Excellence 
Fashion assistant Hannah Davidson
Model Poppy at Select  Photograph: Andrew Woffinden for the Guardian 
Every Sunday evening, Anderson takes the Eurostar from London to Paris, and 
spends two days at Loewe. On Tuesday evening he goes home, and spends three 
days working on his own label. He has a different phone and PA for each role; 
everyone knows not to raise Loewe issues on JW Anderson time, and vice versa. 
“It works. I’m sure if I am doing an interview like this in five years’ time, I 
will be saying, enough is enough.” He laughs. “But for now, I enjoy it. It’s a 
dream come true, for my personality.”


Pavesi’s best advice to Anderson, he says, was “to keep learning. About 
fashion history, cultural history. To learn in order to stay sharp, because you 
will never understand enough, but you will enjoy the view as you get higher.” 
The balcony of his office – presumably like that of fellow die-hard smoker 
Deneuve’s, a few storeys above – faces the immense facade ofSaint-Sulpice 
<http://pss75.fr/saint-sulpice-paris/>, cathedral of the Left Bank, the church 
whereVictor Hugo <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Victor-Hugo> was married 
andCharles Baudelaire <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charles-baudelaire> 
christened. Our interview time is up, and as soon as he has said his goodbyes, 
Anderson grabs his cigarettes and heads out to the balcony. The view is pretty 
good.

 