
Kadeena Cox, the first British Paralympian to win gold medals in multiple 
disciplines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/kadeena-cox-gb-paralympics-rio-athletics-gold>
 at a single Games since 1984, has had her UK Sport funding suspended while she 
takes part in the Channel 4 television programme The Jump.

‘Just don’t call me a celebrity’: Bradley Wiggins takes leap with The Jump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradley-wiggins-the-jump-channel-4-robbie-fowler-louis-smith>
Cox, who won four medals in Rio including gold in the C4-5 women’s cycling 
time trial and on the track in the T38 400m sprint, will join the Olympic 
medal-winners Jade Jones, Louis Smithand Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradley-wiggins-the-jump-channel-4-robbie-fowler-louis-smith>
. The celebrity television show has faced criticism in the past after a number 
of participants includingBeth Tweddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/jump-beth-tweddle-operation-to-repair-neck-injury-after-accident>
, Linford Christie and Rebecca Adlington sustained injuries.

A statement from British Athletics said: “Due to the nature of the activities 
on the show, the athlete cannot continue to be supported by the WCPP 
[world-class performance programme] during this time. Her UK Sport funding will 
be suspended until she returns to training and proves her fitness.”

Cox had a stroke in May 2014 and was subsequently diagnosed with multiple 
sclerosis. She does not yet have any major cycling events for 2017 as no 
Para-cycling Track World Championships have been officially confirmed. However, 
in July the Para Athletics World Championships are due to be staged in London.
kadeena cox (@kad_c) 
Austria bound with these crazy kids @JakeQuickenden 
<https://twitter.com/JakeQuickenden> @Josiestweet 
<https://twitter.com/Josiestweet> exciting times ⛷❄️ #TheJump 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TheJump?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/4li97Kjkmt 
<https://t.co/4li97Kjkmt>
 <https://twitter.com/kad_c/status/816183226179977217> January 3, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/kad_c/status/816183226179977217> 
Cox, 25, is believed to have been advised by medical teams from both British 
Athletics and British Cycling not to take part, but has been given leave to 
make her own call on whether she participates.

“Kadeena enjoyed a fantastic 2016, making history by winning Paralympic gold 
in both athletics and cycling, and we respect her decision to take some time 
away from the sport to pursue the opportunities that her success has afforded 
her,” said British Cycling.

On Tuesday, GB Taekwondo said it had held extensive talks with Jones over her 
involvement in the show and though the governing body said it understood her 
decision to take part it maintained it had reservations. Jones, however, will 
still receive her full UK funding.

“She has made an informed decision to take part in the show,” a GB Taekwondo 
spokesperson said. “[She] has ensured that The Jump and its production company 
has all the requisite cover and medical provision is in place.”

In previous series of the show Tweddle required surgery to a fractured 
vertebrae after being injured in training and Adlington sustained a shoulder 
injury. Christie pulled a hamstring while the former Holby City actress Tina 
Hobley sustained knee, shoulder and arm injuries that left her on crutches 
until shortly before Christmas last year.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> has said there has been 
a thorough review of safety procedures before this year’s series.
 