
She has been dubbed the female Obama. She cooks. She goes to the gym in a 
hoodie. She views lawyers as heroes and takes on mortgage companies the way 
Elizabeth Warren takes on Wall Street. She may soon have as many enemies on the 
other side of the aisle.


She may have made it to the national stage when Barack Obama called her “the 
best looking attorney general in the country”, but Kamala Harris is now the 
odds-on favourite to become the next senator fromCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> – and perhaps the nation’s 
next progressive star in the making.

On Tuesday, following a week of speculation that the 50-year-old California 
attorney general would make the leap from cool-headed attorney to friend of 
Obama to potential Washington power player, Harrisannounced she will run for 
Barbara Boxer’s Senate seat in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/13/kamala-harris-tipped-for-senate-run>
. “Your support has been crucial to me every step of the way,” Harris wrote in 
an email to supporters, “and I’m asking you to help me build a grassroots 
campaign that reaches every community of California.”

Her campaign in the making began by – how else? – starting to solicit 
contributions of $2,600 for a race in which the stiffest challenge may not be 
the general election but winning the Democratic nomination. Potential primary 
contenders include the former Los Angeles mayor Antonio Villaraigosa and 
billionaire environmental activist Tom Steyer – both fierce liberals with 
nationwide notoriety of their own, and both of whom are said to be considering 
a run.

By jumping in before anyone else, though, Harris may intimidate the 
competition from entering the first high-profile Senate contest of 2016. Such 
is the power of her brand: if California is in its post-Schwarzenegger 
political era, Harris may be its next liberal franchise.

The state attorney general has found herself in the midst of controversies 
over the years, but mostly she has climbed California’s political ladder by a 
careful strategy – perhaps “too cautious”,according to the Los Angeles Times 
editorial board 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/endorsements/la-ed-end-attorney-general-20140924-story.html>
 – to establish her credentials for higher office.

Even before the burgeoning Senate bid, some giddy commentators predicted 
Harris might eventually run for the White House –the Washington Post’s Chris 
Cillizza once floated a theory 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/04/05/whats-next-for-kamala-harris/>
 that she could elbow aside Hillary Clinton to run for the top job in 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421240517996%2F2603b9a3-fc75-4a58-8bcd-6cc0d3077081-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kamala%20Harris%3A%20the%20'female%20Obama'%20plots%20her%20course%20on%20the%20road%20to%20Washington&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kamala%20Harris%3A%20the%20%27female%20Obama%27%20plots%20her%20course%20on%20the%20road%20to%20Washington&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421240517996%2F2603b9a3-fc75-4a58-8bcd-6cc0d3077081-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Senate president pro tem Kevin de Leon and Kamala Harris chat after Governor 
Jerry Brown’s inauguration in Sacramento last week. Photograph: Max 
Whittaker/Reuters 
Harris was born in Oakland, a progressive crucible, to high-flying, brainy 
parents: Donald Harris, a Jamaican American Stanford university economics 
professor, and Shyamala Gopalan, and India-born breast cancer specialist who 
taught at McGill University.

Harris lived for a while in Montreal, where her mother worked, and studied law 
at Howard University in Washington. Lawyers were her heroes growing up, Harris
told the San Francisco Chronicle 
<http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Kamala-Harris-grew-up-idolizing-lawyers-3232851.php>
 in 2009.

“They were the architects of the civil rights movement. I thought that that 
was the way you do good things and serve and achieve justice.”

While serving two terms as San Francisco’s district attorney, Harris angered a 
police union by seeking life without parole, rather than execution, for a 
convicted cop killer, David Hill.

Charm and pragmatism helped her repair relationships with police groups – a 
valuable dexterity in the post-Ferguson era that other local-turned-national 
political figures such as the New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio, among 
others, may envy.

Harris still opposes capital punishment and favours gun control.

In 2010, supported by farm workers and public sector unions, Harris squeaked 
past a strong Republican rival to become the first woman of colour to serve as 
the state’s attorney general.

After campaigning for Warren ahead of her own blowout re-election win last 
year, Harris championed consumer protection and privacy, helped negotiate a 
settlement with mortgage lenders andtargeted human trafficking, recidivism and 
school truancy 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-11-27/kamala-harris-bruises-banks-burnishes-image-with-mortgage-deals.html>
.

Civil rights activists, however, have criticised the Harris record on 
California’s notorious prison overcrowding 
<http://thinkprogress.org/election/2015/01/13/3610916/meet-kamala-harris/>. Her 
office argued against the release of eligible nonviolent prisoners because the 
state wanted to keep them as a labour force. When informed,Harris declared 
herself “shocked” and “troubled” 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/adamserwer/some-lawyers-just-want-to-see-the-world-burn#.pbxDrYmQk>
.

Frustrated progressives also pushed back when Harris resisted demands for an 
independent prosecutor to investigate police brutality and ducked marijuana 
legalisation,leaving California’s drug policy in a legal limbo 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/05/kamala-harris-marijuana_n_5652387.html>
.

Harris, who has told interviewers she’s something of a chef and turns off the 
hip-hop, reggae and jazz for CNN and MTV with 35 minutes on the treadmill (she’s
“not a morning person” 
<http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Kamala-Harris-grew-up-idolizing-lawyers-3232851.php>
), has been dubbed the“female Obama” 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2010/06/09/kamala-harris-the-female-obama-wins-primary-for-california-attorney-general.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421240800129%2F944a6f26-9485-4240-9c01-bf1afc65f2db-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kamala%20Harris%3A%20the%20'female%20Obama'%20plots%20her%20course%20on%20the%20road%20to%20Washington&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kamala%20Harris%3A%20the%20%27female%20Obama%27%20plots%20her%20course%20on%20the%20road%20to%20Washington&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fkamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421240800129%2F944a6f26-9485-4240-9c01-bf1afc65f2db-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Harris speaks at the Center for American Progress in Washington in November. 
Photograph: Gary Cameron/Reuters 
That is certainly a simplification – and she has reportedly been consulting 
the likes of potential Hillary Clinton campaign manager Stephanie Schriock 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/political/la-me-pc-harris-launches-us-senate-bid-begins-raising-money-20150113-story.html>
 – but when the Democratic party gave her a national platform with a speech at 
the 2012 nomination convention, she flubbed it.

Tasked with touting Obama’s housing record – “that’s leadership!” – her 
delivery at the convention was widely panned as somewhat snooze-inducing, the 
lowlight being a Freudian slip when she called the opposing candidate “Miss 
Romney”,which woke up Twitter 
<http://www.idigitaltimes.com/kamala-harris-dnc-2012-speech-screw-renames-mitt-romney-miss-romney-making-twitter-crack-video>
.

The president bungled himself during a 2013 fundraiser in California when he 
called her the “best-looking attorney general in the country” 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2013/04/04/obama-calls-kamala-harris-the-best-looking-attorney-general/>
, an off-the-cuff remark for which Obama later apologised and the White House 
explained away as the two having“been friends for many years” 
<http://dyn.politico.com/printstory.cfm?uuid=7236C07B-3508-4CA0-9234-6482DE24B486>
.

Foes pounced on the chance to embarrass Obama and his protege. “Not awkward 
and perfectly fine for him to say, right?”tweeted the Republican National 
Committee 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/obama-blasted-california-ag-hot-article-1.1308261>
.

Stumbles notwithstanding, Harris was dubbed a frontrunner nearly as soon as 
Boxer announced she would not run in this deep blue state again in 2016.

Harris’s statement on Tuesday sought to channel the outgoing senator’s 
pugilistic reputation. “I will be a fighter for middle class families who are 
feeling the pinch of stagnant wages and diminishing opportunity. I will be a 
fighter for our children who deserve a world-class education, and for students 
burdened by predatory lenders and skyrocketing tuition. And I will fight 
relentlessly to protect our coast, our immigrant communities and our seniors.”

Steyer and Villaraigosa are expected to announce soon whether they will take 
on Harris for the nomination – a battle royal, if they do.

Another potential rival, Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor, ruled himself 
out on Monday. The dual announcement prompted suspicion of a pact between him 
and Harris because the telegenic Newsom couldrun 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rubycramer/the-job-nobody-wanted-kamala-harris-and-gavin-newsom-decide#.wpJRXYL9b>
 forgovernor 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rubycramer/kamala-harris-to-run-for-senate#.wsdPl9Z5p> 
in 2018. The duo could create the kind of star power not seen in the Sacramento 
statehouse since Arnold Schwarzenegger occupied it.
 