
Kate Beckinsale has joined the cast 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/10/kate-beckinsale-joins-michael-winterbottoms-the-face-of-an-angel/>
 of Michael Winterbottom's The Face of an Angel, an exploration of our 
fascination with violence based on the Amanda Knox case.

Beckinsale will star as a journalist investigating a murder case in which a 
beautiful young woman (Cara Delevingne) is accused of horrific acts. 
Winterbottom revealed in July that he had optioned the book Angel Face: Sex, 
Murder and the Inside Story ofAmanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox>, by Rome-based American 
journalist Barbie Latza Nadeau, but would avoid using the name of its famous 
subject.

"We bought the rights to the book that tells the story of the trial, but our 
film is not really about that, so we are always a bit wary of even saying that,"
 he told the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/michael-winterbottom-discusses-upcoming-film-588411>
 while promoting his most recent movie, The Look of Love. "Our film is actually 
about losing a daughter, losing someone close to you; why are we so interested 
in violence and why are we not more interested in love."

The Face of an Angel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-face-of-an-angel> 
also stars The Fifth Estate's Daniel Bruhl as a documentary film-maker who 
shares Beckinsale's fascination with the case.

Knox, 26, and her former boyfriend Raffaele Sollecito, 29, were convicted and 
jailed in 2009 for the killing of their British housemate Meredith Kercher in 
Perugia, Italy. The pair spent two years in jail before being released when 
cleared on appeal in 2011. The appeal was then overturned by Italy's supreme 
court this year, and a new trial is currently under way in Florence, ahead of 
the case's likely return to the supreme court. Knox has remained in America and 
continues to protest her innocence.
 