
Kate Beckinsale has earned the best reviews of her career for Love & Friendship
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-and-friendship>, an adaptation of Lady 
Susan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lady_Susan>, the remarkably wry and 
worldly novella Jane Austen wrote as a teen. The film, Beckinsale’s second 
collaboration with director Whit Stillman and co-star Chloë Sevigny, 18 years 
afterThe Last Days of Disco <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dlfLqlNF_cM>, is a 
comedy about a brilliant widow hoping to secure a moneyed future for herself 
and her daughter. Beckinsale, 43, spoke to the Guardian before picking up the 
Evening Standard best actress award this month.

Did the film change your feelings about people getting more cynical as they 
get older?

We always think of Austen as so poised and elegant; there is a sort of rage 
underneath that lives in this character, which I really liked seeing. It’s 
almost like she had to purge that in order to be able to write everything else. 
She was such a smart woman facing all those social constraints, so it felt a 
bit like her going: “Right, this is my shadow having a scream.” And then she 
went: “Oh, I shouldn’t do that.” And put [the manuscript] in a drawer. There is 
something more raw about it, which probably is to do with being younger.

Lady Susan is said to have “an uncanny understanding of men’s natures”. Is 
that still the key to social success?

Yes, except that I think the advent of constantly available porn, which would 
have horrified Austen, has changed things rather. It’s just more apparent now: 
men’s natures had to be covered up a little bit more, just as women’s did. I 
would never be able to go on a dating site, ever. I would just be expecting a 
murderer and a psychotic rapist. However, I do have friends that are on it, and 
it does seem like there is a sort of loophole for free prostitution that seems 
to be beneficial to the bloke. I’m sort of aware that’s happened.

The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK: No 6 Love & Friendship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/09/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-6-love-friendship>
Do women today still have to do a lot of what Lady Susan calls “enduring 
ridiculous manhood”?

No. I mean, one of the things the film does make you think is: my God, we have 
come an awfully long way. Obviously, in the light of certain political events 
this year, one worries those things are a bit more under threat. But if this 
was transposed to a modern setting there would be no story. This is a bright 
woman who would probably be the CEO of a company with a ton of boyfriends. She 
has operate in that slightly machiavellian way because society doesn’t give her 
intelligence enough of an outlet.

Why are audiences so drawn to bitches and bullies? 

When we were making it, Whit referenced Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, and it’s a 
very similar thing: you don’t necessarily want to go on holiday with these 
people, or have them in your family, but it’s quite thrilling watching them at 
work.

Is the key to Lady Susan’s success her absolute confidence? 

I think so. I think she’s got an absolutely iron-clad self-belief, which I 
deeply envy. Her nature is incredibly practical; there’s nothing practical 
about self-doubt and self-loathing and self-torture. She doesn’t waste any time 
doing anything like that. That would be novel for me. I think we all spend far 
too much time doing that.

Why do we? 

Partly because we’re not working in a potato field and worrying our children 
are going to die of leprosy. It’s the luxury of the middle class to have those 
kinds of things going on, I think. And also, we have so much information coming 
at us now. Lady Susan would hear what was happening one county over, possibly, 
but we’re panicking about air crashes all over the world and what kind of 
mosquito might bite us. Our general level of anxiety is related to how much is 
going into our little brains.

Which freaks you out most? 

Climate change really bothers me, and it doesn’t seem to be quite as pressing 
to certain politicians as it think it ought to be – it’s pretty terrifying.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXSMNHKqrCOo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXSMNHKqrCOo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXSMNHKqrCOo&media=>
Is the real love the friendship? 

I think so. The love in the title, which is not the title of the novella, is 
between Chloë’s character and mine. It was a really nice thing to revisit that. 
I was so rotten to her in our earlier movie, whereas this is women complicit 
and battling against everything.

Do you think such bonds can be more enduring than romantic love? 

I know that my oldest friends are from primary and secondary school and I 
don’t know if I will have a relationship that has lasted or will last as long 
as that. I’m not pressured to find friends physically attractive over several 
hundred decades, which is a slightly easier thing to sustain. Female friendship 
in movies is something that you jump at because it’s not every day that a 
director, especially a male director, wants to write a movie about pretty 
complicated women with the kind of love that Whit has. I’ve had two characters 
with him who you wouldn’t want to go on a mini-break with, but it’s so 
delicious to see his real enjoyment of a prickly woman. And it’s borne out: 
people have loved this movie and gone to see it a lot. So, there is a place for 
not just the whore, not just the madonna, but this kind of difficult woman. 
She’s like Emma on steroids.

Is it rare to have a female lead who is older, cleverer and better-looking 
than the men she’s paired opposite?

Not necessarily. I know that it exists, finding parts harder to come by – but 
it hasn’t [happened] so far to me. I’m having a wonderful time being the age I 
am being an actress. It’s partly Whit having had the idea for me to do this 
when I was 22 and doing Last Disco, and him waiting for me to ripen. I didn’t 
know that until recently and I thought: God, that’s really playing the long 
game. You don’t usually find directors patiently waiting for you to age.

Is he waiting for you to ripen further? 

I’m hoping. Maybe he’s got Miss Havisham in mind.

Did you find the reviews saying you were “a revelation” and “surprisingly 
funny” patronising?

I wouldn’t say patronising. I think people tend to remember the last couple of 
movies they were aware of your doing. And it depends on what’s more important 
to you: how you’re perceived or your experience of your career. I’ve done a lot 
of films that a lot of people haven’t seen, coupled withfilms that are a bit 
outside my comfort zone, actually 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underworld_(film_series)>, which a lot of people 
have seen or certainly been aware of. And, for me, the ability to be able to 
sort of flit between genres that shouldn’t go together and generally don’t has 
been an incredible privilege. I don’t mind pockets of time where people go: 
“Oh, maybe she’s a bimbo,” because I know I’m not.

It really depends how much meaning exists for you in your own experience of it 
and what you’re doing it for. If you were doing it to hear marvellous things 
about yourself all the time then you would stop immediately when you had a 
horrible review – probably aged about 19. I think it’s important as an actor to 
have periods where you’re not flavour of the month or rewarded every single 
time you leave your house, because it really does make you question if it’s 
what you really want to do and how you can get better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fkate-beckinsale-austens-lady-susan-is-like-emma-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F923bb70f9519dc9a4afb8379b07d0eeda45e925c%2F0_172_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Beckinsale%3A%20%E2%80%98Austen%E2%80%99s%20Lady%20Susan%20is%20like%20Emma%20on%20steroids%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fkate-beckinsale-austens-lady-susan-is-like-emma-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Beckinsale%3A%20%E2%80%98Austen%E2%80%99s%20Lady%20Susan%20is%20like%20Emma%20on%20steroids%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fkate-beckinsale-austens-lady-susan-is-like-emma-on-steroids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F923bb70f9519dc9a4afb8379b07d0eeda45e925c%2F0_172_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
 Beckinsale with Chloë Sevigny in The Last Days of Disco. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
Do you agree with Lady Susan that facts are horrid things? 

Sometimes. I generally want to get to them, but I’m not necessarily pleased 
when I do. My favourite thing is transparency and honesty, but that can be a 
bit of a brutal life, it can be perhaps easier to get in a bit of a bubble. But 
it’s generally better to know what one’s dealing with, I suspect.

Particularly in 2016?

It is a bit tricky. Both countries that I am part of are so divided, and that 
is a really scary thing in itself. That’s just a sign of restlessness and 
trouble, and it’s a really new and strange position to be in, to be so aware of 
it. I think everybody found that out twice this year, and those facts were 
quite horrid things.

How does Britain look from LA? 

Well, I come back eight or nine times a year and my mum’s here and my best 
friends are here. But it’s weird that a country and a city moves on and grows 
up independently. You do have it in your mind as staying the same and you’re 
homesick for something that is different when you come back. That can be a 
little bit jarring. It looks different. The skyline is completely different. I 
keep wondering where the old ladies in John Lewis went.

They all had to be killed – did you not hear about that?

Yes, I knew something must have happened. The high street where I grew up 
seems a bit more fancy and worldly. I remember when you spent a whole afternoon 
gluing a 50p to the pavement and hiding. Children don’t do that sort of thing 
any more. I would still happily do it. In fact, I might – my mum has got a 
brilliant front gate for that sort of thing.

• Love & Friendship is available now on DVD and Blu-ray
 