
There’s an early scene in The Face of an Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-face-of-an-angel> where Kate Beckinsale 
and Daniel Brühl swig espresso in a scenic Roman square. As a troupe of street 
performers seem to levitate behind them, the pair discuss their plan to observe 
a murder trial in Siena. “If you’re going to make the film, make it a fiction,” 
Beckinsale’s seasoned journalist Simone tells Thomas, the dissolute director 
played by Brühl. “You can’t tell the truth unless you make it a fiction.” Brühl 
furrows his brows and concurs.

How can a feature film about Amanda Knox ring more true than the news?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/20/amanda-knox-face-of-an-angel>
It is possible to see Thomas as a surrogate for Michael Winterbottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-winterbottom>. And while the 
director’s new film never mentionsMeredith Kercher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher> and Amanda Knox, it’s also 
possible to view The Face of an Angel as an attempt to address the truth of 
that infamous murder in Perugia nearly eight years ago. At least, it kind of 
is. But what might start out as a relatively straightforward dramatisation of 
the consequences of a killing soon becomes something else – a study of the 
modern habits of journalism, as well as a descent into madness. Plus, by the 
by, a rumination on Dante’s Divine Comedy. Among other things.

“Obviously we’re aware that this film isn’t going to give people what they 
expect,” says Winterbottom, perched awkwardly on a sofa in Toronto’s Trump 
hotel. It’s the morning afterThe Face of an Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-face-of-an-angel> premiered at the city’s 
film festival and the 53-year-old is talking 14 to the dozen. “The idea of the 
film starts off one way, and then every 10 minutes – as soon as you start to 
think, ‘Oh it’s going to go this way,’ – it changes. It goes from murder 
investigation to journalists and then journalists to struggling director and so 
on. I’m aware of that, and I’m hoping – to be honest – that these changes are 
part of what keep you watching, because you’re wondering how it’s going to end 
up. You’re aware that the film is disappearing off down an alleyway that you 
didn’t really want to go down, but you’ll keep going because you want to see 
what’s at the end.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427382903050%2F02a1c73c-f47e-46b3-81a1-64425d56eb4d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Beckinsale%20on%20The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%3A%20%E2%80%98Without%20journalists%2C%20we%20live%20in%20a%20police%20state%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Beckinsale%20on%20The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%3A%20%E2%80%98Without%20journalists%2C%20we%20live%20in%20a%20police%20state%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427382903050%2F02a1c73c-f47e-46b3-81a1-64425d56eb4d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michael Winterbottom on the set of The Face of an Angel. Photograph: BBC 
FILMS/Allstar/BBC FILMS 
Fans of Winterbottom’s work might not be too surprised by his discursive 
approach to one of the most talked-about crimes in recent memory. He is, after 
all, the man behinda film about a film of Tristram Shandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jan/20/1> and The Trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/may/09/the-trip-to-italy-poignant-tedious-steve-coogan-rob-brydon>
, the BBC comedy that watches Rob Brydon and Steve Coogan sightsee while doing 
the same impressions over and over again. As a director he has also skipped 
happily between genres throughout his 22-film career. He followed 2008’s 
coming-of-age romance (and ghost story)Genova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126603/genova>, with southern noir The 
Killer Inside Me <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-killer-inside-me>. 
Straightforward isn’t really his thing.

One of the objects of Winterbottom’s fascination in The Face of an Angel is 
the mores of the media. After Simone and Thomas head to Siena they are soon 
swallowed up by the small press pack who make their living peddling every small 
detail of the case. There are big-shot Americans, wheezing Italians and a 
strapping stringer for the Daily Mail who could charm the hind legs off a 
donkey.

Michael Winterbottom’s Meredith Kercher movie: revealing truths through fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/21/michael-winterbottom-meredith-kercher-movie>
The caricatures of this dying breed (in Simone’s introductory gambit to Thomas 
she explains how a cushy number in Rome led to her covering an entire country 
for multiple media outlets) are robust, but not cold. There’s even a hint of 
admiration. Having been introduced to the details of the Kercher case through a 
book by Newsweek’s Barbie Latza Nadeau, the inspiration for Simone, 
Winterbottom took time to ingratiate himself with the hacks. “I met a lot of 
the journalists who covered the case: people from the British, Italian and 
American press and it’s not that they’re terrible people, I liked them,” he 
says. “They’re thoughtful people, they’re intelligent people, they’re trying to 
do their job the best they can. I think they were aware of the problems with 
the coverage but they just couldn’t find a way of addressing that problem 
within the system. It’s a market and it’s very clear that as a freelance you 
have to have something to sell. And that means discovering 10 minutes before 
everyone else thatAmanda Knox <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox> 
is wearing a brown skirt.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427383007809%2F522a9f97-9758-4c93-86de-8419e80b6baa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Beckinsale%20on%20The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%3A%20%E2%80%98Without%20journalists%2C%20we%20live%20in%20a%20police%20state%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Beckinsale%20on%20The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%3A%20%E2%80%98Without%20journalists%2C%20we%20live%20in%20a%20police%20state%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkate-beckinsale-face-of-an-angel-interview-michael-winterbottom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427383007809%2F522a9f97-9758-4c93-86de-8419e80b6baa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bruhl and Beckinsale on in The Face of an Angel. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
FILMS/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Beckinsale, whose career to date has left her well-versed in the ways of the 
popular press, thinks the film is more of a study of a mode of journalism than 
anything else. “It was weird for me to be playing the journalist but I realised 
quickly how important it was for my character that people were giving her 
information. It isn’t just salacious, it isn’t just what she wore in court. And 
if we don’t have journalists we live in a police state. It’s also true that 
journalists and actors share some qualities. Say you’re having a terrible 
argument with your boyfriend and you’re breaking up. For an actor there’s this 
still slight distance where you’re observing the event, thinking: ‘This is what 
it looks and feels like to be breaking up with someone.’ I think that 
journalists have that same ability to step back and see things from a different 
perspective. That doesn’t necessarily make the journalist an arsehole, any more 
than it does the actor.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427392227173%2Fcrop_KP_143255_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427392227173%2Fcrop_KP_143255_640x360.jpeg>
 The film team review The Face of an Angel 
Alongside Beckinsale is Cara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne>, the model and ubiquitous 
face. She’s so ubiquitous that, even as I speak to Winterbottom, she’s in the 
same room, prancing, pinging her assistant’s bra and generally sucking up 
attention. Delevingne gives a winning performance as student Melanie, the 
object of Thomas’s increasingly morbid fascination. With her energy and 
wide-eyed charm, Melanie is the heart of the film. “I didn’t really know who 
she was”, says Winterbottom of Delevingne, “but as soon as I met her I knew 
she’d be perfect for it. I wanted someone who had that kind of energy and 
optimism, the sense of someone who wants to live life. People either have that 
quality or they don’t. But you can also have that spontaneity in real life and 
then not be able to portray it on screen. Cara was able to do that. The film is 
pretty much entirely scripted so she is acting, but it’s a quality of hers 
which she’s projecting. I think she’s like Julie Christie in that way: not an 
actor in the traditional sense but with a fantastic ability to project things 
on screen.“

As well as an optimistic counterpoint to Thomas’s gloom, Delevingne also acts 
as an important proxy, as she stands in for the absent victim at the heart of 
the film. “The Melanie character is the kind of person who’s been lost and all 
the things that have been lost because of the murder,” says Winterbottom. 
Ultimately, it’s this loss that the film-maker wants his audience to remember. 
“People want to get to know the people in the story but once they do there’s a 
soap opera about whether they go to prison or not. That I find pretty 
depressing. The whole point of this film is that you should try to remember the 
person who’s been killed. The Kercher family behaved incredibly honourably and 
they didn’t want Meredith to be forgotten. But amid all the books and all the 
media coverage, I think that disappears.”

For Beckinsale, it’s clear that Winterbottom wanted to honour Kercher’s 
memory. “I think for Michael, it’s about love far more than it’s about Amanda 
Knox.” If people go to the cinema expecting a real life whodunnit, she 
acknowledges they’ll be disappointed. Taking a story that inspired frenzied 
fascination only to make a movie that deliberately defies those appetites? It 
sounds like typical Winterbottom.
 