
Name: Katy Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/katy-perry>

Age: 30.

Appearance: Raven-haired, big-eyed pop siren.

Occupation: World’s richest woman.

Really? No, wait, I meant the world’s richest famous woman. Christy Walton is 
the world’s richest woman 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kerryadolan/2015/03/02/the-richest-women-in-the-world-2015/>
.

Never heard of her. That’s why it’s better to be rich and famous. And Perry is 
the richest female celebrity of all <http://www.forbes.com/profile/katy-perry/>
, having earned $135m last year, according to Forbes magazine.

Where did she come in the overall celebrity earning stakes? Third. Taylor Swift
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, the only other woman in the 
top 10, tied at eighth withRobert Downey Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdowneyjr>.

Who came first? Boxer Floyd Mayweather 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/floyd-mayweather/?list=celebrities>, by virtue 
of a record-shredding $300m pay-day for his last fight.

Who came second? The guy that he beat, Manny Pacquiao 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/manny-pacquiao/?list=celebrities>, with $160m.

All that for losing a fight? I could do that. It would probably be easier than 
earning your crust the way Katy Perry does.

Which is how? Mostly through relentless touring. In the last 12 months, she 
has played 124 shows in 28 countries. By comparison, pop juggernautsOne 
Direction <http://www.forbes.com/profile/one-direction/?list=celebrities> 
played just 74 dates to earn $130m and take the number-four spot on the list.

I always thought pop stars lost money through touring. They used to, but 
thanks to more professional management, bigger venues and emerging global 
markets, it’snow extremely profitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/mar/17/live-music-out-performs-record-sales>
.

What does Perry think of her new status? She’s embracing it. “I’m an 
entrepreneur,” she told Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/zackomalleygreenburg/2015/06/29/how-katy-perry-became-americas-top-pop-export-the-forbes-cover-story/>
. “I don’t want to shy away from that. I actually want to kind of grab it by 
its balls.”

What else is she doing to that end? Being the face of Moschino 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/06/15/katy-perry-moschino_n_7588116.html>, 
endorsing brands such asToyota <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XSbWYhv_3B8> and
Adidas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IE1wDwRhkuw&feature=youtu.be&t=33>, 
attempting to trademark Left Shark.

What’s Left Shark? One of two dancers dressed as sharks – the leftmost – who 
flanked Perry during her Superbowl half-time show 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2936210/Pictured-Katy-Perry-backing-dancer-reveals-one-supporting-sharks-s-fumbled-routine-caused-instant-internet-hilarity.html>
. His out-of-sync moves went viral, prompting a few entrepreneurial types to 
attempt to cash in.

So she trademarked it? Not yet 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-32415267>. Her first application 
was rejected, but you can still buy an £80 Left Shark “belovesie”from her 
online shop <http://katyperry.shop.bravadousa.com/Product.aspx?pc=BGCMKP13>.

What’s a belovesie? If you have to ask, it’s probably not your sort of thing.

Do say: “Whatever you think of the music, you’ve got to admire her 
determination, hard work and undiluted avarice.”

Don’t say: “How much for her to go 10 rounds with Taylor Swift?”
 