
Kell Brook’s audacious bid to climb two weight divisions and dethrone the most 
fearsome puncher in boxing came to a brave but bloody end when his trainer 
Dominic Ingle threw in the towel after five brutal rounds against the 
undisputed middleweight world championGennady Golovkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gennady-golovkin>.

Brook had enjoyed his successes, particularly in the second round when he 
reddened the eye of the WBA, WBC and WBO champion. But by the fifth round his 
right eye was closing and he was being pushed back repeatedly, and Ingle 
decided to act after seeing his man stagger to the ropes before taking more 
than a dozen unanswered punches.

Kell Brook left frustrated by premature end to Gennady Golovkin battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/kell-brook-gennady-golovkin-world-middleweight-title>
Brook, the IBF welterweight champion, held his hands up to protest but the 
referee, Marlon Wright from Canada, having belatedly seen the towel, stopped 
the fight with 1min 57sec of the round remaining. The stoppage was greeted with 
boos but Brook was beginning to take a beating and later he said he had broken 
his eye socket in the second round. He slips to 36-1 while Golovkin moves to 
36-0.

Brook was greeted with bawdy, feverish reception from the 17,000 fans in the 
02 as his name was announced and he made the long walk to the ring. He knew he 
was up against a fighter who, as Michael Buffer reminded the crowd in the 
introductions, had stopped every opponent he had faced over the past eight 
years.

Gennady Golovkin beats Kell Brook to retain world middleweight title – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/10/gennady-golovkin-v-kell-brook-world-middleweight-title-fight-live>
If Brook believed the rumours that Golovkin was under the weather, which had 
swelled when the Kazakh left Thursday’s final press conference early, he was 
disabused of the notion within the opening minute as he was staggered by a big 
left hook, forcing him to hold on. But in an enthralling first round Brook 
fought back, earning nods of respect from his opponent as his jab got through 
more than once, along with a big left hand of his own.

At welterweight Brook has long found himself starched before fights: the 
inevitable result of straining to shift as much as four stone to make the 10st 
7lb limit to defend his IBF world title. But the 30-year-old from Sheffield had 
promised he would be stronger having jumped up two weight divisions, without 
losing his speed, and he proved as good as his word as took the fight to his 
opponent in the second round. It ended with both men slinging power shots in 
from all angles, and their left eyes reddened by the blows. But as the round 
ended, it appeared that a big Brook uppercut and left hand had levelled the 
scores on the judges’ scorecards.

As he headed back to his corner there were cries of “One Kell Brook!” But 
Golovkin not only has a reputation as the hardest puncher in boxing, backed up 
with a meaty record of 33 stoppages in a 36-fight unbeaten record, but one of 
the toughest chins too, having never been put down as an amateur or 
professional. And in the third round he rushed out of his corner, pushing Brook 
to the floor – which was ruled as a slip – and soon had the home fighter 
dabbing at his right cheek. As the round progressed the eye got noticeably 
worse, and while Brook was competitive the pendulum of the fight was starting 
to shift decisively. Sensing blood, Golovkin kept up the pressure. The Kazakh 
is a throwback and the crowd delighted in the visceral thrill of seeing a 
fighter with extreme power in both hands, cutting off space, sending punches 
from exotic angles.

Yet Brook was still hanging in there and another left hook brought another nod 
from his opponent. It was just about still competitive but another savage 
attack at the start of the fifth left Brook swaying desperately on the ropes, 
trying to stave off a huge barrage of punches. Ingle, his trainer, decided he 
had seen enough and began to wave a white towel. Eventually the referee saw it 
and called the fight off. Brook left with his reputation enhanced but his 
unbeaten record blemished. Afterwards he suggested he would probably campaign 
as a light-middleweight.

Golovkin, meanwhile, leaves London with his belts retained and his reputation 
enhanced.

Earlier in the night the British flyweight Charlie Edwards’ hopes of winning a 
world title in his ninth professional fight were ended in emphatic style by the 
IBF world champion John Riel Casimero. The 23-year-old from Surrey was steadily 
outclassed before being stopped after 1 min 57 sec of the 10th round. Meanwhile 
Lee “Playboy” Haskins held on to his IBF bantamweight title, winning a 
controversial unanimous over his old rival Stuart Hall from Darlington – a 
decision that was roundly booed afterwards.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fkell-brook-golovkin-weigh-in-ahead-middleweight-title-fight-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kell%20Brook%20and%20Gennady%20Golovkin%20weigh%20in%20ahead%20of%20title%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fkell-brook-golovkin-weigh-in-ahead-middleweight-title-fight-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kell%20Brook%20and%20Gennady%20Golovkin%20weigh%20in%20ahead%20of%20title%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fkell-brook-golovkin-weigh-in-ahead-middleweight-title-fight-video&media=>
Kell Brook and Golovkin weigh-in ahead of title fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/09/kell-brook-golovkin-weigh-in-ahead-middleweight-title-fight-video> 