
British racing reacted with sadness, concern and surprise on Tuesday after 
Jockey Club Racecourses, which ownsKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> Park in south-west London, 
announced it plans to close the track and sell it to developers to fund an 
investment programme elsewhere in its racecourse portfolio.

Kempton’s most famous and historic race is the King George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
, which is staged on Boxing Day and is the highlight of the busy Christmas 
racing programme. Arkle, Desert Orchid and Kauto Star are among the great 
steeplechasers to have won the race.

Thistlecrack recalls Desert Orchid glory days with King George Chase triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/thistlecrack-recalls-desert-orchid-glory-days-king-george-vi-chase-triumph-horse-racing>
If Kempton Park closes, the King George is expected to move to Sandown Park, 
which is also owned by Jockey Club Racecourses.

Simon Bazalgette, the chief executive of the Jockey Club, said on Tuesday that 
Kempton had been submitted as a site for a housing development after Spelthorne 
council issued a “Call For Sites” to address housing needs. The sale is planned 
to generate “at least £100m” which will be invested in a new all-weather course 
at Newmarket, the centre of British Flat racing, and in a programme of 
improvements at Sandown which will upgrade customer facilities and the racing 
surface.

Many dozens of racecourses have closed since organised racing developed as a 
popular spectator sport in the middle of the 18th century. Folkestone, which is 
also expected to be developed for housing, was the most recent closure in 
December 2012, while Aintree, the home of the Grand National, almost suffered 
the same fate in the mid-1970s.

It will be unprecedented in living memory if such a high-profile and historic 
racecourse as Kempton closes its doors. If the redevelopment proceeds as 
planned, it will stage the King George for the last time in December 2021.

Roger Weatherby, the senior steward of the Jockey Club, which owns several 
major tracks including Epsom, Cheltenham, Aintree and Newmarket, said on 
Tuesday it is necessary to “take tough decisions” to keep racing moving forward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa07b0b9707260a92f99191937d852f2f4b8b1d17%2F0_73_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kempton%20Park%20set%20to%20be%20bulldozed%20for%20housing%20under%20Jockey%20Club%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kempton%20Park%20set%20to%20be%20bulldozed%20for%20housing%20under%20Jockey%20Club%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa07b0b9707260a92f99191937d852f2f4b8b1d17%2F0_73_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 Kempton Park in Surrey, as seen from above. Photograph: High 
Level/Rex/Shutterstock 
“The decision to submit our estate at Kempton Park for consideration in the 
local plan is unique and has not been taken lightly,” Weatherby said. “Our 
Board of Stewards are horsemen and, having carefully considered what we can 
achieve in the long run from us doing so, are unanimously of the view that 
British racing is better served by us doing so.”

While several Newmarket trainers welcomed the proposal to build an all-weather 
course in the town, the news that Kempton is earmarked for closure was greeted 
with widespread dismay in National Hunt circles.

“I think it’s absolutely tragic,” Henrietta Knight, who trained Best Mate and 
Edredon Bleu to win the King George, said. “Kempton is a huge part of National 
Hunt racing, especially at Christmas. Kempton is so popular as a jumps track 
and if this happens, it will be very sad.”

Clive Smith, whose brilliant chaser Kauto Star won the King George a record 
five times, donated a statue of his champion to the course in 2014 and the 
chaser’s ashes are buried beneath it.

“It is quite a shock and it seems a great shame,” Smith said. “There’s a 
statue of Kauto Star there in the middle of the parade ring so I’m not sure 
what will happen to that. It might get moved to Sandown, I suppose. I never 
thought this would happen but you just never know.”

Nicky Henderson, who has saddled more horses at Kempton Park than any other 
trainer over the past five years, said it is a course that jumps racing “cannot 
afford to lose”.

Henderson took the King George with Long Run in 2010 and 2012, and has trained 
158 winners from 560 runners at the track since 2003.

“Kempton is unique, predominantly because of the ground,” Henderson said. “I 
had two or three that are due to run at Kempton this weekend that couldn’t have 
run at Sandown last weekend, purely because of the ground. They are only five 
miles apart but they are completely different and you need that variety.

“When it comes down to it, Kempton is a track National Hunt racing cannot 
afford to lose. We fought this battle once before and we won. They were talking 
about having the all-weather track and then Flat racing on the turf and 
doing away with the National Hunt. We saw that off and I think it’s worked 
very well.

“It will be a very sad day if we lose it, and I fear it will be a nail in the 
National Hunt coffin.”
 