
Finding a job has never been an easy task for Frederick Ouko. Despite 
university degrees and a can-do attitude, the 34-year-old Kenyan has found 
himself turned away from employment time and again, solely because he uses a 
wheelchair.


“Just the act of getting on to public transport takes a long time: first you 
have to wait for a bus that has enough room for you and your chair, then 
finally you show up at the office for the interview, and you are turned away at 
the door because they think you are there to beg,” says Ouko, who is from 
Nairobi.

“There is a general notion that if you’re disabled you don’t need to work, 
because your family look after you or you’re on government benefits. Not in 
their wildest dreams would an employer think you want to work and that you may 
be qualified.”

Why does the women's rights movement marginalise women with disabilities? | 
Nidhi Goyal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/why-does-womens-rights-movement-marginalise-women-with-disabilities-nidhi-goyal>
Ouko was born able-bodied but suffered polio as a child, which left him with 
weak legs. In the eyes of most Kenyan employers, this rendered him 
unemployable. So he began thinking about how to reach companies that might be 
interested in diversifying their labour pool, as well as how to explain the 
potential benefits of diversification to less progressive firms.

Government statistics concerning disability are unreliable, with the inclusion 
of albinism skewing numbers, but the International Labour Organisation suggests 
there may be as many as3 million people living with a disability in Kenya 
<http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_emp/@ifp_skills/documents/publication/wcms_115097.pdf>
.

Ouko began developing an online platform to match jobseekers with job 
providers. He named itRiziki Source <http://rizikisource.org/>, Swahili for 
“livelihood”. Users input their qualifications, skillset, location and 
disability, and are then matched with potential employers. Users’ 
qualifications and skillsets are visible to businesses, but not their CVs; 
should an employer express interest in a specific candidate, they connect 
through Ouko and his colleagues.

Kenya’s 2003 Persons with Disabilities Act 
<http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=69444&p_country=KEN&p_classification=08>
 requires both public and private firms toreserve 5% of their jobs for disabled 
employees 
<http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_emp/@ifp_skills/documents/publication/wcms_115097.pdf>
. In practice, though, says Ouko, “they don’t even consider it”. “There is no 
monitoring. There is no coordinated effort by the government to provide jobs 
[to disabled people]. But there is all this unexplored talent you [as an 
employer] may be missing by not employing a person with a disability.”

Riziki Source has been live for six months. So far it has helped 10 jobseekers 
to find employment in the hotel, IT, accounting and software industries. The 
program was recently shortlisted for the Royal Academy of Engineering’sAfrica 
prize for engineering innovation 
<http://www.raeng.org.uk/grants-and-prizes/international-research-and-collaborations/africa-prize>
, and Kenya’s department of labour has provided $30,000 (£23,800) in funding.

Ouko’s goal is to change the narrative of disability in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

“We are important resources that our countries haven’t bothered investing in,” 
he says. “Can we normalise the challenges, and be given an opportunity that we 
are qualified for, whether or not we’re disabled?”

It is a question that fellow Kenyan Peter Mbiria, 26, has also been asking for 
the past five years. After befriending a woman with crippling arthritis, Mbiria 
– an able-bodied electrical engineering student in Nairobi – recognised the 
limitations of existing technology for disabled people.

“I could see how much she was struggling to do her daily tasks, and I wanted 
to make a wheelchair that would really suit her needs – one that would make her 
independent and mobile, comfortable and happy,” he says.

“Here in Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> … surfaces are very 
uneven, mostly rocky and pretty difficult for people who use wheelchairs. In 
fact, even around Nairobi there are no ramps for wheelchairs.”

Mbiria points out that most wheelchairs are limited to a single function. Some 
are best suited to a flat surface, others to rough terrain or moving in an 
upright position. Few, though, are able to combine all three functionalities. 
Mbiria decided to change that. Combining a military tank concept with the 
capacity of a 4x4 and the design of a normal wheelchair, he created the“E-Con”: 
an all-terrain wheelchair that allows users to stand upright, climb up or down 
stairs, and self-navigate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGr6RIiDIf4>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fkenya-creativity-broadens-employment-horizons-disabled-people-africa-prize-for-engingineering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eed38c3d0a258fca397f4c05be4e4624843df82%2F0_0_7092_4728%2F7092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kenyan%20creativity%20broadens%20employment%20horizons%20for%20disabled%20people%20%7C%20Kate%20Hodal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fkenya-creativity-broadens-employment-horizons-disabled-people-africa-prize-for-engingineering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kenyan%20creativity%20broadens%20employment%20horizons%20for%20disabled%20people%20%7C%20Kate%20Hodal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fkenya-creativity-broadens-employment-horizons-disabled-people-africa-prize-for-engingineering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eed38c3d0a258fca397f4c05be4e4624843df82%2F0_0_7092_4728%2F7092.jpg>
 Peter Mbiria is seen with a scale model prototype for his all-terrain electric 
convertible wheelchair. Photograph: Brett Eloff/Royal Academy of Engineering 
Similar to a Transformer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transformers_%28film%29>, the wheelchair morphs 
from its standard shape into a vertical upright position, and can handle flat 
surfaces as well as rocky terrain. Each “wheel” consists of three smaller 
wheels, allowing for greater movement and balance.

The E-Con is still in prototype form, but Mbiria, who was also shortlisted for 
the Africa prize, is in talks with a Kenyan organisation over funding to build 
the first model, which he says will cost about $9,000. Many of the components 
will have to be sourced from abroad, as they are not available in Africa.

Mbiria’s arthritic friend passed away before he was able to present her with 
his invention, and he took her death badly. “I was very sad because I was 
making this for her in secret, and she left without knowing what I was 
preparing for her,” he says. “For a while I was heartbroken, and then I thought 
– ‘Well, there are many people like her who would like a wheelchair that would 
enable them to be independent and mobile.’”

Encouraged by that thought, Mbiria is now pushing for such wheelchairs to be 
made available to those in need without delay.

“Once people are mobile and independent, they can focus on their dreams, their 
goals in life, themselves,” he says. “These other challenges have been taken 
away from them. Now they can ask themselves, ‘Can I start my own business? What 
can I do for my community? What do I want to be?’”
 