
What?

The Milk Maker (hoppsandwoolf.com 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.hoppsandwoolf.com%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHqtYqMxcuH2U6M2MZwu-DmETuHmw>
, £72.99) has a motored blade in steel a chamber, and a heating element. It 
pulverises and pasteurises nuts and water to emulsion.

Why?

Because I have no clue how you milk an oat. How hard are people squeezing 
their nuts, exactly?

Well?

We need to talk about milk alternatives (God knows, I wish we didn’t). Healthy 
stuff derived from soya beans, rice, coconut, owl pellets, packing chips, old 
Blu-Tack etc has been around for years – dairy-swerving options for vampiric 
executives or stringy hippies drying out in Goa. But now it’s the de facto 
choice of a younger, clean-eating crowd. Marketing-wise, there are cunning 
linguistics at play, too. “Milk alternative”, like milk substitute, sounds 
prosaic, limiting, second best; the new vogue is for “alternative milk”, 
suggesting a cooler, more rebellious aspect. Picture this drink in winged 
eyeliner and a heavy fringe, wearingan ironic “milk monitor” badge 
<http://www.campdavebadges.co.uk/school-and-jobs/milk-monitor-button-badge> 
while Snapchatting. And it wants you to call it “mylk” now, FYI.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-milk-maker-non-dairy-coconuts-soybeans-almonds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84aa469fa84a90ee5f9be7bd521ec094e922e71b%2F1370_548_2435_3043%2F2435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Milk%20Maker%20%E2%80%93%20go%20nuts%20with%20this%20non-dairy%20%E2%80%98mylk%E2%80%99%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-milk-maker-non-dairy-coconuts-soybeans-almonds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Milk%20Maker%20%E2%80%93%20go%20nuts%20with%20this%20non-dairy%20%E2%80%98mylk%E2%80%99%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-milk-maker-non-dairy-coconuts-soybeans-almonds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84aa469fa84a90ee5f9be7bd521ec094e922e71b%2F1370_548_2435_3043%2F2435.jpg>
 ‘It makes me want to play tennis’ … Rhik enjoys his steaming bounty of puritan 
juice. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
But let’s leave all that aside and try the Milk Maker by Hopps & Woolf 
<https://www.hoppsandwoolf.com/milkmaker>. It’s a high-powered blender that 
grinds raw ingredients and water into a paste, heating the mixture to 
pasteurise it. Some problems: first I need nuts – and not ones jimmied out of a 
Snickers or bag of KP. No matter how loudly Mr T shouts, it’s actually quite 
difficult to get some nuts. My part of town isn’t dripping with soya beans. 
Fresh walnuts are available only in October. (That children’s song about
gathering nuts in May <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UeMDX7JUGCE>? Typical 
BS.) For optimal creaminess, you should soak your nuts overnight – a monumental 
pain in the beans for anyone aspirational but unorganised.

Eventually I throw in soaked almonds, cinnamon and honey. With one button, the 
machine begins, emitting more heat than a Venusian sauna and an odd, screeching 
grind. In 20 minutes, it yields a steaming bounty of puritan juice. The 
included sieve is quickly overwhelmed by almond meal – invest in a nut bag 
(what? That’s what they’re called!) for smoothest-sippin’ mylk. But I’m highly 
impressed with the fresh taste. Naturally sweet, nutritious – it makes me want 
to play tennis. Does this make me a clean eater? I actually ended up on the 
sofa, guzzling a huge chocolate mylkshake, so let’s not go nuts.

Redeeming features?

Coconut, cashew, soya bean – you can use any nuts you like. I liked – yes! – 
doughnuts best.

Counter, drawer, back of the cupboard?

Counter. Alternatively, under a goth cow (black on black spots, nose ring). 4/5
 