
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> faces being stripped 
of his licence at a meeting of the British Boxing Board of Control on Wednesday.

Tyson Fury’s trainer believes depression is to blame for his cocaine use
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/tyson-fury-depression-peter-fury-drug-addiction>
Fury’s case will be discussed by officials after a reported failed drugs test 
in the United States and his admission in Rolling Stone magazine that he has 
“done lots of cocaine”. A ban is likely to expedite confirmation of a fight 
between Wladimir Klitschko and Anthony Joshua for the newly-vacant world 
heavyweight titles.

Fury pulled out of a scheduled world heavyweight title rematch against 
Klitschko later this month with his team insisting he is medically unfit to 
fight due to mental health concerns. If the Board do decide to strip Fury of 
his licence it is almost certain he will also be forced to relinquish the WBO 
and WBA versions of the title he won from Klitschko last year.

The WBO has already given the 28-year-old a 10-day deadline to declare his 
future plans, and a ban would make his position as champion untenable. 
Klitschko is instead set to sign a deal to face IBF champion Joshua for all 
three belts, with the bout expected to confirmed next week for 10 December.

The former champion David Haye believes it is already a done deal, tweeting on 
Tuesday <https://twitter.com/mrdavidhaye/status/785810251639578624>: “Great to 
hear Joshua-Klitschko is done. Timing is everything & the time is now perfect 
for AJ. Reminds me of Ali Vs Berbick”.

But the projected contest between Klitschko and Joshua is unlikely to be 
officially confirmed before Fury’s position is fully clarified.

‘On mental health Tyson Fury’s case shows we are years behind’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/tyson-fury-boxing-mental-health-david-allen>
Ricky Hatton had his licence taken away by the Board in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/23/ricky-hatton-boxing-license-withdrawn>
 following widespread allegations about the use of cocaine. It was returned two 
years later following a personal hearing. Fury will hope to convince the 
sanctioning bodies to declare him “champion in recess” – which would allow him 
to challenge for the titles in the event he returns to the sport.

But his situation is complicated by his reported failed drugs test by the 
Voluntary Anti-Doping Agency (Vada) in the United States this month. Vada have 
refused to make their findings public, and UK Anti-Doping – which is yet to 
rule on a separate doping issue regarding Fury – has stressed cocaine is not on 
its own list of banned substances in out-of-competition testing.

Both Joshua and the reigning WBC champion, Deontay Wilder, have offered their 
support to Fury, saying they hope he will soon be fit enough to return to the 
sport. Joshua said: “Tyson is a fighting man, a real talent and he is good for 
boxing in his own way. I really hope to see him getting back to what he does 
best.”
 