
Koalas are “under siege” across NSW, with three separate policies poised to be 
implemented set to destroy their remaining habitats, according to a briefing 
paper written by the National Parks Association of NSW.

In light of the increasing threats, the paper calls on the NSW EPA to protect 
koala habitats.

“The NSW government is completely failing to conserve and protect koala 
habitat,” the report says. “Koalas can lay claim to be the most poorly managed 
species in eastern Australia at present – which is hugely disappointing in 
light of their beloved status.”

The report finds the habitats of the declining koala populations are being 
threatened on public land by plans to renew agreements allowing the logging of 
native forests; on private lands by weakened clearing laws proposed by the 
Baird government; and by a failure of local government protections to identify 
more koala habitats as they are intended.

'We have to stop the bulldozers': swaths of koala habitat lost, say activists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/17/we-have-to-stop-the-bulldozers-swaths-of-koala-habitat-lost-say-activists>
Between 1990 and 2010, Koala populations in NSW were estimated by the federal 
government to have declined by 30%. And a report released in May by the NSW 
Environmental Protection Agency found that all koala populations in NSW, with 
one possible exception, have continued to decline, with at least one population 
now considered endangered.

That EPA report also found there were more koalas in forests that were more 
mature. It therefore concluded that logging was bad for koalas, since even if 
the forests are replaced, it reduced the maturity of the forests.

“So the question for the EPA is what are they going to do to force the 
government to protect koalas?,” asked Oisin Sweeney an ecologist with the 
National Parks Association of NSW.

Since 1997 and 2001, state and federal governments signed Regional Forestry 
Agreements, which allowed logging of native forests for 20 years. Those begin 
to expire in 2017 but the federal government’s current policy is to extend them 
when they expire.

An analysis from May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/environmental-groups-demand-end-to-logging-of-australias-native-forests>
 this year found the agreements had failed in all their aims, and it was 
accompanied by a letter from 30 environmental groups saying their extension 
would “would constitute an irrational decision on environmental, economic and 
social grounds”.

The briefing paper says in light of the new evidence showing that mature 
forests are important for koala habitats, the EPA needs to step in and regulate 
the logging of native forests.

“The expiry of the RFAs offers a circuit breaker and we need to take the 
opportunity to honestly appraise the impacts of logging and ask whether it’s 
worth it,” the paper concludes.

But on private land, the picture is at least as bad, the report finds.

Draft NSW legislation, set to be introduced to parliament this month, will 
significantly weaken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/nsw-land-clearing-law-will-let-farmers-clear-native-vegetation-with-no-approval>
 controls around clearing of native vegetation on private land. It will allow 
farmers to clear native vegetation without approval in many cases, and give 
others access to “offsets” so that they can clear their land, and make up for 
it by supporting conservation efforts elsewhere.

According to WWF 
<http://www.wwf.org.au/news/news/2016/more-than-2-2-million-hectares-of-nsw-koala-habitat-could-be-cleared>
, just one of the changes in the sweeping reforms could result in 2.2 million 
hectares of koala habitat being cleared.

The NSW government said the WWF analysis was “alarmist”, arguing local 
government laws prohibit the clearing of koala habitat. But the National Parks 
Association said that was the intention of the laws, whereby koala habitat is 
mapped and classified as “core”, and then used to guide development.

But the report said in the 21 years since that law was introduced, only four 
plans protecting koala habitats have been approved.


“That means that core koala habitat is not identified or protected in the vast 
majority of local government areas in NSW and there no protection … is 
conferred,” the report said.

With the Regional Forest Agreements poised to be renewed, and NSW set to pass 
relaxed land clearing laws, the National Parks Association said NSW has a 
decision to make.

“This means that there is a choice that must be made: do we want to protect 
koalas, or do we want to allow logging and land-clearing to drive them to 
extinction?”
 