
After film-maker Louis Theroux’s trip to Australia last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/27/louis-theroux-the-condition-of-australias-indigenous-people-is-massively-fascinating>
 he noted that Aboriginal Australians are now “out of sight”. It’s a shame he 
didn’t stay a few weeks longer to witness the Koori Knockout – a stunning 
counter-narrative of the world’s oldest continuous culture.


 Played every October long weekend, this unique rugby league carnival draws 
teams from the 40 cultures that make up the New South Wales Koori nations. This 
year the event returned to its home base of Sydney, courtesy of the hosting 
rights of the men’s champions, the Redfern All Blacks, who staged a miraculous 
comeback to winlast year’s event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/15/koori-knockout-if-i-missed-it-i-wasnt-going-to-walk-around-redfern-video>
 in Dubbo.

 After a year of anticipation, more than 30,000 people and 120 teams converged 
for four days of rugby league at the grand old dame, Leichhardt Oval. It’s the 
biggest event on the Koori sporting calendar and a colourful meeting of 
different mobs – freshwater, saltwater, mountain, desert and plains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7be218c7fd18d57a03c7d05dc72f09d289e9a4%2F0_0_4716_2868%2F4716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7be218c7fd18d57a03c7d05dc72f09d289e9a4%2F0_0_4716_2868%2F4716.jpg>
 A player walks around after the Koori Knockout grand final between the Redfern 
All Blacks and Newcastle All Blacks. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
 At 8.30am on Friday morning, the 46th annual Koori Knockout kicked off with 
an under-15 boys match between Butucarbin Aboriginal Corporation and Maitland 
United. The first day is devoted to boys and women and the four fields crackled 
with teen spirit and rebellious energy.

 My tournament guide is Brad Cooke, a veteran knockout commentator who moved 
seamlessly between grounds with a permanent smile, sharing lots of kisses and 
hugs while gathering information and gossip for the competition’s new live score
App <https://www.facebook.com/RoadToTheKO/>. 

 Cooke is the first Aboriginal “On the ball” NRL commentator for ABC Radio and 
this year hosted the inaugural TV show Road to the Knockout, which covered the 
lead-up to the event. He is the centrifugal force of the knockout. “Brother, 
wherever you are you are a blessing for your people,” said one volunteer, Uncle 
Lyall.

 Cooke explained that every match has its own narrative, of obstacles overcome 
by each mob to get to the event and match-ups based on “country” – saltwater v 
freshwater, city v bush. Identity is celebrated through dot painting jerseys 
and clan totems are celebrated in team names: Emus, Goannas (Googars), Magpies, 
Eels, Yowies and Red Belly Black Snakes.

Cronulla's NRL premiership pays back the loyal fans of The Shire | Paul 
Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/cronullas-nrl-premiership-pays-back-the-loyal-fans-of-the-shire>
 One early match featured the Toomelah Tigers, the under-17 defending boys 
champions and the Goodooga Magpies, from the NSW-Queensland border. The Tigers 
had defeated the Magpies in the first round last year but in a tough game, 
Goodooga pulled off an upset win to the unbridled joy of 60 community members, 
many whom had made the 14-hour trek by car.

 The two teams exchanged hugs and complex handshakes and the elated Goodooga 
youngsters were absorbed into the warm embrace of their fans – mums, dads 
uncles, aunties. Their enthusiasm was contagious. “What’s up, cuz?” said one 
fan to a player. “Plenty, bra,” he said, smiling.

 As the Goodooga Magpies team left the ground they were greeted by Uncle Allan 
Lamb, who said to each player: “Yaama dhaadhaa nginda maamali Nga,” which 
translates as: “Grandfather said you done good.” “Without footy,” explained 
Uncle Allan, “what do we have to connect the kids and the elders?”

 In a burnt orange uniform the Goodooga Magpies coach, Gary Gawne, addressed 
the players. “Gee we looked good!” he said, beaming. “But let’s fix the little 
things, slow it down and play at our pace.” Gawne has pulled together a team 
from a remote town east of Lightning Ridge and 70km from the nearest shops. To 
raise funding for the team’s transport and accommodation, the white and black 
townspeople of Goodooga hosted market days. “It’s brought the town together,” 
added his assistant, who proudly introduced himself as “the paperwork man”. 
Goodooga lost their next match to La Perouse and learned the unforgiving rule 
of knockout: a single mistake can come back at you like a bad oyster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42dc8dd10998fef8f904ebdd67e198e8469ad295%2F0_0_4171_2684%2F4171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42dc8dd10998fef8f904ebdd67e198e8469ad295%2F0_0_4171_2684%2F4171.jpg>
 Josh Addo-Carr is tackled in a game Redfern won 30-10. Photograph: Mike Bowers 
for the Guardian 
 As the matches rolled on, the fans moved constantly between the four grounds, 
bracing themselves against an icy breeze that cut across the harbour. The sense 
of belonging is clear as long lost friends hug, share stories of joy and 
sadness and coo over babies. Wiradjuri, Gomeroi, Dunghutti, Yuin, Darug – 
identity coalesced through songlines and bloodlines. One T-shirt paid tribute 
to TJ Hickey, whose death set off theRedfern riots 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2004-02-16/fifty-police-injured-in-redfern-riot/136268>
. Another read: “Australia – Drive it like you stole it.”

 The women’s qualifiers featured fierce hits and flowing rugby league with the 
defending champions, the Redfern All Blacks, looking imperious. Women are at 
the heart of the knockout this year and the organising committee is chaired and 
run by community women.

How rugby league player Dean Widders stared racism in the face and won
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/22/how-rugby-league-player-dean-widders-stared-racism-in-the-face-and-won>
Forty-minute sudden-death games did not suit the fancied Redfern All Blacks 
under-17 boys team and some shed tears after their loss to Mount Druitt 
Initiation. For many, knockout is the new initiation for Kooris, linking men 
and boys and replacing formal ceremonies of bravery that were once the rite of 
passage to adulthood.

 With the junior and women’s semi-finalists locked in, it was time for Super 
Saturday, a brutal throwdown between 62 men’s teams. It was blue sky for all 
with the hero’s script yet to be written. The forward packs launched 
ferociously into each other and the backs sprinted, sidestepped and scored 
brilliant tries. The footy is flashy and it’s a nostalgic return to the 
pre-prototype days of rugby league – diversity of body shapes, from skinny 
wingers to fat forwards.

 Respect is a verb at the knockout and keeping the peace is paramount among 
alpha males representing their community. After each match the teams link arms 
to hear from community leaders and captains. There are inevitable scuffles when 
the heat is on and the stakes are high, but discipline trumps emotion and 
strong leadership always prevails.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103d1d4f3c14818fb715413dce87010d79e1d1f0%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103d1d4f3c14818fb715413dce87010d79e1d1f0%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 The Newcastle All Blacks huddle before the Koori Knockout grand final against 
the Redfern All Blacks. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
NRL players were also on display; the Sydney Roosters star Latrell Mitchell 
for Taree Biripi Sharks, the Melbourne Storm-bound Josh Addo-Carr for the 
Redfern All Blacks, and the SouthSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Rabbitoh Cody Walker for 
the Bundjalung Baygal Warriors. For Walker the fear and excitement associated 
with the knockout is the “unknown”. He lives in the structured world of the 
NRL, where robotic percentages reign supreme and players are videotaped and 
analysed daily. Knockout provides a glimpse of the old world: “More ability, 
less structure,” Walker said on Road to the Knockout. “You turn up as an NRL 
player and a fearless 17-year-old kid nobody has heard of can step you silly!”

 It’s tough to imagine another event in the world where professionals mix so 
freely with amateurs, often against the wishes of their professional clubs. 
“Some player managers don’t like us playing in the tournament,” said Addo-Carr, 
“but it’s very important and we won’t back down on it.”

 To make the semi-finals on Monday, each team must win three games on the 
Sunday. Narwan Eels were led by former NRL star and four-time knockout winner 
Dean Widders who, at the creaky age of 36, has returned to play for his 
ancestral team. “My shoulders and knees are shot but I’ve got to play,” he said 
after leading the Eels to a tough win over the Illawarra Titans. “Knockouts are 
won on spirit, not training.” A Narwan fan pats Widders on the back and says, 
“First games always the hardest, ay?” The Eels would be knocked out later in 
the day.

 Throughout the crowd was boisterous and the language often blue, despite a 
decent contingent of police. The ground announcer bravely tried to stem the 
tide with a request to stop swearing. One Narwan Eels fan screeched in reply: 
“You’ll need a big paddy wagon for that one!” which set off laughter, even 
among the police officers.

 The NITV live coverage began on the Sunday, beamed out to the nation by a 
panel of expert commentators including Brad Cooke, Channel Seven’s Djuro Sen, 
ABC’s Dan Conifer and the former NRL player Joey Williams. They work in shifts 
dissecting matters and providing backstories, their excitement bubbling over at 
the athletic feats and big hits.

 Between shifts, Cooke introduced me to a standout Cabbage Tree Island 
Descendent player, Djann Jarrett, who takes knockout more seriously than most. 
Deaf by birth he has recently had a Cochlear implant and was warned about 
playing. With headgear in place he is prepared to take the risk. “You can’t get 
between a blackfella and knockout,” Jarrett said plainly.

 By the end of Sunday, 62 men’s teams had whittled down to four, including 
last year’s grand finalists the Redfern All Blacks and the Newcastle All 
Blacks, plus outsiders Cabbage Tree Island Descendants and Combined Countries.

 Monday dawned full of promise and there were plenty of walking wounded in the 
stands, some in arm braces and others walking with crutches. Redfern and 
Newcastle won their games to set up a grand final rematch. Djann Jarrett’s 
Cabbage Tree Island did their community proud in their 30-10 semi-final loss to 
Redfern. His hearing implant remains intact and he’ll be back for more, his 
disappointment cured by the alchemy of time. “It was a tough game,” he said, 
shrugging. “Redfern has been there done that. We’re young and we’ll be back.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35bc2ff4f694dc3f44c7ccc5df43e1d388c5441e%2F184_9_4326_2884%2F4326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35bc2ff4f694dc3f44c7ccc5df43e1d388c5441e%2F184_9_4326_2884%2F4326.jpg>
 Action from a women’s semi-final between winners the Redfern All Blacks and 
the Gular Giddyurais. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
 Rebecca Riley, the vice-captain of the Redfern All Blacks women’s team, was 
so nervous she was feeling sick ahead of her semi-final against the Gular 
Giddyurais. By day she works in an international hotel but rugby league is her 
thing. “I get opportunities that mum and nan didn’t have in footy, coming 
together, seeing your mob, playing for family and culture” said Riley, 
originally from Wiradjuri country and the current NSW representative hooker. 
Her left arm is tattooed with the name of Elizabeth Donnelly, a tribute to her 
grandmother. “She raised me,” adds Riley.

 The Redfern All Blacks women’s team triumphed against the brave Red Belly 
Blacks and Riley was named both player’s player of the tournament and best 
grand final player. Surrounded by her whooping team mates she said humbly: “I’m 
proud of the girls, we trained so hard and nobody let anybody down.”

 For Linda Burney, the freshly minted Labor MP and first Aboriginal woman in 
the House of Representatives, 2016 marks her 20th knockout. “Culture, family, 
community around rugby league,” she said. “It’s my favourite time and nothing 
makes me prouder.” The announcer boomed over the loudspeaker: “Final call for 
Linda Burney to the officials table. It’s hard to hide if you’re a politician 
and twice as hard if you’re a black one.”

 The final of the men’s tournament completed the double for Redfern All 
Blacks, who thrashed the Newcastle All Blacks 42-12 with tries that would made 
the league gods weep with pleasure. It was a free-flowing expression of 
creativity, talent and passion. Things got hot-blooded, with a frustrated 
Newcastle quick on the draw and emotional pyrotechnics from both sets of fans 
often aimed at the referee. By the final whistle the Newcastle players were 
shellshocked, hands on heads, and the Redfern All Blacks delirious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faab7857e598ec1bac69a33f39429a46a8ce882b9%2F0_16_4183_2793%2F4183.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Koori%20knockout%20a%20colourful%20meeting%20of%20mobs%20united%20by%20rugby%20league%20%7C%20Patrick%20Skene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fkoori-knockout-a-colourful-meeting-of-mobs-united-by-rugby-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faab7857e598ec1bac69a33f39429a46a8ce882b9%2F0_16_4183_2793%2F4183.jpg>
 Redfern players celebrate after winning the grand final against Newcastle All 
Blacks. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
 The Aboriginal community holds country strong through songs and, as the 
shadows lengthened over Leichhardt oval, a big huddle of players and fans 
marked the moment with a joyous rendition of the Redfern All Blacks club song: 
“We keep the ball in motion, like the rolling of the ocean.”

 In a poignant moment, time’s winged chariot came to collect the former NRL 
star Nathan Merritt, who announced his knockout retirement. The crowd shuffled 
out, the hessian fences came down and the resilient Kooris dispersed with 
promises to regather next year. As I left a smiling uncle winked at me and 
said: “I’ll see ya when I’m lookin at ya.”
 