
Australia has a new and unexpected swimming superstar, with 18-year-old Kyle 
Chalmers storming home from seventh place at the turn to claim gold in the 
men’s 100m freestyle, blowing away American star Nathan Adrian and Australia’s 
leaving pre-Games favourite Cameron McEvoy out of the medals.

 In fairness, Chalmers entered the final as the second fastest qualifier 
behind Adrian but as both Australians struggled in the early stages of the 
race, what followed could not have been expected as the son of former AFL 
footballer Brett Chalmers blitzed his way through the field in the second lap 
to touch in 47.58 ahead of Belgian Pieter Timmers (47.80) and Adrian (47.85).

McEvoy was a distant seventh in a time of 48.12 but was a gracious loser, 
raising his team-mate’s fist in the air as the pair walked back down the pool 
deck in a state of shock at the end of the race. “It’s definitely still sinking 
in that I’ve actually won,” Chalmers said after the race. “I was a bit worried 
that I glided for a bit too long at the finish but very happy with that.”

“It’s unbelievable, I mean, I’m only 18. Nathan [Adrian] is 10 years older 
than me and he’s the reigning Olympic champion so being next to him was pretty 
daunting for me but I knew I had to stick to my guns.”

Despite his personal disappointment, McEvoy was full of praise for his 
countryman, preferring to focus on Chalmers’ success. “Not the best,” was his 
appraisal of his own race. “But enough about me. Kyle’s come in and done a 
second PB on top of the PB he did at the trials. He’s just turned 18 and he’s 
the Olympic champion. That’s bloody wonderful isn’t it?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Folympic-games-rugby-sevens-gold-chalmers-usa-pool-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GB%20win%20in%20rugby%20sevens%2C%20gold%20for%20Chalmers%20and%20the%20USA%20in%20Rio%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Folympic-games-rugby-sevens-gold-chalmers-usa-pool-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GB%20win%20in%20rugby%20sevens%2C%20gold%20for%20Chalmers%20and%20the%20USA%20in%20Rio%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Folympic-games-rugby-sevens-gold-chalmers-usa-pool-video-highlights&media=>
GB win in rugby sevens, gold for Chalmers and the USA in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/11/olympic-games-rugby-sevens-gold-chalmers-usa-pool-video-highlights>
Ten minutes earlier, 21-year-old Madeline Groves claimed a silver medal for 
Australia in the women’s 200m butterfly. Fast-starting Groves entered the final 
among the favourites having qualified half a second faster than her nearest 
rival, Spain’s Mireia Belmonte. The Australian’s start was typically strong, if 
slower than her first lap in the semi-final, and she led by almost half a 
second at the 100m mark.

Belmonte surged in the third lap and touched 0.14 seconds in front at the 
final turn to set up a grandstand finish, and in a frenetic finish managed to 
touch the wall in 2:04.85, three one-hundredths of a second in front of Groves. 
It took a monumental effort to beat Groves, who finished in a PB, and a weak 
touch almost undid Belmonte’s advantage.

Men's basketball: Carmelo Anthony saves USA as Australia fall just short
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/rio-olympics-usa-basketball-score-australia-carmelo-anthony>
Four years ago Groves actually quit the sport 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/olympics/rio-2016/olympics-swimming/rio-olympics-2016-mad-dog-madeline-groves-out-to-become-australias-next-madame-butterfly-susie-oneill-20160810-gqpquq.html>
 and entered the Games as one of the Australian team’s less heralded chances, 
despite arriving in Rio as the fastest swimmer in her event for the year. In 
the past the Brisbane-born swimmer also battled neck and shoulder pain caused 
by clenching her teeth, but she relaxed enough in this final to go within a 
fingertip of a gold medal.

“It feels absolutely amazing. I’ve had such an awesome time. I’m so happy,” 
Groves said to television crews at the conclusion of the race. “I had so much 
fun tonight. I have so much respect for Maria. She’s an awesome competitor.”

“I don’t know what my splits were but I left everything in the pool. I really 
really happy with I went. That’s a PB. It’s a bloody awesome time for me. And I 
could have come last in that race. I’m just so happy.”

Australia also claimed a silver medal in the women’s 4x200m freestyle relay, 
for which Leah Neale, Emma KcKeon, Bronte Barratt and Tamsin Cook had qualified 
fastest but couldn’t quite usurp a talented American team containing Games star 
Katie Ledecky.

Neale led off for the Australians and sat in fourth position after the first 
100m as Sweden went to an early lead. McKeon entered the pool with plenty of 
work to do as the Chinese team established a full body length lead, and hauled 
the Australians back into the race with to establish a 0.31 second advantage 
ahead of the Americans as Barratt took off for the third leg.

Barratt not only held firm but moved Australia ahead another half a second, 
but an 0.89 second buffer was not enough for Tamisin Cook to prevent Ledecky 
from streaking clear to take gold for Team USA by a couple of body lengths. The 
US finished in 7:43.03 with the Australians second in 7:44.87, while Canada 
took bronze in 7:45.39 ahead of China and Sweden.

“It’s crazy. It’s so surreal,” Neale said afterwards. “I wasn’t expecting to 
medal with that. To come away with that is pretty amazing.” McKeon, who now has 
gold, silver and bronze medals in her first Games, agreed with her team-mate. 
“To get a silver medal...I don’t think any of us were really expecting or even 
thinking about medals really, but we all just got in there and all did very 
gutsy swims.”

The last word came from 17-year-old Cook, who was impressive in holding onto 
the silver medal position as Ledecky powered away. “To be honest my first 
emotion was terrified,” she said of being told she’d face off against the 
American star. “I’m so happy for us and for the girls that I was able to put 
together a good swim.”

Elsewhere at the pool, Australian sisters Cate and Bronte Campbell, one the 
world record holder and the other the world champion, will now race each other 
in the Olympic women’s 100m freestyle final after qualifying in Wednesday’s 
semi-finals. World record holder Cate was fastest, breaking the Olympic record 
of 52.78 that she had set earlier in the heats with a time of 52.71 seconds, 
while younger sibling Bronte was fifth of the final eight.
 