
Víctor Fernández wasn’t leaving, not officially, not yet, but he came to say 
goodbye anyway. Although the axe that had long hovered over his neck, blade 
glistening, still hadn’t fallen, he was sure it would be along presently and so 
he bade farewell to them before they bade farewell to him. The Deportivo de La 
Coruña manager settled into his seat behind the bottles of beer and water and 
the board with the insurance company’s name on it, coughed, adjusted the mic 
and waited, doughy eyes wide. A few minutes before, a late own goal had 
captured a 1-1 draw with Córdoba and at the final whistle a familiar chant had 
started up again: “Víctor, go now!” This time, he would.

Fernández was on his fourth ultimatum of the season. They had started all the 
way back in the autumn; six months later, he was still standing … just. Each 
time he had emerged battered and bruised, weaker than before, but alive. This 
time he did not emerge at all, except to leave a few final words. On Monday, 
president Tino Fernández had called him and told him he had to win,sí o sí: yes 
or yes. And if ‘yes’ was ‘no’, he’d be sacked. On Tuesday, it was in all the 
papers, just like the other three ultimatums had been. And on Wednesday, the 
team whose target was survival got a draw to keep them a point above 
relegation, but Víctor Fernández knew it wasn’t enough.

A couple of questions went by and then the question. Do you think this was 
your last game? It seemed to come as a liberation, the charade finally over. “I 
think so,” he said. “For sure.” There’d been no conversation post-game, no 
meeting with the president, no deal done, no pay-off agreed, no announcement, 
no insincere institutional statement saying “thanks for your efforts, good luck 
in the future and all that, now sling your hook”, nothing. Officially, Víctor 
Fernández was still the manager of Deportivo. But nor was there a promise to 
fight on. Just a moment for him to lament a sacking had hadn’t yet been given 
and say an emotional goodnight and good luck.

“If what the president said on the phone on Monday is fulfilled, this is [my 
last game],” Fernández said. “I tried. I tried with all my might. I would like 
to say thank you to everyone. What was said on Monday, and was filtered out [to 
the media], I suppose it’s true. I am convinced that they will survive; I am 
convinced that they would have survived with me too. I will leave with my head 
held high. I have a clear conscience. When you have given your all it gives you 
an inner peace that no one can take away from me … I wish you all a lot of 
luck, health, and happiness.”

On he went. Alongside him, the press officer squirmed, wanting to wrap it up, 
but the questions kept coming and Fernández noted with a wry smile: “I’ve got 
all night.” There would be no training in the morning and there was nowhere 
else to go, after all. And so he continued, trying to contain his hurt, 
rambling, not sure where he was heading except out of there. “I was trying to 
hold it together but I almost cracked, [because] three or four of the players 
were crying,” he said. “It’s been a long time since I had a relationship like 
this with a dressing room,” he went on. “Our objective is survival and we’re 
not in the relegation zone; we only have been three times,” he said. “I’ve not 
been well treated at times,” he said.

“Very few people know how I really feel today,” he continued. The questions 
continued too,what ifs? “You’re talking about hypotheses,” he said finally, as 
the whole surreal spectacle closed at last. “Life is reality. The reality is 
that I am the Deportivo coach.” A pause. “[But] I was told that I had to winsí 
o sí and [now] I’m exposed to whatever might happen …” Another pause. “I’m 
answering badly … I don’t know what I’m saying now.” Fernández leaned into the 
mic, said “bye”, got up suddenly and walked out. The End.

Any chance of him staying, any chance of the president backtracking, had gone 
with him. Not long after, it was official: Víctor Fernández had been sacked as 
manager of Deportivo. His replacement will be Víctor Sánchez de Amo, Míchel’s 
former assistant at Getafe and Olympiakos.

“It has been hard from the start,” Fernández had said and quite rightly. 
Deportivo had got rid of Fernando Vázquez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/apr/08/la-liga-deportivo-fernando-vazquez-profesor>
, the coach who given them hope but proven unable to save them two years ago, 
but had then brought them back up to the first division. They had done so on 
the eve of pre-season training and for no apparent reason. By the time the 
season proper began, they still hadn’t completed their squad, the budget was 
the fourth smallest in the division, and the last two seasons they spent in the 
first division, in 2010-11 and 2012-13, ended in relegation.

Being a former Celta manager didn’t help Fernández (although so too was 
Vázquez and indeed Jabo Irureta, who won the league for Depor), the fans did 
not warm to him and the performances didn’t exactly help him. He had talked 
about an attacking style that never appeared. Mostly, it was dire. If he knew 
that survival was all they could realistically aspire to, and it probably was, 
he only said that towards the end, even though the lack of trust from the board 
was quickly apparent. On Wednesday night he described the environment as “not 
healthy, not edifying, from the start”. At one point he noted that if there is 
one person who needs support and affection it is the president, pausing to add, 
tellingly: “Well, I needed it too …”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Fla-liga-manager-deportivo-victor-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428589221488%2Fd60160e4-e304-4a5a-bf7a-9bdd1c3f4879-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20Liga%E2%80%99s%20manager%20cull%20continues%20with%20Deportivo%E2%80%99s%20coach%20the%20latest%20to%20go%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Fla-liga-manager-deportivo-victor-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20Liga%E2%80%99s%20manager%20cull%20continues%20with%20Deportivo%E2%80%99s%20coach%20the%20latest%20to%20go%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Fla-liga-manager-deportivo-victor-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428589221488%2Fd60160e4-e304-4a5a-bf7a-9bdd1c3f4879-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Deportivo defender Juanfran Moreno, left, fights for the ball with Heldon 
Ramos on Wednesday. Photograph: Cabalar/EPA 
The first ultimatum came in October and an ultimatum is always a bad sign. An 
absurd one too: a manager who was not good enough one minute is good enough 90 
minutes later? Two more ultimatums came and each time Fernández got through, 
getting the results that he needed to carry on, but damage was done and lots of 
it. He described the sapping of energy brought about by so many last chances as 
“brutal”.

The players could not be immune from it all, especially because each time it 
was public, the coach’s authority constantly undermined. Leaks are damaging and 
so often come from the very top, something that supporters often seem strangely 
reluctant to see. As the board’s relationship with fans grew more strained, 
particularly afterthe murder of Jimmy Romero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/01/death-jimmy-romero-spanish-football-violence>
, so the atmosphere became more tense and cracks widened. Pressure built, 
played out publicly, information filtered externally but not shared internally.

“I don’t know. You probably know: you’ve written it all …” Fernández said on 
Wednesday night. He also noted that he had not told anyone about a “private 
conversation” with the president on Monday that was in every paper on the 
Tuesday.

“Have I spoken to you about it?” he asked.

A “no” from the back of the room.

“So …”

So? So it ends. The question now is how it will end. There are eight games 
left and Deportivo are one point above the relegation zone. If they were going 
to sack the manager, perhaps they should have done it sooner: it would have 
been more honest, more coherent. It might also have given a new manager time to 
make an impact. What it would not have been is a guarantee, just as it is no 
guarantee now.

Fernández is the ninth manager to be sacked this season, while 11 have gone in 
total. From 13th-placed Getafe, who saw Cosmin Contra and Quique Sánchez Flores 
walk, pushed towards the door by an institutional crisis and a president’s 
broken promise and need for money, almost every club below them has had more 
than one manager: Getafe have had three; Levante have had two; Deportivo are 
now on their second; on Wednesday night Sergi Barjuán took charge of his first 
game for Almería, becoming their third coach of the season after Juan Ignacio 
Martínez was sacked at the weekend; Granada have had two, the second of whom 
has just conceded nine at the Bernabéu; Córdoba, down at the bottom, are on 
their third.

Mostly, it hasn’t helped. Perhaps only Levante have significantly improved. 
The most marked change has probably been at Real Sociedad, for whom David Moyes 
completed an entirevuelta on Tuesday night: he’s now played every team once, 
having started at Deportivo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/24/david-moyes-real-sociedad-la-liga-sid-lowe>
, and has pulled them away from the risk of relegation to 10th place and 
safety, 12 points off the drop zone.

By contrast, of the bottom nine only Elche and Eibar have stuck with their 
managers all season. Neither are safe yet, but both have improved. Patience has 
paid. Elche, bottom between weeks 14 and 17, have a three-point cushion and 
play Getafe on Thursday night. Eibar meanwhile had not won a single game in the 
second half of the season until Tuesday night. Eleven matches, two draws, nine 
defeats. Safe at Christmas, the league’s smallest club,daily defying the odds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/25/eibar-la-liga-fairytale-introduction>
, suddenly found themselves under pressure. Suddenly, they were where they 
should be but didn’t want to be: losing and dangerously close to the relegation 
zone.

Yet there was never any doubt; no axes, no ultimatums, no calls for a new man 
in charge. On Monday, the coach, Gaizka Garitano, insisted: “We feel like the 
win is very close.” And on Tuesday night they got it, beating Málaga 1-0. At 
the final whistle, the captain José María Añibarro dropped to the ground and 
beat the turf with his fists, then embraced the goalkeeper Xabi Irureta, 
relieved. With 31 points, they’re 14th, six points clear of the relegation 
zone. “There’s no tranquillity: there will still be anguish and anxiety,” said 
Garitano, “but we will keep going, as we always do. I would like to thank 
everyone. We deserved this and we have been united, together. It is not easy to 
withstand 11 games without a win, but in all this time there has not been one 
whistle.”

Talking points

• “Real Sociedad arrive late to the game,” ran the headline in El Diario 
Vasco. They weren’t the only ones. So, ahem, erm, not much to report, alas. 
Unless you want to know all about what Antoine Griezmann’s goal for Atlético 
sounded like from just outside, or what the “Tebas, go now!” chant was like in 
the 12th minute. Down 2-0 after 11 minutes,la Real could never find a way back 
into the game. “There have been two goals and nothing else,” said one 
commentator, really rubbing it in.

• “This is the kind of game that it is worth saving on video and showing the 
players one day when the doubts come,” Paco Jémez said after his Rayo Vallecano 
side had faced Real Madrid. They didn’t win,in fact they lost 2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/rayo-vallecano-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
, but he was happy: “Happier,” he admitted, “than if we had played badly and 
won. For 45 minutes, his side were superb – “[Iker] Casillas shut a lot of 
people up tonight and I’m pleased for him,” Jémez said – but they could not 
keep it up. “If we could do that for 90 minutes, we’d be Bayern Munich or 
Barcelona,” he said. After a dreadful first half where the only plan seemed to 
be to boot it behind the full-back for Gareth Bale to run on to, Madrid were 
far, far better in the second. Goals from Cristiano Ronaldo and James Rodríguez 
won it. “I’m very pleased with the way we played,” Carlo Ancelotti said.

• Barcelona were boring but won 4-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/barcelona-almeria-la-liga-match-report>
. Leo Messi and Luis Suárez both scored beauties before Marc Bartra and Suárez 
added two more.

• Abel Resino’s idea of resting his Granada players against Real Madrid 
because the home game against Celta three days later was more important didn’t 
pay off … quite. A 9-1 defeat at the Bernabéu was followed by a draw at home. 
One-nil up and one man down for 50 minutes, they eventually dropped two points 
thanks to a 93rd-minute goal from Theo Bongonda.

Results Atlético 2-0 Real Sociedad, Levante 1-2 Sevilla, Eibar 1-0 Málaga, 
Deportivo 1-1 Córdoba, Barcelona 4-0 Almería, Granada 1-1 Celta.Thursday 
Athletic v Valencia, Elche v Getafe, Villarreal v Espanyol.
 