
La La Land continued its seemingly unstoppable charge toward the Oscars with a 
record-breaking night at the Golden Globes. It won seven awards, including best 
acting gongs forRyan Gosling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> 
and Emma Stone and best director for Damien Chazelle, but Moonlight – which had 
been snubbed throughout the evening – took home best picture drama.

What we learned from the Golden Globes: Meryl Streep always wins and Ryan 
Gosling never fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/what-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails>
But the standout moment of the evening came away from the awards action. Meryl 
Streep’s searing critique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 of Donald Trump’s imitation and treatment of the disabled New York Times 
journalistSerge Kovaleski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-mock-new-york-times-reporter-disability>
 was a sobering moment which brought a stunned silence to the usually 
boisterous Globes.


“This instinct to humiliate, when it’s modelled by someone in the public 
platform,” she said. “By someone powerful, it filters down into everyone’s life 
because it kind of gives permission for other people to do the same thing. 
Disrespect invites disrespect, violence invites violence. When the powerful use 
their position to bully others, we all lose.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&media=>
Meryl Streep attacks Donald Trump in Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
It a great night for British talent, with the cast of The Night Manager having 
a particularly special evening – Tom Hiddleston, Olivia Colman and Hugh Laurie 
all won on the night.Claire Foy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/21/claire-foy-actor-subtle-talent-majestic-roles-crown-wolf-hall>
 also took home a gong for best actress in a TV series, for her performance in 
The Crown.

There was an early upset when Aaron Taylor-Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/23/aaron-taylor-johnson-avengers-age-ultron-interview>
 took home the award for best supporting actor over strong favouriteMahershala 
Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/28/entertainment-film-music-tv-2016-oblivion>
, who was expected to win for his turn in Barry Jenkins’ Moonlight. 
Taylor-Johnson has only picked up one other award this season, while Ali has 
won nearly every major award so far.

There were other big shocks as well, including Isabelle Huppert winning best 
actress in a motion picture for her performance in Paul Verhoeven’s 
controversial and divisiverape revenge comedy Elle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/elle-review-paul-verhoevens-brazen-revenge-comedy-is-a-dangerous-delight>
. The film also won the Golden Globe for best foreign language film.Moonlight’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
 best picture win was surprising as well, if only because it had been shut out 
of every other category.

Golden Globes 2017: full list of winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-full-list-of-winners>
In an emotional speech, Gosling thanked his wife, actor Eva Mendes, for her 
support. “You don’t get to be up here without standing on the shoulders of a 
mountain of people, and there’s just no time to thank everyone,” he said. “I’d 
just like to try and thank one person properly. While I was dancing and playing 
piano and having one of the best experiences I’ve ever had on a film, my lady 
was raising our daughter, pregnant with our second, and trying to help her 
brother fight his battle with cancer.”

Despite a barrage of negative publicity for sexual harassment claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/casey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood>
 made back in 2010, Casey Affleck won the award for best actor in a drama for 
playing a grieving janitor inManchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergan-casey-affleck>
. Viola Davis also continued her streak of wins for her role inFences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/22/fences-review-denzel-washington-viola-davis-august-wilson>
, with the award for best supporting actress.

Backstage, the actor spoke about Trump and the future of America. “I will, 
believe it or not, remove Trump from the equation, because I feel that it’s 
bigger than him,” she said. “I believe that it is our responsibility to uphold 
what it is to be an American and what America is about and the true meaning of 
what it means to pursue the American dream.”

The shocks and upsets continued in the television categories, with Donald 
Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/30/donald-glover-rapper-comedian-martian-star>
’s Atlanta transferring its critical acclaim into awards. The series won for 
best TV series, comedy, and Glover won in the best actor in a TV series, 
musical or comedy. Glover’s win was one of several victories for diverse actors.


Earlier in the evening, Tracee Ellis Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/tracee-ellis-ross-crush-bim-adewunmi>
 became the first black woman to win the award for lead TV comedic actress at 
the Golden Globes since 1983, and in her acceptance speech addressed young 
women of colour: “This is for all of the women of colour whose stories, ideas, 
thoughts are not always considered worthy or important but I see you and we see 
you.”

'Hidden Fences'? Golden Globes slip-up combines nominated film titles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/hidden-fences-golden-globes-2017-mistake>
The People v OJ Simpson continued its awards haul with Sarah Paulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/07/sarah-paulson-interview-marcia-clark-emmys-beauty-standards>
 winning best actress in a miniseries or TV movie, while Ryan Murphy’s 
dramatisation of the OJ Simpson trial also won best miniseries or TV movie 
after its sweep at the Emmys.

There were some bizarre moments, too. Pre-show host Jenna Bush Hager was 
interviewing Pharrell Williams, who worked on the music for space-race drama 
Hidden Figures, when she mistakenly called the film Hidden Fences, conflating 
Hidden Figures with Fences, the August Wilson adaptation starring Denzel 
Washington and Viola Davis.

The performance of Jimmy Fallon failed to impress, with the Tonight Show host’s
musical number based on La La Land 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/tv/news/watch-jimmy-fallons-hilarious-golden-globes-2017-opening-w459677>
 falling flat, followed by his prompter failing to work.
 