
Bouncing a chattering toddler on her knee, a patterned headscarf framing her 
broad smile, Safa shows few signs of how difficult her life has been. But as 
she describes the past five years, her hand moves instinctively to her pregnant 
stomach.

In 2012, Safa and her husband, both in their late 20s, were living in Aleppo 
when a blast destroyed their home, injuring him and leaving them with nothing. 
The young couple travelled by bus to Lebanon where, for six months, they shared 
a room and one toilet with 10 other people. Surviving on a tiny stipend from 
the UN, they were eventually given their own room – “about the size of this”, 
she says, gesturing to a small table – in return for collecting all the rubbish 
in the block. It was there that she gave birth to her first child, a daughter, 
now 18 months old. “We were treated like animals,” she says.

It was in Lebanon that the new family learned they would become three of the 
20,000 Syrian refugees the British government has agreed to take through the
vulnerable persons relocation scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/22/first-of-20000-syrian-refugees-arrive-in-uk>
. Of the news that they would be flown to Leeds, Safa recalls simply, “It was 
wonderful, like a dream.”

She became pregnant again soon after arriving in the UK, something that meant 
her life might still be at risk. Asylum-seeking and refugee women currently
account for 14% of all maternal deaths in the UK 
<https://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/assets/0002/8418/BJM_21_6_404-409_refugees.pdf>
 (despite comprising only 0.5% of the population) according to the Centre for 
Maternal and Child Enquiries. Navigating the British health service without the 
language or confidence to ask the right questions, their interaction with 
maternity services can be too little or come too late, with complications going 
undetected. Asylum-seeking and refugee women are statistically more likely to 
experience late miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal death.

In the UK, Safa faced the prospect of giving birth without anyone she knew in 
the room. “My husband will be looking after her,” she explains, whispering 
Arabic into her daughter’s ear. “And we are alone here – we had to leave all 
our friends and family in Aleppo.”

I was scared. Where we come from, when you do this sort of operation, either 
the baby or the mother dies

Thanks to a newly revived befriender scheme run by the Refugee Council 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/>, Safa will not be alone. Last week, she was 
introduced to Fatoma, a bustling, maternal woman in a denim maxi dress and 
peach headscarf who scoops Safa’s daughter up and tickles her. Fatoma fled the 
civil war in Sudan 10 years ago, arriving in Leeds; she has volunteered to 
support Safa through her pregnancy and the early stages of motherhood. She 
grins at her new friend: “I met her for the first time on Tuesday, and she has 
already asked me to be at the hospital during her labour.” Fatoma understands 
what it is like to be alone in a country you do not understand, and which often 
does not understand you. When she gave birth to her daughter six years ago, it 
was “terrifying, confusing and lonely”, she says, wiping away a tear.

I meet Safa and Fatoma in a municipal office space in Leeds. They are among a 
small group of mothers (Sudanese, Syrian, Russian, Bolivian) who sit and trade 
stories, passing their babies between them. Each experienced a terrifying 
flight from her home country. Now, through the Refugee Council, each of them 
has volunteered to support another pregnant woman. “These are some of the most 
marginalised women in our country,” says Rose McCarthy, volunteer coordinator 
for the scheme, which started in 2011 and is currently relaunching with a focus 
on Syrian women. “But they believe no one should have to give birth in this 
country afraid and alone.”

With Fatoma translating her Arabic, Safa explains: “I don’t yet speak English, 
so when I have the baby I want someone with me I can trust and speak to in my 
own language.” She looks shyly at Fatoma. “I feel so much better already, 
knowing that she will be there.”

***

When Luisa arrived in this country from Bolivia in 2009, she spoke barely a 
word of English. Knowing no one, she spent two years determinedly learning the 
language by watching TV. When she became pregnant a few months later, it was a 
shock. “She was my first baby, so I didn’t know very much about being pregnant, 
or about labour,” she says. “I didn’t even have a GP. And I didn’t know about 
midwives – they don’t exist where I come from.” When she gave birth, “It was 
horrible – I felt like I was being torn apart.”

At home in Chuquisaca, she was a law student. She was organising 
demonstrations against the government when, in 2008, there were violent clashes 
between supporters and opponents ofPresident Evo Morales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/evo-morales>. Her friends began to disappear 
and her mother, fearing her daughter would be next, sent her to the UK. After 
her baby, also called Luisa, was born, the two were briefly sent to a detention 
centre, before being moved from London to Leeds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d25e2866870e71d86c8bc2789e9a8555530084%2F0_0_1875_3022%2F1875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d25e2866870e71d86c8bc2789e9a8555530084%2F0_0_1875_3022%2F1875.jpg>
 Dasha, left, befriended new mother Luisa, here holding Dasha’s baby: 
‘Sometimes you just need a friend, someone who can hold your hand.’ Photograph: 
Rebecca Lupton for the Guardian 
“I became paranoid,” Luisa says. “I had an appointment at the Home Office, but 
no money to get there. I went to the Refugee Council offices to ask for 
emergency funds, but I’d already received some and they said no. I was 
desperate. I had no money to feed my daughter, so I left her there in the 
offices, making sure she was safe. Then I walked out and tried to kill myself.”

She took an overdose of sleeping pills. Meanwhile, staff at the Refugee 
Council had found her telephone number, called her and kept her talking until 
an ambulance arrived. When she was discharged from hospital, Luisa was referred 
to the befriender scheme as a new mother in need. At the charity’s offices, 
Luisa had her first meeting with her volunteer befriender, Dasha.

“I didn’t want to know at first,” Luisa admits. “For a long time, I’d only 
really interacted with people who sat behind desks, asking lots of questions I 
didn’t feel comfortable answering. I felt everyone was pitying me, and I can’t 
stand pity. But Dasha was really funny, and really persistent. If I cancelled a 
plan to meet up, she might turn up on my doorstep. She worked in a cafe and 
would bring cake. For the first time since I arrived in this country, she 
talked to me as an equal, not an inferior.”

Befrienders make the most enormous difference. They are figures of trust for 
women who may be scared to trust others

Dasha, whose family claimed asylum in the UK from Russia 15 years ago, took 
Luisa to playgroups. Together, the women joined self-esteem classes provided by 
students from Leeds University in collaboration with the Refugee Council. “She 
even bought me a Christmas present,” Luisa says with a smile.

One day, Dasha dropped by Luisa’s flat and found her young daughter falling in 
and out of consciousness. “Luisa didn’t know what to do,” Dasha remembers. 
“There was deep snow outside but I told her we had to get to the hospital.” She 
bundled the three of them into a taxi and they rushed to A&E.

“The doctors were talking about terrifying possibilities, and making Luisa 
sign all sorts of forms,” Dasha tells me. “Everything turned out fine, but 
sometimes you just need a friend, someone who knows how the system works, 
someone who can explain and hold your hand, who can pack an overnight bag and 
bring snacks for you.”

***

There are many reasons why migrant women might fail to engage with health 
services. Like Luisa, their isolation might mean they simply do not know about 
them. Others fear being charged for services they cannot afford: undocumented 
women can be charged up to £9,000 for giving birth in this country; last 
month’s government proposalthat patients could be required to bring two forms 
of identification to hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/hospitals-may-require-patients-to-show-passports-for-nhs-treatment>
 to alleviate so-called “health tourism”, has fuelled further fears.

Pregnant refugees often need urgent care. They are likely to have arrived in 
this country malnourished, with conditions ranging from tuberculosis and 
malaria to HIV. Plus, as Dasha says, “They come here to escape from danger – 
how could they not be psychologically damaged, too?” Yet those who do access 
help often report poor experiences: no interpreters, or midwives and other 
maternity workers who do not understand their cultural and health needs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe356926d4be5ce6479371016565be94b8d5e2d3c%2F0_0_1875_2258%2F1875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe356926d4be5ce6479371016565be94b8d5e2d3c%2F0_0_1875_2258%2F1875.jpg>
 ‘There’s nothing like this work,’ says Dasha, far left, with the rest of the 
group. ‘It gives you such self-confidence, a feeling of doing good.’ 
Photograph: Rebecca Lupton for the Guardian 
In Leeds, any English-speaking, asylum-seeking and refugee mothers can apply 
to be befrienders. Successful applicants undergo four training sessions, which 
cover listening and empowerment skills, as well as understanding how health and 
maternity care differs across cultures. In 2011, 74 women speaking 30 different 
languages were recruited as volunteers and matched with 180 women in Leeds, 
referred by midwives, children’s centres and community refugee organisations. 
Research carried out after the first year showed that every woman involved 
reported a higher sense of wellbeing.

Funding for the scheme ended in 2014 – but three months ago, McCarthy managed 
to revive the programme, specifically to support the 419 Syrians who have been 
resettled in the Yorkshire and Humberside region since October 2015. Her old 
volunteers have flooded back, along with new ones. Since September, McCarthy 
has recruited and trained 40 volunteers. The first three befriending pairs have 
already been matched. With 1,340 Syrians expected to settle in the region over 
the next two to three years, “there is a big appetite for it”, she says.

***

When Alia arrived in the UK this year, she had to hide the fact that she was 
more than eight months pregnant: she feared being banned from the flight. She 
was fleeing the genocide inDarfur <https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur>, 
Sudan (wherean estimated 480,000 people have now been killed 
<http://worldwithoutgenocide.org/genocides-and-conflicts/darfur-genocide>), to 
meet her husband, who had already made the arduous journey and settled in Leeds.

“I took her to the local children’s centres, and to antenatal classes,” says 
Muna, a volunteer befriender, and another Darfur refugee, who met Alia within 
days of her arrival. Then one evening her phone rang. “Her husband was crying,” 
Muna remembers. “He said: ‘We’re at the hospital and they say there is an 
infection. The baby is in danger. We need an emergency caesarean but Alia won’t 
consent.’”

While Muna tells their story, Alia quietly nurses her five-month-old son, 
Sammy. “I was scared,” she says softly, with Muna as her translator. “Where we 
come from, when you do this sort of operation, either the baby or the mother 
dies.”

“So I ran,” says Muna. “I dropped everything and ran all the way to the 
hospital. I didn’t see the cars. Everything was a blur.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1db1401f499b1ec17ae6922a8510d2bcddcd98c%2F22_10_1825_2996%2F1825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20of%20love%3A%20the%20volunteers%20helping%20fellow%20refugees%20give%20birth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Flabour-love-volunteer-doulas-helping-fellow-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1db1401f499b1ec17ae6922a8510d2bcddcd98c%2F22_10_1825_2996%2F1825.jpg>
 ‘I helped her with breastfeeding, how to bathe the baby – I am like her second 
mum,’ says Muna, right, with Alia and her son, Sammy. Photograph: Rebecca 
Lupton for the Guardian 
This wasn’t just any running: Muna had competed in the 800m for Sudan in the 
2008 Olympic Games. Minutes later, she was at Alia’s bedside. “I knew nothing 
about caesareans. I was terrified,” she says. “But I held her hand and I said: 
‘You must do this and I will go in with you. I will talk to you while they do 
it, and you can talk to me, and the baby will be fine.’”

The two women went into theatre together. Moments later, Sammy was born, a 
greenish blue, but alive. “When it was over, I cried,” says Muna, “I could stop 
being brave for her. Afterwards, I was with her every day, I helped her with 
breastfeeding, how to bathe the baby – I am like her second mum.”

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Officially, volunteer befrienders are only expected to give up three hours of 
their time a week, and are under no obligation to attend the birth itself. 
Often, however, three hours turn into much more, and partnerships turn into 
lifelong friendships. Many befriended women end up as volunteers themselves. 
Luisa, for example, has become a vocal campaigner for the scheme. “Last week I 
chaired a debate,” she says, smiling. “I’ve spoken in parliament, in 
conferences and schools. I even went toGlastonbury festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> to talk.”

Other women have gone on to find paid jobs after volunteering. “There’s 
nothing like this work,” Dasha says. “It gives you such self-confidence, a 
feeling of doing good.” She now works for the council, providing information 
about housing support.

As midwives become increasingly overstretched, McCarthy hopes that similar 
schemes could be introduced across the UK. “Befrienders make the most enormous 
difference,” she says. “They are figures of trust for women who may be scared 
to trust others.”

I leave the group of women chatting and giggling, and cooing over Sammy, who 
is now sleeping soundly. One more healthy baby, and a life saved by a group of 
ordinary, extraordinary women.
 