
Labor says it will not support the Turnbull government’s attempt to 
reintroduce controversial “green lawfare” changes to limit the legal standing 
of conservation groups to mount environmental court cases.

Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
this week flagged a renewed attempt to amend the Environmental Protection and 
Biodiversity Conversation Act, expressing concern that “systematic, 
well-funded” environmental campaigns were using the act to target major 
projects.

In August 2015, the Abbott government announced plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/05/approval-for-adanis-carmichael-coalmine-overturned-by-federal-court>
 to remove the right of most environmental organisations to challenge 
developments under federal laws unless they could show they were “directly 
affected”.

Coal will be important 'for many, many decades to come', says Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/coal-will-be-important-for-many-many-decades-to-come-says-turnbull>
The act allows any Australian citizen or resident who has engaged in 
conservation activities in the previous two years to bring a legal challenge to 
government environmental decisions.

Abbott’s proposed changes in August last year followed a federal court decision
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/05/approval-for-adanis-carmichael-coalmine-overturned-by-federal-court>
 that the then-environment minister, Greg Hunt, had not properly considered all 
advice in his approval of the $16.6bn Adani Carmichael coalmine in Queensland.

After becoming prime minister, Turnbull unexpectedly retained plans to 
introduce the laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/18/coalition-unexpectedly-pushes-on-with-green-lawfare-legislation-plan>
 limiting legal standing in November last year.


He raised the prospect of those changes again this week.

Tony Burke, the shadow minister for the environment, said on Tuesday that 
Labor “does not support any changes to the [act]” that would remove 
Australians’ rights to challenge project approvals which could do damage to our 
environment.


On Wednesday, he said he did not think section 487 of the act was too broad.

“I find it odd that we’ve gone from complaining environmentalists are 
blockading or protesting to now complaining that they’re turning up to a 
courtroom,” he told ABC radio.

“That section is Howard government legislation. That’s where it comes from. 
That definition was put in there by Robert Hill under the Howard government.

“The challenge for this government isn’t that the law allows people to 
complain, it’s that some of the complaints have been successful.

“The way to solve this problem is to make lawful decisions. The original 
delays to the Adani project happened because the then-environment minister made 
a decision which, given recent rulings that had been made by the courts, was 
pretty reckless and should not have been made.

“That’s why the decision to overturn it ended up being an application from the 
federal government because they realised they’d got it wrong,” he said.

George Brandis: vigilante green groups destroying thousands of mining jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/george-brandis-vigilante-green-groups-destroying-thousands-of-mining-jobs>
Last year, the attorney general, George Brandis, said the Coalition would seek 
to repeal section 487 (2) of the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Act 
and “return to the common law”. The government complained that“vigilante” green 
groups have been “sabotaging” development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/george-brandis-vigilante-green-groups-destroying-thousands-of-mining-jobs>
, jobs and growth, by “lawfare” – unfair and improper use of the courts.

Burke said on Wednesday that Labor has always supported the Adani coalmine 
subject to environmental approvals.

Nick Xenophon told Guardian Australia he was very unlikely to support the 
government’s attempt to amend the legislation significantly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/coal-will-be-important-for-many-many-decades-to-come-says-turnbull>
.

He said he might support amendments “around the edges, in cases where legal 
challenges were vexatious” but he was not persuaded about the need for a 
substantial overhaul.
 