
On 28 September the Stockport NHS Watch group presented an analytical account 
of the way in which the Conservative government, starting with theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Social Care Act 2012, has been 
transforming the NHS into a US-style insurance scheme.

The Conservatives have a guarantee of another four years to carry out this 
programme, another six years if they win a snap election in 2017. John Harris (
Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/labour-party-of-the-future-labour-conference-momentum>
, 29 September) writes that a “new modernised movement is taking place” on the 
left in which a “remodelled Labour party might eventually emerge”.

By 2020? By then it will be too late. By then the degree of damage to the NHS 
and the extent of transformation of it into private health care will be 
immense. We will be back to 1947, before the NHS. Harris speaks of “Labour’s 
predicament”. He can say that again. There is only one solution: it is unity of 
opposition to the Tories now and defeat of them at the next election whenever 
it comes. That requires one almighty transformation into cooperation between 
the PLP andMomentum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum>.

The whole parliamentary Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party must now pledge support to Corbyn and offer itself entire for places in 
the shadow cabinet, and Momentum must abandon deselection of MPs. It is the 
sacrifice by both sides that has to be made.

The 1948 NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is the jewel in the 
crown of this country’s achievements. Only unity can save it for the people. 
What else is the Labour movement in existence for?
Michael Knowles
Congleton, Cheshire

• Mandatory reselection of Labour MPs, abolished under Tony Blair, is simply 
basic democratic accountability. Trade union general secretaries stand for 
election every five years and lay union representatives, working hard to 
represent their members while facing facility time cuts, between one and three 
years.

The sense of entitlement and concern for their careers that has anti-Corbyn 
MPs hyperventilating at the prospect of mandatory reselection will not restrain 
them from colluding with the pro-corporate establishment to conduct smear 
campaigns or organising coups to ensure their party leader is subjected to 
yearly mandatory reselection through doomed but divisive leadership challenges.
John McInally
National vice-president, Public and Commercial Services union

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 