
Labour backbenchers are preparing to call for a series of MPs’ ballots to 
signal their dissent from the party’s leadership on policy areas where they 
believeJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> is 
out of step with mainstream public opinion.

Heathrow expansion, which Corbyn opposes, will be the test case for the new 
approach, which one critical backbencher called “constructively muscular”. If 
accepted, the proposal could see MPs openly defy the official position of their 
leader.

Airport expansion: the experts' view
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/airport-expansion-the-experts-view>
Gavin Shuker, chair of Labour’s backbench transport committee, plans to 
present a report supporting a third runway to Monday’s weekly meeting of the 
parliamentaryLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party (PLP), 
and call for a “votable motion” to gauge the views of MPs.

If the PLP chair, John Cryer, agrees to call a vote – as he did when a motion 
ofno confidence in Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/jeremy-corbyn-faces-no-confidence-motion-after-brexit-vote>
 was tabled in June – it would act as a strong public signal of Labour MPs’ 
stance.

Corbyn has said he will not try to whip his party to reject a new runway, but 
pro-Heathrow rebels believe the lack of an agreed party position will make 
Labour look weak. A source close to the leader’s office played down the 
significance of the Heathrow report being presented to the PLP meeting, 
stressing that MPs were likely to receive a free vote on the issue.

Some are pushing for the same approach to be used to bypass the shadow cabinet 
and constrain Corbyn’s room for manoeuvre on other contested issues, including 
the conflict in Syria and the expected US assault to recapture theIraqi city of 
Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/last-battle-against-isis-in-iraq-forces-mass-for-mosul-assault>
 from Islamic State.

Chris Leslie, the former shadow chancellor who chairs the backbench economic 
committee, said: “There is no reason why policymaking needs to be the exclusive 
preserve of the front bench. We can’t allow the party to drift along, because 
the public are watching and they want to know what we stand for.”

A source close to the leadership rejected Leslie’s suggestion that 
backbenchers’ views were being ignored. “Leslie should know the PLP has a role 
in policymaking via the national policy forum,” the source said, adding: “If it 
was up to him we would have supported Osborne’s discredited fiscal charter last 
year, which would have been excruciatingly embarrassing when Philip Hammond 
abandoned it.”

Corbyn received an angry reception at last week’s PLP meeting for apparently 
hesitating to condemn Russia’s role in attacks on the besieged Syrian city of 
Aleppo. Some MPs were further angered by his viewexpressed by a spokesman last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/stop-the-war-coalition-protest-russian-embassy>
 that the focus on Russia “diverts attention” from other “atrocities”, such as 
those committed by the US-led coalition. “He is trashing the Labour brand,” 
said one senior party insider.

Another prominent Labour backbencher said the comments on Russia had been very 
frustrating. “They do not speak for MPs, for Labour voters and not even, I 
suspect, for the majority of Labour members. But if you disagree with it in 
public, you get denounced.”

A source in the leftwing Labour grassroots movement Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> said moves by anti-Corbyn MPs 
to undermine the leader so soon after his re-election would not be popular with 
rank-and-file members. “Policy debate is healthy but these committees don’t 
make Labour policy,” the source said. “Party members will look unfavourably at 
any actions which undermine our party or our ability to hold the government to 
account.”

Who on the left or right will stand up to evil in Syria? | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/15/syria-aleppo-jeremy-corbyn-far-left>
New internal Labour party figures show membership dropped by roughly 1,000 in 
the week after Corbyn’s victory, caused by the resignation of more than 2,500 
members in a single week, which insiders said was extremely unusual. However, 
the drop in membership was compensated by about 1,000 additional members 
joining in the week of Corbyn’s victory.

After comfortably winning the summer leadership challenge against Owen Smith 
and promising to “wipe the slate clean”, Corbyn has tempted some of his 
critics, including more than 25 MPs who had resigned, back into the shadow 
cabinet.

He has also beefed up the party’s response to the referendum result by 
appointing former director of public prosecutions Keir Starmer as shadow Brexit 
secretary.


But his refusal to back plans for Labour MPs to elect some shadow cabinet 
posts and the sacking of Rosie Winterton as the party’s chief whip alienated 
others. Ian Murray, Labour’s only MP for a Scottish constituency, said last 
week that Corbyn had “set alight” the olive branch he had promised to extend to 
colleagues.

If MPs do flex their muscles over Heathrow and other divisive issues, it will 
be an early test for Corbyn’s new chief whip, Nick Brown, a seasoned veteran of 
party battles. Rather than strengthening the hand of MPs, Corbyn would like to 
give Labour’s members, who now number more than half a million, a role in 
policymaking and a beefed-up presence on the party’s key decision-making body, 
the national executive committee.

John Woodcock, who chairs the backbench defence committee, said: “There 
certainly has been talk of how we best recognise the strength of feeling and 
the majority opinion within the PLP. “Where we can best add value is taking a 
more in-depth and rigorous approach to policy discussions.”

Plans for more prominent backbench policymaking in areas such as foreign 
affairs were far less advanced, one source said. “We have got to find ways of 
being more effective, but Heathrow is an immediate policy proposal where we are 
facing a vote.”
 