
The architect of the Labour rule change that saw Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> lose his majority support 
on the party’s national executive committee has said it would be “deeply 
unhealthy” if critics of the leader were silenced.

Jeremy Corbyn’s critics must decide: unity or terminal decline | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/jeremy-corbyn-critics-must-decide-unity-or-terminal-decline>
Johanna Baxter, who served on the party’s executive for six years before 
losing her bid for re-election over the summer, said opponents of her decision 
to give Scotland and Wales dedicated seats on the ruling body had tried to put 
internal politics ahead of the national interests of the party.

“The NEC is not a cheerleading group for a party leader, it has never been 
that; it has a responsibility to hold the leadership to account and govern 
responsibly for the whole of the party,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Jones%20at%20Labour%20conference%3A%20can%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Jones%20at%20Labour%20conference%3A%20can%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&media=>
Owen Jones at Labour conference: can Corbyn unite the party? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/28/can-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
“Every decision cannot be a referendum on Jeremy Corbyn. He is the elected 
leader and he deserves respect, but no one should go unchallenged because of 
it. When there are legitimate questions to be asked they should be asked, 
because power unchecked is deeply unhealthy.

“It’s not about calling Jeremy out all the time, it’s about agreeing when 
decisions are good, but expressing concern when it is there.”

Baxter, who is from North Ayrshire, said the past 12 months on the committee 
had been exceptionally difficult, with a climate of intimidation from all sides 
outside meetings. “They want to silence us and I am not going to be silenced by 
people who hide behind pseudonyms on Twitter sending abusive messages,” she 
said.

The change, which Baxter said she had pushed for her entire time on the 
committee, was voted through this week at party conference after an angry 
debate on the conference floor where Corbyn supporters accused the NEC of a 
“stitch-up” and “gerrymandering”.


“Quite frankly, I cannot believe anyone would put internal party politics 
before the interests of the Scottish or WelshLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> parties. That would be an utter 
disgrace,” Baxter said. “The Scottish political scene is very different, as it 
is also in parts of England and Wales, and as a Scot I have always felt very 
strongly there should be a dedicated voice.”

The Scottish Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale, will now join the committee as a 
full member and the Welsh first minister, Carwyn Jones, chose a representative, 
Alun Davies. Dugdale and Jones are prominent critics of the Labour leader and 
as well as securing better regional representation, the seats are a huge boost 
to the anti-Corbyn faction in the party.

The committee is now finely balanced between the two wings of the party, 
having previously been tipped towards the leadership with six leftwing 
candidates being elected to the executive this summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flabour-party-johanna-baxter-jeremy-corbyn-critics-national-executive-committee-nec%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7cb9ab9c83240b7f8667e2236e09772b6212d89%2F452_0_864_1080%2F864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20activist%3A%20it%20would%20be%20deeply%20unhealthy%20to%20silence%20Corbyn%20critics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flabour-party-johanna-baxter-jeremy-corbyn-critics-national-executive-committee-nec%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20activist%3A%20it%20would%20be%20deeply%20unhealthy%20to%20silence%20Corbyn%20critics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flabour-party-johanna-baxter-jeremy-corbyn-critics-national-executive-committee-nec%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7cb9ab9c83240b7f8667e2236e09772b6212d89%2F452_0_864_1080%2F864.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn. Johanna Baxter says she is not willing to be uncritical of any 
leader. Photograph: The Guardian 
Baxter said the political balance was also an important factor: “I also think 
it’s not healthy that one side of a party has control of all of the 
constituency seats in the NEC. We are best when we are reflective of the broad 
church of our party and frankly, before these two seats, I don’t think that we 
were. This change means power is no longer in the hands of one group.”

The NEC has power over how leaders are elected, including the number of MPs 
needed by each candidate to get on the ballot and who is allowed to vote, as 
well as the process of choosing or deselecting MPs and holding responsibility 
for party staff.

Baxter said she had become increasingly concerned over the past months about 
attacks on staff, with many Corbyn-supporting Labour members blaming general 
secretary Iain McNicol and staff in the party’s compliance unit, for denying 
some members a vote in the election either because of abuse claims, or because 
of an NEC decision to deny a vote to 130,000 members who had joined in the last 
six month.

Baxter said she was extremely concerned about the effect of the last 12 months 
on party staff. “They are not in a position to speak out and have a voice for 
themselves on this. The reports that certain members of staff would be targeted 
after the leadership result were so unhelpful and divisive, and left people 
very worried.”

NEC meetings have rarely in the past made headline news, and Baxter said the 
past year had been “very difficult and increasingly fractious”. “I think it 
reflects the atmosphere that has pervaded the party of late, a lot of hate and 
abuse,” she said. “And all of that has to stop.”

The online abuse increased when Baxter tweeted over the summer about being on 
the party’s decision panel when concerns were flagged about new members. Many 
new members had complained of being “purged” for their pro-Corbyn views, though 
the party said only 0.5% of applications had been denied a vote, for a range of 
reasons from not being on the electoral roll, to being members of other parties 
or for online hate.

No NEC member has a casting vote, however, and decisions are made by two 
different panels of three committee members, with a spread of political views.

Baxter also hinted the new political makeup of the NEC would mean no radical 
changes would be able to take place regarded the deselection of MPs.

There had been speculation that parliamentarians whose seats have boundary 
changes could be made to face open selections, with a raft of new, leftwing 
candidates standing against them as the political make-up of the party shifts.

“I can understand why they would be worried about it. I’m not sure it would be 
helpful for the first act under Jeremy’s renewed leadership for there to be 
seen to be some sort of retribution toward members of parliament,” Baxter said.

“MPs do need to reach out to the new members in their constituencies, 
absolutely. But the leadership could say ‘there’s no threat, normal procedures 
will apply.’ Anything other than that would be perceived as a hostile 
manoeuvre.”

Baxter called being on the NEC “the most purposeful thing I have ever done” 
and said she was devastated to no longer be on the committee, despite the 
turmoil of the past year. “Every time I went to a meeting I felt the weight of 
it. I absolutely hope others feel the same,” she said.


After the most bitter meeting of the NEC when the decision was taken to keep 
Corbyn on the leadership ballot, and to introduce a cut-off date for new 
members and a £25 fee for registered supporters, Baxter spoke out in the media 
saying she and others had felt bullied by the leadership. She later lost her 
bid for re-election to the executive, along with fellow member Ellie Reeves, 
both replaced by Momentum activists Rhea Wolfson and Claudia Webbe.

“This is my party, I am not going anywhere,” she said. “I’ve always tried to 
be a voice for grassroots members and some agree with Jeremy and some don’t. 
Their voice deserves to be heard and not silenced.

“I will put the effort in but I am not willing to be uncritical of any leader. 
I’m not going to start now. We have a responsibility to fight for our party.”
 