
Labor has attacked the Coalition’s plans to limit paid parental leave for 
parents accessing both the government and their employer’s scheme.

On Sunday the opposition leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said the plan to 
limit so-called double-dipping would decrease income support for 80,000 mothers.

Last week the government gave notice it would reintroduce its paid parental 
leave bill, which lapsed when parliament was prorogued in April.

The bill prevents parents accessing both the government and their employer’s 
paid parental leave scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/06/double-dipping-on-paid-parental-leave-wont-be-gone-by-july-says-minister>
, or limits federal government payments to a top-up of the employer’s scheme to 
the value of $11,500.

Josh Frydenberg to work with Port Melville operators over struck-down approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/josh-frydenberg-to-work-with-port-melville-operators-over-struck-down-approval>
The fate of the bill is uncertain. Although Nick Xenophon indicated opposition 
to paid parental leave cuts before the election 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/crucial-crossbenchers-slam-mean-and-stupid-turnbull-cuts-to-paid-parental-leave-20160115-gm6owo.html>
, the Nick Xenophon Team (NXT) is still negotiating with the government on the 
bill before its party room of four makes a decision.

Pauline Hanson’s One Nation is also due to discuss the bill this week.

Parliament does not resume until 7 November, when the Senate will meet to 
consider government bills passed in the last sitting includingthe plebiscite 
enabling legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/marriage-equality-malcolm-turnbull-wont-rule-out-a-free-vote-for-coalition-mps>
 and the Australian Building and Construction Commission bill.

The government’s industrial relations agenda was given a boost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/malcolm-roberts-reveals-one-nation-intends-to-support-coalitions-abcc-bill>
 by One Nation’s announcement it would support the ABCC and registered 
organisations bills but it will spend the coming weeks negotiating support with 
NXT and other crossbench senators.

In the meantime, Senate committees will meet to inquire into the 2016 census 
debacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/census-2016-malcolm-turnbull-shifts-blame-to-ibm-for-predictable-attack>
 and the government’s bills to cap vocational education and training loans ina 
bid to restrain runaway loan growth from programs with poor-quality courses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/dodgy-vocational-education-operators-will-have-business-model-smashed>
, low completion rates and unethical enrolment practices.

The Australian Human Rights Commission president, Gillian Triggs, may be 
recalled to explain a claim before another committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/christopher-pyne-attacks-gillian-triggs-judgment-saying-she-has-politicised-role>
 she has since retracted that she had been misquoted in an interview with the 
Saturday Paper in which she described politicians as “usually seriously 
ill-informed”.

The Coalition and Labor will be keen to move on from internal party divisions 
in the last week, after Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbullcontradicted each other 
on the existence of a deal on shotgun importation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/oct/20/david-leyonhjelm-its-inconceivable-tony-abbott-would-not-know-about-gun-deal-politics-live>
 and went head to head withduelling motions for party reform at the New South 
Wales Liberal state conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/22/tony-abbotts-motion-for-liberal-party-reform-voted-down>
.

Christopher Pyne attacks Gillian Triggs' judgment, saying she has 
'politicised' role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/christopher-pyne-attacks-gillian-triggs-judgment-saying-she-has-politicised-role>
On Sunday Shorten said that employer paid parental leave schemes were a 
condition “negotiated to offset wage rises” workers otherwise would have got, 
whereas the government’s scheme is a “minimum standard”.


“Why should nurses, or shop assistants or other people who have foregone pay 
rises in lieu of getting a paid parental benefit now be slugged because they’ve 
negotiated these conditions and not get the minimum paid parental leave?”

The shadow minister for families and social services, Jenny Macklin, said the 
planned parental leave cut was particularly unfair on women “who are pregnant 
right now [and] face the prospect of massive cuts to their paid parental leave 
arrangements if their baby is born after 1 January 2017”.

But the social services minister, Christian Porter, said more than half the 
parents who used the scheme – about 90,000 – would not be affected by the 
changes.

“Currently a parent earning $140,000 annually can receive a combined 
government and employer PPL amount of more than $44,000 – this is more than 
another parent working a minimum wage will earn in an entire year and that is 
not fair,” he told AAP in a statement.

The government has previously estimated that cuts to paid parental leave will 
save almost $1bn over the forward estimates butbusiness groups have warned 
employers will simply stop offering paid leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/10/ending-double-dipping-on-parental-leave-unlikely-to-save-money-business-group>
, reducing any potential savings.
 