
Jeremy Corbyn was challenged about his position on Brexit and questioned over 
hissacking of Rosie Winterton as chief whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/conor-mcginn-holly-lynch-labour-mps-whips-resign-rosie-winterton>
, as he faced his party’s MPs for the first time since his re-election as 
leader.

Two Labour MPs resign as whips after Rosie Winterton sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/conor-mcginn-holly-lynch-labour-mps-whips-resign-rosie-winterton>
The Labour leader was pressed by colleagues after the party’s shadow secretary 
of state for exiting the EU, Keir Starmer, appeared toset out a different line 
on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/09/keir-starmer-calls-for-immigration-to-be-reduced>
 policy than the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott.

A spokesman for Corbyn told journalists outside the meeting that Starmer’s 
call for immigration numbers to be reduced was not at odds with Abbott or 
Corbyn himself.

“Jeremy has made clear chasing after impossible targets or caps doesn’t work 
and inflames divisions,” he said. “But the case he was making during the 
referendum campaign was for decisive action against the undercutting of wages 
and the exploitation of migrant workers. If you take effective action … you 
will reduce numbers.”

This came after Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs said 
they were not clear on the party’s position on Brexit in advance of an 
opposition day debate on Wednesday, with Barry Sheerman asking Corbyn: “What’s 
the plan, Stan?”

Corbyn’s response was not satisfactory for some of those present, with one MP 
heckling: “What’s the line? What’s the line?”

Emma Reynolds called on the leader to consider taking a more robust position 
on freedom of movement because of the demands of constituents across the 
Midlands and the north of England.

The MPs also asked their leader about a Guardian/ICM opinion poll, which gives 
the Conservatives a 17-point lead at the end of the party conference season. 
The survey places Theresa May’s party on 43% while Labour slips to 26%, with 
Ukip on 11% and the Lib Dems on 8%.

One MP said the meeting felt like “Groundhog Day” and they were not convinced 
by Corbyn’s call for unity. During a tribute to Winterton, whom he has replaced 
with Nick Brown in his post-victory reshuffle, the Labour leader was heckled by 
MP John Spellar who shouted: “Why did you sack her then?”

Another MP, Jess Phillips, challenged the leader for speaking at an 
anti-racism rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/corbyn-under-fire-speaking-anti-racism-rally-links-swp-socialist-workers-party>
 linked to the Socialist Workers party.


Some MPs were angry after they felt Corbyn questioned whether Russia had been 
involved in the bombing of a UN aid convoy in Syria that resulted in the deaths 
of a number of civilians. MPs said Corbyn referred to an attack that was 
“apparently” carried out by the Russians.

Angela Smith MP, who asked about the issue, said: “It is deeply concerning 
that Jeremy is unwilling to face up to the role that Putin’s Russia is playing 
in Syria. The recent criminal atrocities committed in Aleppo make the case for 
an effective international response overwhelming and Labour needs to show moral 
leadership on what is an intolerable situation.”

However, Corbyn’s spokesman denied that he had held back on the issue. “The 
evidence is often very murky but he said that the evidence appears to show that 
Russia was involved in the bombing, if not Russia the Syrian airforce, and all 
evidence appears to show it was a war crime.

“He’s looking at real evidence rather than the rhetoric. He has condemned all 
atrocities, he has condemned Russia, he opposes all forms of foreign 
intervention in the conflict.”

The spokesman said he had not heard Corbyn use the words “apparent” or 
“alleged” in reference to Russia’s bombing. “There are many, many other 
atrocities taking place as well.”

He added that Corbyn had used the meeting to push for unity, but said MPs were 
having to adjust to the size of the leader’s second mandate.

“The majority of Labour MPs are looking for ways to work with the leadership. 
It’s in everybody’s interests. That’s the clear mood at the meeting tonight. 
There have been a number of stormy meetings and this doesn’t even register on 
the low level of the Richter scale,” he said.

The decision to remove Winterton was taken because of a clear need to reset 
the relationship with the parliamentary Labour party, he added. “After a year, 
it’s necessary for that to be reset in a way that represents his mandate. It’s 
time to move to a new one.”

Meanwhile, a leading thinktank is preparing to launch an initiative examining 
what people who voted remain believed about “taking back control” of their 
lives.

Research 
<http://neweconomics.org/political-leaders-ignore-remain-voters-at-their-peril/?header=Latest>
 from the New Economics Foundation found that the majority of remain voters 
felt they were lacking in power, with 62% saying the world is run by “the few 
people in power and there is not much the ordinary citizen can do about it”.

Just 27% of remain voters agreed with a statement saying, “The average citizen 
can have an influence on government decisions”, while 55% specifically 
identified big business and corporate elites as having “too much control over 
their lives”.

At an event attended by the former Labour leader Ed Miliband and greater 
Manchester mayoral candidate Andy Burnham, the thinktank will launch a “new 
agenda” that looks beyond Westminster to institutions such as devolved 
government, forward-looking businesses, and trade union and community-led 
campaigns.
 