
Labour strategists are planning to relaunch Jeremy Corbyn as a leftwing 
populist in the new year, as the party seeks to ride the anti-politics mood in 
Brexit Britain andnarrow the gap with the Tories. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/are-you-worried-about-labours-polling-figures>

While the Islington North MP’s politics are very different from those of Nigel 
Farage or Donald Trump, senior Labour figures believe his unpolished 
authenticity could help the party draw onthe wave of anti-establishment feeling 
sweeping through politics. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/05/economic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide>


Corbyn is expected to appear more frequently on television, and a newly 
expanded team of advisers are working to formulate flagship policies that would 
underline his willingness to lead a revolt against vested interests.

With the party languishing 14 percentage points behind the Conservatives in 
the latest ICM poll, and aftera disastrous performance in recent byelections, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/witney-byelection-lib-dems-tories-slashed-majority>
 Jon Trickett, the party’s election coordinator, told the Guardian that Labour 
was honing its message and “ramping up” preparations for a possible early 
election.

Jeremy Corbyn blames leadership contest for low poll ratings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-blames-leadership-contest-for-low-poll-ratings>
“Theresa May has said there will not be a snap election; that doesn’t mean 
there won’t be an early election,” he said. “It’s our job to be ready. We’re 
ramping up the organisation now. There’s a great deal of analytical work going 
on behind the scenes.” He added that he had been working 15-hour days to put 
the party on standby.

Trickett said Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> was 
starting to frame the policies it would need to fight a future campaign. “We 
need to frame an argument about Britain, its past, present and future – but we 
will be doing that in a carefully modulated way.”

In the recent Richmond Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
, Labour candidate Christian Wolmar lost his deposit, receiving fewer votes 
than the local party has members. But Trickett rejected the frequent complaint 
of Labour MPs that the new recruits, who have swelled the party’s ranks since 
Corbyn won the leadership, are reluctant to play their part in campaigning. He 
said: “I’m confident that they’re ready to be mobilised, and ready to go.

“We are the largest party in Europe. Elections consist of an air war and a 
ground war. The kind of ground war we’re going to run would be something on a 
scale this country hasn’t seen before. That’s an important new feature in 
British politics, which we’re going to be using.”

With an early general election impossible to rule out as May prepares to 
trigger article 50, which starts the formal process for leaving the EU, Labour 
has yet to identify a list of target seats, or select candidates, to contest 
them. The Liberal Democrats, who have just nine MPs, have chosen 200 
candidates, including former business secretary Vince Cable as well as new 
recruits, for seats they held before 2015.

Some senior Labour figures have been pressing Trickett to make a defensive 
list, identifying the seats Labour is likely to have to fight hardest to hold. 
Trickett said decisions about selection and resources would have to be made by 
the party’s governing body, the national executive committee (NEC). He said it 
had already released enough funds for him to be able to hire a “significant 
number” of new staff.

Helped by the revenue brought in by party members, who now number about 
600,000, Corbyn has been bolstering his support team, including hiring David 
Prescott – son of the former deputy prime minister – to write speeches. Labour 
has also retained the polling firm BMG and the advertising agency Krow 
Communications to professionalise its approach to campaigning.

Some critical Labour MPs, alarmed at the party’s prospects, particularly in 
its traditional strongholds, are already thinking about how they would draw up 
election materials playing down their links to Corbyn. But his backers believe 
his populist credentials, seen in a series of raucous rallies throughout the 
summer as he fought off the challenge from backbencher Owen Smith, could be one 
of Labour’s strongest weapons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Flabour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7a67ddab5863bc7738b9973426d57050458c42d%2F0_127_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20plans%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20relaunch%20to%20ride%20anti-establishment%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Flabour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20plans%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20relaunch%20to%20ride%20anti-establishment%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Flabour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7a67ddab5863bc7738b9973426d57050458c42d%2F0_127_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn takes part in a class showing how to make cheap healthy food 
during a visit to Centrepoint hostel in south London. Photograph: John 
Stillwell/PA 
Corbyn’s supporters have been buoyed by his improved performance in recent 
prime minister’s questions, in which he has angrily challenged Theresa May 
about issues includingsocial care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/dec/14/pmqs-verdict-corbyn-gets-better-of-may-over-social-care>
 and theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/oct/19/pmq-verdict-theresa-may-vulnerable-on-nhs--jeremy-corbyn>
.

Emily Thornberry – the shadow foreign secretary and Corbyn’s constituency 
neighbour – was widely perceived to have done well in pressing the government 
on Brexit when shestood in for him at PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/stand-ins-david-lidington-emily-thornberry-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs>
 last week. She is now regarded as the favoured pro-Corbyn candidate to take 
over if the 67-year-old fails to restore the party’s fortunes and faces a 
renewed challenge to his leadership.

Corbyn’s new pollsters are telling him he faces a greater electoral threat 
from Ukip on the right than from centrist Labour voters lured to the Lib Dems 
by Tim Farron’s anti-Brexit stance.

The Brexit debate creates a tough electoral challenge for Labour by increasing 
the salience of issues such as immigration, which risk dividing the party’s 
liberal, metropolitan wing from many of its working-class voters. A study 
published on Thursday by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation suggestedpoorer voters’ 
concerns about immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/poorer-voters-worries-immigration-fuelled-brexit-vote-study-finds>
 were a key driver of the referendum result – and the latest ICM poll showed 
Labour lagging behind the Conservatives among the working-class, DE 
socioeconomic group.

Privately, some members of Labour’s national executive committee are extremely 
worried about the party’s readiness for a general election campaign.

“The party is technically on election footing but we haven’t seen much in the 
way of tangible action,” one source close to the NEC said. “If this was 
December 2019, we would have selected all the candidates for winnable seats, 
we’d have asked MPs who was going to retire and done selections in their seats 
and probably be well on the way to selecting candidates in unwinnable ones too.”

Labour’s vote is being “eaten three ways”, the source said. “If there is an 
election, it is a Brexit election, nothing else. We’ll have the problem that we 
want to talk about the NHS and voters want to talk about Brexit. And we have no 
real coherent message about it.”

NEC member Alice Perry said the party was focused on the 2017 local elections. 
“We are throwing ourselves into getting fantastic Labour candidates elected at 
local government level and if there’s a general election at the same time, 
we’ll be ready,” she said.

Candidates who stood in 2015 are likely to be approached to stand again in the 
event of an emergency general election, because of the logistical challenge of 
organising selections with as little as six weeks’ notice.

Privately though, Labour sources said they thought many who lost in 2015 would 
be unwilling to stand again given the party’s current poll rating. “Even 
writing and printing a manifesto, you are talking about it taking eight weeks,” 
the source said. “If there was a spring election, that would have to be done by 
the end of January. These are problems other parties will face too but the 
Tories are probably preparing.”

The party appears increasingly divided over immigration, with the shadow home 
secretary,Diane Abbott, urging against Labour becoming “Ukip-lite” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
, while her predecessorAndy Burnham, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/andy-burnham-election-trump-cry-for-change>
 who is standing for Manchester mayor, warned in the Commons last week that 
failing to tackling immigration risks undermining the cohesion of our 
communities and the safety of our streets.
 