
The government has defended the New Year honours and insisted it is unfair to 
criticise awards given to Tory donors, despite allegations of cronyism.


Theresa May has previously pledged to shake up the system and in November said 
she “retched” when she saw David Cameron’sresignation honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/22/david-cameron-honours-delayed-as-questions-raised-over-nominees>
, in an attack on his former spin doctor,Sir Craig Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/david-camerons-adviser-feared-panama-papers-would-end-bosss-career>
.

But Labour has condemned the Tories for rewarding “cronies” in the New Year 
honours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/andy-murray-knighted-in-new-year-honours-list-rewarding-uk-sport-stars-mo-farah-ennis-hill>
.

Voluntary sector professionals celebrated in 2017 New Year honours list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/dec/30/charity-voluntary-professionals-2017-new-year-honours>
Tory donor David Ord, who has given the party £930,000, has been knighted for 
“political service” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/company-boss-david-ord-tory-donor-receives-knighthood>
, while Dominic Johnson, associate treasurer of the Conservative party and now 
CBE, gave the Cameron family somewhere to stay when they left Downing Street in 
July.

The government emphasised the independent oversight of honours nominations, 
which can be submitted by Whitehall departments and members of the public. A 
government source said: “Honours are rewards for hard work and contributions to 
civic society. All nominations for honours are assessed by one of the nine 
independent honours committees.

“It is unfair to criticise individuals being honoured just because they have 
also chosen to donate to a political party. Donations should be transparent, 
but it’s not an excuse to knock people for broader philanthropy, enterprise and 
public service.”

But a spokesman for the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, said: “The Conservatives 
are making a mockery of our honours system. Every crony appointment is an 
insult to the incredible people from right across Britain who are rewarded for 
the great contributions they make to our national life.”

The prime minister could also face complaints over the 14 honours handed to 
officials from the Home Office, which she ran for six years until entering 
Downing Street in July. Despite no other department receiving more honours if 
embassy and consulate staff are excluded, it is believed the government will 
highlight the 13 awards given to Home Office civil servants inlast year’s list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/30/new-years-honours-2016-the-full-list>
 in its defence.

The New Year honours have also faced criticism for “rewarding failure”, with 
the head of Britain’s foreign aid department coming under fire after being 
awarded a knighthood.Mark Lowcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/30/public-servants-civil-service-2017-new-year-honours-list>
 has been honoured just weeks after the Department for International 
Development was reprimanded for building a£285m airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/st-helena-islanders-compensation-285m-airport>
 on the remote island of St Helena, where it is too windy for commercial planes 
to land.

Tory MP Philip Davies, a regular opponent of the way Britain spends money on 
foreign aid, told the Daily Mail that Sir Mark should be known as “Sir 
Waste-a-Lot”.

Other public servants to have received honours include Sarah Pearson, head of 
customer services at the personal tax division of HM Revenue and Customs, which 
has this year faced criticism over a previous collapse in telephone helpline 
services amid staff cuts. HMRC has also been criticised over its role in the
Concentrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/treasury-refuses-to-hold-inquiry-into-concentrix-tax-credits-contract>
 tax credits scandal.

Also honoured was Oliver Morley, chief executive of the Driver and Vehicle 
Licensing Agency, which faced an outcry over its handling of theabolition of 
paper tax discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/18/dvla-disputes-revenue-loss-tax-disc>
 under his stewardship.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP John Mann told the 
Telegraph the latest batch of honours was “more reward for failure, an 
irritation that needs preventing in the future”.
 