
The most important result of Thursday’s elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/06/uk-elections-sadiq-khan-ahead-in-london-mayoral-race-live-updates>
 across the UK, the one that will have an enduring impact and great meaning 
beyond these islands, is theelection of Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/06/uk-elections-sadiq-khan-ahead-in-london-mayoral-race-live-updates>
 as mayor of London. The symbolism is potent. London, the most diverse city on 
the planet and one of the great cities of the world, has chosen a Muslim as its 
leader.

UK elections: Sadiq Khan 'has won' London mayoral race - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/06/uk-elections-sadiq-khan-ahead-in-london-mayoral-race-live-updates>
What an eloquent rebuttal that is to all those, from Isis to Donald Trump, who 
insist there is some fated, and fatal, tension that means Muslims do not belong 
in western societies, that Muslims and non-Muslims can never live together side 
by side. While Isis denounce“the grey zone” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/isis-binary-struggle-grey-zone-jihadism>
 defined by variety and difference, while the Republican party has chosen as 
its standard bearer a man committed to barring Muslims from entering the United 
States, Londoners have chosen the son of a Pakistani bus driver called Khan: a 
Muslim who has gone out of his way to empathise with all of London’s multiple 
communities, a Muslim whobroke his Ramadan fast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/apr/11/sadiq-khans-concern-for-londons-jews-shames-his-smearing-tory-foes>
 in several synagogues. And they did it in defiance of a cheap, race-baiting 
campaign by Zac Goldsmith that willstain him forever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/zac-goldsmith-attacked-by-senior-tory-over-tactics-in-london-mayor-election>
.

Next in significance is surely the result in Scotland, where the SNP have 
narrowly lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/scottish-labour-facing-third-place-after-collapse-in-vote>
 the outright majority they won in 2011 but will remain firmly in charge. They 
first won power in 2007, and will now keep it at least until 2021. Their 
command of Scottish politics is dented, but no more. Indeed, through a quirk of 
the electoral system – and that anorak’s favourite, thed’Hondt mechanism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%27Hondt_method> – the SNP lost a handful of 
seats even though they gained more votes. (They did so well in 
first-past-the-post constituency battles that they qualified for fewer “top-up” 
seats under PR.) Simultaneously the natural party of government in Scotland and 
an insurgent movement, the SNP has a good claim to be the most successful 
political party in the United Kingdom.

Their only competitors for that title are the un likely runners-up north of 
the border: the Conservative party. Once an endangered species in Scotland, the 
Tories will now be the official opposition in that country, led by a woman,Ruth 
Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/holyrood-elections-see-rise-of-team-ruth-and-demise-of-labour-vision>
, whose star quality and appeal across party lines have some UK Tories 
wondering whether she, rather than the warring posh boys in Westminster, might 
be the future leader they’ve been looking for.

What is usually seen as a test of strength for the government became framed as 
a test for Labour

But Scotland conceals a deeper success for the Tories. In government for six 
years and encountering serious turbulence, they should, by rights, have tanked 
at these elections. But they didn’t. They held on, losing Worcester council but 
not much else.

Which brings us to Labour. The oddity of these midterm contests was that what 
is usually seen as atest of strength 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/election-labour-thursday-westminster>
 for the government of the day became framed instead as a test for Labour. And 
here opinions divide on factional lines.

For Jeremy Corbyn and his allies, this was a step in the right direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/05/uk-election-results-2016-live-updates-and-news>
. Labour did well in London, held on to fragile councils in southern England 
and, best of all, defied the polls that projected council seat losses in the 
hundreds. Sure, Scotland was a disaster, but Labour held on in Wales and 
increased its share of the vote on 2015. Consider the terrible publicity of the 
final few days of the campaign –Ken Livingstone mouthing off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/apr/28/john-mann-calls-ken-livingstone-a-nazi-apologist-video>
 about Hitler, a Labour MP calling him “a Nazi apologist” in front of the 
cameras – as well as the constant incoming fire from the irreconcilables of the 
parliamentary party and their friends in the press, and, say the Corbynites, 
it’s a testament to Corbyn that Labour won as many seats as it did. Bottom 
line: Corbyn’s enemies expected – maybe even wanted – a meltdown and they 
didn’t get it.

The counter-view is rather less cheery. It begins with the observation that 
Labour has not come third in Scotland for a century. During last summer’s 
leadership campaign, Corbyn’s advocates said that shifting left – denouncing 
austerity, promising to raise taxes and scrap Trident – would bring back those 
who had defected to the SNP. ScottishLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> followed that advice to the 
letter, fighting on an impeccably Corbynite platform. And it was trounced.

As for England, the last time Labour in opposition failed to make local 
council gains was in 1985, when the party had lost two elections and would go 
on to lose two more. On this measure, there is little comfort to be had in the 
fact that the losses were confined to double figures. That Labour failed to 
make gains is indictment enough. Michael Foot managed it, as did William Hague 
and Iain Duncan Smith. It really is the very least an opposition is expected to 
do. Not sufficient to gain Westminster power, but certainly necessary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjeremy-corbyn-no-10-labour-trounced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b71f1fec7dda4fab349759eb8c6d74b77aec86%2F0_172_4294_2576%2F4294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%E2%80%99s%20argument%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20settled%20until%202020.%20By%20then%20it%20will%20be%20too%20late%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjeremy-corbyn-no-10-labour-trounced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%E2%80%99s%20argument%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20settled%20until%202020.%20By%20then%20it%20will%20be%20too%20late%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjeremy-corbyn-no-10-labour-trounced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b71f1fec7dda4fab349759eb8c6d74b77aec86%2F0_172_4294_2576%2F4294.jpg>
 Sadiq Khan arrives at City Hall with his wife Saadiya (right) and campaign 
team. ‘The symbolism is potent. London, the most diverse city on the planet and 
one of the great cities of the world, has chosen a Muslim as its leader.’ 
Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
Especially when facing an opponent engaged in open civil war. These elections 
could have been timed to ensure Tory disaster, bang in the middle of aEuropean 
referendum campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> that 
has seen a cabinet resignation and daily internal bloodletting, with senior 
Conservatives regularly tearing down their own leader and each other. There was 
so much flesh to be pecked off Tory bones that Labour should have been gorging 
itself. Yet even in these circumstances, after a calamitous budget that sought 
to rob from the sick and disabled to feed the rich, it was Labour that lost 
seats.

In the totemic seat of Nuneaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/view-nuneaton-corbyn>, where 
Tory victory last May presaged the party’s overall triumph, there was an 11% 
swing away from Labour and toward the Conservatives. That hardly suggests a 
party on its way to Downing Street. Similarly alarming are Ukip’snew foothold 
in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
 and its steady encroachment on toLabour turf in the north of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/uk-elections-at-a-glance-the-key-points>
.

Nor will it do to say that Corbyn did well by seeing few losses from the 
high-water mark set in2012, when Labour made 857 gains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/local-uk-elections-results-2016-analysis-opinion>
. For asone observer quipped 
<https://twitter.com/mrianleslie/status/728481491991277568>, if Ed Miliband 
represents your high-water mark, you need a bigger boat. That 2012 performance 
came three years before an election defeat. Remaining consistent with that 
position does not inspire optimism. Remember, without Scotland, Labour needs to 
be13 points ahead 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/gary-gibbon-on-politics/elections-labour-europe/32716>
 of the Tories in England to win a general election. And where, incidentally, 
are those millions of non-voters who, the Corbynites insisted, were turned off 
by New Labour and Milibandian austerity-lite but would stampede to the polling 
stations when Jeremy was there to inspire them?

Corbyn hails local election results but faces 'long journey back' in Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/jeremy-corbyn-defies-critics-labour-local-elections>
The trouble is, there can be no resolution of this argument. The only way to 
determine once and for all whetherJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> can win a general election 
is to let him fight one. Until then, every other supposed test will be 
imperfect. The way voters choose councillors is not a reliable guide to how 
they will choose a UK government: if it were, Ed Miliband would be in No 10. 
And in local contests there will always be mitigating, complicating local 
factors that can explain away anything.

Besides, you can never be sure if a Labour win is despite or because of the 
leader. Sadiq Khan distanced himself from, and regularly denounced Corbyn, 
during his campaign, yetDiane Abbott claimed 
<https://twitter.com/JeremyCliffe/status/728478368895619074> his projected win 
was “all about Jeremy”. Both camps will see what they want to see in these 
results.

For Corbyn’s defenders, it’s obvious. The country is itching to embrace him as 
its prime minister, if only the embittered refuseniks would stop sniping and 
get out of the way. For Corbyn’s opponents, the picture is just as clear. 
Labour is marching, banners bright and in fine voice, off the same cliff it 
fell from in 2010 and 2015. This argument will not be settled until 2020 – but 
by then it will be too late.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fplymouth-politics-labour-conservatives-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20for%20Plymouth%3A%20politics%20in%20the%20age%20of%20chaos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fplymouth-politics-labour-conservatives-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20for%20Plymouth%3A%20politics%20in%20the%20age%20of%20chaos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fplymouth-politics-labour-conservatives-video&media=>
The battle for Plymouth: politics in the age of chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/may/06/plymouth-politics-labour-conservatives-video> 