
Councils must be given millions more in funding if a new law to tackle 
homelessness is to succeed, two former housing ministers have said.

The bill will end 40 years of discrimination against single men and women who 
currently have no right to immediate help with housing assistance if they 
become homeless. Families, the mentally ill, army veterans and domestic 
violence victims are guaranteed support.

Homelessness can only really be tackled if people have somewhere to go | Poppy 
Noor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/28/homelessness-housing-bob-blackman-bill>
The homelessness reduction bill, which is a private member’s bill from 
Conservative MP Bob Blackman via efforts from homelessness charities, has 
government backing and will oblige councils to prevent homelessness of anyone, 
regardless of their status, within 56 days.

Speaking in the House of Commons, Blackman said those who were “non-priority” 
were told they must sleep on the streets. “Go to a park bench, a doorway and 
you may be picked up by a charity,” he said. “That to me is a national 
disgrace, at a time when we have a relatively low level of unemployment, a 
single person sleeping rough on our streets is a disgrace and we must combat 
it.”

Despite cross-party support for the bill, former Tory housing minister Mark 
Prisk and Labour’s housing spokesman John Healey said local authorities would 
need extra funding to fulfil the new legal commitments.


‘My first New Year’s Eve as a homeless man wounded me deeply’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/crisis-at-christmas/2016/oct/28/my-first-new-years-eve-as-a-homeless-man-wounded-me-deeply>
Prisk said he had reservations about the bill because of the lack of attached 
funds for councils. “I think the bill offers real hope,” he told a debate in 
the Commons. “I have to say to the minister that we can only hope for that 
progress if the government plays its part.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Place%20to%20Call%20Home%3A%20clip%20from%20homelessness%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Place%20to%20Call%20Home%3A%20clip%20from%20homelessness%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video&media=>
No Place to Call Home: clip from homelessness documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/oct/18/no-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video>
“But I think it’ll also be the case that there will be the need, when 
required, for additional funding for many councils in order for them to fulfil 
that commitment.”

Healey said the government had to fund the costs of the extra duties in the 
bill in full, and make wider efforts tackle the causes of the growing 
homelessness. “Those will be the two tests that we on this side hold the 
government hard to account,” he said.

The warnings have been echoed by the Local Government Association chairman, 
Gary Porter, who said the legislation would not be a “silver bullet”, and 
called for more support for local councils.

“Councils want to end homelessness and are already doing everything they can 
within existing resources to prevent and tackle it,” Lord Porter said. “It is 
clear that legislative change alone will not resolve homelessness. If we are 
all to succeed, then all new duties proposed in the bill will need to be fully 
funded. Councils need powers to resume our role as a major builder of 
affordable homes.”

What you can do to help rough sleepers this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/27/help-rough-sleepers-winter-homelessness>
Asked whether he agreed the government must promise more funding to support 
the actions in the bill, Blackman said: “Clearly this proposed bill is part of 
a strategy, it is not the sole solution … new duties mean new money for local 
government and I hope we will hear that.”

The communities secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “No one should have to sleep 
rough on the streets. We want to build a country that works for everyone, not 
just the privileged few. That’s why we are determined to do all we can to help 
those who lose their homes and provide them with the support they need to get 
their lives back on track.

“This government is therefore very pleased to support Bob Blackman MP’s 
private member’s bill, with its ambitious measures to help reduce homelessness.”

A spokesman for the Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government said: 
“The government’s support for the bill comes just a week after it confirmed 
£40m to provide innovative approaches to tackle and prevent homelessness. The 
government has invested £500m since 2010, which has helped to prevent or 
relieve over 1m cases of homelessness.”
 