
Once famous for its earnest, wholesome books that introduced British children 
to topics such as space travel, nuclear power and thegunpowder plot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/interactive/2008/nov/05/police>, the 
publisher Ladybird is launching a series of guides to help cynical adults make 
sense of modern life, from hipsters to hangovers.

Embracing the trend for spoof Ladybird editions that juxtapose the twee and 
genteel imagery with captions rewritten for comic effect, the companysaid its 
“kidult” range is intended to “enable grown-ups to think they have taught 
themselves to cope”.

Why we love the Ladybird books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/03/why-we-love-the-ladybird-books>
The eight new books – penned by Jason Hazeley and Joel Morris, the writers of 
the BBC comedy show Miranda – will be published next month as part ofLadybird 
Books’ <http://www.ladybird.co.uk/> centenary celebrations.

Illustrations of bearded, pipe-smoking men and women with immaculate hair 
appear alongside the large, simple script, which Hazeley has described as 
“light and silly and funny”.

One passage in the Ladybird Book of the Hipster explains:

This is a hipster.

He is childless, unaccountably wealthy, and always well turned out.

He likes art, porridge, scarves, anything reclaimed from French factories, 
like this dog rack.
Jason Hazeley (@JasonHazeley) 
The Ladybird Book Of The Hipster. pic.twitter.com/qjmyeODrxL 
<http://t.co/qjmyeODrxL>
 <https://twitter.com/JasonHazeley/status/652953442525310977> October 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JasonHazeley/status/652953442525310977> 
The Ladybird Book of the Mid-Life Crisis, another of the titles, begins with:

When we’re young we wonder if we’ll be a surgeon or an astronaut. We can be 
anything we want to be. Then one day we can’t.

Morris said: “That bit makes me cry. It’s too close to the bone.”

He told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/ladybird-books-new-adult-targeted-series-takes-wholesome-publications-in-a-less-innocent-direction-a6689306.html>
 he wanted to help adults make sense of the world, just as the classic books 
had helped children through the decades understand how locomotives and 
computers work.

Hazeley and Morris said they decided to use original illustrations of previous 
Ladybird books and to “write as if we were time travellers from the 1960s 
looking at stuff such as online dating and nightclubs”.

Going through Penguin’s vast archive of Ladybird artwork they realised that 
pictures depicting first dates and binge drinking were hard to come by: in the 
classic books, “mum is at home with the kids and dad is at work fixing a 
Lancaster bomber”, said Morris.

“It’s hard to find images that have men and women in the same picture. 
Luckily, that’s become part of the joke.”

Other titles in the new series include The Ladybird Book of Dating, and 
Mindfulness.

Although the trend for spoof Ladybird books has been appropriated by the 
publisher, a search online reveals parody Ladybird artwork for titles such as
Hot Dads, Ménage à trois, and The Futility of Existence 
<https://www.pinterest.com/domlane/funny/>. 


Last year, Miriam Elia, an artist and comedian, was ordered by publisher 
Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/22/the-flyaway-success-of-the-ladybird-art-prank>
 to stop selling her satirical work in which Ladybird characters Peter and Jane 
were mashed with Tracey Emin-style conceptual art. She was told her art book 
breached Ladybird copyright. After publishing a brief run of 1,000 privately 
printed books – selling them for £20 each – Elia was told that if she continued 
to sell copies, the courts would be rule that the books be seized.
 