
From Uplyme <http://www.uplyme.com/>, shady paths beside the river Lim 
<http://www.lymeregis.org/river-lym.aspx> lead to the renovated mill in the 
middle of old Lyme Regis; the waterwheel is geared to millstones that grind 
wheat into flour, and amicro hydro system 
<http://www.townmill.org.uk/the-watermill/sustainable-technology> generates 
32,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity a year. Before 10.30am, the associated 
tearoom, galleries and workshops remain quiet, but the nearest car park is 
already full. Sun sparkles on the sea; a flotilla of sailing dinghies is 
heading out and a gig cuts across the bay.

Land and cliffs on the eastern side of town have been stabilised and protected 
by a new seawall; beyond this, towardsthe Spittles 
<http://www.360panoramas.co.uk/lymeregis/spittles.php>, morning sun highlights 
dangerous cliffs, made of alternating layers of slippery grey clay and pale, 
lumpy limestone that overhang the rough and muddy shoreline. Farther up the 
coast,Golden Cap 
<http://www.visit-dorset.com/things-to-do/attractions/golden-cap-p1296663> is 
cloud-free, and visibility extends to the hazyIsle of Portland 
<http://isle%20of%20portland/>.

A walk of ‘diversified pleasings’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/cornwall-fowey-polruan-south-west-coast-path>
Back by the clock on the front, near the fossil shop, buses drop off 
passengers; in the summery warmth visitors stroll past beach huts, crowd around 
morris dancers and singers, and converge on food outlets along the promenade. 
In the revampedLangmore Gardens 
<http://www.360panoramas.co.uk/3/273/Lyme_Regis_Langmore%26nbsp%3BGardens>, 
families play crazy golf and, at the sandy end of the beach, swimmers and 
sunbathers pitch by the harbour known asthe Cobb 
<http://www.lymeregis.org/the-cobb.aspx>. 

The protecting curved breakwater, which dates from the 13th century, was 
joined to the land in 1756 and, in the 19th century, rebuilt inPortland stone 
<http://www.dorsetgeologistsassociation.com/Portland-Stone/Portland_Stone_Document_-_7_June_12.pdf>
. Ships used to trade all over the known world from here, and a plaque 
commemorates locally bornSir George Somers 
<http://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofEngland/Sir-George-Somers/> 
(privateer, merchant trader and military leader). In 1618 his body, pickled in 
a barrel, was shipped back from Bermuda and landed here for eventual burial at 
nearbyWhitchurch Canonicorum 
<http://www.visit-dorset.com/about-the-area/whitchurch-canonicorum-p1124813>.

Today, in relatively calm conditions, people walk carefully above the sea on 
the upper walkway; others are taken off in boats for mackerel fishing and 
scenic trips.Outside the bouldery point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2011/aug/11/lyme-regis-jurassic-fossil-coast>
, where shags perch above the waves, the little boats dip and roll across the 
open sea as they pass westwards, off the pebbly shore, backed by the undercliff 
with its tangled vegetation and bare landslides.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 