
It’s the best kind of late summer day, with bright sunshine and a temperature 
as high as anything we’ve had this year. The smell of new-mown grass carries on 
the warm breeze and from a few fields away comes the muted drone of a tractor. 
Emerging from under the bridge the river curves sinuously as it crosses the 
sand on the final stage of its journey to the sea. But unlike it, rather than 
heading for the beach I take the path behind the low dunes. It is edged by a 
riot of plants, some still in flower.

The violet-blue flowers of common vetch 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/common-vetch> stand out from the 
luxuriant tangle of its intertwining leaves, while clumps of purple thistle-like
hardheads <http://www.wildflowershop.co.uk/WF%20Plant%20Notes/Knapweed.htm> 
rise above them. The remains of umbelliferous hogweed, dried ochre seed-heads 
atop brittle, ridged stems, make sculptural statements amid the foliage. 
Scattered liberally throughout are the cheerful yellows of theautumn hawkbit 
<http://www.hebridensis.co.uk/Flowering%20Plants/species.php?id=37>. 

Country diary: Wenlock Edge: This dragonfly is both messenger and missile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/10/wenlock-edge-dragonfly-both-messenger-missile>
With the exception of the two sandy lines kept clear by the passage of the 
crofter’s tractor, the path itself is half-covered with plants. Various 
grasses, now sporting feathery flower heads, grow along its centre, while from 
its margins, silverweed has sent reddish, tendril-like exploratory stems across 
the intervening space. Acommon darter dragonfly 
<http://www.british-dragonflies.org.uk/species/common-darter>, almost identical 
in colour to the silverweed stems, rests a moment on the patch of sand they are 
attempting to bridge, then takes off again.

As the path dips through the dunes the warm breeze is no longer discernible. 
Severalgreen-veined white butterflies 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/679-607/green-veined-white.html> flutter 
past and a red admiral settles briefly on a thistle, wings moving gently in the 
sunlight.

Turning from the track I climb the path that leads over the dunes to the 
beach. Before me is a curve of white sand and a lazy sea of glorious Hebridean 
blue, breaking with a gentle whisper on to the shore. At the water’s edge, a 
group ofoystercatchers 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/o/oystercatcher/>
, head beneath wing, doze among a few strands of gleaming kelp left behind by 
the falling tide.

The Birds of North Wales, this year’s memorial lecture in honour of the late 
Country diary writerWilliam Condry (thecondrylecture.co.uk 
<http://www.thecondrylecture.co.uk/>), by Jonathan Elphick, is at 
Tabernacle/MoMA, Machynlleth, 1 October, 7pm for 7.30; £5 including 
refreshments (no need to book)
 