
Latvia will not send its skeleton athletes to the 2017 world championships in 
Sochi – the first such announcement by any national team in response to the
Russia doping scandal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/russia-doping-scandal>.

Second McLaren report: five questions on the Russian doping scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/second-mclaren-report-questions-russian-doping>
The bobsleigh and skeleton world championships are scheduled to be held on the 
2014 Olympic track from 13-16 February. A number of athletes have said in 
recent weeks that they will consider skipping the world championships unless 
officials move the event out of Russia but no other national team had taken 
such an official stance, until now.

“Enough is enough,” the Latvian skeleton team said in a statement.

If the world championships are going to be moved out of Sochi, a decision by 
the International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation would have to come quickly. 
The IBSF said it will “act promptly and decisively” after the World Anti-Doping 
Agency investigatorRichard McLaren’s latest report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
 detailing the scope of the doping programme in Russia was released on Friday.

US officials have said they will support any American athlete who chooses not 
to race in Sochi.

The Russians are scheduled to compete this weekend in a World Cup bobsled and 
skeleton competition in Lake Placid, New York, as are sliders from most other 
nations on the circuit.

“I want to compete in a World Championships that’s drug free and safe for 
all,” the US women’s bobsled pilot Elana Meyers Taylor said on Twitter. “Sochi, 
Russia, is not an option.”

The British Bobsleigh <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bobsleigh> and 
Skeleton Association is among those taking a wait-and-see approach for now, not 
making any decisions until the IBSF decides if the world championships should 
be moved.

“I hope, too, that they will want to join the fight,” said Lizzy Yarnold, the 
Olympic women’s skeleton gold medallist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/14/lizzy-yarnold-sochi-winter-olympics-gold>
 from Britain.

Latvia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/latvia> has seven Winter Olympic 
medals in its history, all of them in sliding sports. The Latvian team is led 
by Martins Dukurs, the seven-times defending World Cup overall champion who has 
secured silver medals at the past two Olympics. At the Sochi Games in 2014, 
Dukurs entered as a gold-medal favourite but was beaten by Russia’s Aleksandr 
Tretyakov.

McLaren’s report released on Friday said that Russians who won 15 medals in 
Sochi had their drug-testing samples tampered with, including two athletes who 
won four gold medals. McLaren’s report did not include names.

“While our international federation is still going to ‘read and digest the 
report’ we will do what we can,” the Latvian skeleton team wrote. “We will be 
glad to race in world championships at any track of the world but we are not 
participating in World Championships in Sochi, Russia, a place where Olympic 
spirit was stolen in 2014.”
 