
Lazio beat Empoli 4-0 to take over second spot in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> from Roma, who were held 
1-1 at Torino on Sunday.

Stefano Mauri, Miroslav Klose, Antonio Candreva and Felipe Anderson scored to 
giveLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> an eighth consecutive 
win despite playing the last 32 minutes with 10 men after Diego Novaretti was 
sent off for a second booking.

Lazio moved a point above Roma after the Torino substitute Maxi López 
cancelled out Alessandro Florenzi’s penalty.

Lazio were flying high in Serie A and confidence was further boosted after 
beating Napoli in midweek to reach the Cup final against Juventus.

They got off to the perfect start when Mauri headed in Pedro Luis Cavanda’s 
cross from the right.

Lazio doubled their lead shortly after the half hour with almost a carbon copy 
of the first goal – this time it was Klose who headed in Cavanda’s cross.

Candreva all but sealed the win just before half-time with a long-range effort 
that swerved into the near top corner and Felipe Anderson added to Empoli’s 
humiliation in the 53rd minute, tapping in the rebound after his initial effort 
was saved by Luigi Sepe.

“We are happy with our position in the table but the season isn’t over today,” 
the Lazio coach, Stefano Pioli said. “We are happy with the result and the 
performance, especially as this is our third match in seven days.

“We’ll enjoy this positive run but we have to look beyond it to the next 
match. It’s still very early, there are 24 points available, which is a lot. We 
will be focused and determined also because we have still not secured a 
European spot.”

Lazio and Roma play each other in the penultimate match of the season. “What’s 
important is to be second at the end of the season,” the Roma coach, Rudi 
García, said. “We have to make the most of our next game at home, we have to 
win and then see what the others do.”
 