
The world’s most widely used insecticide is an inadvertent contraceptive for 
bees, cutting live sperm in males by almost 40%, according to research. The 
study also showed the neonicotinoid pesticides cut the lifespan of the drones 
by a third.

The scientists say the discovery provides one possible explanation for the 
increasing deaths of honeybees in recent years, as well as for the general 
decline of wild insect pollinators throughout the northern hemisphere.

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> and other insects are 
vital for pollinating three-quarters of the world’s food crops but have been in 
significant decline, due to the loss of flower-rich habitats, disease and pests 
and the use of pesticides.

Neonicotinoids were banned from use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
 on flowering crops in the EU in 2013. The UK opposed the ban and allowed a 
limited“emergency” lifting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/23/uk-suspends-ban-pesticides-linked-serious-harm-bees>
 of the ban in 2015, but hasrefused further suspensions 
<https://www.farminguk.com/news/Defra-rejects-second-NFU-neonicotinoid-emergency-use-request_42358.html>
 this year. There isclear scientific evidence that neonicotinoids harm bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
, but there is only a little research showing the pesticides harm the overall 
performance of colonies.

Previous work has shown that neonicotinoids reduce the number of bumblebee 
queens produced <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/336/6079/351> and 
severelycuts the survival and reproduction of honeybee queens 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep14621>. But the new research, led by Lars 
Straub at the University of Bern, Switzerland andpublished in the journal 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B <http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2016.0506>, 
is the first to test how neonicotinoids affect male bee fertility.

They exposed drones to the levels of two neonicotinoids, thiamethoxam and 
clothianidin, seen in fields, and found that they had on average 39% less 
living sperm compared with unexposed bees. “Any influence on sperm quality may 
have profound consequences for the fitness of the queen, as well as the entire 
colony,” said the researchers.

Queen bees perform mating flights soon after emerging to collect and store 
sperm from multiple males, which is then used for reproduction over the queen’s 
lifetime. The drones reach sexual maturity at 14 days, but the researchers 
found 32% of the exposed drones were dead by then, and therefore unable to 
mate, compared to 17% of the unexposed controls.

“This could have severe consequences for colony fitness, as well as reduce 
overall genetic variation within honeybee populations,” the scientists said.

The researchers also found that exposed drones lived for 15 days compared to 
22 days for the controls. They concluded: “For the first time, we have 
demonstrated that frequently employed neonicotinoid insecticides can elicit 
important lethal and sub-lethal effects on non-target, beneficial male insects; 
this may have broad population-level implications.”

Peter Campbell, from Syngenta, the company that makes thiamethoxam, said the 
new research was interesting. However, he noted that the sperm quality of all 
the drones in the study was reduced, compared to earlier work. “Given the 
multiple mating of honeybee queens it is unclear what the consequences of a 
reduction in sperm quality would actually have on queen fecundity,” he said.

Christopher Connolly, at the University of Dundee and not part of the research 
team, said: “This study is important, as failures in honeybee queen mating is 
reported to be a growing problem for beekeepers.”

He added: “Although the insecticide levels used in this study are realistic, 
it is unclear whether both neonicotinoids are commonly consumed together at 
these levels.

“Therefore, it will be important to investigate the impact of the 
neonicotinoids separately. Importantly, this study demonstrates the complexity 
of the possible consequences from chronic exposure to pesticides and these are 
not assessed during safety testing. Therefore, this study further supports the 
need to adopt the precautionary principle on neonicotinoids.”

 * This article was amended on 27 July. It was originally published with an 
incorrect picture of hoverflies.  