
It is almost five years to the day since Blackpool kept their hopes of Premier 
League survival alive with a1-1 draw at Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/07/tottenham-blackpool-premier-league>
. They lost that battle in the end, going down after losing at Manchester 
United on the final day of the season, but at least Ian Holloway’s side earned 
the admiration of neutrals across the country thanks to the charm and 
fearlessness of their football.

Money laundering funds ‘might have been put into Blackpool’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/money-laundering-funds-blackpool-claim>
They began that campaign – during which they would beat Liverpool home and 
away – with a 4-0 win at Wigan.That scoreline was reversed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/30/blackpool-wigan-athletic-league-one-match-report>
 when they hosted the same opponents last Saturday, leaving Blackpool on the 
brink of a second consecutive relegation and an ignominious fall into League 
Two. The game was played amid a backdrop of supporter protests against 
Blackpool’s deeply unpopular owners, the Oyston family, at Bloomfield Road, and 
a plane towing a banner calling for “the club killers” to “get out now” flew 
above the ground before kick-off.

Karl Oyston, Owen Oyston’s millionaire son, is the chairman who has enraged 
supporters by bringing the club to its knees and the poisonous atmosphere is 
likely to stay until there is a change in the boardroom. The club began last 
season with eight professional footballers on their books and ended it with 35 
points. They have gone from bad to worse inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

While Wigan returned to the Championship at the first time of asking thanks to 
their victory, Blackpool are heading in the opposite direction. They were 
handed a lifeline when Fleetwood, two points above them in 20th, lost at 
Walsall on Monday. Yet the likelihood is that it only delayed the inevitable.
Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool>, without a victory 
in their past four games, need to win at Peterborough on Sunday and hope 
Fleetwood fail to beat Crewe, who are already down.

At the other end of the table, Burton will be promoted to the Championship for 
the first time in their history if they get a point at Doncaster, or even if 
they lose and Walsall fail to win at Port Vale by a sufficient margin.
 