
Life in the bottom tier is seldom straightforward. There's barely a club not 
entering the new season in a state of tumult. For many it's been a close season 
of cost-cutting, for some a battle to hold on to their better players or cobble 
together a squad of professionals. Not for the first time, a hint of stability 
and a couple of quid in the bank may be all that is required for a tilt at the 
top.

Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> are in a better 
position than most, though their hopes rest on turning back the clock. Will 
Grant Holt be the lethal striker he was for Rochdale in 2004 and 2005 or the 
man who scored just three times for a strong Nottingham Forest side last 
season? Will Paul Simpson be the managerial magician who guided his Carlisle 
side to the League Two title in 2006 or the curmudgeon who failed so miserably 
at Preston? Will Richard Walker be the awkward customer who scored and created 
so many goals for Bristol Rovers at this level in 2006-07 or the toothless 
striker who has failed to find the net so far this year?

If the Shrews can get positive answers to those questions it's tough to see 
anyone with a better chance of taking the title. Walker and Holt will be key 
and despite difficult times of late, they do have excellent records at this 
level. After replacing Gary Peters in March, Simpson won only one of the 11 
games for which he was in charge last season, but his arrival in itself bodes 
well for the club. As Milton Keynes and Peterborough showed last season, money 
talks inLeague Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> as 
much as it does in the leagues above. Shrewsbury, who broke their transfer 
record by splashing £170,000 on Holt, are clearly in a more robust state than 
many of their rivals.

Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford>, on the other hand, 
don't have much in the bank - a total of £11,383 according to recently released 
accounts - despite their big crowds (down largely to their commendable season 
ticket pricing). Michael Boulding will score plenty and new signing Paul 
McLaren created more goals in League One last season than anyone else, but it's 
hard to shake the feeling that they're the bookies favourites on the back of 
those attendances rather than their talent on the pitch. They'll need a big 
improvement on last season to justify the expectation and it's a make-or-break 
season for Stuart McCall, with whom fans' patience is being tested, despite his 
legendary status at Valley Parade.

Rochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> showed remarkable 
resilience last time out - recovering from the loss of Glenn Murray and Chris 
Dagnall, the side's chief sources of goals, to Brighton and injury respectively 
- to make the play-off final. Their manager Keith Hill will be hoping Jon Shaw, 
prolific in the Conference with Halifax, does for his side what Aaron Mclean 
did for Peterborough and that Dagnall, who weighed in with nine goals last year 
despite missing six months of the season, can recapture his best form. The loss 
of David Perkins, however, deprives Dale of energy in midfield and it may well 
mean just another play-off campaign for the club stuck in the fourth tier since 
1974.

Of the sides dropping down from League One, Gillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> are the strongest and are 
sure to be there or thereabouts. The spine of the side - Simon Royce in goal, 
Simon King at centre-half, Andrew Crofts in midfield and Simeon Jackson up 
front - is arguably the best in the division. Royce was the club's player of 
the year last season, King has been watched by Championship scouts, Crofts is a 
Welsh international and a largely unsung hero in the Gills engine room, while 
Jackson, another prolific Conference goalscorer, will benefit from the company 
of Mark McCammon - not prolific himself, but a creator for others - alongside 
him. The jury is very much out on the management of the former Stevenage boss 
Mark Stimson, however.

Elsewhere, Darlington - despite tailing off terribly in the second half of 
last season - should also be among the contenders after four back-to-back 
top-half finishes, but they'll need Pawel Abbott to shake off the fitness 
problems that have dogged him of late. Peter Taylor's Wycombe, who in Scott 
McGleish and Leon Knight have a front two as capable as any in the division, 
should make the play-offs for the third time in four years.Chesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> should again go close - I 
like the look of their back five, and in Jamie Ward and Jack Lester they have a 
strike pair to rival McGleish and Knight. There are gaps - particularly in 
midfield - but the Spireites manager Lee Richardson will hope to plug those 
with loans.

As will everyone else. The season's ups and downs could well hinge on which 
players teams are able to get in on a temporary basis. To that end a solid 
start is essential - it's easier to sell a play-off push to the loaning clubs 
than it is a battle at the very basement of the Football League.

That leaves Luton, Rotherham and Bournemouth, Gillingham's fellow relegatees, 
in a difficult position. The Hatters begin at -30, the Millers are likely to 
kick off with -20, and the Cherries will probably start at -15, which is 
tremendous news for the likes of Chester,Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, Dagenham and the other 
likely stragglers.

At the time of writing Luton are 7-2 on to slip into the Conference, and the 
perceived wisdom seems to be that they'll need an exceptional, possibly 
title-winning, season to survive. But things aren't quite that dire - last 
season 73 points in League Two would have seen them safe, a tally that, without 
a 30-point penalty, would have been good enough for eighth. It's not an 
impossibility therefore, but nevertheless, with the club haemorrhaging players 
at an alarming rate, there's little reason for optimism.

And it's difficult to see Rotherham not joining Luton in the Conference in 
2009-10. The Millers will play their home games atDon Valley Stadium 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/southyorkshire/content/panoramas/don_valley_stadium_360.shtml>
 in Sheffield (for an idea of how the club got into this mess have a look at
David Conn's report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/apr/23/rotherham.leaguetwofootball>
), which can't be a good thing (think Brighton and the Withdean) and although 
they've been able to bring in one-time next-big-thing Mark Burchill from 
Dunfermline, the squad is egg-shell thin. Bournemouth, who had that remarkable 
run at the end of last season whichalmost kept them in League One, look 
stronger, and the effect of the points penalty on Kevin Bond's team should be 
eased by the severity of the other two - if they can stay afloat that is, as the
Football League is threatening to block both Rotherham and Bournemouth's 
participation in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/aug/06/rotherham.bournemouth> over 
the timetable of takeovers.

With finances so fragile, the threat remains that one or more League Two sides 
won't make the end of the season. Aldershot are a club that know all about 
that, their original guise folding in the spring of 1992. But 16 years after 
formingAldershot Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aldershottownfootball> from the charred 
remains of Aldershot FC, the Shots are back in the Football League. And they 
should fare well. No side has dominated the Conference or Blue Square Premier 
in the way Gary Waddock's side did last season since Yeovil romped to promotion 
in 2002-03. A play-off punt is a realistic objective. For Exeter, the other 
promoted side, consolidation will be the aim, a target that looks much more 
achievable with their headstart over Luton and co.

And finally, if you're looking for a potential surprise package, look no 
further than Lincoln City, who improved more than any other League Two club in 
the second half of last season and strengthened during the summer. They could 
well clamber over Brentford, Barnet, Morecambe and co in the mid-table morass 
and if they can sort out the red tape tying upnaked-girlfriend-carrying 
Romanian striker Adrian Patulea 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/teams/l/lincoln_city/7517384.stm>, 
they might be able to bring some light relief to a division where tensions are 
sure to be running high.

Predictions: Champions: Shrewsbury Promoted: Gillingham and Chesterfield 
Play-offs: Rochdale, Aldershot, Wycombe, Lincoln Relegated: Luton and Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham>
 