
The leader of Plaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru> 
has vowed to make life uncomfortable for the new Labour-led minority government 
in Wales, and said she expects the administration to work with her party to get 
its budget and bills through.

Although Plaid made a deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/17/plaid-cymru-and-labour-reach-welsh-assembly-deal>
 allowing the Welsh Labour leader, Carwyn Jones, to be reappointed as first 
minister, Wood told the Guardian there would be no cosy relationship between 
the parties.

“I feel I’ve been given a mandate to shake things up a bit and to try to bring 
about the changeWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> needs. I stood on 
a platform of change. Business as usual in the fifth assembly term is not an 
option,” she said.

“Allowing” Jones to become first minister was a one-off, Wood added. “It 
wasn’t a vote of support for the government. It wasn’t an endorsement for their 
first minister. We will hold them to account.

“Labour as a minority government has to deal with another party. I can’t see 
how they can go to the Tories or Ukip for support. We would give them some 
serious flak over that. They have to deal with us or they can’t get their 
budget or legislation through. We intend to use the position we are in to 
maximise our leverage and get as many of our policies from our manifesto 
through as possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d96082dd09666f8ff72165aee0db8667f3c1d1%2F170_505_5506_3303%2F5506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leanne%20Wood%3A%20'Business%20as%20usual%20in%20this%20assembly%20term%20is%20not%20an%20option'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leanne%20Wood%3A%20%27Business%20as%20usual%20in%20this%20assembly%20term%20is%20not%20an%20option%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d96082dd09666f8ff72165aee0db8667f3c1d1%2F170_505_5506_3303%2F5506.jpg>
 Wood with supporters after this month’s Welsh assembly elections. Photograph: 
Tracey Paddison/Rex/Shutterstock 
Labour remained by far the biggest party in Wales following this month’s 
elections butfell just short of an overall majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
, winning 29 of the 60 seats. Plaid was next with 12, and the Tories took 11, 
whileUkip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/ukip-caerphilly-serious-contender-welsh-assembly-elections>
 won seats for the first time, securing seven. The Lib Dems plunged from five 
to one.

Labour began to plan a minority government until Plaid unexpectedly put 
forward Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/carwyn-jones-leanne-wood-tied-welsh-first-minister>
 to challenge Jones for the post of first minister. Spotting the chance to give 
Labour a bloody nose, Ukip and the Tories – Plaid’s natural enemies – backed 
Wood. Had thesole Liberal Democrat AM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/lib-dem-kirsty-williams-appointed-to-welsh-labour-led-cabinet>
 supported her, the Plaid leader would have been first minister.

Speaking in her corner office overlooking the assembly and Cardiff Bay, Wood 
smiled broadly at the idea. “I recognise that running a government in those 
circumstances would have been very very difficult, but I would have given it a 
go,” she said.

“I would have sought to try to win the support of some of those Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members who I know agree with the 
bulk of our programme. I think we could have put something together.

“It’s not all about legislation, You can run a government without passing 
legislation. The main thing is getting the budget through but you do hold a 
huge amount of executive power. The opportunities for using that executive 
power would have been there.”

But that wasn’t the idea of the nomination. “The purpose was to demonstrate 
Labour couldn’t automatically rely on Plaid Cymru’s support. They had to come 
to the table in the spirit of equality. I think we sent that message to them 
loud and clear.”

Labour did come to the table and the parties hatched a deal, which they 
called, rather clunkily, A Compact to Move Wales Forward.

There is no coalition but Plaid will sit with Labour on three new liaison 
committees that will examine finance, legislation and the constitution. Key 
Plaid election pledges on health, apprenticeships and childcare, some of which 
overlapped with Labour’s, will be prioritised. The parties will also work 
together to tackle the steel crisis in Port Talbot, and campaign to remain in 
the EU.

The deal done, Wood’s nomination for the job of first minister was withdrawn 
and Carwyn Jones was re-elected.Jones’s tone was conciliatory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/18/labour-lead-welsh-government-deal-deadlock-plaid-cymru-carwyn-jones>
, promising to work with other parties.
Carwyn Jones (@fmwales) 
We have no doubt about the responsibilities on us, and the responsibility upon 
me in particular, to work with others
 <https://twitter.com/fmwales/status/732916271709310977> May 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/fmwales/status/732916271709310977> 
Afterwards, Wood made what she described as a “fierce” speech in which she 
attacked the new Labour government in Wales as arrogant, complacent and 
bullying.

Reflecting on that speech, she said: “I was trying to send a signal about the 
way in which we intend to operate as an opposition. I wanted to create a tone 
which said to the country and the government that whatever is good for Wales we 
will do. But that doesn’t mean we will automatically support this minority 
Labour government.

“They’ve been in power for 17 years. They have run out of ideas, their 
manifesto was shockingly thin, they have nothing to offer this country, which 
needs transformation, change. I think it was really important the government 
understood the terms under which we are engaging.”

Wood has long been seen as a firebrand. A former probation officer from the 
Rhondda Valley in south Wales, she wasonce expelled from the assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/23/leanne-wood-wales-plaid-cymru>
 for referring to the Queen as Mrs Windsor. She is no fan of the royal family.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8d9a0fc196fef8303d591b69f21963ae5e77f12%2F922_78_2509_1505%2F2509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leanne%20Wood%3A%20'Business%20as%20usual%20in%20this%20assembly%20term%20is%20not%20an%20option'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leanne%20Wood%3A%20%27Business%20as%20usual%20in%20this%20assembly%20term%20is%20not%20an%20option%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fleanne-wood-business-as-usual-not-an-option-plaid-cymru-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8d9a0fc196fef8303d591b69f21963ae5e77f12%2F922_78_2509_1505%2F2509.jpg>
 Leanne Wood during a televised leaders’ debate before last year’s general 
election. Photograph: ITV/Getty Images Europe 
She was a star of the UK general election campaign in 2015, taking on the Ukip 
leader, Nigel Farage, 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/general-election-2015/11512722/Nigel-Farage-chided-by-Leanne-Wood-for-HIV-comment-in-leaders-TV-debate.html>
during a televised leaders’ debate. But her speech this week may be the start 
of a new, even fiercer chapter.

Her own standing, and perhaps her confidence, was bolstered on election night 
this month when she won theconstituency seat in the Rhondda 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/politics/assembly-election-2016-leanne-wood-11292451>
, a Labour heartland.

“It’s a great honour to be elected by people who you have grown up with and 
live amongst. The reason I wanted to stand in a constituency seat was to lead 
from the front. We recognise that to become the biggest party in the assembly 
we have to make a breakthrough in the constituencies. Psychologically it’s an 
important breakthrough. It’s one we have to build on and expand.”

Ukip, led at the assembly by the former Tory MP Neil Hamilton, has also 
promised to shake things up. Hamilton leapt in with both feet this week when he 
said the deal with Labour showed that Plaid was a “very cheap date”, and 
branded Wood and the Lib Dem Kirsty Williams as Labour’s“political concubines” 
<http://www.itv.com/news/wales/2016-05-18/ukips-neil-hamilton-causes-a-storm-with-a-carwyns-hareem-accusation/>
.

Wood said Hamilton’s remarks had made her feel resigned and deflated. “We’ve 
spent 17 years building up this institution. There has been an unspoken 
agreement that certain issues wouldn’t be used as political footballs. Sexism, 
racism, immigration, the Welsh language, climate change – we’re all pretty much 
agreed that these things are territory that we shouldn’t try to make political 
gain on.

“That has been overturned by the election of these seven [Ukip members]. I 
think they were testing the water, trying to seek attention, but I think we 
need to think seriously how we handle it. It could quickly descend into 
something very ugly.”

Unlike the SNP in Scotland, independence is not something Plaid is focusing on 
at the moment. Wood accepts Wales needs to feel more prosperous before that 
issue can be higher on the agenda.

“All of our manifesto is designed to try to close the prosperity gap between 
Wales and the rest of the UK. For many people that is the key question. We have 
to demonstrate progress before people will be open to consider independence. 
Closing that economic gap will be our priority over the next five years.”

And afterwards? “Come back to us on that in five years’ time.” 
 