
The wide-ranging consequences for sport of a vote for Scottish independence on 
Thursday have only become a matter for debate relatively late in the day.

UK Sport, the body that distributes £125m a year in National Lottery and 
exchequer funding to Olympic sport, insists it will wait for the result before 
considering its plans. So does the British Olympic Association. And Fifa. And 
the International Olympic Committee. And theBritish Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>. And so on.

While sport would come some way down the list of concerns facing an 
independent Scotland, the consequences to it of the end of the Union would be 
profound. Some repercussions, including those detailed below, will be of 
practical or financial concern. Others, related to the waysport can define a 
nation, will be less tangible. But all represent a leap into the unknown.

So what would Scottish independence mean for the following?

1 Scottish athletes at Rio 2016

Sir Craig Reedie, an International Olympic Committee vice-president and a 
prime mover in the bid to secure the 2012 Olympics for London, has gravedoubts 
about whether a Scottish team could be formed in time for the Rio Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/06/scotland-independence-rio-olympics-sir-craig-reedie>
. The SNP is targeting March 2016 as the date to declare Scotland an 
independent country but that timetable could slip. While Scotland could easily 
satisfy the requirement of having five national sporting federations affiliated 
to their international counterparts, it must also be formally admitted into the 
IOC as “an independent nation recognised by the international community”. In 
practice, that has tended to mean membership of the United Nations.

To add a further layer of complication, in sports such as cycling countries 
qualify for a number of “team places” rather than individual athletes earning 
Olympic spots – so even if there were a Scottish team, athletes would not be 
able simply to switch.

If Scotland were unable to register as a national Olympic committee in time, 
athletes would face a choice between donning aTeam GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> vest or, potentially, competing 
independently under the IOC flag. There would be question marks over funding 
and the extent of their support operation. The IOC president, Thomas Bach, has 
said it will respect “democratic decisions” and “safeguard the interests of the 
athletes” whatever the outcome of the vote.

2 Team GB

The warm, hazy glow around the achievements of Team GB at London 2012 has been 
invoked by some of those in the Better Together camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/07/david-cameron-scotland-independence-snp-olympics>
 in an attempt to imbue their often negative campaign with some positivity: Sir 
Chris Hoy, Katherine Grainger, Andy Murray and others contributed to Britain’s 
best medal haul for more than a century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410872981876%2F8658b018-f55b-4c49-b232-ad30102b5245-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410872981876%2F8658b018-f55b-4c49-b232-ad30102b5245-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Katherine Grainger of Scotland, left, and Anna Watkins of England with their 
double sculls gold for Team GB in 2012. Photograph: Stephen Pond/PA Wire/Press 
Association Images 
Scottish athletes make up just over a 10th of the 1,272 athletes funded by UK 
Sport <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport> but in London they 
contributed to a fifth of Team GB’s 65 medals. In Sochi, the split was 50-50 
thanks to the medals won by the all-Scottish men’s and women’s curling rinks. 
Team sports that featured mixed lineups of athletes from Scotland and the rest 
of the UK would inevitably suffer.

Even if some Scottish athletes stuck with Team GB in Rio, a yes vote would 
leave UK Sport’s promise to become the first nation to beat their medal haul 
from a home Games four years later – the basis on which its funding was 
committed – looking shaky.

3 Lottery funding

Scotland’s secretary of sport, Shona Robison, has made it clear that in the 
event of independenceshe expects the appropriate share of UK Sport’s budget 
(around £37m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/sep/06/sport-winners-losers-scotland-yes-no-battle>
 over four-years) to be transferred to SportScotland and for the lottery to 
continue in the way it currently operates.

A review of Scottish sport headed by Henry McLeish, the former first minister, 
which criticised UK Sport for failing to engage, said it was imperative for the 
funding to be shifted to Scotland as quickly as possible in the event of a yes 
vote. It is understood the government would insist on a renegotiation of the 
entire basis on which National Lottery income is divided and it is far from 
clear whether the portion of exchequer funding that goes to UK Sport would 
transfer to SportScotland, facing athletes with further difficult choices over 
whom to represent. Reedie suspects many would “follow the money” and stick with 
Team GB.

4 National high performance centres

Scottish athletes competing for Team GB benefit from policy championed by the 
former UK Sport performance director, Peter Keen, to establish national high 
performance centres for the biggest sports. Most obviously, the velodrome in 
Manchester has become the hub for British Cycling. There are five Scottish 
riders on British Cycling’s development and academy programmes, who are 
centrally funded but train locally, and four Scottish riders –Katie Archibald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/28/britain-women-team-pursuit-world-track-cycling-gold>
, Callum Skinner, Neil Fachie and Craig MacLean – on the podium programme who 
are based in Manchester. What would happen to those shared facilities and 
carefully honed high-performance programmes in the event of Scottish 
independence is as yet unknown.

5 The British and Irish Lions

A vote for independence would likely mean a name change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/12/british-irish-lions-renamed-scotland-yes-vote-independence-rugby-union>
 for the representative side, with the Lions believed to be the favoured choice 
in the event that the yes campaign wins. On the first official tour in 1891, 
the team were known as the British Isles but have been the British Lions and 
then British and Irish Lions ever since.

6 Berwick Rangers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410873519829%2F05b90d7a-57b3-4d2d-8261-8b16927afc3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410873519829%2F05b90d7a-57b3-4d2d-8261-8b16927afc3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ian Oliver, left, groundsman at Berwick Rangers FC, which is just on the 
English side of the border, is a Scotland supporter while his half English half 
Scots apprentice Ross Aitchison, right, refuses to support either team. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
The picturesque border town of Berwick has been a source of some fascination 
during the independence debate, withthe New York Times among those to dispatch 
reporters there 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/14/world/europe/scottish-independence-referendum-berwick-upon-tweed.html?_r=0>
 to canvas opinion among residents. The likely fate of its Scottish Division 
Two side Berwick Rangers, the only English team to play in the Scottish league, 
has also been a source of conjecture. Founded in 1884, they have played in 
Scotland since 1951. The expense involved in travelling to play English 
opposition would be a huge burden.

However, Scottish league officials are believed to be confident that 
Scotland’s status as a separate nation in the eyes ofFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> would protect Berwick’s position. 
The club’s vice-chairman, John Bell, has said: “Berwick Rangers are full 
members of the Scottish Professional Football League and as such we would 
expect to remain members of it, regardless of any independence issue.”

7 Position of home nations within Fifa

The home nations have always closely guarded their historic privileges within 
Fifa. Little would change on the pitch, except that the looming England v 
Scotland match at Celtic Park in November would be afforded extra spice. Off 
it, the Fifa vice-president Jim Boyce is concerned that a yes vote could open 
the door for those within Fifa who would like to see the influence of the home 
nations diluted. “It does leave a question mark. It leaves a grey area,” he 
told the Guardian.

Boyce, from Northern Ireland, steps down in March next year and, under recent 
reforms, his seat no longer automatically goes to another home nation but is in 
the gift of Uefa. European football’s governing body has confirmed that it will 
continue the policy of awarding it to a British candidate but whether that 
would include a Scot in the event of a yes vote remains to be seen. Similarly, 
the presence of all four home nations around the table at Ifab – the body that 
sets football’s rules – could also be under threat.

8 The Open

A spokesman for the Royal & Ancient has already confirmed that the rota for 
the Open would be unaffected in the event of a vote for independence. The 
tournament rotates among courses in Scotland and England, with the next two 
slated for north of the border atSt Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/27/royal-and-ancient-golf-club-st-andrews-drop-ban-female-members>
 and Royal Troon. It will return to Royal Portrush in Northern Ireland – 
possibly in 2019 – for the first time since 1951.

9 The Davis Cup

Just as Britain’s Davis Cup team has ceased to be a source of embarrassment, 
it could risk losing its talisman, Andy Murray. Under persistent questioning, 
Murray has confirmedhe would turn out for Scotland in the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/29/andy-murray-tennis-independent-scotland>
 in the event of a yes vote but has refused to be drawn on his own views. “I am 
proud to be Scottish but I am also proud to be British. I don’t think there is 
any contradiction in that,” he has said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410873884850%2F6707b4c9-dc3e-4ec1-9db2-e2b7eb00253f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leap%20in%20the%20dark%3A%2011%20sporting%20questions%20raised%20by%20Scottish%20independence%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2F11-sporting-questions-scotland-independence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410873884850%2F6707b4c9-dc3e-4ec1-9db2-e2b7eb00253f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Andy Murray has said that he feels both Scottish and British and sees no 
contradiction there. If forced to choose he has said he would turn out for 
Scotland in Rio. Photograph: David Goldman/AP 
For those who breathed a huge sigh relief at the conclusion of a national 
obsession when Murray broke a 77-year hoodoo and won the men’s singles at 
Wimbledon in 2013, the bad news in the event of Scottish independence might be 
the resumption of the search for the first male English winner since Fred Perry 
in 1936.

10 Horse racing in Scotland

Racing in Scotland could be severely threatened by a yes vote, with serious 
financial questions facing the courses at Ayr, Hamilton Park, Kelso, 
Musselburgh and Perth. Between them they account for 6% of betting turnover in 
the UK but would be left with an estimated annual aggregate deficit of £4m in 
Levy payments. The British Horseracing Authority has said it was “not possible 
for British racing to conduct meaningful scenario planning” before the vote.

11 London Scottish

While the debate in the stands among London Scottish’s largely expat average 
crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/08/scottish-expats-have-been-disenfranchised>
 of 1,500 has been vigorous, there is unlikely to be much impact on the club 
itself. “We are a member of the RFU and the Scottish Rugby Union. I can’t 
imagine that changing whatever the outcome of the vote,” said a spokesman.
 