
1) Question: how long does it take to run 45 feet? Answer: two seconds, if 
you’re LeBron James. That was all the time it took forthe Cleveland Cavaliers 
legend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/22/cleveland-cavaliers-parade-lebron-james-nba-champs-video>
 toblock a potentially decisive effort 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIZqOTIbWDg> by Golden State Warriors man 
Andre Iguodala with two minutes remaining in Game 7 of the NBA finals. It was
the defining moment <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HeMcoJci8ug> of a 
scintillating contest, a feat of speed and athleticism all the more astounding 
for the fact that it came at such a critical juncture, with the teams locked at 
89 points apiece and James already on court for more than three-quarters of an 
hour. “I’m at a loss for words,” said James afterwards. “This is unbelievable.” 
He was talking about a win that saw Cleveland become the first team to overturn 
a 3-1 deficit in the best-of-seven series, leaving their star playercrying on 
the court <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Nefuo0ZuuI>. He could have been 
describing this moment alone.

2) If unpredictability is sport’s lifeblood, dominance can be its death knell. 
To many Wimbledon fans, Pete Sampras had assumed the air of the grim reaper by 
1996. His serve might have beena thing of beauty when viewed in isolation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BIs-YnjkXc>, but spectators hoping to enjoy a 
rally or two were growing as tired of therelentless barrage of aces 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QUP8jnZyb0> that flowed from the American’s 
racket as they were of his business-like on-court demeanour. Champion in each 
of the three preceding years, Sweet Pete had long since turned sour. FromCliff 
Richard crooning in the Royal Box <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Selj7_CIRg> 
during a rain delay to Melissa Johnson, the streaker who ran on to Centre Court 
before the start of the men’s final, everyone did their bit to enliven things. 
And no one did more than the eventual champion, Richard Krajicek, who stunned 
the defending champion in the last eight and went on towin the only grand slam 
title of his career <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UceqnabrLBk>. A 6ft 5in 
Dutchman with a whacking great serve of his own was hardly the obvious antidote 
to Sampras’s SW19 hegemony. But his victory, combined with MaliVai Washington’s 
fairytale progress to the second Sunday – the Floridian fought back from 5-1 
down in the fifth set of hisepic semi-final against fellow American Todd Martin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=39eGdINKXdY> to become the first black player 
to contest the final sinceArthur Ashe in 1975 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MqiN-EFsMso> – proved a breath of fresh air. 
It was the only defeat Sampras would suffer at the All England Club between 
1993 and 2000.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv7RNXCItQaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv7RNXCItQaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv7RNXCItQaI&media=>
Richard Krajicek breaks Pete Sampras in the first set of their 1996 Wimbledon 
quarter-final <https://youtu.be/v7RNXCItQaI> 
3) There was a time when referees refrained from drawing attention to 
themselves withbizarre tongue movements 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIpSpqXyKU0>, alleged sarcastic quips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/28/phil-jagielka-referee-sarcastic-comment-everton-defending-manchester-city>
 and pre-match ritualsbetter suited to American college basketball teams 
<https://twitter.com/DanielHarris/status/744282624693264384>, and instead 
focused simply on the smooth running of football matches. If that seems 
unlikely, cast your mind back to the occasion when a certain David Elleray wore 
a mic for a First Division clash between Millwall and Arsenal. To hear the 
former Harrow schoolmaster roundly inform David O’Leary, “You do not speak to 
my linesman like that”, or bark at Tony Adams to “Stand up”, is to recall an 
era before the Premier League turned footballers into self-regarding 
gazillionaires. Little did we dream then that the day would dawn when nostalgic 
yearning for Elleray would become a legitimate pastime.

4) “Don’t stand there like you’re going to do something to me … man to man, 
show some respect.” The regulation verbals before some drunken bar-room brawl, 
or the words of a quietly-spoken,apple-crumble eating 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fB0Rr09d97M> world heavyweight heavyweight 
champion preparing for his first title defence against a 6ft 7in Californian 
intent on getting under his skin? The latter. The exchange between Anthony 
Joshua and Domic Breazeale at a photocall following the announcement of their 
clash at London’s O2 Arena may yet prove a good deal more entertaining than 
anything than happens come fight night.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHLeW3pV1xsc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHLeW3pV1xsc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHLeW3pV1xsc&media=>
Anthony Joshua and Dominic Breazeale trade words <http://Anthony Joshua Dominic 
Breazeale> 
5) Marshawn Lynch, the recently retired Seattle Seahawks running back, earned 
the nickname ‘Beast Mode’ for his celebrated aggression and ability to break 
tackles. But was there more to his success than just running straight through 
his opponents?No. No there wasn’t <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ut2vrhQZhI0> 
– as the big man spells out with meticulous clarity at 29 seconds. Lynch is 
similarly forthright with Hugh Jackman during a workout at an Oakland school –
this ain’t rugby, mate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HYik4n5_EBU>...

6) He is Zlatan. And after the Sweden star’s announcement that Euro 2016 will 
be his international swansong, now seems a good moment to relivesome of his 
best goals <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1xrNGOWCCo&feature=youtu.be> for 
his country – includingthat strike against England 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xh_KNH8QqSw>.

Highlights from last week’s blog

1) “If Nascar rollovers were an Olympic sport, Maynard Troyer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fLyjQP4MT5U> would be a certainty for the gold 
medal.”

2) To paraphrase Vesper Lynd in Casino Royale <https://youtu.be/nPNPXym2_Sg>, 
there are catches and there are catches.This is the latter 
<https://youtu.be/dByZVxLQk4w>.

3) Under the table it may have been, but there was nothing illegal about world 
No2 Fan Zhendong’sremarkable, improvised winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/21/table-tennis-wondershot-stuns-opponent-at-ittf-japan-open-video>
 against Simon Gauzy at the Japan Open.

4) Rule No1 of competitive sport: don’t celebrate too early 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xCUv8pWFkk8>.

Spotters badges: Graham Clayton, pauleolithic, TheCedarRoom, BlackCaeser


Guardian YouTube football channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy <https://www.youtube.com/user/GuardianFootball>

Guardian YouTube sport channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwD9E_QNwFwrQC7OnPnrg2Q>
 