
Ronda Rousey has received support from fellow high-profile athletes after her 
first-round defeat to Amanda Nunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
 on Friday night.

Rousey who, along with Conor McGregor, is UFC’s biggest draw was beaten in 48 
seconds during her comeback. But Cleveland Cavaliers starLeBron James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lebron-james> showed sympathy after her 
defeat.

Ronda Rousey's defeat to Amanda Nunes is a cautionary tale for UFC fighters | 
Josh Gross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
“In sports, in general, they build you up as high as they can, put you on the 
highest mountain in the world, just to tear you down. That’s coming from 
somebody who has experienced it,”James told the Akron Beacon Journal on Saturday
 
<http://www.ohio.com/blogs/cleveland-cavaliers/cleveland-cavaliers-1.275356/lebron-on-ronda-rousey-they-build-you-up-just-to-tear-you-down-1.737247>
. “That’s a fact. I know exactly how she feels because I was that athlete. I 
went through that.”

James was heavily criticized after he left the Cavaliers to join Miami Heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/09/lebron-james-joins-miami-heat>, 
where he won three NBA titles. He won another title with the Cavs in 2016.

LA Lakers legend Kobe Bryant also defended Rousey. “Instead of clapping for 
@RondaRousey <https://twitter.com/RondaRousey> defeat give her a standing O for 
putting the sport on the map#pioneer 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pioneer?src=hash> #muse 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/muse?src=hash>,” he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/kobebryant/status/815310476116566016?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. 

Jon Jones, another UFC star currently facing adversity, also offered his 
thoughts on Rousey’s situation. “My advice to Ronda would be to pick yourself 
up and try again,”Jones wrote on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/JonnyBones/status/815561873840107520>. “I think it’s 
important for Ronda to show her fans how great she truly is by displaying her 
courage and giving it another try.
Jon Bones Jones (@JonnyBones) 
To all the people who loves to kick a person when they're down. 
https://t.co/cb3b0vMygt <https://t.co/cb3b0vMygt> pic.twitter.com/H8itfnUKyX 
<https://t.co/H8itfnUKyX>
 <https://twitter.com/JonnyBones/status/815561873840107520> January 1, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/JonnyBones/status/815561873840107520> 
“What she does next will truly determine her legacy. I really hope she chooses 
to be unbroken. Her story doesn’t have to be over here. I also still believe 
she beats 90% of the division. Lots of ass kicking still to be done, lots of 
money to be made.”

Jones, the former UFC lightweight champion, is currently serving a one-year 
doping suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/jon-jones-ufc-title-doping-ban>. 

Rousey, meanwhile, says she is taking time to consider her future. “I want to 
say thank you to all of my fans who have been there for me in not only the 
greatest moments but in the most difficult ones. Words cannot convey how much 
your love and support means to me,”Rousey said in a statement to ESPN 
<http://www.espn.com/mma/story/_/id/18384443/ufc-207-ronda-rousey-take-some-decide-future>
.

“Returning to not just fighting, but winning, was my entire focus this past 
year. However, sometimes – even when you prepare and give everything you have 
and want something so badly – it doesn’t work how you planned. I take pride in 
seeing how far the women’s division has come in theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> and commend all the other women who 
have been part of making this possible, including Amanda. I need to take some 
time to reflect and think about the future. Thank you for believing in me and 
understanding.”
 