
Leeds Carnegie will change their name to Yorkshire Carnegie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leedsrugby> from next season in an effort to 
broaden the Championship club's appeal across the county.

Sir Ian McGeechan, the former British and Irish Lions coach who is the 
chairman of the Leeds club, unveiled plans for the launch of the new 
professional outfit at Headingley on Tuesday.

The club, who have bounced between the Premiership and Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> for much of the 
last decade, will continue to play at Headingley in order to meet minimum 
standards for the top flight, but with a remit to create a powerhouse for the 
game in England.

McGeechan said: "Undoubtedly the player pool within the county is as strong as 
ever and we have successfully created an academy structure that benefits all 
clubs across the county and the time is right now to spread that philosophy to 
the senior structure.

"We now face a crossroads if we are able to create a sustainable future for 
the professional side of the game.

"The only way we can fulfil this vision is to bring together all interested 
parties and create a new board to enable Yorkshire Carnegie to have the 
resources to compete with the very best."

The venture has the blessing of the Yorkshire RFU and the England head coach 
Stuart Lancaster, a former Leeds coach.

Leeds Rugby's chief executive, Gary Hetherington, said: "Leeds Carnegie, 
Rotherham and Doncaster have all tried to create a winning team on the field to 
gain and retain a place in the Premiership. Clearly, by leveraging talent and 
support across Yorkshire that gives us the best chance possible of succeeding.

"This year marks the 150th anniversary of rugby being played in Leeds for the 
first time, which presents a timely opportunity for us to examine a way forward 
for the game."
 