
The Leeds chief executive Gary Hetherington has been charged by the Rugby 
Football League with improper conduct.

The 57-year-old Hetherington, who is widely regarded as the most innovative 
and successful administrator in the game, will face an independent tribunal on 
Wednesday 1 October over comments he made about the RFL’s investigation into 
homophobic commentsalleged to have been made by the Leeds full-back Zak Hardaker
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/16/zak-hardaker-no-charges-alleged-homophobic-comments>
.

“Leeds Rhinos chief executive Gary Hetherington has been charged with improper 
conduct for questioning the motivation and integrity of an RFL investigation 
into an incident in his club’s First Utility Super League fixture against St 
Helens, played on Friday 29 August,” theRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> said.

“Mr Hetherington is charged with a breach of operational rules ... by engaging 
in conduct which is prejudicial to the interests of the game.”

Hetherington, a former player with Castleford, Leeds, York and Huddersfield, 
accused the governing body of carrying out a witch-hunt against Hardaker and 
claimed it was using the services of a lip-reader in an attempt to prove the 
case.

“We are concerned there appears to be a witch-hunt by the RFL towards Zak 
Hardaker and we are calling for an external investigation into the issues 
surrounding the investigation,” Hetherington said in a statement at the time.

The RFL announced last week it was dropping the investigation due to 
insufficient evidence but now Hetherington finds himself in the spotlight.

Hetherington, a former president of the RFL and founder of Sheffield Eagles in 
1984, has been at the helm of Leeds since 1996 and has overseen the most 
successful period in the club’s history, with six Grand Final victories in the 
last decade.

The Rhinos were also crowned world club champions three times in that period 
and last month ended a 15-year wait to get their hands on theChallenge Cup when 
they beat Castleford at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/23/catleford-leeds-challenge-cup-final-match-report>
.
 