
Leeds have made a formal approach to Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> to speak to their manager 
Darrell Clarke, the club has confirmed.

The current Leeds head coach Steve Evans is still waiting to hear if he will 
be handed a new contract after steering the club to 13th-placed finish in the 
Championship, but it appears owner Massimo Cellino is already looking for the 
Scot’s replacement.

Leeds supporters hire ‘for sale’ sign in bid to oust owner Massimo Cellino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/leeds-supporters-massimo-cellino-for-sale>
Rovers confirmed on Tuesday that an approach for Clarke, who has steered 
Rovers to back-to-back promotions, has now been made, although permission has 
yet to be granted because Leeds “have failed to meet the conditions set out” by 
the club.

“Bristol Rovers can confirm that they have received an approach from Leeds 
United to speak to Darrell Clarke regarding him taking over as manager at 
Elland Road,” read a statement 
<http://www.bristolrovers.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-on-darrell-clarke-3124067.aspx>
.

“As yet, the Yorkshire side have failed to meet the conditions set out by 
Rovers to enable any talks to take place and until that happens there is 
nothing else to report.

“We can also confirm that Rovers have offered Darrell a new and improved 
three-year contract to remain as Bristol Rovers manager. Bristol Rovers will 
not make any further comment until, and unless, there have been any further 
developments.”

Cellino has already met the MK Dons manager Karl Robinson, who is understood 
to have turned down the offer, while Oldham’s John Sheridan had been favourite 
to succeed Evans last week.

Evans was of the belief that keeping Leeds in the Championship would earn him 
an extended deal with his current contract set to expire in June, but has yet 
to receive any official word from Cellino.

Clarke, who began his managerial career at Salisbury City, has secured four 
promotions in five seasons, guiding Rovers from the Conference to League One in 
the last two.

Evans told the Yorkshire Evening Post on Monday that he was “hurting” at the 
lack of contact from the Leeds hierarchy but intended to return to work on 
Wednesday after an end-of-season break.

His situation is nothing new for Leeds managers under Cellino. The last two 
summers have seen Brian McDermott and Neil Redfearn put in almost identical 
positions and then leave after limited contact from the owner.

Such issues have contributed to large sections of the Leeds support turning on 
Cellino, who said a fortnight ago he wants to sell the club.

The 59-year-old has courted controversy throughout his two-year reign and is 
currently considering how to respond to aFootball Association charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/leeds-united-massimo-cellino-fa-charge-ross-mccormack>
 of allegedly breaking its agent regulations over the sale of Ross McCormack to 
Fulham in 2014.
 