
Lego <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> is to raise its prices in 
Britain by 5% next year as it becomes thelatest manufacturer to respond to the 
plunging pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/manufacturers-feel-falling-pound-is-bad-despite-increasing-their-exports>
 after the UK voted to leave the EU.

The Danish firm confirmed it had decided to to hike the prices of its 
playsets, bricks and mini-figures in the UK owing to “currency fluctuations”, 
while not ruling out further increases if sterling does not recover.

A letter shared on social media this week from a senior Lego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> executive to UK toy retailers 
revealed that prices would increase across the board from 1 January.

Signed by Lego UK and Ireland’s general manager and vice-president, Fiona 
Wright, it explained that the hike was a “direct result of the continued 
devaluing of the UK pound”. The letter went on to warn that the company might 
be forced to put up prices again in the “event of further negative trend”.

It means that a Star Wars Lego Death Star set, currently priced at £399, will 
go up by £20 next year, while a Doctor Who Lego will rise by £2.49 to £52.48.

A spokesperson for the company said: “As communicated to our retailers, The 
Lego Group will raise prices in the UK, due to currency fluctuations.”

Lego said that while it was raising the prices it charged retailers to stock 
its products, it was up to stores to decide if they passed on the increase to 
customers or absorbed it themselves. Its Star Wars Rebel U-Wing Fighter playset 
(which would go up to £73.50 next year) is among UK’sbest-selling toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/11/top-toys-christmas-2016-find-best-deals-in-store-online>
, according to Toy Retailers Association.

The latest manufacture to signal rising costs, Lego is privately owned and 
based in Billund, Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2014/aug/29/inside-the-lego-factory-in-billund-denmark-in-pictures>
. It is controlled by the founding Kristensen family, which has a 75% stake. 
The company recently confirmed the appointment of aBritish chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/06/lego-saviour-jrgen-vig-knudstorp-moves-on-to-build-global-brand>
 and opened its biggest flagship store in Leicester Square, London.

Since the EU vote in June, the pound has plummeted by about 16 % against the 
dollar and by 9% against the euro, forcing manufacturers to signal or introduce 
price rises. A string of major food brands have already sought increased prices 
from supermarkets as the fall in the pound has driven up the cost of importing 
ingredients and other essentials, such as packaging.

Economists expect this scenario to squeeze household budgets with inflation 
tipped to creep towards 3% over the next 12 months.







 