
Leicester City are hoping to start an extensive summer of transfer recruitment 
by arranging a deal with Deportivo La Coruña for their leading scorer, Lucas 
Pérez, that could see thePremier League champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
 break their transfer record and provide competition forJamie Vardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/09/leicester-city-jamie-vardy-premier-league-title>
 in attack.

Claudio Ranieri also confidently expects to bring in at least one more player 
from Spain with Leicester in advanced negotiations to finalise a free transfer 
for Luis Hernández, a central defender from Sporting Gijon, who will help 
provide cover for Wes Morgan and Robert Huth.

Leicester’s Jamie Vardy praises Ranieri’s foresight in title-winning run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/09/leicester-city-jamie-vardy-premier-league-title>
Ranieri wants to provide extra competition for places now Leicester also have 
the Champions League to prepare for and the manager plans to strengthen every 
other area of his team in case the club endure the kind of injury issues they 
avoided en route to becoming the most unlikely champions of the Premier League 
era.

Lucas, as he is commonly known, is regarded as having similar attributes to 
Vardy after a season when the Spaniard’s 17 league goals for Deportivo 
represents over a third of their entire total. He is 27, like Hernández, and 
equalled a 22-year club record this season when he emulated Bebeto’s 
achievement of having scored in seven successive games for the Galician club.

Apart from the forwards of Barcelona, Real Madrid and Atlético Madrid, only 
two other players have scored more in Spain this season. Lucas has never been 
capped by Spain but has been in the best form of his career and will not come 
cheaply bearing in mind his contract does not expire until 2019.

It would also be an emotional wrench for Lucas to leave Deportivo, his 
hometown team, after two seasons at the club. His career until that point had 
struggled to take off properly in Spain, culminating in him leaving Rayo 
Vallecano for the Ukrainian side Karpaty Lviv in 2011 and subsequently having a 
loan spell at Dynamo Kyiv before moving to PAOK Salonika and returning to La 
Coruña, initially on loan.

His first season back in Spain featured six goals in 21 games, including one 
of the goals in a 2-2 draw against Barcelona that saved his team from 
relegation, whereas he has been more prolific in his second campaign, scoring 
19 times from 38 games, including another goal at the Camp Nou.

Leicester have been enticed by his one-in-two goals record and it will not 
faze them unduly if it means they have to exceed the £9m spent on making the 
Croatian Andrej Kramaric, nowon loan at 1899 Hoffenheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/20/leicester-city-andrej-kramaric-hoffenheim-loan>
, their record signing from Rijeka in January last year.
 