
In rugby league’s wheel of emotional fortune, there is no surer bet than a 
good Sunday at Leichhardt. And while a line about “sure bets” may be a little 
close to the bone for some right now, the betting analogy is apt. TheWests 
Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> carry the burden of 
expectation heavier than most, and so of course, in the most romantic rugby 
league setting available, they capitulated badly in front of their fans on 
Sunday. Even so, it was a great day out.

A few weeks ago, NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> CEO Todd 
Greenberg appeared on Sydney’s cult league radio show, Fire Up!. His unrivalled 
penchant for bald rhetoric reached its zenith on air when he bombastically 
declared that rugby league was, above all else, “in the entertainment business, 
baby!”


Tigers' finals hopes die as Canberra underline NRL premiership credentials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/tigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials>
If rugby league is in the entertainment business, then where does Leichhardt 
Oval fit? For a game still not yet sure of its identity after the deep wounds 
inflicted by Super League, the rustic allure and suburban aesthetic is either 
novel or necessary, depending on whom you ask.

Leichhardt Oval: is it community theatre, off-Broadway, or the headline act?

Whatever your stance, the ground stands as one of the last remaining vestiges 
of 20th century Sydney rugby league. To enter it is not so much a trip back in 
time as a gateway to what league could be: local, distinctive, familial. It was 
in full swing on Sunday. Sold out before matchday, punters sensed something 
momentous in the air. The Tigers had negotiated the late season bend and found 
themselves an outside lane to the semis.

History may record it differently, but at 1.50pm yesterday, Leichhardt Oval 
was not heaving because of Robbie Farah. Farah became the story because the 
Tigers got belted. No, Leichhardt was heaving because the local team stood a 
hitherto unlikely, but now legitimate, chance of making the semi-finals. It was 
also packed because people adore the ground, the scene and everything about it.

 What is Leichhardt Oval about? The hill (which must always be referred to as 
“sun-drenched”), the dubious PA, the cries of “hot-doggy-hot-dog” make for 
predictable copy, but Leichhardt carries a significance that transcends the 
rectangle in what many argue is actually in Lilyfield, not Leichhardt itself. 
In 2016, going to Leichhardt is the closest thing one gets to the experience of 
pre-Super League footy. While some may need reminding that century was nearly 
20 years ago, for many it’s where the game’s heart still resides. And whether 
that’s right or wrong, opportunities to bask in it are few.

So you drink it in while you can. You’re close enough to breathe the freshly 
cut grass as soon as you enter, before being hit by players’ Dencorub as you 
walk purposefully past the changerooms to the always-alarmingly long queue for 
a beer. The seasoned Leichhardt campaigner also notices the whiff of heavy, 
stale oil that should’ve been changed a couple of hundred schnitzels ago. That, 
and the smell of dashed hopes and personal vendettas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fleichhardt-oval-community-theatre-off-broadway-or-nrl-headline-act%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d80e361bdc41afa88f68720bb76834768311468%2F0_0_4149_2766%2F4149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leichhardt%20Oval%3A%20community%20theatre%2C%20off-Broadway%2C%20or%20NRL%20headline%20act%3F%20%7C%20Sam%20Perry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fleichhardt-oval-community-theatre-off-broadway-or-nrl-headline-act%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leichhardt%20Oval%3A%20community%20theatre%2C%20off-Broadway%2C%20or%20NRL%20headline%20act%3F%20%7C%20Sam%20Perry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fleichhardt-oval-community-theatre-off-broadway-or-nrl-headline-act%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d80e361bdc41afa88f68720bb76834768311468%2F0_0_4149_2766%2F4149.jpg>
 Robbie Farrah sat on the scoreboard at Leichhardt after bidding farewell to 
fans on a half-time lap of honour. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
On good days the hill is supposed to act as a single entity, heaving and 
willing the home side on to victory. It may have been full yesterday, but its 
component parts didn’t gel. The different shades of orange retro jerseys – from 
1960s yellow through to modern burnt orange – clashed when usually they 
complement. With credit to the travelling fans or 90s bandwagoners, flecks of 
green broke the normally ubiquitous gold throughout the ground. Raiders, fans 
and players alike, seemed to be everywhere, and most who took a moment to watch 
the game itself would have walked away with a view of what a clinical 
competition contender actually looks like.

No sport does low-rent pomp quite like rugby league, and so it was yesterday. 
Cheerleaders who look far younger than you ever remember, singers who wouldn’t 
sound out of place on a Sunday evening at your local, and Farah’s farewell. His 
half-time lap was inversely proportionate to namesake Mo’s recent gold in the 
Olympic 5000m – Mo was quick, Robbie was the opposite.

What Mo wouldn’t give for Robbie’s publicity machine though, who delivered 
Farah photographic immortality with an image of a solitary, reflective Farah 
perched on the scoreboard, skulling a beer. The presumably spontaneous moment 
of Farah in a suit drinking beer on a scoreboard had the effect of capturing 
the loneliness of a local legend scorned. It’s a provocative one, leaving many 
wondering not only how this stalwart could be treated so poorly, but also who 
gave the directive to paint “#YNWA” and what does Farah’s Premier League team 
have to do with his farewell from the club? Hardened Tigers will feel rightly 
aggrieved at the whole sorry spectacle of the Taylor-Farah feud, but there’s 
rarely been a more ostentatious and contrived display of self-pity played out 
in full view of the rugby league community. Even so, he had a great career with 
the Tigers, fully worthy of commemoration.

And you had to be there to see it, warts and all. Even though a 2pm kick-off 
seems too early (I’d like to have lunch) and a 4pm kick-off too late (the game 
starts in the day and ends in the night), there was, in the end, something 
fitting about the inaccessibility of this game on TV. Even though it was sold 
out, it wasn’t the TV game, so unless you had Fox you had to go to be a part of 
it.

The game is a fully fledged TV show these days; the match itself requiring a 
live audience in the way X-Factor might too. While we may be only years away 
from an “Applause” sign after a correct bunker decision, very occasionally the 
game delivers things only worth experiencing live, even if you do lose by 42 
points.
 