
Thousands of patients could be put at serious risk of life-threatening or 
life-changing health problems as they wait several weeks to see family doctors, 
a leading GP has warned.

Surgeries have been struggling to keep waiting times down during the busy 
winter period, with some patients waiting two or three weeks to seeGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> for non-urgent matters, such as 
suspect lumps or bleeding problems, the chair of the Royal College of General 
Practitioners (RCGP) said.

Dr Helen Stokes-Lampard said waiting times could rise to three or four weeks 
and such delays may cause non-urgent conditions to become acute problems.

Life of a GP: 'We are crumbling under the pressures of workload'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/08/life-of-a-gp-we-are-crumbling-under-the-pressures-of-workload>
Stokes-Lampard raised particular concerns over the tens of thousands of people 
with chronic and long-term health conditions, such as heart problems and 
diabetes, who may be neglected becauseGPs had to “firefight” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/23/nine-in-10-gps-fear-missing-symptoms-workload-survey>
 patients with urgent issues. The consequences for people with such conditions 
could be “very serious indeed”, she added.

The senior GP, based in Lichfield, Staffordshire, said she was “profoundly 
concerned” abouthow general practice would cope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/08/life-of-a-gp-we-are-crumbling-under-the-pressures-of-workload>
 over winter when there is higher demand for NHS services.

Although seasonal woes have been a longstanding problem in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, Stokes-Lampard said attention had 
been focused on the impact on hospital care, when every peak in workload in A&E 
departments was magnified at GP surgeries, which were “already skating on thin 
ice”.

“If you’ve got to deal with people who are acutely sick on the day, because 
people need help, then chronic disease management will disappear,” she said.

Asked if patients with non-urgent needs would be forced to wait weeks to see 
their GP, she said: “Absolutely. If it’s already taking some patients two to 
three weeks to get in to see a GP for the non-urgent stuff, then by the time 
three to four weeks has passed, the non-urgent stuff may be becoming urgent.

“With lumps or bleeding problems or things that could be signs of serious 
disease, my profound concern is that people will delay seeking help for things 
that could potentially be life-threatening or life-changing if they are not 
tackled swiftly. Extended waiting times pose a serious risk because of all 
those unintended consequences.

“If we rein back on all that preventative care and all that chronic disease 
management because we are too busy firefighting the urgent stuff, the knock-on 
consequences could take years to manifest, but they will be very serious 
indeed. And that would be a tragedy.”

The shadow health minister, Julie Cooper, said the situation was extremely 
worrying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/03/more-than-half-of-gps-say-the-quality-of-their-service-has-deteriorated>
 and “the government needs to wake up to the fact that there is a full-scale 
crisis in the NHS at every level”.

“We have heard a lot about the shortage of beds and waiting times in accident 
and emergency departments, but there has been little acknowledgement of the 
pressures facing GP surgeries,” she said.

“The truth is that they are overwhelmed by ever increasing demand. Add to this 
a chronic shortage of GPs and a crisis in recruitment, and the result is a 
service that is at breaking point.”


An NHS England spokesman said: “Over the Christmas and new year period, the 
top priority has to be medical emergencies, but the RCGP are right to remind 
everyone of what they describe as the ‘most phenomenal success story of the 
NHS’ – every day tens of thousands of people do not die who would have died 20 
to 30 years ago, because we are quietly saving them from having heart attacks, 
strokes and complications of diabetes.

“That’s why GP services are on track to receive an extra £2.4bn in real terms 
investment by 2020 to build on this track record of success and expand access 
to convenient appointments throughout the week.”
 