
Even in this eyebrow-raising summer of exorbitant spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/crazy-transfer-fee-gonzalo-higuain-theatre-absurd-football>
, the £37m spent by Manchester City on a 20-year-old with four international 
caps, one full season of senior football and zero trophies to his name does not 
rest entirely easily. Then again, Leroy Sané is no ordinary player.

Manchester City sign Leroy Sané from Schalke for £37m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/manchester-city-sign-leroy-sane-schalke>
When Pep Guardiola took over from Manuel Pellegrini and evaluated the squad he 
inherited, the Catalan may have noticed substantially bigger holes to plug – 
strengthening the defence perhaps, or adding weight to an at times flimsy 
centre midfield. City, on paper, look well stocked in the attacking midfield 
role Sané has thus far occupied but the manager was absolutely certain he would 
target a player who had been thesubject of interest from the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/31/manchester-city-schalke-leroy-sane>
 for some time. The Germany international would fit his masterplan.

So City engaged in a protracted game of hardball with Schalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke>, who held a strong hand aided by 
their best player being under contract until the end of the 2018-19 season. The 
German side’s decision to tie him to an extension twice in three months last 
season in retrospect looks shrewd.

Bargaining was inevitable, though, and considering how much larger the 
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> club’s 
asking price was, the initial fee paid by City almost seems a bargain. Various 
add-ons could take the package above £40m.

It will take some time to appraise whether Sané is worth it. He remains a 
rough diamond in need of some polishing. But as we have come to learn from 
Guardiola’s time at both Barcelona and Bayern Munich, there are few things the 
manager relishes more than nurturing talent.

In Gelsenkirchen Sané was a shining star in little more than a muddle of 
mundanity, the leading light in a distinctly ordinary team comfortably beaten 
by Shakhtar Donetsk in the first knockout round of the Europa League and who 
finished 36 points behind Guardiola’s Bayern in the Bundesliga last season.

Certainly their fixtures against Bayern enforced the favourable impression 
held by Guardiola. Sané provided an assist for Max Meyer in the first meeting – 
a goal that put Schalke ahead until they were overpowered 3-1 – and in the 
reverse fixture he looked the most likely in blue to cause havoc in a 3-0 loss. 
“Leroy is a huge talent,” Guardiola said while still in Bavaria. “I can only 
congratulate Germany on a talent like him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fleroy-sane-manchester-city-schalke-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d353ca6c45c6f294e52a4e9ce773e580b9f38ba%2F67_40_2734_1641%2F2734.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leroy%20San%C3%A9%3A%20a%20rough%20diamond%20who%20could%20be%20a%20Manchester%20City%20bargain%20at%20%C2%A337m%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fleroy-sane-manchester-city-schalke-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leroy%20San%C3%A9%3A%20a%20rough%20diamond%20who%20could%20be%20a%20Manchester%20City%20bargain%20at%20%C2%A337m%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fleroy-sane-manchester-city-schalke-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d353ca6c45c6f294e52a4e9ce773e580b9f38ba%2F67_40_2734_1641%2F2734.jpg>
 Leroy Sané in action for Schalke last year at Real Madrid, where he scored a 
stunning goal and played a part in another. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty 
Images 
His flair and ability were evident from the beginning. In Schalke’s 112-year 
history there may not have been a more startling first appearance in Europe 
than Sané’s at the Santiago Bernabéu of all places in March 2015. With Schalke 
trailing 3-1 on aggregate to Real Madrid inthe second leg of a Champions League 
last-16 tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/10/real-madrid-schalke-champions-league-match-report>
, Roberto Di Matteo, who would resign three months later, replaced the injured 
Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting with Sané less than half an hour in.

The tie appeared out of reach and Real looked comfortable. But they had not 
planned for the voracious hunger of a teenage substitute. Sané injected a fresh 
intensity and made the match 3-3 on the night, 5-3 on aggregate, thanks to a 
stunning curled finish from 20 yards before playing an important role in the 
buildup to Klaas-Jan Huntelaar’s second of the evening.

Schalke still needed one more goal to go through, though, and Sané almost 
produced it, only to be denied by Iker Casillas. Real progressed but the seed 
had been planted and he soon established a starting berth, scoring in the 
Bundesliga against Hertha Berlin the following weekend.

With such supreme athleticism, it is no surprise to learn Sané is also the 
heir to rich sporting stock. His distinguished father, Souleyman, played 55 
times for Senegal as a rapid striker, and his mother, Regina Weber, won a 
bronze medal in the 1984 Olympics, becoming the only German to secure a 
gymnastics medal in the history of the Games. Both his brothers are talented 
footballers too but it was evident from an early age that Leroy was special.

Heralded by some in Germany as the principal figure of their next generation, 
which is quite a feat considering the depth of talent at the country’s 
disposal, every coach he has worked it with is unequivocal in terms of his 
ability.

There is versatility, which Guardiola will utilise in time. Deployed mostly on 
the right at Schalke, allowing him to cut in on his stronger left foot, he also 
played sporadically on the opposite wing and in a more central role. Sané’s 
willingness to track back will no doubt have been noted by the manager too, 
making him ideally suited to the high-energy pressing style that not every 
player has the aptitude to carry out.

As Joachim Löw said after calling Sané into the Germany squad for the first 
time this year: “We see his great potential.” Löw gave him just over 10 minutes 
at Euro 2016, as a substitute in the semi-final against France. The challenge 
now is for Guardiola to help a rare and prodigious talent to fulfil it. Either 
way it will be fascinating to observe his development.
 