
Mark Zuckerberg has taped up his webcam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/22/mark-zuckerberg-tape-webcam-microphone-facebook>
. A photo he posted online yesterday, ostensibly to demonstrate his happiness 
at Instagram’s user growth, shows that he has placed a small square of masking 
tape over his laptop’s camera. This presumably shows that he is nervous about 
hackers gaining control of the webcam and exposing all his secrets. And since
Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> is smarter 
than you, it probably means that you should tape up yours as well.

But Zuckerberg is not the only tech CEO with odd habits that you should 
replicate in the pursuit of unstoppable success. Here’s what else you should do 
if you really want to make it.

Unplug

Once a year, Bill Gates <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> 
embarks on something called a ThinkWeek, where hedisconnects from the internet 
and moves into a cabin in the woods 
<http://www.joe.ie/start-ups/6-top-entrepreneurial-tips-from-multi-billionaire-bill-gates/457684>
. Free of distraction, he can read a year’s worth of books and strategise for 
the months to come in a state of ultimate productivity. Anyone hoping to 
cheaply ape Gates’s method of being stranded in the middle of nowhere for 
extended periods of time without any form of internet connection is advised to 
buy a Virgin train ticket to Manchester.

Reduce your choices

Anna Akbari, who calls herself an “innovation strategist”, eats the same thing 
for breakfast and lunch every day, so that she can focus all her 
decision-making energy on the most important subjects.Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/10/obama-zuckerberg-us-president-facebook-founder>
 (grey T-shirts) and Barack Obama (blue suits) adopt a similar strategy by 
paring down their wardrobes to the absolute basics. The message is clear: the 
way ahead is to only own one pair of pants and eat chips three times a day.

Really reduce your choices

Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/steve-jobs-apple-car-project-titan-jonathan-ive>
 was a notoriously picky eater, throwing himself into fad after fad that saw 
him eat only one type of food for weeks on end. At one point, Jobs reportedly 
ate so many carrots – and only carrots – in such a short space of time that his 
skin turned orange. This might sound like extreme behaviour, but Jobs was Jobs 
and you’re a loser reading a listicle on the internet. Go to a greengrocer 
immediately and rectify this.

Only buy two pizzas

Amazon CEO and notorious skinflint Jeff Bezos tries to make meetings as 
productive as possible by employing a“two-pizza rule” 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/jeff-bezos-two-pizza-rule-for-productive-meetings-2013-10?IR=T>
. This rule states that the ideal team size is one that can be fed with two 
pizzas. This is extremely woolly – it doesn’t say how big the pizza should be, 
or whether sides are included – but the message seems to be that you should 
either make friends with one hungry genius or several hundred 
lactose-intolerant coeliacs of average intelligence.

Shower

This gold nugget came from Elon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/05/elon-musk-we-need-a-revolt-against-the-fossil-fuel-industry>
 in a Reddit AMA last year. When asked “What daily habit do you believe has the 
largest positive impact on your life?” he replied: “Showering. 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/elon-musk-most-important-daily-habit-2015-1?r=US&IR=T>
” This could be because the time he spends alone in the shower each day makes 
him more receptive to inspiration. Or it could be because he naturally emits 
such a hideous stench that nobody would work with him otherwise. Either way, if 
you want to be as successful as Musk, wash sometimes.

Make an entire room out of gold

Yoshiro Nakamatsu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2014/apr/07/picture-this-inventive-failures>
 invented the floppy disk. Why? Because he spends all hisdowntime relaxing in a 
room tiled with 24-carat gold 
<https://www.virgin.com/entrepreneur/better-ideas-with-dr-nakamats>. The gold, 
he says, “blocks out radio waves and television signals that are harmful to 
imagination”. This sounds like the ravings of a lunatic, but remember he 
invented the floppy disk. What have you ever invented? Nothing. And you never 
will until you start living like Donald Trump’s wet dream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78f439fe34dde4fe1d98eebea5813691824be4d%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20from%20the%20tech%20elite%3A%20eat%20carrots%2C%20shower%20more%20and%20tape%20up%20your%20webcam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons%20from%20the%20tech%20elite%3A%20eat%20carrots%2C%20shower%20more%20and%20tape%20up%20your%20webcam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78f439fe34dde4fe1d98eebea5813691824be4d%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Have a two-pizza rule like Jeff Bezos and go offline for a week like Bill 
Gates. Illustration: Guardian 
Set personal goals

As well as taping up his laptop, Zuckerberg has achieved success by setting 
himself a new personal challenge every year. Whether it’s learning Mandarin or 
eating only meat that he has killed himself, Zuckerberg’s challenges keep his 
mind in a state of constant pliancy, which ensures that he will never lapse 
into complacency. Still, it is important to remember that his goal for 2009 was 
just to wear ties a lot, because even billionaire tech geniuses are allowed to 
half-arse it sometimes.

Keep a weird notebook

Your brain has two sides; one that favours logic and systems, and one that 
favours creativity. How best to keep these sides in a state of equilibrium? Be 
as literal as you possibly can.Nike CEO Mark Parker  
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303376904579135802125126572>always 
has a notebook with him. One side of the page is used for important 
brainstorming, the other for mindless doodles. Treat 50% of all the stationery 
you own as if you were a child, and enormous success will find you in the end.

Learn from unhappy customers

Gates again. He attributes much of his success to his willingness to listen to 
negative feedback. Stating that “Success is a lousy teacher”, Gates prides 
himself on the motto: “Your most unhappy customers are your greatest source of 
learning.” As the man who brought us theZune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/16/microsoft-ends-zune-music-streaming-service-apple>
, theMicrosoft Kin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/jun/30/microsoft-kills-kin-mobile>
, Windows Me, Windows Vista, Microsoft Bob and that bloody talking paperclip 
thing, Gates must be one of the most learned men in human history.

Be literal

Really, when you think about it, the tech industry is like a jousting match. 
You have to face down your competitors in the most violent way imaginable if 
you are to survive. Co-founder of Cisco SystemsSandy Lerner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2000/apr/20/onlinesupplement12> knows 
this only too well, to the extent that she has bred her own horses and bought 
her own Elizabethan costumes so she can literally joust people whenever she 
wants.

Own a terrible phone

Another of Zuckerberg’s tics is to force the worst phones imaginable on his 
engineers. He hands them old flip phones, low-end Android devices and junk that 
won’t connect to the internet, and makes them trial new Facebook apps on them. 
This is to help them understand what the Facebook user experience will be like 
for users such as those in rural India, or the ones who can’t afford 
cutting-edge technology, or anyone who has ever been on a Virgin train to 
Manchester.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e49307528171abb17be3d1d0fb55d9f153afeb%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20from%20the%20tech%20elite%3A%20eat%20carrots%2C%20shower%20more%20and%20tape%20up%20your%20webcam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons%20from%20the%20tech%20elite%3A%20eat%20carrots%2C%20shower%20more%20and%20tape%20up%20your%20webcam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbe-literal-shower-more-murder-elephants-how-to-become-a-tech-billionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e49307528171abb17be3d1d0fb55d9f153afeb%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sit in a gold-tiled room like Yoshiro Nakamatsu and have rubbish phones like 
Mark Zuckerberg. Illustration: Guardian 
Sleep less than everyone else

In the same AMA that revealed his important love of showering, Musk also 
disclosed that he sleeps an average of six hours a night. Since the medical 
recommendation for adults is between seven and eight hours, it is clear that 
Musk’s self-administered sleep deprivation is a key component of his ability to 
design and build self-landing rocketships. It also explains why all new parents 
are insanely productive idea-machines, often favourably compared to Tony Stark.

Stay underwater

Nakamatsu again. When he isn’t resting in the most garish room on Earth, 
Nakamatsu likes to stimulate his creative-inventive process by forcing himself 
underwater until he’s half a second away from drowning. He even has his own 
plexiglass board so that he can brainstorm ideas underwater. Don’t have a 
swimming pool? No matter! Ram your head down the toilet instead and, right on 
the brink of death, you too might invent something as cutting edge as a floppy 
disk.

Be Felicity Cloake <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/felicity-cloake>

Yahoo’s Marissa Mayer 
<http://www.businessinsider.in/From-fireworks-to-jousting-these-13-tech-executives-have-some-weird-and-awesome-hobbies/Marissa-Mayer-approaches-baking-cupcakes-in-the-same-way-she-approaches-releasing-products-Perfection-When-the-now-Yahoo-CEO-was-still-an-engineer-at-Google-she-wanted-to-come-up-with-the-perfect-cupcake-recipe-so-she-created-a-spreadsheet-of-ingredients-and-measurements-Then-in-true-Mayer-fashion-she-did-this-with-frosting-as-well-/slideshow/49001735.cms>
 once revealed that her go-to method of making cupcakes was to buy as many 
cookbooks as possible, recording all the various cupcake ingredients on to a 
spreadsheet, testing them all meticulously and then creating her own cupcake 
using the best aspects of each recipe. The same approach catapulted her to 
success whenever she launched a new product for Google. Since it’s how she 
compiles her recipes for the Guardian, it’s safe to assume that Felicity Cloake 
will also be a tech billionaire by Christmas.

Shoot elephants

Go out to Africa with a gun, kill a bunch of elephants and then photograph 
yourself feeding bits of dead elephant to Zimbabweans who are dressed from head 
to toe in your corporate logo. That’s whatBob Parsons of GoDaddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/09/godaddy-files-for-100m-ipo> 
did in 2011, and he’s worth $2bn. Are you worth $2bn? Of course you’re not, 
because you lack the cold black heart of Parsons.

Be unhappy and a bit of a douche

When a Quora user last year asked how they could become as successful as Elon 
Musk, Musk’s ex-wife Justine wrote an answer. “Extreme success results from an 
extreme personality and comes at the cost of many other things,” she wrote. “If 
you’re extreme, you must be what you are, which means that happiness is more or 
less beside the point.” Success always comes at a cost. You might be worth 
billions of dollars but, in a way, aren’t you richer for being a decent person? 
No, you’re right, you’re probably not.

Indulge your hobbies

Videogame designer Shigeru Miyamoto 
<http://www.pressthebuttons.com/2008/08/the-scandalous.html> has made millions 
by turning his hobbies into art. His love of exploring caves as a child helped 
him create The Legend of Zelda. Gardening helped him create Pikmin. Exercise 
helped him create Wii Fit, and his new pet helped him create Nintendogs. This 
is proof that you can easily exploit your personal interests for professional 
gain, and also why you can soon expect a videogame about a Mandarin-speaking 
animal murderer who wears a tie and tapes up his webcam from Mark Zuckerberg 
any day now.
 