
The question arising from Owen Jones’s article (How the Tories are victimising 
young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/tory-policy-young-people-britain-wellbeing>
, 12 January) has to be: is socialism choking itself to death on its own 
inherent contradictions? Has the past 50 years been a good period in history, 
or has it not? If it could be repeated, should it be repeated? If the parental 
generation has spent its children’s future, how does the next generation 
suppose it can avoid doing the same to its children?

Jones reports that rates of depression and anxiety among the young have 
increased by 70%; a third feel they will have a worse standard of living than 
their parents; 42% feel owning a home is an unrealistic prospect. If we compare 
the last 50 years with preceding periods of history, it is apparent that the 
last 50 years has been the aberration. The parental generation enjoyed a higher 
standard of living, not because it worked for it, but because it mortgaged 
(borrowed) from subsequent generations.

When socialists argue that a socialist government could renew the country with 
a different tax regime, they implicitly argue that the Tories haven’t done such 
a bad job of running the country. The evidence in the rest of Jones’s article 
suggests that failure is endemic in that class. Britain is poor because it has 
been running a trade deficit for 40-odd years.Austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/austerity> was the hangover from decades 
of overindulgence. Brexit is the tantrum that comes from the loss of 
self-worth. Unfortunately, youthful optimism is no substitute for gainful 
employment. We need to be more honest about the excreta we are sitting in.
Martin London
Henllan, Denbighshire

• John Harris’s recommendation of universal basic income as a key Labour 
policy is sensible (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/jeremy-corbyn-big-radical-ideas>
, 13 January). It is, as he says “a given that work will define a declining 
share of most of our lives”. In their thought-provoking 2015 book, Inventing 
the Future, Postcapitalism and a World Without Work, Nick Srnicek and Alex 
Williams argue that we should welcome that fact, even demand full automation, 
and, among other things, introduce UBI. Then, as Harris also says, tax 
avoidance is naturally an obvious target for Labour, though awkwardly a moving 
target: it is transnational and the avoiders move. Therefore one other policy 
Labour must promote more strongly is a land value tax. Land cannot be secreted 
away in treasure islands.
John Airs
Liverpool

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 