
When the robin was voted the UK’s national bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/10/robin-wins-vote-uk-national-bird-britain>
 last month, we chose to celebrate half of a broken relationship. Therobin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/07/robin-redbreast-my-friend> 
evolved to make use of wild boar, preying on the worms and insects exposed by 
their grubbing. It is to the boar what theoxpecker is to the Cape buffalo 
<http://fog.ccsf.cc.ca.us/~jmorlan/Tanzania/CapeBuffaloTanzania-198.htm>. But 
boar are mostly absent from the UK, so the robin’s survival depends on finding 
the next best thing: human gardeners. You and I are just fake pigs.

15 species that should be brought back to rewild Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/rewilding-britain-launches-with-the-aim-of-restoring-uks-lost-wildlife-and-habitats>
We are surrounded by such broken relationships, truncated natural processes, 
cauterised ecologies. In Britain we lack almost all large keystone species: 
ecological engineers that drive the fascinating dynamics which allow other 
lifeforms to flourish.Boar <http://www.britishwildboar.org.uk/>, beavers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
,lynx <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-32450051>, wolves, whales, large sharks, 
pelicans, sturgeon: all used to be abundant here; all but for a few small 
populations or rare visitors are missing.

The living systems that conservationists seek to protect in some parts of this 
country are a parody of the natural world, kept, through intensive management, 
insuspended animation 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2013/10/18/thinking-like-a-forest/>, like a collection 
in a museum. An ecosystem is not just a place. It is also a process. I believe 
their diminished state also restricts the scope of human life. We head for the 
hills to escape the order and control that sometimes seem to crush the breath 
out of us. When we get there, we discover that the same forces prevail. Even 
our national parks arelittle better than wet deserts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/02/lake-district-wildlife-desert-blame-wordsworth>
.

Our seas were once among the richest on Earth. A few centuries ago you could 
have watchedfin whales <http://www.worldwildlife.org/species/fin-whale> and 
sperm whales 
<http://animals.nationalgeographic.com/animals/mammals/sperm-whale/> hammering 
the herring within sight of the shore. Shoals of bluefin tuna thundered up the 
North Sea. Reefs of oysters and other sessile animals covered the seabed, over 
which giant cod, skate and halibut cruised. But today, industrial fishing rips 
up theliving fabric of all but 0.01% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2014/oct/24/ripping-up-the-sea-floor-on-behalf-of-royal-profits>
 of our territorial waters. To walk or dive in rich environments we must go 
abroad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181cf793d431c6729de5ef29e734ca9ed4958f1b%2F0_0_5315_3190%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181cf793d431c6729de5ef29e734ca9ed4958f1b%2F0_0_5315_3190%2F5315.jpg>
 ‘A few centuries ago, you could have watched fin whales and sperm whales 
hammering the herring within sight of the shore.’ Photograph: Reinhard 
Dirscherl/Visuals Unlimited/Corbis 
Though not, I hope, for long. On Wednesday a new organisation, Rewilding 
Britain <http://www.rewildingbritain.org.uk/>, was launched. (It was inspired by
my book Feral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/24/feral-searching-enchantment-monbiot-review>
 and I helped to found it, but I don’t have a position there). Its aim is to 
try to catalyse the mass restoration of the living world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/rewilding-britain-launches-with-the-aim-of-restoring-uks-lost-wildlife-and-habitats>
, bring trees back to bare hills, allow reefs to form once more on the seabed 
and to return to these shores the magnificent, entrancing animals of which we 
have so long been deprived. Above all it seeks to enhance and enrich the lives 
of the people of this nation. I hope that it might help to change the face of 
Britain.

Rewilding offers enchantment and delight in a world that often seems 
crushingly bleak

Already, local projects hint at what could be achieved. In the southern 
uplands of Scotland, theBorders Forest Trust 
<http://www.bordersforesttrust.org/> has bought 3,000 hectares of bare 
mountainside and planted hundreds of thousands of native trees. TheArran Seabed 
Trust <http://www.arrancoast.com/> in the Firth of Clyde managed, after 13 
years of campaigning, to persuade the government to exclude trawlers and 
scallop dredgers from one square mile of seabed. The result, in this tiny 
reserve, is an explosion of lobsters, crabs, scallops and fish. It’s now trying 
to extend the project to a larger area.

In Sussex, the Knepp Castle <http://www.knepp.co.uk/> estate gave up its 
unprofitable wheat farming, released a few cattle and pigs and let natural 
processes take over. Now it hosts some of Britain’s highest populations of 
nightingales,purple emperor butterflies 
<http://www.ukbutterflies.co.uk/species.php?vernacular_name=Purple%20Emperor> 
and turtle doves. Partly through ecotourism, accommodation and selling 
high-grade meat, it has become profitable. In south London, theWandle Trust 
<http://www.wandletrust.org/> has turned a mangled and polluted urban river 
back into a beautiful chalkstream, supporting kingfishers and wild trout. 
Wonderful as these projects are, until now they have lacked a national voice. 
Britain remains in a state of extreme depletion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F060d489a8d6093fd39200ce0daa3a14f592fa596%2F0_0_5250_3151%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F060d489a8d6093fd39200ce0daa3a14f592fa596%2F0_0_5250_3151%2F5250.jpg>
 ‘The Wandle Trust has turned a mangled and polluted urban river back into a 
beautiful chalkstream, supporting kingfishers and wild trout.’ Photograph: Mike 
Lane/Alamy 
Some people argue that we should not seek to re-establish missing species 
until we’ve protected existing wildlife. But nothing better protects our 
ecosystems than keystone species. Beaver damsprovide habitats for fish 
<http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/abs/10.1139/cjfas-2014-0105#.U86FrECNDCr>, 
invertebrates, amphibians andwaterbirds 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2001.tb03660.x/pdf>. In 
Ireland, resurgent pine martens appear to have pushed back the grey squirrel,
allowing red squirrels to recolonise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/30/how-to-eradicate-grey-squirrels-without-firing-a-shot-pine-martens>
. One study suggests that our woodland ecology cannot recover unlesshalf the 
country’s deer are culled every year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-21688447>. Lynx could do it for 
nothing. Functional ecosystems in which dynamic living processes prevail are 
likely to be more resistant to climate change than stagnant collections in 
virtual glass cases.

Over the past two years there has been a surge of enthusiasm for change. A 
poll in Scotland found that 60% support the reintroduction of beavers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-27201105>, with only 5% opposed. Over 
90% of respondents to a survey by the Lynx UK Trust 
<http://news.stv.tv/north/318594-public-backs-lynx-uk-trust-survey-to-introduce-cats-to-scotland/>
 supported a trial reintroduction. Researchers at the University of Cumbria 
digitally altered photographs of Borrowdale in the Lake District, adding or 
subtracting trees. Of the people who saw them,69% favoured the images  
<http://www.cumbria.ac.uk/AboutUs/News/Articles/201314/June/PR1383.aspx>with 
extra trees. A video extracted frommy TED talk 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/george_monbiot_for_more_wonder_rewild_the_world?language=en>
, about the relationship between wolves and other wildlife has beenwatched 18m 
times <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysa5OBhXz-Q>.

But the interests of local people must never be overruled. Rewilding must take 
place only with active consent. Already landowners are coming forward, 
proposing to rewild their own property. Community groups, such asCambrian 
Wildwood <http://www.cambrianwildwood.org/> in mid-Wales, are seeking to buy 
and restore surrounding land. What rewilding offers is a new set of options in 
places where traditional industries can no longer keep communities alive, where 
schools and shops and chapels and pubs are closing and young people are leaving 
the land to find work elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef9136ca6d18d34720737688903ac12bb18d777%2F0_130_5315_3190%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20make%20Britain%20wild%20again%20and%20find%20ourselves%20in%20nature%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbritain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef9136ca6d18d34720737688903ac12bb18d777%2F0_130_5315_3190%2F5315.jpg>
 ‘In the hills of southern Norway, the small income from farming is 
supplemented with eco-tourism, forest products, rough hunting, fishing, outdoor 
education, skiing and hiking.’ Photograph: Alamy 
In the hills of southern Norway, the return of trees has been accompanied by a 
diversification andenrichment of the local economy 
<http://www.cifalscotland.org/docs/DuncanHalley_Woodlands&Norwegians.pdf>. 
There, the small income from farming is supplemented with eco-tourism, forest 
products,rough hunting 
<http://basc.org.uk/game-and-gamekeeping/game-shooting-2/rough-shooting/>, 
fishing, outdoor education, skiing and hiking. The governments of Britain now 
claim to be willing to pay for the protection of soils and watersheds. These 
are likely to be more resilient sources of income than the current farm subsidy 
system upon which all hill farming in this country depends, whose gross 
injustice – transferring vast sums from the poor to the richsimply for owning 
land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/01/farm-subsidies-blatant-transfer-of-cash-to-rich>
 – is as unsustainable politically as it is ecologically.

Perhaps most importantly, rewilding offers hope. It offers the hope of 
recovery, of the enhancement of wonder and enchantment and delight in a world 
that often seems crushingly bleak. My involvement with rewilding, to my own 
amazement, has made me much happier and more optimistic than I was before. I 
feel an almost evangelical sense of excitement about the prospects for change. 
I want other people to experience it too.

15 species that should be brought back to rewild Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/rewilding-britain-launches-with-the-aim-of-restoring-uks-lost-wildlife-and-habitats>
In 2009, the rewilding pioneers Trees for Life <http://treesforlife.org.uk/> 
released some wild boar into an enclosure at Dundreggan, in the Scottish 
Highlands. Within 20 minutes, robins came down from the trees and started 
following them. Their ecological memory was intact. When I’ve accompanied 
children from deprived London boroughs to the woods and rock pools for the 
first time in their lives, I have seen something similar: animmediate, 
instinctive re-engagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/07/education-children-not-feral-enough>
, the restoration of a broken ecological relationship. Once we have richer wild 
places to explore, we won’t need much prompting to discover their enchantments.

•Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot <https://twitter.com/georgemonbiot>

• A fully referenced version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>

• When this article was first published George Monbiot was under an 
obligation, to a third party unrelated to the Guardian, to assist the charity 
Trees for Life. This note was added on 1 September 2016.

 