
Irial Mac Murchú knows how a minority language can help to win business: the 
former journalist’s television production company has grown from a one-man show 
in 1993 to become the largest in Ireland, employing the equivalent of 50 
full-time staff.

Nemeton TV <http://www.nemeton.ie/> may be located in the unlikely, if 
striking, setting of Mac Murchú’s native An Rinn in County Waterford, but the 
company is now an international player, transmitting to audiences all around 
the world.

Nemeton’s success in making Irish-language programmes – it provides channel 
TG4 with all its sports coverage and has justwon Ireland’s most prestigious 
marketing award <http://www.aimawards.ie/finalist/?award=2> – is a dynamic 
example of the business reach a minority language can achieve beyond its core 
market of speakers, in a commercial world dominated by English.

Beware unconscious bias that has you hiring 'mini-mes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/may/25/hiring-mini-mes-unconcious-bias-discriminate>
Mac Murchú says Nemeton was once known simply as a company producing in Irish 
for TG4 but then opted to leverage the language into a key element of its 
marketing strategy.

“We decided to make the language part of our USP [unique selling point], part 
of our distinctive image in the marketplace. We have found that the language 
... gives us something unique that gets us noticed.”

While English has become the indisputable global business language, the UK has 
been waking up to the business benefits of multilingualism: according to 
government figures, ashortage of language skills is costing the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/14/seven-language-learning-uk-multilinguilism>
 3.5% of GDP – that’s £48bn – every year.In Europe 
<http://www.cracking-the-language-barrier.eu/organisations/elen/>, 55 million 
people, 10% of the EU’s population, speak a regional, minority or endangered 
language.

In Ireland, concern is growing over the status of Irish and its decline within 
Gaeltacht – or Irish-speaking – enclaves. The language isspoken as a first 
language 
<http://www.gaeilge.ie/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Attitudes-towards-Irish-2015.pdf>
 [pdf] by only a small minority and Unesco has classified it asdefinitely 
endangered <http://www.unesco.org/languages-atlas/> – prompting the government 
to develop an ambitious20-year development strategy 
<http://www.ahg.gov.ie/app/uploads/2015/07/20-Year-Strategy-English-version.pdf>
 [pdf].

As attention on the language has increased, the case for using it in business 
has gained momentum. This draws on linguistic research into thesocioeconomic 
factors <http://www.mcser.org/journal/index.php/mjss/article/view/1267/1296> 
that encourage the use of one language over others, especially if this promises 
financial security ormobility 
<http://www.scilt.org.uk/portals/24/library/slr/issues/22/3_gayton_-_socioeconomic_status_ml.pdf>
 [pdf]. The OECD is among global bodies calling for abetter understanding 
<http://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/missing-entrepreneurs.htm> of barriers such as 
language faced by potential entrepreneurs.

Tom Trainor, chief executive of the Marketing Institute of Ireland 
<http://www.mii.ie>, has travelled across Europe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bPYdADwLYbQ> talking to entrepreneurs using 
languages as diverse as Welsh and Basque.

Differentiation is key in marketing, and using the Irish language can be a 
powerful way of standing out from the crowd
Tom Trainor, Marketing Institute of Ireland 
A key role played by a minority language, Trainor says, is as a brand 
differentiator offering a competitive edge in a crowded market.

He says: “Differentiation is key in marketing and using the Irish language can 
be a powerful way of standing out from the crowd, especially for small 
businesses.

“Irish firms can emphasise their origin and brand values through the use of 
Irish, aiming at either the home market or internationally, and the potential 
marketing benefits can extend to attracting new customers, increasing customer 
loyalty, harnessing goodwill at relatively low cost or enhancing their public 
relations efforts.”

Global brands might not have as much power as is often assumed: research on 
the manufacturing and traded services sector suggests Irish branding can also
promote customer loyalty and consumer awareness 
<http://www.udaras.ie/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Utilising-a-Minority-Language-to-Develop-Brand-Identity.pdf>
 [pdf].

While the wholly Irish-speaking community is a tiny sub-set of the market in 
Ireland, goodwill towards the language is reflected in official initiatives to 
support its use in business.


Foras na Gaeilge <http://www.gaeilge.ie>, the cross-border body that promotes 
Irish, has explored thevalue of the Irish language to business 
<http://www.udaras.ie/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Value-of-the-Irish-Language-to-the-Private-Sector.pdf>
 [pdf] and makes a robustcase for developing 
<http://www.gaeilge.ie/gno-means-business/case-irish-business/?lang=en> this. 
Údarás na Gaeltachta <http://www.udaras.ie/en>, the authority responsible for 
Gaeltacht areas, has compiled aBusiness in Irish 
<http://www.udaras.ie/media/pdf/Gno-le-Gaeilge1.pdf> guide [pdf] as part of its 
support to enterprises 
<http://www.udaras.ie/en/forbairt-fiontraiochta/tairiscint-an-udarais>. The 
marketing institute’s annual awards include a special Irish-languagecategory 
<http://www.aimawards.ie/award/2-gradam-gn%C3%B3-as-gaeilge/>. Local bodies 
such as Gaillimh le Gaeilge work toencourage the development of bilingual 
business <http://www.gleg.ie/using-irish-in-business/?lang=en>.





What's the secret to scaling up? Ask the experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/25/whats-secret-scaling-up-ask-the-experts-webchat>
Use of a minority language is particularly valuable in the food industry, 
allowing producers to highlight origin and quality.

Sorcha Sweeney, finance director of Gallaghers Bakery 
<http://gallaghersbakery.ie/> in Ardara, County Donegal, which has marketed 
products in Irish for a generation, says: “I see a lot of new entrants to the 
market and startups in the food sector launching things like jams and meat 
products highlighting the Irish language to get that ‘look’: it’s an Irish 
company, so the ingredients must be local.”

This has also been recognised in Wales, where a government taskforce argued in 
2014 that using the language could greatly boost trade 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-26294575>, especially among food producers, 
a strategy adopted by the award-winning Caws Cenarth Cheese in Carmarthenshire. 
The Welsh government says there is a strongbusiness case for use of the language
 <http://cymraeg.llyw.cymru/business/business/cymraeg-mewn-busnes/?lang=en> and 
offers companies support to do so through its Business Wales initiative.

Cornwall is also tapping into the potential of its language, as illustrated by 
the launch by Bodmin-based Kelly’s ice cream of thefirst-ever Cornish language 
TV ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/20/first-cornish-tv-ad-to-air-weeks-after-language-funding-is-axed>
 aired nationally in prime time. The 30-second TV ad, featuring an ice cream 
vendor speakingKernewek 
<https://www.cornwall.gov.uk/leisure-and-culture/cornish-language/> comes as 
the UK governmentcuts funding 
<http://www.itv.com/news/westcountry/update/2016-04-21/anger-as-government-cuts-all-funding-for-cornish-language/>
 to support the language.

Languages such as Irish may also enable business to target marketing at key 
socioeconomic groups: evidence suggests greater enthusiasm for the language 
amongprofessional and executive-level staff 
<http://www.mayococo.ie/en/Services/OifignaGaeilge/Publications/PDFFile,15645,en.pdf>
 [pdf].

And if sceptics in an overwhelmingly English-language market dismiss the 
business case for Irish as wishful thinking, they will be doing so in the face 
of hard evidence that it can be amultimillion-euro contributor to the economy 
<http://www.gleg.ie/wp-content/uploads/TAIGHDE_Luach_na_Gaeilge2009.pdf> [pdf]. 

Nemeton’s Mac Murchú says: “When you see brands like Tayto Crisps, which is 
huge in Ireland, Aer Lingus our biggest airline, RTÉ our biggest broadcaster 
and even the likes of Toyota doing TV ads in Irish to stand out from the herd, 
the case speaks for itself.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 