
As the rope hisses through the air at blurring speed, with his feet skipping 
beneath him, it looks as if tears are running down Liam Williams’s face. His 
wet cheeks shine under the hot lights and his bandaged hands switch sides so 
that the rope makes fresh loops and twirls. He increases the pace of his 
skipping and salty drops splatter the canvas. Williams, of course, is sweating 
rather than crying amid the addictive intensity and heartbreak of boxing.

Gary Lockett: seeing Nick Blackwell on life-support will haunt me forever | 
Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/gary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr>
Last Monday night, wearing an inky black tuxedo, the 24-year-old walked shyly 
onstage at the Savoy Hotel to collect his awardas the Young British Boxer of 
the Year 
<http://www.britishboxers.co.uk/2016/09/liam-williams-named-as-best-young-boxer-of-the-year-by-the-boxing-writers-club>
. It was another acknowledgement of his rising status as the unbeaten British 
and Commonwealth light-middleweight champion – and offered sweet relief to 
Williamsand his trainer, Gary Lockett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/gary-lockett-interview-nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jr>
.

They have endured a brutal six months. Real tears have been shed and 
consciences examined. Williams’s close friend Nick Blackwellspent nine days in 
an induced coma <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwe 
ll-in-coma-title-fight-defeat-chris-eubank-jr>, his life in the balance, after 
a British middleweight title fight against Chris Eubank Jr on 26 March. 
Fortunately, Blackwell has made a remarkable recovery –but he will never box 
again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/nick-blackwell-boxing-chris-eubank-jr-no-hard-feelings>
.

A few weeks ago Williams, Blackwell and Lockett flew to Glasgow to support 
their friend and stablemate Dale Evans – who won a fierce battle against the 
unbeaten welterweight Mike Towell. Twenty-four hours later, on the night of 30 
September,Towell died from his injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/scottish-boxer-mike-towell-dies-after-bout>
.

Williams had been in the corner for both bouts, acting as a second to his 
friends. The Welshman is a warm man, at least outside the ring, and he has been 
affected profoundly. His commitment to boxing has been tested – but it 
remains intact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d89d3f6fb16268f3f32bab27f0f75b37c1931c%2F0_0_5136_3396%2F5136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d89d3f6fb16268f3f32bab27f0f75b37c1931c%2F0_0_5136_3396%2F5136.jpg>
 Liam Williams: ‘There is more to life than boxing – as much as we all love 
it.’ Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
On a Thursday morning in Cardiff, Williams smacks precise combinations into 
the pads held by Lockett as the fighter stalks his trainer. In an empty gym, 
the force of Williams’s punches is most evident when he hits the heavy black 
bags dangling from the rafters. Standing close to Williams, listening to the 
crack of his punching and seeing the big bag sag on its chain, it is easy to 
understand how a professional boxer’s fists can cause fatal damage.

After unwrapping his hands, Williams is soaked in sweat. He smiles as he 
remembers his perspiration at the Savoy. “It was nerve-racking and harder than 
fighting. I would get in the ring before doing that again. There were lots of 
big names there and I felt nervous when my name was called and everyone was on 
their feet clapping. I made a little speech but kept it short and sweet.”

Nick Blackwell retires from boxing but tells Chris Eubank Jr ‘no hard feelings’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/nick-blackwell-boxing-chris-eubank-jr-no-hard-feelings>
Their memories of everything that happened to Blackwell and Towell remain raw. 
We meetthe day before Towell’s funeral in Dundee 
<http://www.itv.com/news/wales/2016-10-14/welsh-boxer-dale-evans-attends-funeral-of-opponent-mike-towell-in-dundee/>
 last Friday and Williams expresses compassion for the family – and concern for 
Evans, who flew to Scotland with Blackwell. Evans broke down at the funeral and
was comforted by Towell’s grieving family 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/sport/boxing/emotional-moment-distraught-welsh-boxer-12025723>
.

“It’s unusual for one terrible incident like this to happen in your career,” 
Williams says. “But twice – and with the second happening six months later? It 
was horrible to see what happened to Mike – and Nick is my close mate. It 
really got to me.”

Blackwell’s last fight, which Eubank dominated, was stopped in the 10th round 
when a grotesque swelling had formed over his left eye. After congratulating 
Eubank, his face etched in disappointment, Blackwell collapsed in Lockett’s 
arms. He was oxygenated quickly and rushed to hospital. Blackwell remained in 
an induced coma while doctors attempted to reduce a severe bleed on his brain.

Did Williams think he might lose his friend forever? “Definitely. When he was 
in a coma we didn’t have so much hope. We didn’t know what was going to happen. 
He could have come around and something was wrong with him. He could not have 
come back at all. It was very scary and we were heartbroken. But it was 
obviously a lot worse for Nick’s family.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7a8ca396c49b1c9fc370f30a31bfe2e682d1f3%2F0_0_4968_3168%2F4968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7a8ca396c49b1c9fc370f30a31bfe2e682d1f3%2F0_0_4968_3168%2F4968.jpg>
 Liam Williams trains at the Ufit gym in Cardiff. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for 
the Guardian 
How did Williams’s girlfriend feel about boxing during those bleak days? “Evie 
was good friends with Nick as well because we trained together. Nick was 
staying over in Cardiff and coming to visit – especially to see my daughter 
when she was born eight months ago. So Evie was devastated. We travelled to 
London a few times to visit him in hospital. The first time we walked in the 
room Evie couldn’t stay. She had to leave because Nick had tubes coming from 
everywhere. It was tough. I would sit at the bedside and talk to him. He was 
sleeping hard … but I talked to him and a couple of times Nick squeezed my 
hand. That gave me hope.”

Did Williams consider quitting boxing? “No. It was very sad but you know the 
risks when you step inside the ropes. I was supposed to fight a week later but 
Nav Mansouri pulled out and that was a relief. I could have ended up losing 
because my mind was on Nick.”

Blackwell remains close to everyone in the Cardiff gym and he often works out 
alongside his friends. The extent of Blackwell’s improvement is made clear by 
the fact he recently broke a gym record on one of the machines testing stamina. 
It seems as if Blackwell still loves boxing.

“Yeah, he really does,” Williams says. “I think if it was allowed Nick would 
love to get his licence back and fight again. Of course I wouldn’t want to see 
him fighting and Nick knows he could never do it. There is more to life than 
boxing – as much as we all love it. If I have any scares I wouldn’t think twice 
about stopping. My health is more important.”

When Blackwell joined Williams, Lockett and Evans in Glasgow for the Towell 
bout late last month, tragedy struck with terrible finality. It is not easy to 
relive the fight but, because he is so honest and open, Williams explains their 
tangled feelings. “At first we were looking forward to the trip but then it 
turned out to be devastating. These two guys were both known to be ferocious 
punchers. We expected a good fight.”

Evans was meant to box sensibly – but he knocked Towell down early in the 
fight and the war began. “After three rounds I thought Dale had lost it because 
Mike was coming on strong. It wasn’t looking good and me and Gary were 
thinking: ‘Dale’s not going to get through this.’ But they were both very 
tired. Dale’s not known as a good boxer but he started jabbing his head off. 
That was a sign Mike was in trouble.”

Dale Evans ‘heartbroken’ after death of opponent Mike Towell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/mike-towell-boxing-dale-evans-heartbroken>
A few hours later, after Towell had been carried on a stretcher from the ring, 
Lockett was told the shattering truth: “The kid’s in a bad way. He’s not going 
to make it.”

The trainer’s face scrunches up with hurt as he remembers having to break the 
news to a distraught Evans. Lockett looks up: “I knew what to expect after what 
happened to Nick. But I’m so proud of Dale and the compassion he has shown.”

Williams has decided that he will not work the corner again. “It plays on my 
mind. It upset me too much. But I will keep fighting. This is what I do. I also 
believe in my ability and I don’t think something like this would happen to me. 
I know nobody does but I have complete trust in Gary. If I was ever in big 
trouble I know Gary would look after me.”

Before he became such a promising boxer, Williams was a roofer in Rhondda. “I 
enjoyed being with good people but it was never great money. It was hard work 
in all sorts of weather but no one has it easy in Rhondda. People say it’s a 
tough place but for me it’s a very tight community. People there will tell you 
that, whatever I achieve, I’ve not changed.”

Williams “always loved a scrap” and, rather than being a slinky amateur, “I 
wanted to get stuck in. I was walking through people, throwing bombs. Gary put 
plenty of time into teaching me to box more. People say to Gary that I can 
really punch but he says: ‘Yeah, but you haven’t seen how well he can box.’ 
I’ve just never been in a fight where I’ve needed to go on the back foot and 
box. But in my next fight [his British title defenceagainst the undefeated 
Ahmet Patterson 
<http://www.boxnation.com/boxing-matches/liam-williams-v-ahmet-patterson/> in 
Cardiff on 26 November] you will see a very controlled performance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103399ffac82e21b2475b5ff70ef032217e0ea5d%2F0_0_4896_3120%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Williams%3A%20It%E2%80%99s%20unusual%20for%20one%20terrible%20incident%20to%20happen%20in%20your%20career.%20But%20twice%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fliam-williams-interview-terrible-incident-twice-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103399ffac82e21b2475b5ff70ef032217e0ea5d%2F0_0_4896_3120%2F4896.jpg>
 Liam Williams hopes to be offered a world title fight next year. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Williams is candid about suffering from nerves throughout his career. “I 
remember my first fight [in November 2011] really well. It was in the Aberdare 
sports centre. I fought Ryan Clark and he’d had [49] fights, so he could look 
after himself. He was in the changing room next door, which was a squash court, 
and he shouted over the top to me: ‘I’ve been in with the best, boy. I hope 
you’re ready, boy.’ I fronted it as if I didn’t care but deep down I was 
shitting myself. Any boxer who says he’s not nervous is lying.

“Once the fight started I won every round. I outboxed him and afterwards he 
reeled off the big names he’d fought and he said: ‘I think you’re the best.’ It 
does get easier but even when you’re stopping people you go in thinking: ‘What 
if I lose … what if I get knocked out?’ But as soon as the bell goes I’m always 
confident.”

Williams was tested most when, after an unsuccessful operation on his right 
hand in 2014, his career looked in jeopardy. “I went to see a consultant in 
Manchester and he said: ‘You’re done. Start looking for a new line of work.’ I 
was heartbroken for months.

“But Evie’s father helped me. He said: ‘I’ve been looking on the internet and 
there’s a guy who is supposed to be very good in Cardiff.’ He had operated on 
Joe Calzaghe.”

They felt I was good enough to help Kell Brook get ready for the biggest fight 
of his life. I held my own

Lockett’s father-in-law, a retired orthopaedic surgeon, arranged a 
consultation with the specialist. “I was excited again,” Williams says, “and 
the doctor said: ‘I am sure we can make a good go of it.’ I came through 
surgery and we’ve never looked back. I’ve had seven stoppages on the bounce and 
I’m looking to continue that.”

Williams was asked to help Kell Brook prepare for his impressive performance 
last monthagainst the imposing Gennady Golovkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/kell-brook-title-bid-ended-gennady-golovkin>
. “That was a shock to me – but they obviously felt I was good enough to help 
Kell get ready for the biggest fight of his life. I came out with lots of 
credit and held my own – if not even more than that. It told me I belong at top 
level – and I could be offered a world title fight next year.”

Lockett stresses the need for caution and Williams nods. “I’ll be guided by 
Gary. We’ve been through so much this year and there’s always danger in boxing. 
But I’m ready to move up.”

Williams’s training session ended an hour earlier and, while we have been 
talking, the sweat has dried and his skin has turned cold. The young fighter 
stands up. He keeps talking but, to get warm, his feet skip lightly on the 
spot. Williams snaps out a jab for fun, smiling and talking, looking once more 
like a fighter who finds so much life and hope in boxing.
 