
‘Not only had I never done any form of martial art in my entire life, but I 
couldn’t even do any exercise’

When I was 21, I lived in Hong Kong, having dropped out of university in 
London and basically run away. Somehow it worked: I was soon making a living 
working as an extra in Chinese soap operas, which were broadcast on the 
mainland but shot in Hong Kong, where it was easier to find white people to 
play roles such as “foreign woman standing at the back of a party”. I played 
her quite a lot.

Many backpackers tried it for a couple of weeks and then moved on, but I had a 
childhood background in drama and was keen, so the offers improved. They peaked 
when I got invited toJackie Chan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie-chan>
’s studios to audition for an unspecified part in his forthcoming filmHot War 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0181582/>. By this point, I really felt I was made 
of magic: I was just some girl from Yorkshire who couldn’t even handle uni – 
how on earth had any of this happened? So when I got there and filled in the 
form, which asked if I knew any martial arts, I wrote a big YES.

Then I sat and waited, reading all of Jackie Chan’s birthday cards from his 
mates, which were stapled to his office door. He was away, but the producers 
finally called me in for my screen test. I think I was videoed reading a few 
lines from a script. I’m not entirely sure, because all I really remember is 
the bit where they said, reading from my notes, that I could apparently do 
martial arts? “YES,” I repeated. Not only was this utterly untrue – I had never 
done any form of martial art in my entire life – but I couldn’t even do any 
exercise. I was the least sporty person you could imagine, entirely 
uncoordinated, and had also acquired a beer belly from enjoying the tropical 
expat lifestyle rather too much.

“Can you show us a high kick?” they asked. “YES!” I repeated, by now fully 
believing in angels, miracles and just the basic amazingness of me. I wouldn’t 
say that I fell over exactly, more that my attempt to thrust my leg into the 
air derailed the rest of my body and the floor seemed to shake a little as my 
arms flew up towards the heavens. I imagine that, for the panel of Chinese 
experts watching me, it was a little like watching an elephant pretend to be a 
bird. “Ah,” they said.

I did not get the part. Looking back, I’m not even embarrassed. It just felt 
so madly wonderful to be free.Sophie Heawood

‘He shot me a look of withering, friendship-destroying contempt. All my 
bullshit turned to ash’

The Argos catalogue said: “Snake Mountain. Skeletor’s stronghold. Talk into 
the wolf’s head and your voice changes into a scary voice of evil.” It should 
have said: “Snake Mountain. A plastic box that looks as if it once contained 
dildos. Talk into the cruddy, spring-operated box and your voice sounds exactly 
the goddamn same.” But I was five. I wanted it badly.

Matthew’s house was bigger than mine. His school jumper wasn’t handknitted, 
and he had more toys

Everyone else wanted Snake Mountain, too, but it was £40. Nobody’s parents 
could justify throwing that sort of money around. Matthew’s house was bigger 
than mine. His school jumper wasn’t handknitted, and he had more toys. One day, 
he told me he’d just bought Night Stalker, Skeletor’s gold robot horse. The 
seed of an inferiority complex kicked in for the very first time, and I did 
something stupid.

“Yeah, well, I just bought Snake Mountain,” I lied.

My regret was instant. Matthew wasn’t the type of kid who would easily forget 
this. He wanted to come to my house to see it. I tried putting him off, but it 
didn’t work. He went above my head, asking my mum if he could come for tea. She 
said yes, so I was screwed.

I pleaded with my parents to buy me Snake Mountain, but they wouldn’t budge. I 
racked my brain, thinking up ways to cobble together £40, but none came. 
Eventually, in a fit of abject, sweat-drenched desperation, a solution appeared 
like a ray of light from heaven.

The next day Matthew came over, brimming with excitement. With my heart in my 
mouth, I led him upstairs. I opened my bedroom door. And then…

“That’s not Snake Mountain.”

I was anticipating this reaction. He was right. It wasn’t Snake Mountain at 
all. It was a damp cardboard box on which I’d drawn a wonky face in Biro.

“Yes, it is,” I replied, determined to front it out. I cupped my hands around 
my mouth. “Listen to my scary voice. Rargh.”

Matthew shot me a look of withering, friendship-destroying contempt. All my 
bullshit turned to ash. This pitiful “my greatest toy is my imagination” shtick 
held no truck with him. He was furious.

“Don’t tell anyone,” I whispered.

As mortifying as this still is – to this day, I can’t look at Snake Mountain 
without feeling my stomach lurch – it did teach me some important lessons about 
life. It taught me that actions have consequences. It taught me that it’s 
always better to own up. And, most importantly, it taught me that I should have 
bought Snake Mountain and left it in its box. Those things go for hundreds of 
quid now.Stuart Heritage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48cd498be17e3737d2d80bf7c7845e99c6d4dbd3%2F156_273_3660_4575%2F3660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liar%2C%20liar%3A%20in%20a%20post-truth%20world%2C%20writers%20reveal%20their%20biggest%20fib&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liar%2C%20liar%3A%20in%20a%20post-truth%20world%2C%20writers%20reveal%20their%20biggest%20fib&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48cd498be17e3737d2d80bf7c7845e99c6d4dbd3%2F156_273_3660_4575%2F3660.jpg>
 Telling porkies: ‘My regret was instant.’ Photograph: Lol Keegan for the 
Guardian 
‘Where’s my salad, he asked. I told him it was still defrosting’

If there was some way of communicating to a bull that china is worth 
preserving, I’m sure it would have most of the motor skills required to tread 
carefully through that shop. I say this because, as a teenager, I was that bull 
– at least when it came to lying. I just didn’t know when to do it.

When I was 15, instead of asking my parents if I could “sleep over at a 
friend’s house”, as any normal teen would, I asked if I could stay with my 
19-year-old boyfriend for two nights. It was all about practicality, you see: 
we were driving to Oxford one day and Alton Towers the next, and driving to and 
from my parents’ house on top of all that would have been a pain. 
Unsurprisingly, they answered (and I’m paraphrasing), “No, 
15-year-old-daughter, you obviously may not stay at your much older boyfriend’s 
house.” I scoffed likeHarry Enfield’s Kevin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dLuEY6jN6gY>: “Ugh! What’s the problem? His 
parents aren’t even going to be there!”

They laughed, loudly. “You think we’re worried you’ll be putting his parents 
out?”

Relieved at my innocence, but amused by my stupidity, they laughed for roughly 
17 years.

I worked out the whole lying thing embarrassingly late. I was 17, and had 
started working Sundays as a waitress in crap pubs on the outskirts of Slough.

Early on, I got in trouble for telling an unnecessary truth. The first 
customer of the day had ordered a sandwich. When I brought it, he asked, 
“Where’s the salad?” I told him it was still defrosting.

During the dressing down that followed, I had an epiphany. When the truth will 
provoke a bad reaction, you can just... lie. It’s magic, essentially. In an 
establishment where lettuce and pre-sliced tomatoes needed thawing, and the 
chef morphed from “still drunk” to “monstrously hungover” in the first two 
hours of the day, lying became my shiny new toy.

For a while, I continued to report customer comments to the chef – “They say 
the bacon is undercooked/the cabbage is raw/the gravy is lumpier than a rice 
pudding” – even though the response was always, “Well, tell ’em to fuck off – 
it’s my fucking menu.” But eventually I would just stand in the kitchen for a 
count of 15 before going back to the table and giving my, “She says she’s 
really sorry…” speech. A grunt and a gruff acceptance usually followed. I had 
finally learned how to tiptoe through the china shop.Erica Buist

‘I was left unsupervised near a paper shredder, I told someone’

My forearms are striped with self-harm scars. These wounds were inflicted when 
I was much younger and fed up with everything. (I’m paraphrasing: I was 
clinically depressed, struggling to find the right medication, and in a lot of 
pain.) In those days, I wore long-sleeved shirts at all times, until it became 
unfeasible, or just absurd. You can’t go swimming in a shirt or play football 
in a cardigan. I am neither Thierry Henry nor Mr Darcy.

Years later, when I was either confident or bored or hot enough to start 
wearing short sleeves again, people began to notice the scars. If they 
understood, they would stiffen imperceptibly, the conversation becoming 
suddenly strained. But often they didn’t and asked about them. That’s when I 
started lying.

It’s just easier, I’d tell myself, watching relief flood their faces as I told 
them I owned a cat who scratched. (Animals offered a handy alibi for the 
wildness, and deepness, of some of the slashes.) Over time, though, my excuses 
grew more baroque. I referred darkly to an accident with a thresher, despite 
the fact the closest I’d ever got to harvesting cereals was bulk-buying Coco 
Pops.

I sometimes wonder why I responded this way, and what lies beneath a lie. 
Unacknowledged anger? Shame?

“I was left unsupervised near a paper shredder on work experience,” I told 
someone, without elaborating. As I got older and more frustrated with the 
question, the lies became preposterous: “My first job was training attack dogs 
for the police,” I’d tell people, looking them dead in the eye. Or, “I became 
entangled with a flotilla of jellyfish on a European holiday.”

I sometimes wonder why I responded this way, and what lies beneath a lie. 
Unacknowledged anger towards the people asking? An English sense of the 
indecorous? Shame? I think elements of all of them were present, but there was 
something else, too. As many politicians can tell you, it’s fun to lie. It felt 
creative. To dip a toe into an alternative history, write my own backstory, go 
one better than the squalid truth.

These days, I am stronger, with less need to lie. Telling the truth is 
uncomfortable, and can blow up in your face, but that’s the risk that makes any 
kind of connection precious. The scars on my arms have faded now, and blend 
better with my natural skin tone. I’m asked about them far less – which is 
ironic, because I’ve finally reached a point where I can talk about them 
honestly.Rhik Samadder
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4adffb39470e55ed2c1c282336c8ed5a12e729%2F101_269_3274_4092%2F3274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liar%2C%20liar%3A%20in%20a%20post-truth%20world%2C%20writers%20reveal%20their%20biggest%20fib&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liar%2C%20liar%3A%20in%20a%20post-truth%20world%2C%20writers%20reveal%20their%20biggest%20fib&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fliar-liar-post-truth-writers-reveal-biggest-fib%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4adffb39470e55ed2c1c282336c8ed5a12e729%2F101_269_3274_4092%2F3274.jpg>
 Thanks to Calum Franklin, executive head chef,Holborn Dining Room 
<http://www.holborndiningroom.com/>, London WC1, for the pork pies. Photograph: 
Lol Keegan for the Guardian 
‘I pretended to be a Dalek hosting a party at Wagamama’

On occasion, a lie is preferable to the truth. I don’t lie much now, but I 
have lied an inordinate amount to celebrities. It’s generally been more a 
fudging of the truth than a downright deceit, and to me has always felt morally 
sound because it was told in pursuit of another virtue (a salary). I don’t for 
a minute want to normalise lying – it leads to a decline in trust that creates 
cynicism, and worse. But, sometimes, needs must. Here are my professional lies

I lied to Jake Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal>

I was a teen, he was a teen star; I was a bit drunk, outside the theatre on my 
own, and he, fresh from starring in Kenneth Lonergan’sThis Is Our Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/mar/18/theatre.artsfeatures>, was 
hovering outside, waiting for his car. I walked over, shook his hand and 
discreetly passed over one of those boxes of matches with a space for your 
number. I told him I was from London (lie), 24 (lie) and would be happy to show 
him around. He smiled and said thank you (lie).

I lied to Tony Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/aug/13/guardianobituaries.media>

A music festival in Turin, Italy, in the mid-00s, where I lied repeatedly 
because I wanted to meet Factory Records founder Tony Wilson. First I lied to 
his manhandlers, a terrifying pair of stone dogs who guarded his DJ booth, then 
I lied to Tony in order to procure an interview. The lie – that I was a British 
journalist, not a student, in Turin to review music, and not for a holiday – 
worked. He did the interview, and then he died a couple of years later. I 
eventually sold the story posthumously. I’m not proud of this story.

I lied to Bob Hoskins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bob-hoskins>

It was 2007 and I told him I liked his film.

I lied to Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>

During a roundtable interview with multiple journalists, I asked Benedict 
whether he felt he could relate to Sherlock in any way. He paused and fixed his 
eyes on me: “I don’t know what you are insinuating,” he said, because I was, of 
course, insinuating he had Asperger’s. “Nothing,” I muttered and passed the mic 
on. I was then asked where I worked and I lied to my fellow journalists, 
muttering about a blog. If anyone had known I was there for the News Of The 
World, asking that sort of thing, there’s a strong chance I would have been 
lynched.

I pretended to be a Dalek’s publicist

Or, rather, I was paid to lie in the name of social commentary (to ring up 
restaurants pretending to be a celebrity publicist and make outlandish demands 
for my clients). I did this a lot, pretending to represent Tom Cruise, George 
Clooney and Grace Coddington’s hair. A career high was the time I pretended to 
be a publicist representing a Dalek who wanted to host a dinner at Wagamama and 
to check there was sufficient wheelchair access. Yes, they said, there was. I 
stopped this line of work when the lying became too easy, and when real 
celebrity demands began to outweigh even my creativity.Morwenna Ferrier

‘Some people are rude to cold callers, some are icily polite and some hang up 
straight away. I always chose to lie’

I’ve been a freelance writer for 25 years, and in all that time I’ve never not 
been working. That is the main lie I tell. When people ring or email me about 
work, I always act and speak as if I am sitting at my desk. Sometimes I am 
sitting at my desk, but I might just as easily be downstairs watchingHomes 
Under The Hammer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006v5kb>, or sitting on the 
top deck of a bus, or standing in a dusty field in France. That thing I said 
I’d have finished for you today? Yes, I’m working on that right now and it’s 
nearly done. I never say, “I’m on holiday and I have no idea what you’re 
talking about.”

'He’s not here,' I would say. I would sigh heavily, like a useless personal 
assistant

When I am actually working at my desk, I don’t want to talk to anyone. I’m 
busy. Some people are rude to cold callers, some are icily polite and some hang 
up straight away. I always chose to lie, boldly and without effect. Whenever my 
phone rang, I deployed my all-purpose office hours response.

“He’s not here,” I would say. If the person at the other end asked to leave a 
message, I would sigh heavily, like a useless personal assistant. “Yeah, fine,” 
I’d say, then pretend to write words on a pad. Sometimes it would turn out not 
to be a cold call at all, but an urgent inquiry about my lapsed house 
insurance. But once I started playing someone else, I had to carry on.

“And who am I speaking with?” said the voice at the other end one day. This 
was unexpected. A long silence followed.

“My name’s Ron,” I said.

“Ron,” said the other voice, with transparent disbelief.

“Yes,” I said. “R-o-n.”

“When do you expect him back, Ron?” said the voice.

“No idea,” I said. “He doesn’t tell me anything.”

“OK,” said the voice, exasperated. “Thanks for your help, Ron.” I couldn’t 
understand what was so unconvincing about my bad-tempered PA. He reminded me so 
much of me, back when I was an office temp.

Ron never passed on the message, and I later had to sack him, mostly because 
he required too much acting. But also because you would sack someone like Ron. 
No one who called back a week later would believe Ron still had a job. I 
haven’t answered my landline since.Tim Dowling

‘The only time I told a real whopper, I did it in style: on television, in 
front of millions’

I am a hopeless liar. In fact, I’m a compulsive truth-teller, to the point of 
self-destruction. The only time I can remember telling a real whopper, I did it 
in style: on television, in front of millions. It was, and remains, the low 
point of my career.

I was due to interview the documentary-maker Louis Theroux for the Guardian in 
2002 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/mar/04/broadcasting.comment>. He 
insisted we do it in his office. I thought that was unfair; after all, he likes 
to follow his subjects around, see them in action. But there was no budging him.

At the time, Theroux was making a TV show about the then-undisgraced celebrity 
publicist Max Clifford. Like many journalists, I knew Clifford a bit, having 
interviewed his clients over the years. I asked him if there was any way he 
could get Theroux and I together before our formal, office-based interview. A 
few days later, I got a message telling me to meet Clifford at Sainsbury’s in 
Weybridge in a couple of hours. That was it. I hoped this was to do with 
Theroux, but there was no other information. (This was typical Clifford: 
keeping his cards close to his chest, manipulating Theroux and me at the same 
time.)

I arrived at Sainsbury’s and spent half an hour self-consciously mooching 
around the aisles, then decided to leave before I got arrested for lurking with 
intent. But on my way out I walked into Louis Theroux, Max Clifford and a 
camera crew. Which is when everything went tits up.

“Simon Hattenstone!” Theroux exclaimed loudly. “What are you doing here?”

I hadn’t even anticipated this moment, when I would have to make something up. 
I burbled some incoherent nonsense about being there to interview Clifford, and 
suggested that now that we were all happily together, through pure serendipity, 
why didn’t we just carry on like a happy family; I could quietly observe 
Theroux observing Clifford.

Theroux wasn’t having any of it. “Oh come on,” he said, “you’re obviously here 
because Max told you I’d be here.” No, I insisted, my eyes flitting nervously 
from Clifford to Theroux and back again. “I’m here to see Max.”

“Do you often shop together?” he asked.

Yes, no, yes, I don’t know, I whimpered. Why didn’t I just tell the truth? 
Because I felt a perverse loyalty to Clifford, who had set this up for my 
benefit. Theroux, slicker than me, suggested that if I had business to discuss 
with Clifford, I should walk around with him as he shopped, then leave them to 
make their film.

So Clifford and I walked up and down the aisles. “Do you think we should level 
with him?” I asked. OK, begged.

“Nooooo,” Clifford said, with utter assurance. “You came up to do a piece on 
me, you’ve read about the Louis thing, you know I come here every week.”

Five minutes later, shopping completed, we returned to Theroux. “I don’t think 
you’ve been totally honest,” Theroux said to us.

“I have,” I said, blushing, aware of a huge camera eyeballing me and wanting 
to die.

“The thing is, Max left his mic on,” Theroux said, “and we could hear 
everything.”

Clifford groped inside his shirt, threw the mic on the floor and walked out, 
shouting, “You can all fuck off!” Theroux and his crew, panicked and thrilled, 
raced after him. I was left alone, humiliated in Weybridge.

For months after the documentary was broadcast, I was stopped on a regular 
basis. “Aren’t you the journalist who lied?” I was asked by a stranger on a 
train. People were surprisingly generous. They felt sorry for me, they said: I 
had been caught in a difficult situation, and it was obvious I’d wanted to tell 
the truth. Friends told my partner she was lucky to be with such a bad liar. 
And the Mirror got in touch to say they were so impressed by my “rabbit in the 
headlights impression” that they would like to offer me a job on their 
undercover investigations team. I think they were taking the piss.Simon 
Hattenstone

‘I announced to my classmates that my real family was in fact the A-Team’

Like most people, I grew up being told not to lie, and broke that rule when I 
was but a girl. As the daughter of immigrants, and someone who felt I was the 
wrong colour, culture and somehow born into the wrong family, I devised what I 
thought was an ingenious lie. I announced to my classmates that my real family 
was, in fact, the A-Team. Despite them pointing out that a small Asian woman 
called Nilu came to pick me up every day from school, I ploughed on. “That’s 
all a cover, you wallies, because of the Situation. My real father is Hannibal, 
but he’s on an international wanted list. Murdock is in a mental health 
institution and BA can’t get on a plane. So I’m having to stay with this family 
called the Hazarikas who live in Coatbridge for safety reasons. But I’ll be 
back with the gang soon.” It’s no wonder I ended up being a political spin 
doctor.

I have since become highly conscious of the value of truth in a profession 
that can treat it casually. When I got my first job, as a junior press officer 
at the ministry of agriculture, the director of communications, a very 
hard-drinking, well-connected, Westminster operator, took me aside and gave me 
the most important political advice of my career: “Never lie, even if your boss 
tells you to and you think you can get away with it. Don’t. It’s always the lie 
or the cover-up that gets you in politics.”

I always remembered those words, mainly because I was so scared of them. Of 
course, politicians, like most humans, at times sail close to the wind, and 
sometimes for understandable reasons – personal, security, confidentiality. But 
there is a dangerously relaxed approach to the truth that has infected our 
political discourse. I think every politician should be reminded of my old 
boss’s words on an annual basis. Especially when there’s a big red Brexit bus 
involved.Ayesha Hazarika 
 