
The sole Liberal Democrat elected to the Welsh assembly, Kirsty Williams, has 
been appointed education secretary in a new-look Labour-led government.

Williams had led the Lib Dems in the assembly but suffered the bitter blow of 
seeing the party’s presence cut from five seats to one. However, she has now 
been invited by the first minister,Carwyn Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/carwyn-jones>, to join his minority 
administration in Cardiff.

It has been an interesting fortnight for Williams since election day. It was 
her vote in favour of Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/welsh-labour-plaid-cymru-accusations-assembly-standoff>
 that stopped the leader of Plaid Cymru, Leanne Wood, becoming first minister 
with backing from the Tories and Ukip.

Williams then found herself – and Wood – being branded “political concubines” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/18/labour-lead-welsh-government-deal-deadlock-plaid-cymru-carwyn-jones>
 by Ukip’s new leader in the assembly, the former Tory MP Neil Hamilton, after 
a deal was hatched between Labour and Plaid that allowed Jones to remain first 
minister.

Explaining his decision to appoint Williams as cabinet secretary for 
education, Jones said: “Kirsty has a wealth of experience and is one of the 
assembly’s most able politicians.”

He said the appointment did not mean Labour had formed a coalition with the 
Lib Dems. But he added: “This is a new era forWelsh politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/wales>, and today’s agreement reflects 
the need for Wales’s progressive politicians to work together.”

Labour won 29 of the 60 seats on the assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
 – a better than expected performance but shy of an outright majority.

Williams said of her appointment 
<http://www.welshlibdems.wales/progressive_agreement_reached_between_welsh_labour_and_kirsty_williams_am>
: “Government in Wales has entered a new era. Where there is common ground, we 
must have the confidence and ambition to work together for the good of its 
people.”

The Tories attacked the appointment. Its leader in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, Andrew RT Davies, said: “That Kirsty 
Williams is now joining Labour’s magic roundabout, which she has spent the last 
five years railing against, is astounding and shows how elastic her principles 
really are.”
 