
Ruth Williams has lived in Bristol all her life. She grew up in the city’s 
Bedminster district and bravely wore her Bristol Rovers scarf at a school where 
the majority of students were Bristol City supporters. The reason for becoming 
a Gashead was simple; her dad Roy has supported them all his life. “My first
Bristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> match was a 
1-1 draw against Hull City on 15 September 1990. I was 12 years old at the time 
and the club were in the old second division. Having lost their Eastville 
Stadium in 1986, Rovers were groundsharing with Bath City at the time. It was a 
bit of a trek getting to Twerton Park. But the game stuck with me and I was 
hooked. I’m 38 now and have been going to games with my dad regularly ever 
since. We’ve had season tickets for nearly a decade.”

What’s wrong with wanting to be as good as Geoff Bradford, even though I 
couldn’t see where the goal was?
Roy Williams 
Roy Williams has been blind all his life. Mervin Davis, a friend of the 
family, took him to his first Bristol Rovers game in 1951, when he was four 
years old. “One Friday evening, as I was arriving home from the Royal School 
for the Blind, Merv was repairing a window I had broken with my football 
earlier. What’s wrong with wanting to be as good as Geoff Bradford, even though 
I couldn’t see where the goal was?”

Roy’s older brother Mike was also a huge influence on his decision to start 
supporting the Gas. “He never stopped talking about Bristol Rovers, so I 
followed in his footsteps. He doesn’t attend many games anymore, as he is busy 
being a self-employed motor mechanic, but he still takes an interest.” Mervin 
turned up the following day and asked Roy to get his coat as he was going out 
with him. “Not thinking about what day it was, I just thought we must be going 
to The Sally Army. Instead I was soon part of a congregation of 25,000 football 
fans watching Bristol Rovers beat Llanelli Town 3-1.”

Still living in Ruth’s childhood home in Bedminster, retired piano tuner Roy 
has witnessed many great Bristol Rovers moments in the last 64 years, including 
the club beating Sheffield United 7-6 on penalties to clinch the 1972 Watney 
Cup and the Gerry Francis led Rovers side pipping Bristol City to the Third 
Division title at the end of the 1989-90 season.

Roy’s favourite moments are more recent. “The second leg of the 2007 League 
Two play-off semi-final against Lincoln City was special. We went there on the 
supporters’ coach and had no voice left after a 5-3 victory. Ruth remembers the 
recent tightly contested Conference play-off final at Wembley, when Bristol 
Rovers eventually beat Grimsby Town on penalties after a 1-1 draw. “Dad’s radio 
had a bit of a delay on it and I had to advise him to put it away. There was no 
way I could let him listen to a penalty shoot-out on a delay. The roar of the 
crowd told him when we had won!”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Flifes-a-gas-supporting-bristol-rovers-with-my-blind-dad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77962648927557d80799f9fd6a7266bae24cfc2%2F0_0_2057_1157%2F2057.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life's%20a%20Gas%3A%20supporting%20Bristol%20Rovers%20with%20my%20blind%20dad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Flifes-a-gas-supporting-bristol-rovers-with-my-blind-dad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%27s%20a%20Gas%3A%20supporting%20Bristol%20Rovers%20with%20my%20blind%20dad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Flifes-a-gas-supporting-bristol-rovers-with-my-blind-dad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77962648927557d80799f9fd6a7266bae24cfc2%2F0_0_2057_1157%2F2057.jpg>
 Ruth Williams with friends at the Annexe Photograph: Ruth Williams 
Living close to the Memorial Ground, Bristol Rovers’s home since 1996, Ruth 
enjoys specific match day rituals. “I love Saturday morning trips to the 
Bristol Rovers shop to collect my tickets. Kick-off might be hours away, the 
turnstiles are shut, but the atmosphere in that empty ground crackles with the 
anticipation of the game to come.” Ruth then meets her boyfriend and fellow 
Bristol Rovers fans for matchday lunches in the Annexe pub. “The Annexe is a 
lively little pub, an ideal place to discuss our hopes for the upcoming game 
punctuated with shouts of food order numbers. What I love about the pre-match 
pub visit is that you see the same faces sitting in the same seats every time, 
giving each other knowing nods.”

Ruth explains that the food and atmosphere of the place can take the sting out 
of bad days for Bristol Rovers on the pitch. “I remember when we faced West 
Brom in the 2008 FA Cup Quarter-Finals. It was the first time we’d got that far 
in the competition for 50 years, but we ended up losing 5-1in the freezing cold 
and I was gutted. I stomped into the Annexe after the game, ordered one of 
their legendary pizzas and immediately felt better.”

Ruth then meets up with Roy before the game. “Dad has to trek across the city 
on the bus to get to games. We sit up with the hospital radio guys in the 
Dribuild Stand. Dad plugs in and listens while I watch the game. We discuss the 
game in detail on our walk back to the bus stop.” People still ask Roy why he 
loves going to games. “It’s hard for those of us blessed with sight to be able 
to understand why he would sit in the cold and rain at the Memorial Ground 
rather than stay in the warmth with the radio commentary,” Ruth explains. But 
her dad is passionate about attending games. “You just don’t get the atmosphere 
and humorous banter of the crowd on Radio Bristol. One Saturday I got so 
exasperated with the officials that I stood up and informed the ref that his 
eyesight was even worse than mine. The crowd erupted.”

One Saturday I got so exasperated with the ref that I stood up and informed 
him his eyesight was even worse than mine
Roy Williams 
However, Ruth is thankful for her dad having the radio for the commentary 
rather than relying on her to provide it. “He learnt a long time ago not to 
rely on me commentating. I’m rubbish at it.” There have been times when Roy’s 
been without the radio but still been able to sense what’s occurring on the 
pitch. “Sometimes you don’t have to be a scientist to realise when the ref has 
made a bad call. Sometimes it’s obvious what’s happening thanks to the Rovers 
Choir. When the opposition balloon shots over the bar, roll around on the pitch 
play acting, or make bad tackles, their reactions are all I need to know what 
is going on.” Roy also gives thanks to a dear friend who, despite his alliance, 
has provided him with all things football related in the Bristol Post. “Despite 
supporting Bristol City, Pat has exchanged cassettes in the mail or in person 
for the past 38 years. Now that’s what I call friendship.”

There have been ups and downs for Bristol Rovers in recent years, but Ruth and 
Roy have supported the club through thick and thin and are not planning to 
alter their match day rituals any time soon. “Our season in the Conference last 
season really showed me that, whatever league you’re in, football still goes 
on,” Ruth says. “The standard of football wasn’t that great but the enthusiasm 
of the fans was. With Rovers back in the Football League this season, we’re 
certainly hoping for some success. But, whatever happens, there’s nowhere dad 
and I would rather be on a Saturday afternoon.”

You can share your own football photos and stories via GuardianWitness  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55d31e7de4b07318d17fd934>
 