
Lionel Messi passed 300 Primera División goals as Barcelona extended their 
lead at the top to six points with a 3-1 victory overSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>.

Lynsey Hipgrave hits out at sexist abuse after criticising Lionel Messi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/lynsey-hipgrave-football-sexist-abuse-lionel-messi-barcelona-luis-suarez>
It took Messi 25 minutes to reach the landmark, and six minutes later he made 
it 301, with Luis Suárez putting a missed penalty behind him to add the third 
in the second half.

Gijón had briefly levelled matters through Carlos Castro and gave a good 
account of themselves, with Iván Cuéllar producing several good saves, 
including from Suárez’s spot-kick.

Luis Enrique grew up as a Sporting fan and said before the match that if their 
record 30-match unbeaten run was to end, he would want it to do so at El 
Molinón. But that never looked likely to happen, and Cuéllar produced his first 
fine save in the 21st minute to deny Suárez after he had been played through by 
Neymar.

Four minutes later Cuéllar was beaten as Messi dropped his shoulder and cut in 
from the right before finding the bottom corner from 20 yards. Sporting had 
looked dangerous on the break and it took them only two minutes to draw level, 
Álex Menéndez playing a precision ball across the box for Castro to slide in 
and convert.

But four minutes later Messi struck again, finishing high into the net after 
an intelligent cutback from Suárez. It was nearly three almost immediately but 
Cuéllar denied Messi a hat-trick and then earned some luck as Neymar’s 
follow-up hit the post.

Lionel Messi named La Liga player of month for first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/12/lionel-messi-la-liga-player-month-barcelona>
Cuéllar blotted his copybook by bringing down Suárez to concede a penalty but 
made amends with a fine save. After their headline-grabbing penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/lynsey-hipgrave-football-sexist-abuse-lionel-messi-barcelona-luis-suarez>
 at the weekend, whenMessi passed for Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/luis-suarez-hat-trick-lionel-messi-barcelona-beat-celta-vigo-6-1>
 to score, Barça took the conventional route this time only to be denied.

Suárez did not have to wait long for a goal, though, and this time it was all 
his own work as he curled home a sublime finish.

Cuéllar prevented a fourth with another save from Neymar but the visitors had 
done more than enough to move six points ahead of Atlético Madrid.
 