Ian Rankin: In which 2016 novel would you find a killer named Roderick Macrae?  
Out of Bounds by Val McDermid  Home by Harlan Coben  His Bloody Project by 
Graeme Macrae Burnet Alex Bellos: The title of Thomas Pynchon’s novel Gravity’s 
Rainbow is a reference to which geometric curve?  the ellipse  the parabola  
the hyperbola Marina Lewycka: In which month did Chaucer’s pilgrims set out on 
their pilgrimage?  April  May  June Will Self: Which famous poet lurks in the 
background of the film that accompanied Dylan’s “Subterranean Homesick Blues”?  
WH Auden  Gary Snyder  Allen Ginsberg Sarah Waters: In Evelyn Waugh’s Vile 
Bodies, what kind of hat does Mr Chatterbox unsuccessfully attempt to turn into 
a high-society trend?  A chrome-yellow fedora  A bottle-green bowler  A 
polka-dot fez Kate Summerscale: Which of these is not one of the rules for 
detective fiction devised by Ronald Knox in 1929?  The criminal must be 
mentioned in the early part of the story  The detective must be unmarried 
during the investigation of the crime  No Chinaman must figure in the story 
William Boyd: Which of these American poets was a curator at the Museum of 
Modern Art in New York?  John Ashbery  Frank O'Hara  Weldon Kess Nikesh Shukla: 
Zadie Smith’s brother, children’s author Ben Bailey Smith​,​ was a member of 
which UK rap crew?  London Posse  Poisonous Poets  Foreign Beggars AL Kennedy: 
Was Benjamin Franklin:  Timid  Cautious  Careful Rose Tremain: In Jim Crace’s 
apocalyptic novel The Pesthouse, do the protagonists:  Destroy each other  
Travel eastwards towards the Atlantic  Save the world Blake Morrison: “If one 
man’s got 10 buns and another’s got two, and a bun has got to be given up by 
one of them, then surely you take it from the man with 10 buns.” This is the 
taxation policy advocated by:  Alfred Polly in HG Wells’s The History of Mr 
Polly  Gordon Comstock in George Orwell’s Keep the Aspidistra Flying  Jim Dixon 
in Kingsley Amis’s Lucky Jim Sarah Perry: When Watson first discusses sharing 
lodgings with Holmes, he warns the Great Detective that he keeps a “bull pup”. 
What is it?  An English breed of dog  A firearm  A band of pipe John Banville: 
Who gave a lecture on life in Gloriani’s garden?  William James  Lambert 
Strether  Fabrizio Corbera Charlotte Mendelson: What was the verdict of Angela 
Carter, subject of Edmund Gordon’s new biography, on Jane Austen’s Emma?  "Ugh!"
 "Surprisingly savage"  "A miracle" Shami Chakrabarti: A female writer last won 
the Man Booker prize in which year?  2013  2014  2015  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  