
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> could not 
hide his frustration as Liverpool spurned a chance to close the gap on Chelsea 
to three points at the top of the Premier League.

Despite twice taking the lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 at the Stadium of Light, Klopp’s second-placed side were restricted to a draw 
thanks to two penalties from Jermain Defoe as David Moyes’s Sunderland 
collected a potentially precious point in their struggle to avoid relegation.

“In this moment it is hard for me to accept but I have to be professional,” 
said Klopp, who fears Chelsea will extend their five-point advantage at 
Tottenham Hotspur on Wednesday night. “Maybe I do not look like the best loser 
in the world it but today two penalties against us feels not good.”

Liverpool drop two points as Jermain Defoe strikes twice from the spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Not that a man who saw first the impressive Daniel Sturridge and then Sadio 
Mané putLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> in front, 
contested the legitimacy of those spot‑kicks converted by Defoe. Instead 
Klopp’s beef was with the decision to award Seb Larsson the free‑kick which 
prefaced the second penalty, after Defoe had tumbled easily in the face of 
Lucas and Emre Can’s combined challenge. With Mané subsequently handling 
Larsson’s free-kick, the stage was set for Defoe’s late equaliser.

“I have no idea when a side of mine last conceded two penalties,” lamented 
Klopp, who had earlier seen Didier Ndong brought down by Ragnar Klavan but 
believed his own side could have had a penalty following Larsson’s perceived 
tug on Nathaniel Clyne. “The first one of course you can give it, both players 
are there. The second was clear handball. Two right decisions. But we all know 
in a football game a lot of situations like this can happen and the referee 
doesn’t spot them. Sometimes he can have a good view of it sometimes not. Both 
decisions are right but it feels bad. It feels so difficult.

“We scored the second goal, it felt good, it felt deserved. Then I would say 
no foul, no free-kick – there was no contact. Then handball, 2-2, I must be 
honest it doesn’t feel good.Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> got a point because of two 
penalties in a game. It is usually hard to get one. But to get two! The 
free‑kick, that was harsh and hard to accept but obviously I have to accept. 
It’s not the worst mistake in the world by the referee [Anthony Taylor] but 
it’s so hard to accept. Referees have a really hard job – but two penalties. 
Ah, that’s hard.”

If his countenance was softened slightly by the news the ankle injury which 
caused Sturridge to limp off in the second half does not appear overly serious, 
Klopp was clearly irked by having to play two games in less than 48 hours as 
the festive fixture programme reached peak frenzy. “Maybe we can play better 
football,” he said. “But not with a one-day break. But I have to accept. It’s 
like the fixtures, I cannot change anything. We have to accept the results of 
the other teams, there is a long way to go. We have a long trip home. Sorry for 
my mood.”

It seems unlikely he and Moyes shared any new year humour as Sunderland’s 
manager was still clearly miffed by Klopp having dubbed Sunderland “the most 
defensive” team he had faced when Liverpool won 2-0 at Anfield in November. 
“I’m feeling we weren’t too defensive today,” Moyes said. “I thought we did 
well today. We got at Liverpool, put them under pressure, pressed them. Maybe 
if I was a German manager you might praise that. If I’d been German you might 
praise me for doing something different.”

Asked if he had any sympathy with Klopp, he demurred. “I think things go 
against you,” he smiled. “He should see what it’s like at the bottom of the 
league. I could say we should have had another penalty for handball [against 
Can].”

Moyes singled out the “brilliant” Defoe for praise as well as goalkeeper Vito 
Mannone who shone in goal following a shaky displayin the 4-1 defeat at Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/burnley-sunderland-premier-league-match-report-andre-gray>
 on Saturday. Sunderland’s manager indicated he would not be getting any money 
to spend in the transfer window this month after owner Ellis Short turned a 
deaf ear to his pleas. “If that changes in January we’ll all get a surprise,” 
he said.

Asked to pick a title winner from Liverpool and Chelsea he sat on the fence. 
“I couldn’t pick one of them,” he said. “It would be hard for me to pick 
Liverpool where I’ve come from – but I think they both have a big chance.”
 