
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have confirmed that 
the central defender Joël Matip will join the club from Schalke at the end of 
the season.

“Liverpool Football Club can confirm they have reached an agreement to sign 
Cameroon defender Joël Matip,” said a statement on Liverpool’s official 
website. “The 24-year-old will join the Reds in the summer following the 
conclusion of his current deal with FCSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke>.”

Explaining his decision to leave Schalke, Matip said: “I have always said that 
there is only one reason I would leave Schalke - to experience something 
completely new. For that reason, I never considered a move to another 
Bundesliga club. Even though the decision wasn’t easy, I am certain that this 
is the right moment for me to take the next step in my career.”
FC Schalke 04 (@s04_en) 
Joel #Matip <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Matip?src=hash> will join @LFC 
<https://twitter.com/LFC> at the end of the season. More information to follow. 
#s04 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/s04?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/PsZrSCaUt5 
<https://t.co/PsZrSCaUt5>
 <https://twitter.com/s04_en/status/699225868263149568> February 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/s04_en/status/699225868263149568> 
Horst Heldt, the Schalke sporting director, said: “His decision is nothing 
against Schalke. He wants to try something new. We have held extensive 
discussions with both the player and his agent since May. It became clear very 
quickly that certain decisive factors meant we would not be able to influence 
his decision.”

Matip will arrive on a free transfer when his current contract with the 
Bundesliga side expires this summer, and reports have suggested he will be on a 
four-year deal at Anfield.

The German-born player, who can operate as a midfielder as well as at 
centre-back and has 27 Cameroon caps, came through Schalke’s youth set-up.

He made his Bundesliga debut at the age of 18, playing as a midfielder and 
scoring in a 1-1 draw with Bayern Munich in November 2009, and has over 200 
senior club appearances to his name.

Liverpool put six past sorry Aston Villa as home fans turn ire on Lerner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/aston-villa-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Liverpool’s interest in Matip has been known since January, when it had 
appeared at least two French clubs were ahead of them in the running, while 
Schalke had also not given up hope he would sign a new deal with them.

Matip will follow the Serbian midfielder Marko Grujic – Jürgen Klopp’s first 
signing as Liverpool manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/liverpool-sign-marko-grujic-red-star-belgrade>
 – to Anfield.

Grujic, recruited in early January for £5.1m on a four-year contract, 
immediately returned to his former club Red Star Belgrade on loan for the 
remainder of this season and will rejoin Liverpool this summer.
 