
Wearside proved an unexpectedly hazardous staging post on Liverpool’s road 
towards a potential title with two Jermain Defoe penalties and some defiant 
goalkeeping from Vito Mannone restricting Jürgen Klopp’s side to an unwelcome 
draw.

It leaves them five points behind the leaders Chelsea, who visit Tottenham 
Hotspur on Wednesday, and Klopp appeared personally affronted by this setback. 
Irritated by the Anfield manager’s annoyance at not winning, David Moyes 
mischievously suggested that had he been German rather than Scottish he might 
have collected some praise for choreographing a resilient, pressing performance 
which keeps his third-bottom team in touching distance of safety from 
relegation.

If Defoe was, once again, Moyes’s saviour, it should be acknowledged that 
Liverpool’s Sadio Mané discarded two points for the visitors with a ludicrous 
handball in the 84th minute. That came 12 minutes after Mané had given the 
visitors the lead for the second time on an afternoon when Daniel Sturridge 
also scored, and impressed enormously, before limping off with an unspecified 
ankle injury the manager trusts is not overly serious.

Jordan Pickford’s knee injury has offered Mannone a chance to show off his 
goalkeeping reflexes and they looked reassuringly sharp as the Italian dived 
smartly to repel Sturridge’s early low shot before tipping away Georginio 
Wijnaldum’s curler.

It was a bitter afternoon, with temperatures hovering just above freezing, but 
Mannone must have felt increasingly warm as he kept out another curving shot, 
dispatched by Sturridge this time, following some fine approach work on Roberto 
Firmino’s part.

Mannone, though, is only human and after his defence had failed to deal with 
the fallout from a James Milner corner in the 20th minute, Dejan Lovren’s 
miscued shot bounced into Sturridge’s path and from around six yards out, the 
sometime England striker directed a looping header into the net.

While that was only Sturridge’s second Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> goal this season, Defoe 
soon registered his 10th, equalising from the penalty spot after Didier Ndong 
stole between Wijnaldum and Ragnar Klavan as he accelerated into the area and 
the latter sent him tumbling. Although Simon Mignolet guessed the direction 
correctly, Defoe’s low, unerring execution proved far too good for the Belgian 
keeper as the ball arrowed snugly inside a post and into the bottom corner.

West Ham remain extremely keen on spiriting Sunderland’s leading scorer back 
to east London but that represents a doomsday scenario Moyes surely cannot even 
bear to contemplate.

Within minutes of drawing level, Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> should have taken the lead 
after Adnan Januzaj’s fancy footwork set up Defoe for a shot Mignolet performed 
wonders to get a hand to and push away, with Fabio Borini directing the rebound 
wide.

Moyes had dubbed his players “useless” – among other things – after they 
surrendered 4-1 at Burnley on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/burnley-sunderland-premier-league-match-report-andre-gray>
but rearranged in a 4-4-1-1 formation they, initially at least, seemed in much 
better shape. So much so that Mignolet was required to make a couple of decent 
saves from Defoe and then Jack Rodwell before Sturridge scored the opener.

Klopp, meanwhile, simply looked frozen through as he shivered on the 
touchline. The German was furious about having to play again less than 48 hours 
after his side’s New Year’s Eve tea-time win over Manchester City and as 
Liverpool’s attempts to bypass John O’Shea and Papy Djilobodji in the 
Sunderland defence became increasingly jaded, those dire prophecies of physical 
and mental fatigue appeared close to fulfilment.

Yet even though the visitors were missing the injured Jordan Henderson and 
Philippe Coutinho, and were further hampered by rather flat displays from Adam 
Lallana, Emre Can and Wijnaldum in particular, they continued to dominate 
possession and should really have regained the lead when Nathaniel Clyne 
crossed well but Mané somehow missed the most inviting of openings.

Moyes was convinced his team should have had another penalty after Borini’s 
chip struck Can on an arm but it did not look deliberate and the referee had no 
hesitation about waving play on.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, meanwhile, felt they might 
have had a penalty of their own due to Seb Larsson’s tug on Clyne.

It seemed the sort of day when set pieces would decide matters but Klopp’s 
players belatedly rallied and proved they were not quite all out of ideas after 
all. Lallana and Sturridge exchanged passes before Lallana’s cute backheel cued 
the striker up for an angled shot Mannone performed acrobatics to divert to 
safety.

When the resultant corner was inadvertently flicked on by Djilobodji, it fell 
to Mané who, completely unmarked at the far post, guided it into the net from 
close range.

Not for the first time, Sunderland paid the price for slapdash defending, with 
their protestations Mané had been in an offside position irrelevant as 
Djilobodji’s intervention played him onside.

Creditably refusing to fold, Moyes’s side fought back and won another penalty. 
It came after Defoe collapsed in the face of a joint challenge from Lucas Leiva 
and Can and Larsson’s resultant free-kick was handled by, of all people, Mané 
who blatantly, ridiculously, stuck an arm up.

Up stepped Defoe again. This time, he sent Mignolet the wrong way, the ball 
flying low into the same corner as his first as Sunderland stuck two strictly 
metaphorical fingers in Klopp’s direction.

Manchester City’s 10 men sink Burnley thanks to Gaël Clichy and Sergio Agüero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report> 