
Liverpool will ask to play a European home game at Wigan Athletic or Bolton 
Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> next season 
should Jürgen Klopp’s team return to the Europa League in the third qualifying 
round.

The redevelopment of Anfield’s main stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/liverpool-stadium-expansion-anfield-gathers-pace-new-roof>
 enters its most time-sensitive phase this summer, when concrete is relaid in 
the existing stand and that section is connected to the new build under 
construction behind.

Manchester United face May deadline to make move for José Mourinho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/31/manchester-united-deadline-jose-mourinho>
As a consequence the stadium’s capacity will be limited when the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> third qualifying 
round takes place on 28 July and 4 August – and the club would look to a 
north-west neighbour as an alternative venue.

A simple geographical solution, a short walk across Stanley Park to Merseyside 
rivals Everton, has been discounted byLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> officials but the DW Stadium 
in Wigan and Bolton’s Macron Stadium are under consideration. Ewood Park, the 
home of Blackburn Rovers, is also a possibility.

Liverpool’s participation in the Europa League in July is dependent on many 
permutations – such as the FA Cup winners finishing in the top five of the 
Premier League, the Capital One Cup winners, Manchester City, staying in the 
top five and not least the Anfield club improving their position of ninth to 
claim a qualifying place through the league. But the club have drawn up 
contingency plans to cover the possibility.

Liverpool would be in the third qualifying round had they won February’s 
Capital One Cup final at Wembley and seventh place in the Premier League will 
deliver the same should the FA Cup and Capital One Cup winners both finish in 
the top five.

Klopp’s team can still qualify for the Champions League by winning this 
season’s Europa League but Anfield could host a play-off (which would occur 
only if the Champions League winners do not qualify for next season’s 
competition through their domestic league) scheduled for 16-17 and 23-24 August.

Anfield’s new £114m main stand is scheduled to open at the start of next 
season, with the opening round of Premier League matches on 13 August.

However, interior work, including the changing rooms, match officials’ 
facilities and media working areas, are unlikely to be completed until 
Christmas. Players will be required to change in marquees outside the main 
stand until the redevelopment work is finished.

Liverpool have asked the Premier League to schedule their first two matches of 
next season away from Anfield, thereby ensuring more home games in the second 
half of the campaign when the interior fit-out has been completed.

The Premier League is considering the club’s request. Anfield’s capacity will 
rise to 53,500 when the new main stand opens.
 