
The Reds dug deep to strike gold through an own-goal by the Alaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> defender Geli in the 27th minute 
of
 extra-time in Dortmund last night.

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> had been just two 
minutes away from completing a cup treble when Jordi Cruyff headed a goal
 that forced Gérard Houllier's team to go in search of a golden goal in 
extra-time in the most dramatic
 final in Uefa Cup history. After Alaves had been reduced to nine men in 
extra-time with Antonio Karmona
 and the substitute Magno sent off Gary McAllister swung over a free-kick 
which the Spanish defender
 headed into his own net.

 Alaves presented a sharply contrasting challenge to Arsenal in the FA Cup 
final. Liverpool knew
 everything about Arsenal and while they had mugged up on last night's 
opponents they were only really
 going to find out about Alaves once the match had kicked off. 

 Houllier had made just one change, keeping McAllister, a substitute on 
Saturday, in the team which
 meant Robbie Fowler returning to the bench. The difference, however, was soon 
to swing last night's
 final Liverpool's way. In the fourth minute Emile Heskey was fouled midway 
inside the Alaves half.

 McAllister swung the free-kick into the middle of the goalmouth and Markus 
Babbel nipped between two
 rigid defenders to nod the ball past Martin Herrera. 

 The Alaves coach Jose Manuel Esnal, known universally as Mane, had opted for 
three at the back,
 presumably hoping that a five-man midfield would restrict Liverpool's service 
to their front men. If so he
 was swiftly disillusioned. Alaves were simply torn asunder by the speed and 
execution of Liverpool's
 movements. Just past the quarter-hour Houllier's side scored again, with 
Michael Owen a predator
 turned provider. When in the 12th minute Sander Westerveld had to move 
sharply to turn aside a
 resounding 30-yard free-kick from Oscar Tellez it seemed that Alaves were 
about to turn the final into a
 more even contest. Four minutes later, however, Owen gathered a pass from 
Dietmar Hamann, spotted
 Steven Gerrard sprinting through in the inside-right position, and set up his 
England team-mate for a
 straightforward low drive into the net. 

 Mane's response was bold and quickly rewarded. The struggling Dan Eggen, a 
statue in the back three,
 gave way to an extra striker, Ivan, and he it was who after 26 minutes 
outjumped Babbel at the far post to
 nod Cosmin Contra's cross back past Westerveld. 

 Now Liverpool began to learn more of what Alaves were about. With Javi Moreno 
asserting himself up
 front and making life especially awkward for Stéphane Henchoz, the Spanish 
side began to pour attack
 after attack into their opponents' penalty area. Alaves were prepared to risk 
everything to bring the
 scores level, but four minutes from half-time they risked too much. Another 
through pass from Hamann
 sent Owen completely clear. Herrera met the threat outside the 18-yard line 
but as Owen forced his way
 into the penalty area he was brought down by the Alaves goalkeeper. 
McAllister calmly drove the kick
 past Herrera's left hand. 

 All Alaves could do now was redouble their attacking efforts in the hope of 
resuming the trade in goals.

 In the event they went to market with a vengeance. Liverpool were never going 
to be able to sit on their
 lead although few could have expected it to disappear by the 51st minute. Not 
for nothing is Moreno
 Spain's leading scorer; now he scored twice in three minutes. First Contra 
teased Jamie Carragher
 before providing the cross from which Moreno's head did the rest. Then the 
striker drove a hard,
 precise free-kick low through Liverpool's defensive wall with an unsighted 
Westerveld having no idea
 where the ball was going until it passed him. 

 Houllier replaced the struggling Henchoz with Vladimir Smicer and withdrew 
Gerrard to shore up his
 defence on the right. Four minutes past the hour, to loud Liverpudlian 
encouragement, Heskey gave way
 to Fowler while Pablo came on for Moreno. 

 The plot now demanded that Fowler score. With 17 minutes remaining the 
Liverpool substitute collected
 a pass from McAllister and brought the ball square to make space for a shot. 
Fowler joyfully beat Herrer
 inside the right-hand post.

 You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 