
1) Aréola’s nerves crumble in front of the Kop

Liverpool push past 10-man Villarreal and into Europa League final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/liverpool-reach-europa-league-final-villarreal>
Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> arrived on 
Merseyside with a reputation for stingy, resolute defending, having conceded 31 
goals in 36 La Liga games, yet their cause was not helped by the way their 
goalkeeper, Alphonse Aréola, spread uncertainty throughout his back four during 
the opening exchanges. Perhaps the noise from the Kop on a night of raw Anfield 
emotion affected the 23-year-old, who had already had one escape when his 
failure to adequately deal with Nathaniel Clyne’s low cross culminated in 
Liverpool’s opener. Afflicted by nerves, Aréola could only push Clyne’s awkward 
centre back into the danger area and although Daniel Sturridge was unable to 
bundle Roberto Firmino’s cutback into the empty net, the ball deflected in off 
the unwitting Bruno Soriano. Villarreal’s 1-0 advantage from the first leg had 
been wiped out after eight minutes and Liverpool, spotting a weakness that 
could be exploited, were always quick to work the ball into the wide positions.

2) Mignolet and Lovren make vital contributions

A tense evening was on the cards once it became clear that Villarreal were not 
going to sit on their 1-0 lead from the first leg. Jonathan Dos Santos sent a 
shot over from the edge of the area and Simon Mignolet had to make a fine save 
from Maria Gaspar’s deflected shot after good link play from Roberto Soldado. 
The game was still goalless when Gaspar aimed for the far corner from the right 
of the Liverpool area and Mignolet had to be alert to deny an away goal that 
would have deflated them. Two minutes later,Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> led. Mignolet has suffered 
plenty of criticism since his move from Sunderland three years ago because of 
his frailties at set-pieces and his unconvincing distribution, but the 
Belgian’s contribution was vital while Dejan Lovren also made a vital block to 
deny Cédric Bakambu early in the second half. Perhaps there is hope for them 
yet. Lovren in particular has been transformed in recent weeks, even without 
Mamadou Sakho alongside him.

3) Sturridge shows his class with a clinical finish

Sturridge had a point to prove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/29/liverpool-daniel-sturridge-europa-league-villarreal-bench>
 after returning to Liverpool’s European team for the first time since 
Manchester United away on 17 March.Divock Origi’s injury against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/21/liverpool-divock-origi-ankle-injury>
 has given Sturridge a chance to show Jürgen Klopp why Roy Hodgson regards him 
as England’s most naturally talented striker and he was bright in the opening 
20 minutes, troubling his markers with his elusive movement away from the 
central positions. Yet he was finding clearcut opportunities hard to come by 
and cut a frustrated figure after a tame effort in the 52nd minute. His 
expression seemed to betray his anxiety. Just after the hour, however, 
Sturridge stirred. He delivered a warning with a shot from a tight angle and he 
was in the right place at the right time when a loose ball broke to him in the 
area moments later. His finish was clinical and Liverpool finally led on 
aggregate. Sturridge’s embrace with Klopp was warm when he came off in injury 
time.

4) Liverpool’s fast start offers promise for the future

Jürgen Klopp’s prediction comes to pass as Liverpool vanquish Villarreal | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-villarreal-europa-league>
The intensity of Liverpool’s start was hardly surprising given the rousing 
pre-match rendition of You’ll Never Walk Alone in the wake of the verdict in 
the Hillsborough inquest. Attacking the Kop, Klopp’s team flew at their 
accomplished Spanish opponents, who have already secured their place in next 
season’s Champions League, and it was not long before they led. Their pressing 
game unsettled Villarreal, whose increasingly petulant tactics reflected their 
frazzled mindset, and in those moments it was clear that Klopp’s influence is 
having a positive effect. Leaving aside his obvious powers of motivation, the 
German’s work on the training ground has led to vast improvements in several 
players. While Liverpool have fallen slightly below expectations in the Premier 
League, they have demonstrated their potential in Europe and will be in the 
Champions League if they beatSevilla in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/sevilla-shakhtar-donetsk-europa-league-match-report>
 on 18 May.

5) Villarreal’s semi-final curse continues

With the two Madrid clubs to contest the Champions League final on 28 May, it 
could have been another all-Spanish affair in last two in this competition. Yet 
Villarreal will not be joining Sevilla in Basel in a fortnight’s time and 
instead they were left to reflect on continuing their club’s tradition of 
falling short in European semi-finals. They have got this far four times now 
and have lost four times, and Marcelino’s players were unable to put an end to 
a run that dates back to their defeat to Valencia in the Uefa Cup in 2004. This 
was not quite as agonising as losing to Arsenal in their Champions League 
semi-final in 2006, when Juan Román Riquelme missed a last-minute penalty, but 
the disappointment for Villarreal was considerable nonetheless. They were 
outplayed by Liverpool and a poor performance was summed up by Víctor Ruiz’s 
red card in the second half. The visiting fans experienced a crushing sense of 
deja-vu.
 