
Liverpool will face Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> in the Europa League 
quarter-finals after they were paired with Jürgen Klopp’s former side in 
Friday’s draw.

Europa League quarter-final draw – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/18/europa-league-quarter-final-draw-live>
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> side will play the 
first leg in Germany on 7 April with the return at Anfield a week later.

Borussia Dortmund, who beat Tottenham Hotspur in the last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/tottenham-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-match-report>
, are the tournament favourites, and are looking forward to welcoming Klopp 
“back home” in what their coach, Thomas Tuchel, defined “a dream draw for all 
fans of football”.

Hans-Joachim Watzke told the Dortmund website: “Given our experiences this 
season, it was always to be expected that Alexander Frei [the former Dortmund 
striker] would not give us just a mundane draw. Now Jürgen Klopp’s coming back 
home with Liverpool, and it’s certainly going to be something quite special.

“We were always sure that we were going to meet the Reds at some stage of this 
competition and we’re now looking forward to two extremely attractive European 
matches.”

Klopp led Dortmund to back-to-back Bundesliga titles and broke up Bayern 
Munich’s hegemony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/16/jurgen-klopp-borussia-dortmund-bundesliga-premier-league>
 of the German game during a memorable seven years in charge of the 
Westphalians. That ended last year when Dortmund struggled to live up to the 
standards they had set under Klopp, and he chose to resign, doing so after 
being deprived of one final trophy as Dortmund coach withdefeat to Wolfsburg in 
the German Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/jurgen-klopp-borussia-dortmund-wolfsburg-german-cup-final>
.

Champions League draw: Manchester City to face PSG in quarter-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/18/champions-league-draw-quarter-finals>
Tuchel, who has take over the reigns from Klopp so impressively this season, 
said: “This is a dream draw for all fans of football. For us, it’s a huge 
sporting challenge. We’re going to need two top performances in order to go 
through, and we’re looking forward to two games of the highest level.”

The draw paired Sevilla, who are going for three Europa League trophies in a 
row, with Athletic Bilbao, whoput out Gary Neville’s Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/valencia-athletic-bilbao-europa-league-gary-neville>
 in the last 16.

Sparta Prague, conquerors of Lazio, play Villarreal while Braga were drawn 
againstShakhtar Donetsk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shakhtardonetsk>.

Liverpool were drawn against Dortmund shortly after Uefa announced that they 
would becharging Liverpool and Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/18/uefa-charge-manchester-united-liverpool-europa-league-trouble>
 over crowd trouble duringtheir last-16 clash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/liverpool-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report-second-leg>
.

The full quarter-final draw

Braga v Shakhtar Donetsk

Villarreal v Sparta Prague <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spartaprague>

Athletic Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> v Sevilla

Borussia Dortmund v Liverpool
 