
It is rarely a good sign to find yourself yowling with laughter while watching 
a film that’s supposed to lull you into solemn contemplation. There are a few 
such moments inLive by Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/09/live-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video>
, Ben Affleck’s love letter to – and hopefully death knell of – the classic 
Hollywood gangster flick. I recommend smuggling some bingo cards into the 
cinema (and some illicit rum cocktails) so you can at least make a game of its 
cliches.

There are speakeasies aplenty, all of them jumping. There are double-crossing 
molls. There are corrupt Irish policemen, Italian-American hoodlums with Tommy 
guns, and showdowns in the shadowy corridors of fancy hotels. I’m pretty sure 
someone calls someone else a “knucklehead” at one point. And there is no shot of
Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> (yes, he stars as 
well as produces and directs) that does not underline just how much Joe 
Coughlin, the gangster hero he portrays, is on the right side of American 
history. We are never left in any doubt that his mobster is someone to whom we 
should all aspire. “You realise that to be free in this life,” runs his 
voiceover, “breaking the rules means nothing. You have to be strong enough to 
make your own.” Full house!

Live by Night is an adaptation of Boston author Dennis Lehane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/26/moonlight-mile-dennis-lehane-review>
’s novel (Affleck also adapted his Gone Baby Gone). While not exactly a 
disaster, it’s something of a cautionary tale. After winning the best picture 
Oscar for Argo four years ago, Affleck had the rare opportunity to make 
whatever movie he wanted: “It was sort of pick what you want to do and this is 
what I wanted to do,” he said. “I wanted to make a classic Warners picture.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flive-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20by%20Night%20trailer%3A%20Ben%20Affleck%20directs%201920s%20gangster%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flive-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20by%20Night%20trailer%3A%20Ben%20Affleck%20directs%201920s%20gangster%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flive-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video&media=>
Live by Night trailer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/09/live-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video>
Robert Richardson, Quentin Tarantino’s long-time cinematographer, ensures it 
all looks beautiful – you’ll want to book a night out in Prohibition-era 
Florida immediately – and there are compelling turns fromElle Fanning 
<https://filmbreeze.com/live-by-night-movie-clip-pick-our-sins-2017-elle-fanning-movie_038b9bff6.html>
 as a fallen starlet turned one-woman-religious-right and Sienna Miller as an 
Irish super-vixen. The violence is so stylishly choreographed it looks like an 
Armani ad, and the baddies – including the local chapter of the Ku Klux Klan – 
always get what’s coming to them.

Still, Affleck clearly hopes to provide not mere entertainment, but a critique 
of US capitalism – and in so doing illuminates the essential hypocrisy of the 
gangster genre. He wants to be the bad guy and the good guy at the same time. 
Lehane’s Live by Night novels (there are three) might have worked better 
stretched over a TV mini-series, but it’s not as if HBO’sBoardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/21/boardwalk-empire-box-set-review>
 breathed much fresh life into a genre exhausted byThe Sopranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/15/sopranos-finale-david-chase-explanation>
. Ridley Scott’s heavy-handedAmerican Gangster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/16/russellcrowe.denzelwashington> 
and Ruben Fleischer’s limpGangster Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/10/gangster-squad-review> have also 
fallen short in recent years. The gangster now stands way below the superhero 
in modern movie myth-making. Don’t be surprised if Affleck’s paymasters hold 
him to a couple of extra Batman movies by way of penance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0faeac3d0a4579d205120da79e39111bde659da0%2F0_0_2501_2044%2F2501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0faeac3d0a4579d205120da79e39111bde659da0%2F0_0_2501_2044%2F2501.jpg>
 Pinnacle … Al Pacino in Scarface, 1983. Photograph: Allstar/Universal 
It’s a surprising turn of events since, in recent memory, the gangster movie 
was pretty much the pinnacle. The two most revered modern male leads – Al 
Pacino and Robert de Niro – made their names withmumbling mobsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/25/the-godfather-review>. So too did 
the two most admired directors, Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese. If 
you’ve ever bought an eighth of weed from an English public schoolboy, you’ll 
appreciate the deep penetration these movies made on the popular psyche. A 
certain kind of teenager always wished to be Pacino in Brian De Palma’sScarface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/scarface-crime>. “Gangster” is a 
term of playground respect, a fantasy of being unconstrained by law or 
conscience. You might see the whole genre as a form of capitalist pornography.

The opening of Scorsese’s Goodfellas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/philip-french-classic-dvd-goodfellas-martin-scorsese-25th-anniversary-robert-de-niro-liotta-pesci>
 lays out the wish-fulfilment aspect pretty clearly. “As far back as I can 
remember, I always wanted to be a gangster,” says Ray Liotta, the wistful 
Wonder Years tone jarring with the horrific violence that his character, the 
youngHenry Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/shortcuts/2012/jun/13/why-goodfellas-henry-hill-murdered-mob>
, witnesses from his window. Scorsese never denies the allure of crime, with 
its dizzying highs, terrifying lows, and creamy middles. But the joke of the 
title is that the good fellas are really exceptionally evil fellas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ea3a3af2d779135f472da123787b15043fbf67%2F10_0_2422_1453%2F2422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ea3a3af2d779135f472da123787b15043fbf67%2F10_0_2422_1453%2F2422.jpg>
 Horrific violence … Goodfellas, 1990, with Joe Pesci, Robert De Niro and Ray 
Liotta. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
The movie culminates in the famous diner scene where De Niro makes it clear to 
Liotta that he will have to kill him (though gangster dialogue is neverthat 
clear). Scorsese’s reverse-tracking shot, zooming inwards while moving the 
camera outwards, makes the scene pulsate with the dawning realisation. Still, 
it’s so subtle, you might miss it. What stains the memory are those lovable 
mobsters, those balletic hold-ups.

It was the original 1932 Scarface <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarface> 
that laid out the speciousness of the genre. Set in gangland Chicago, Howard 
Hughes and Howard Hawks’ gleeful opera of violence was released one year after 
Al Capone was put away for tax evasion. It took two years of wrangling with the 
American board of censors before audiences were allowed to see it. The subtitle 
“Shame of a Nation” was tacked on, along with a final judgment scene and a bit 
of pre-title moralising that allowed its creators to have their cake and shoot 
it to bits: “This picture is an indictment of gang rule in America and of the 
callous indifference of the government to this constantly increasing menace to 
our safety and our liberty. Every incident in this picture is the reproduction 
of an actual occurrence, and the purpose of this picture is to demand of the 
government: ‘What are you going to do about it?’ The government is your 
government. What areYOU going to do about it?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17f51eb8a0958fa03788c52887133cd80ec1fad1%2F0_0_2751_2035%2F2751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17f51eb8a0958fa03788c52887133cd80ec1fad1%2F0_0_2751_2035%2F2751.jpg>
 Shame of a nation … 1932’s Scarface, with C Henry Gordon, Paul Muni and George 
Raft. Photograph: Allstar/United Artists 
The 19th amendment, prohibiting alcohol, allied the average drinking moviegoer 
with the mobsters against the police

From the outset, then, an uneasy dynamic was established. It was fine to envy 
the freewheeling mobsters because, ultimately, you would have the satisfaction 
of seeing them brought to judgment. And you were perfectly at liberty to enjoy 
all the bloodletting as long as you remembered who the real villains were. No, 
not the mobsters – but the government and its agents. And in the 19th 
amendment, which prohibited alcohol from 1920 to 1933, the moviegoing public 
had an obviously dim bit of legislation to rail against: a ruling that put the 
average whiskey-drinker in loose alliance with the mobsters against the police.

“I violate the Prohibition law, sure, who doesn’t?” Al Capone once reasoned. 
“The only difference is I take more chances than the man who drinks a cocktail 
before dinner and a flock of highballs after it.” Indeed, the moral pushed 
hardest in the gangster genre is that you mustn’t be a rat and spoil everyone’s 
fun. AsGore Vidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/14/gore-vidal-gripped-a-nation> 
once noted: “In a sanctimonious society of hustlers, which is what the United 
States has been from the very beginning, the first law is, ‘I won’t blow your 
scam and you don’t blow mine.’”

Live by Night <https://www.theguardian.com/film/live-by-night> makes similar 
efforts to expose the iniquities of American capitalism. “Witness the price of 
the American dream,” says the trailer. But Affleck is determined to paint his 
outlaw not merely as a hustler, doing what he can to survive, but as a figure 
worthy of sympathy and admiration. The opening sequence takes place in the 
trenches of northern France, where Coughlin serves as a US conscript. When he 
returns to his native Boston, he is so disillusioned with his homeland, he 
somehow feels his only option is to rob banks.

“I went away a soldier, I came home an outlaw,” he says. But while your 
Corleones and Sopranos were in the family business, locked into a rigid, 
semi-aristocratic hierarchy, Coughlin is essentially freelance – an 
uberhoodlum, if you will, beholden to no one. Somehow his chief-of-police 
father – played by IrishmanBrendan Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/brendan-gleeson-q-and-a-interview>
 – is willing to turn a blind eye when by rights he should have locked him up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4d7f578338d92fcc0b27604743c984114adf4d%2F0_0_2336_3504%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20by%20Night%3A%20how%20the%20gangster%20film%20went%20from%20top%20of%20the%20world%20to%20sleeping%20with%20the%20fishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Flive-by-night-ben-affleck-gangster-movie-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4d7f578338d92fcc0b27604743c984114adf4d%2F0_0_2336_3504%2F2336.jpg>
 Only required to look foxy and concerned … Zoe Saldana in Live by Night. 
Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
Later, the action moves to Florida, where Coughlin must repay a debt to an 
Italian mobster named Pescatore. It seems there have been a few problems with 
Pescatore’s supply of rum from Cuba, giving Affleck a chance to prove his 
liberal business ethics. The usual way for the gangster hero to get ahead is to 
show greater guile, cunning or bloodlust than his rivals. Violence is a 
constant – what matters is how judiciously you use it. Here, however, Coughlin 
shows greater compassion. His innovation is to treat a dark-skinned Cuban rum 
manufacturer with respect, cutting his family in on the deal and thus 
dispensing with costly middle-men (Denzel Washington pulls off a similar trick 
in American Gangster).

You can imagine how this multicultural entrepreneurship goes down with the 
local white supremacists. Coughlin then inflames them further by marrying the 
man’s sister, played byZoe Saldana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zoe-saldana>, who has very little to do 
except look foxy and concerned. At one moment, she worries that his various 
double-crossings will come back to haunt them. “You don’t think I’m strong 
enough?” he asks. “I don’t know if you’re cruel enough,” she responds. Beat. 
“Powerful men don’t have to be cruel.” Yes, they can be social justice 
warriors, too!

All of which would be lovely, had Coughlin not spent the entire movie being 
cruel. And if the denouement didn’t involve further lashings of cruelty. And if 
Affleck had allowed any non-white character to do anything except admire him.

A more interesting place to play out these themes would be the inner cities of 
America in the 80s and 90s, where crack cocaine offered Prohibition-style 
business opportunities for young African-Americans and allowed “gangster” to 
take on its present playground meaning.The dynamics of the “dope game” (Jay Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/jay-z-war-on-drugs-epic-fail-new-york-times>
, passim), and the ways in which it both undermines and exemplifies the 
American dream form the basic content of gangster rap.

However, you rarely see this played out on the big screen. It is cheap to make 
hip-hop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> records, and expensive to 
make Hollywood films, after all. Affleck is one of a handful of (white) stars 
with the clout to make things happen – but such a storyline would deny him the 
opportunity to cast himself as the hero. At best, he might get to play a 
socially conscious cop. No fun at all.

Then again, perhaps the notion that a lack of conscience and an excess of 
vanity really do pay is simply too close to the bone in America in 2017. The 
system is rigged, folks. As the young Michael Corleone says of his old man in 
the Godfather: “My father’s no different than any other powerful man, any man 
who’s responsible for other people – like a senator or a president.”

 * Live by Night is released in the US and UK on 13 January  