
Liverpool stand defiant in the face of Spain’s dominance of Europe. The 
Champions League is destined for Madrid but Jürgen Klopp’s brand of “emotional 
football” denied La Liga guaranteed success in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> as Villarreal were 
swatted aside at Anfield. A fourth triumph in the competition and a ticket back 
to the Champions League will be Liverpool’s should Sevilla fall the same way on 
18 May.

Liverpool 3-0 Villarreal (agg 3-1): five Europa League talking points | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/liverpool-villarreal-europa-league-talking-points>
Anfield has been revitalised by Klopp, and the manager turned cheerleader 
after the final whistle to whip up celebrations from all four sides of the 
stadium. He has had the same effect on Liverpool’s players. The club’s 200th 
win in European competition was achieved in commanding, comfortable style as a 
Bruno Soriano own goal quickly levelled the tie on aggregate before Daniel 
Sturridge and Adam Lallana capped a dominant semi-final display.

“It will be much more difficult for Villarreal than they imagine in this 
moment,” Klopp had said on the eve of the second leg. But it was Liverpool’s 
tactics, industry and quality that caused the fourth best team in Spain to fold.
Lallana, Emre Can, Roberto Firmino and Dejan Lovren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/liverpool-villarreal-europa-league-talking-points>
, to name just four players who have improved immeasurably under Klopp, 
excelled in following their manager’s instruction to play “emotional football 
while using your brain”. The result is a second final only seven months into 
the Klopp era and the Premier League’s first representation in the Europa 
League final since Chelsea’s victory under Rafael Benítez in 2013. What a pity 
therefore, or more accurately a disgrace, that the finalists receive merely 
10,000 tickets apiece for the showdown in Basel.

Klopp was thumping his chest during the warm-up, such was the intensity of the 
occasion. The atmosphere was charged not only by the frenzied welcome that the 
Liverpool team bus received as it inched along Anfield Road but alsolast week’s 
verdicts from the Hillsborough inquests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
. A mosaic reading “96 – The Greatest Football Family” covered three sides of 
the ground before the first home game since it was concluded the 96 were 
unlawfully killed. The night fulfilled Anfield’s expectations.

Liverpool tore into Villarreal from the start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-villarreal-europa-league>
, gave them no time to build from the back or through their assured captain, 
Soriano, and punished them to level the tie inside eight minutes. It helped 
that Marcelino’s bizarre rotation policy with his goalkeepers resulted in 
Alphonse Aréola starting in place of Sergio Asenjo. His unconvincing opening 
spread almost as much anxiety through the visiting defence as Liverpool’s front 
four.

Poor crossing undermined Liverpool in the first leg, Klopp had claimed, but 
the flaw was remedied quickly in the return. The fit-again Can released 
Nathaniel Clyne and when his dangerous cross arrowed in from the right, Aréola 
parried the ball into the path of Firmino. It was the second of three slips by 
theVillarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> keeper in the 
opening 10 minutes. Firmino turned the ball back into a crowded six-yard area 
where Sturridge failed to connect cleanly but his effort struck Soriano and 
sailed over the line.

Jürgen Klopp’s prediction comes to pass as Liverpool vanquish Villarreal | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-villarreal-europa-league>
Villarreal were visibly unnerved. They were dangerous when they broke out but 
were rarely able to do so. Simon Mignolet saved well from Mario Gasper and 
Jonathan Dos Santos blazed over when Cédric Bakambu’s run presented him with an 
excellent chance seconds before the opener. But with Adam Lallana relentless in 
his pressing – the watching Dirk Kuyt would have been impressed – Can and James 
Milner dominant in central midfield and with Firmino a constant distraction, 
Villarreal could not disrupt Liverpool’s control.

The one concern for Klopp at half-time, and hope for Marcelino, was the 
aggregate scoreline.Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
had dictated the rhythm and flow of the game but remained vulnerable to the 
away goal without a commanding lead. It arrived moments after their manager had 
implored the crowd to raise their game having quietened at the start of the 
second half, and Firmino released Sturridge behind the Villarreal defence with 
a fine pass. Controlling Lallana’s cross on his chest, the Brazilian took out 
three yellow shirts with a first-time ball into Sturridge and the recalled 
striker converted off the inside of a post. His celebrations marked a release 
after starting the three previous Europa League ties on the bench.

Villarreal’s night deteriorated further when the defender Víctor Ruiz was sent 
off for a second offence. Booked for dissent in the first half, he went after a 
late foul on Lallana and the visitors’ exasperation increased when Alberto 
Moreno escaped with a push on Denis Suárez inside the Liverpool area. But they 
could not dispute the outcome. Firmino, having earlier deceived Mario Gasper 
with an outrageous trick, left Mateo Musacchio trailing to set up Sturridge at 
close range. The striker miscued but Lallana steered home the loose ball from a 
yard and was kept onside by Musacchio on the by-line. Anfield erupted, thoughts 
turning to Basel.
 