
The League Managers Association has demanded the Daily Telegraph furnish it 
with “full disclosure” of every detail relating to the its investigation into 
corruption in professional football. The newspaper said on Thursday that the 
police has asked to review the information first.

Barnsley sack Tommy Wright after bung allegations against assistant head coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/barnsley-sack-tommy-wright-bung-allegations>
Already the revelations have prompted Sam Allardyce’s removal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-relax-return-club-management-gareth-southgate>
 as the England manager over his comments regarding third-party ownership of 
players to undercover reporters. There are also allegations about coaches 
accepting “bungs”.

Tommy Wright, the assistant manager of Barnsley has been sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/barnsley-sack-tommy-wright-bung-allegations>
 by the Championship club after being filmed allegedly accepting a £5,000 cash 
payment from undercover reporters. He has denied wrongdoing.

The Telegraph said: “Telegraph Media Group said on Tuesday [27 September]that 
we would release to the FA the relevant transcripts of our investigation into 
football corruption. It remains our intention to do so. However, the police 
have asked to review this information first. The FA and the Premier League are 
aware of this.”

Like the Football Association, the LMA is taking the Telegraph’s reportage 
extremely seriously but with certain of its members – most notably Allardyce – 
complaining of entrapment both bodies want access to the “unedited” version of 
the inquiry.

It said in a statement: “Following further revelations by the Telegraph and a 
follow-up LMA meeting with the FA this morning, the LMA remains extremely 
concerned about allegations made against a number of managers and individuals 
in the game.

FA unsteady and unprepared for role as guardian of the game’s standards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/fa-unprepared-guardian-football-standards>
“Alongside the FA, and the other principal stakeholders in the game, we want 
to fully investigate any and all substantive allegations of corruption, quickly 
and comprehensively. Very disappointingly, this process is being delayed as the 
Telegraph is yet to provide to the FA, as requested, full and complete 
unconditional disclosure of all the information it has.

“We urge the Telegraph to provide full disclosure of all its information 
relating to the allegations, including all recordings, transcripts and full 
details of how the information was obtained, to the FA, immediately. This 
information should not be provided selectively but unedited and unconditionally 
in order that a fully comprehensive investigation can be expedited.”
 