
Fewer than half of local charities are confident they will still be around in 
five years. It’s a shocking statistic, particularly given the fact that 
organisations with an annual income of less than £100,000 make upthe vast 
majority <https://data.ncvo.org.uk/a/almanac16/size-and-scope/> of the UK’s 
voluntary sector.

Small charities miss out on donations because public unaware of them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/13/small-charities-miss-donations-public-unaware>
On Local Charities Day 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/local-charities-day-16th-december>, 16 
December, Localgiving’s second annualreport [pdf] on the sustainability of 
local charity and community groups 
<https://localgiving.org/reports/Local_Charity_Community_Group_Sustainability_Report_2016.pdf>
 finds a sector stretched to breaking point. Despite three in four 
organisations reporting a continued increase in demand for their services, 60% 
say they know of one or more local groups that have been forced to close in the 
last year alone.

 Talking to the hardworking people behind these organisations, we hear 
passionate voices frustrated by a constant uphill struggle. Linzie, for 
instance, is the only paid staff member atChelwood Foodbankplus 
<https://localgiving.org/charity/chelwood-foodbankplus/>, an independent 
charity operating four food banks in Stockport and the surrounding area that 
helps hundreds of people each month. She says community support is high but her 
organisation still struggles to make ends meet.

Linzie’s role covers everything from running the operations and managing 
volunteers to writing grant applications. Contracted for just 16 hours a week, 
she regularly works more than 40. The charity is supported by a number of 
volunteers, but they come and go because of other commitments.

Like many of the groups we at Localgiving support, Chelwood has seen a massive 
increase in demand for its services as a result of job insecurity and zero 
hours contracts. Many people are referred by the police and other government 
agencies, but the charity receives no public sector funding for its work.

As a local independent group, Chelwood often finds itself overshadowed by 
national organisations and their teams of professional fundraisers. Generating 
food donations at local level is increasingly difficult, with many national 
supermarkets stopping collections altogether. Linzie says people often tell her 
they have donated to Chelwood via a food bin in a local shop, not realising it 
is going to a different national network. She fears for Chelwood’s future. The 
process of applying for grants is confusing and overwhelming, making gaining 
funding a constant battle. Despite being aware of the resources and training 
available to help with fundraising, she simply doesn’t have the time to 
dedicate to learning.

In four years there will be no grants for charities – it will destroy 
communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/11/grants-local-charities-campaign-appeal-government-cuts>
Linzie’s story is just one of many. The issues facing the local voluntary 
sector are complex and wide-ranging – and there is no silver bullet. Much good 
work is being done to raise awareness, funding and support for local charities 
and community groups, fromtraining opportunities 
<http://www.thefsi.org/services/training/local-charities-day-2/> to matched 
funding campaigns <http://localcharitiesday.localgiving.org/>. But there is 
plenty more to do to ensure these unique organisations are able to continue 
helping local people in the future.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 