
The number of people doing jobs in London’s gig economy has increased by 
almost three-quarters since 2010, according to research by thinktank the New 
Economics Foundation.

Analysis by the group found that the number of people working for themselves 
in the capital in the transport and storage sector had increased from 38,000 in 
2010 to about 65,300 in 2016.


Recent years have seen a boom in app-based taxi and delivery services, such as 
Uber andDeliveroo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo>, which are 
operated by technology firms and use self-employed couriers and drivers.

The thinktank said it believed it was this type of casual employment that was 
behind the huge increase in the number of “non-employing businesses” that the 
Office for National Statistics had recorded in the sector.

These are businesses that do not employ anyone other than the owner, and would 
include most people working in the gig economy, the group said.

Across the UK as a whole, the number of non-employing businesses was up by 28% 
over the period studied, but in London’s transport sector it increased by 72%.


The New Economics Foundation said the growing gig economy meant thousands more 
people had been left without the security of a regular wage, a pension or full 
employment rights.

“Rather than the blooming of a thousand flowers, as the digital economy was 
supposed to encourage, we have seen the emergence of extremely powerful tech 
giants whose business model is to achieve market dominance and then reap the 
rewards,” it added.

Stephen Devlin, the senior economist who did the analysis, said: “There are 
many advantages to the working lifestyles offered byUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> and Deliveroo, but too much power 
now rests in a handful of platform companies. Workers are seeing their wages 
squeezed and hard-won employment securities eroded.”


In October, an employment tribunal found that drivers for Uber should be 
classed as workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 and given extra rights, but the case is going to appeal. A separatecase has 
been heard against courier firm CitySprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/citysprint-courier-tells-tribunal-of-fear-of-receiving-less-work-on-refusing-jobs>
, although no ruling has yet been made, and recentlyworkers for Deliveroo 
requested union recognition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/deliveroo-union-recognition-iwbg-camden-london-uber>
.

The government has commissioned a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/i-tell-theresa-may-working-lives-review-modern-employment-zero-hours-flexibility>
 into workers’ rights and practices from Matthew Taylor, who worked for Tony 
Blair before heading the Royal Society of Arts.

Devlin said: “There’s no reason we can’t have flexibility for workers as well 
as strong employment rights.”
 