
London Broncos are considering moving in with Barnet FC at their new home, The 
Hive <http://www.thehivelondon.com/>, next season. The Broncos have run into 
increasingly regular problems with Harlequins, who have been their landlords at 
The Stoop, their home since 2006.

The club's owner, David Hughes, and the chief executive, Gus Mackay, have been 
seeking alternative options for months, and The Hive, in Edgware, north London 
is now thought to be the firm favourite. It does represent a major move from 
the development work they have done in west London, but an expected capacity of 
around 5,600 at the new stadium currently being built forBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> should help them generate a 
better atmosphere – and, crucially, the ground is a short walk from the Canons 
Park and Queensbury stations on the Jubilee Line, which will leave the club 
more accessible from the tube since the halcyon days of Fulham at Craven 
Cottage.

At least one leading Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> official has already inspected 
the site, although Mackay remained non-committal. "Negotiations with a number 
of potential venues are at a sensitive stage, so now is not the right time to 
comment," he said.

The Broncos have been forced to switch home games to Esher and Wycombe this 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/06/london-broncos-bradford-bulls-super-league>
 because of their role as tenants of Harlequins, and will return toGillingham's 
Priestfield Stadium for the second consecutive season for the Super League 
fixture against Warrington on 8 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/nov/19/london-broncos-rugby-league-wigan>
. Gillingham is thought to be another option for 2014, largely because of the 
successful development of theMedway Dragons amateur club 
<http://www.pitchero.com/clubs/medwaydragons/>, and Leyton Orient's Brisbane 
Road, where the Broncos played Bradford Bulls last season, is another.

However, this weekend they are back at The Stoop for a fifth-round Challenge 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup> tie against the Bulls on 
Friday night – another fixture that had to be switched because of a potential 
clash with the rugby union Premiership play-offs, although as it turned out 
Harlequins are now away from home.
 