
London Irish have been stumbling around the Premiership trapdoor for some time 
now and, barring something pretty unlikely, they are set to slip through it on 
Sunday after their match against Harlequins. With aseven-point gap to 
second-bottom Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/newcastle-london-irish-premiership-rugby-match-report>
, and Wasps as their final-day opponents the following Saturday, any success 
against Quins is likely to merely delay rather than alter the Exiles’ fate.

Newcastle cling on to leave London Irish tumbling towards relegation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/newcastle-london-irish-premiership-rugby-match-report>
Irish have been a fixture in the top flight since the 1996-97 season and a 
drop into theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> will be hard to 
take. The TV cameras disappear, as do most of the crowds, and the newspapers no 
longer follow your progress with much interest. But it need not be all doom and 
gloom.

First of all, though, let’s dispel a myth: don’t believe it when people tell 
you the drop is a great opportunity to re-evaluate your business, give yourself 
a good shakedown and bounce straight back in rude health. People always quote 
the relegations ofQuins in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/may/02/rugbyunion.harlequinsru> and 
Northampton in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/apr/30/rugbyunion.sport4> and tell you 
that both roared back and soon won the Premiership title. They forget, though, 
the two clubs were relegated in what was almost a different era and had strong 
and stable squads. They were relegated more in spite of what they were rather 
than because of it. This narrative also ignores the Bristol story, where a club 
who didn’t immediately bounce back have repeatedly failed to get back up 
through the play-offs.

What relegation does give is an opportunity to clear your mind and work out 
exactly what you want as a coach. Survival coaching, when you are battling the 
drop, is very different to strategic coaching. You’ve got the group you’ve got, 
you’ve got to win the game next week and the principles you started out with 
are not necessarily the ones that will achieve that.

The Premiership is so brutal that you can easily become sucked in, despite 
your intentions when you started out. Tom Coventry began his time atLondon Irish
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> with principles based on his 
experience of Super Rugby but after being well beaten repeatedly he had to 
tweak his approach to the attritional nature of the Premiership and go chasing 
results. You have to compromise to get the result, and after doing that five or 
six times you can lose sight of what you believed in in the first place.

The first thing to deal with once you have had the chance to sit back and 
reflect after relegation is who you want playing for you. New signings are 
important but you need to prioritise who you want to fight to keep in the 
inevitable post-season recruitment shake-up.

The pressure is to get promotion at the first time of asking and the easy way 
to do that is to keep the players you have because they should be good enough 
to get you out of the Championship. But the reality is that if you keep too 
many they will simply keep you in the same cycle once you get back to the
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>.

Equally, you need to avoid the temptation of buying a bunch of 33-year-olds 
purely because they have been there and done it. They may well get you back up 
but they may also take you straight back down.

Instead you need to create a core group who buy into your approach, to which 
you keep adding quality to help you move up the league. Rob Baxter has done 
this fantastically well at Exeter where young players such as Jack Nowell, 
Henry Slade and Luke Cowan‑Dickie have been steadily fed into the team and have 
been supplemented by astute and experienced signings such as Thomas Waldrom, 
Julian Salvi and Geoff Parling.

Baxter has developed a club from achieving promotion with a group of unknowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/26/exeter-chiefs-bristol-rugby-playoff>
 to building on that core group season by season, by adding quality without 
compromising on the original values. Very few names remain from the original 
promoted group within the current squad but that original group set out what it 
took to be an Exeter player and the current group are maintaining those values.

For all the planning and plotting a route out of the Championship, it is 
important to remember to enjoy yourself and to respect the clubs and the people 
who play in it. Many players’ first reaction will be that this is a tournament 
they don’t want to be in but with an eight-month season and some challenging 
environments it’s essential to retain a high dose of humility. If you don’t get 
stuck in and you play without engaging with your opposition and surroundings, 
you just set yourselves up as a target for everybody else to hit.

Losing away to a tactically astute Jersey backed by a passionate, packed 
crowd, followed by a few post‑match beers, is both a sobering and invigorating 
experience that reminds you why you got involved in this sport in the first 
place. The whole experience may seem a bit old school but too many of today’s 
professional players have bypassed that kind of experience. A couple of hours 
in the beer tent after a Pirates game will take them back to a bygone era – and 
it may even win them a few new friends and supporters.
 