
London Welsh <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-welsh>, the club 
relegated after one season in the Premiership, will face Bristol, a side who 
regularly look favourites for promotion before tripping up at the last hurdle, 
for a place in the top tier next season.

On Sunday a late penalty from the former Scotland fly-half Gordon Ross saw 
London Welsh into the final with a two-point aggregate win over Leeds Carnegie, 
another of those sides with a history of yo-yoing between divisions.

Leeds had held a seven-point advantage from the first leg of their Championship
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> semi-final and 
extended that to 13 with just 12 minutes left to play. However, Seb Stegmann 
went over for a converted try in the 68th minute and when Ollie Stedman crossed 
three minutes later London Welsh led 26-20 on the day, but trailed by just a 
single point on aggregate, before Leeds were undermined by one of their former 
players.

Ross, who was with Leeds from 2002â€‘06 and had a habit of pulling rabbits out 
of the hat, then landed the winning penalty two minutes from time to make it 
29-20 on the day and 60-58 on aggregate to the team whose time in the 
Premiership was seriously undermined by docked points for playing an 
unregistered player.

The side coached by Justin Burnell will play Bristol over two legs, the first 
in nine days at the Kassam Stadium, Oxford. Bristol avoided another year of 
embarrassment by coming from behind to beat Rotherham 22-11, making the 
aggregate score 39-25.

Bristol, who have spent heavily anticipating a return to the Premiership, had 
only a three-point lead after the first leg and trailed by eight points, with 
one man in the sin-bin, before scoring 19 in the second half, inspired by the 
former Wales captain Ryan Jones, making his debut after being released early by 
the Ospreys.

Nicky Robinson, another Wales international, kicked 17 points as Bristol, who 
have gone through the season turning down chances for the boot, turned to 
pragmatism.
 