
The average cost of a home in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
is more than 14 times average earnings – the highest level on record, according 
to figures from property consultancy Hometrack. Oxford and Cambridge are not 
far behind, the company’s latest index of city prices indicates, with house 
prices at 13.5 and 13.6 times local earnings respectively.

A lack of homes for sale combined with demand fuelled by low mortgage rates 
has pushed up average prices in London by 86% since 2009, according to 
Hometrack, to an average of £482,000. The increase is far in excess of wage 
growth and means prices are 14.2 times the average London wage packet of 
£33,720 a year – the highest multiple since 2002.

Don't mistake autumn statement for infrastructure splurge | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/23/dont-mistake-autumn-statement-for-infrastructure-splurge>
Prices in London did falter during the credit crisis but it was not long 
before they resumed their upwards march. The boom is slowing however, Hometrack 
said, with the annual rate of growth in the capital falling to 9.1%, and the 
firm forecasting a further drop to “low single digits” in the next six to 12 
months.

The figures highlight how tough the housing market has become for prospective 
buyers in cities around the UK, with prices in all 20 tracked by Hometrack 
higher than their post-crash low. In Oxford, prices have increased by 72% since 
their nadir, to an average of £415,000, while in Cambridge the average has 
risen by 84% to £420,600 and in Bristol prices are up by 61% at £259,400. 
Glasgow has shown the smallest increase, with prices 13% above their low at 
£114,700.

Prices in Glasgow are typically just 3.7 times local earnings, making it one 
of three cities where the ratio is below its long-run average, Hometrack said. 
The other two are Liverpool and Newcastle. At £112,700 the average price in 
Liverpool is 4.4 times earnings, while in Newcastle it is 4.8 times earnings at 
£122,600.

Graph showing average house prices in relation to earnings 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-24T17:38:04/embed.html>
Richard Donnell, insight director at Hometrack, said he expected Oxford and 
Cambridge to see falls in growth similar to that in London.

“The impetus for house price growth is shifting from the 
affordability-constrained cities in southern England to cities in the midlands 
and the north of England,” he sad. “Regional cities have more attractive 
affordability levels and house prices have significant potential upside for 
growth in the near term subject to the outlook for the economy.”

Housing gets £4bn boost to increase number of new homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/housing-gets-4bn-boost-to-increase-number-of-new-homes>
Wednesday’s autumn statement included the announcement of a £2.3bn fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/housing-gets-4bn-boost-to-increase-number-of-new-homes>
 to pay for infrastructure that would unlock sites in areas of highest demand, 
in a move the government said would enable up to 100,000 more homes to be built.

Donnell said the statement had focused on the longer term challenges of 
addressing housing supply. “This will have limited impact on the current 
profile of housing affordability in the near term which will be dictated by 
market forces and households’ expectations for jobs and the cost of borrowing,” 
he said.

Figures from the Office for National Statistics indicate that saving for a 
deposit will get harder for those living in rented accommodation in many parts 
of Great Britain. The ONS’s latest private rental index suggested that in the 
year to October private rents in England increased by 2.5% in England, while in 
Wales they went up by 0.4%. OnlyScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> recorded a fall, with rents down by 
0.2%.

Rent inflation was highest in the south-east of England, where tenants are 
paying 3.4% more than a year ago, and lowest in the north-east where costs have 
gone up by 1.1%.
 