
The red dragon was still fluttering above the clubhouse at Old Deer Park this 
week as the veterans of Richmond Lawn Tennis Club, suitably swaddled against 
the chill, played gentle mixed doubles on their new all‑weather courts. In the 
shadow of the tall pagoda, a benign sentinel on the other side of the wall 
separating the playing fields from the botanical wonderland of Kew Gardens, a 
lone groundsman steered his tractor back and forth, the rotating tines of his 
aerator cutting into the firm going. In the mid-morning gloom, a couple of 
cricketers were practising in the nets.

All perfectly normal on this piece of land, once a park attached to 
Elizabeth I’s Richmond Palace and still owned by the Crown Estates. Except that 
by the entrance on Kew Road, above the turnstiles with their cracked glass and 
broken locks, the signboard that normally provides information on London 
Welsh’s next fixture was ominously blank.

A few hours earlier the news of the 131-year-old club’s plunge into voluntary 
liquidation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/london-welsh-liquidation-semi-professional-return-rugby-union>
, provoked by their inability to meet a £250,000 tax bill, had broken. The 
announcement ended their survival as a fully professional club, terminated the 
employment of 35 players and five coaches, and wiped the name of Doncaster 
Knights, this weekend’s scheduled opponents in a round of the British and Irish 
Cup, from the signboard.

Richmond at London Irish a reminder of Premiership promise and unfairness | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/09/richmond-london-irish-championship-rugby>
Sad, of course, for the officers of the club, their staff and their many loyal 
supporters, but also for those who simply remember a time when the reputation of
London Welsh <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-welsh> was one of the 
most admired in the game of rugby and a visit to Old Deer Park was awaited with 
expectation.

The wooden board on the wall inside the clubhouse door, listing past 
presidents and captains in golden letters, now looks like a memorial. It 
records the service of men such as Captain Geoffrey Crawshay, president from 
1924 to 1939: brought up in the splendour of Cyfarthfa Castle near Merthyr 
Tydfil, badly wounded in the first world war, ADC to the Viceroy of India, a 
Lloyd George Liberal whose failure to win a parliamentary seat did not stop him 
working on behalf of the unemployed in south Wales during the harsh 1930s. Or 
Gwilym Lloyd George, the prime minister’s son, home secretary under Anthony 
Eden at the time of the Suez crisis and later raised to the peerage as the 
first Viscount Tenby, who presided from 1956 to 1967. The roll of past captains 
includes several notable internationals, from Vivian Jenkins, a prewardouble 
Oxford blue who became a distinguished sports writer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/jan/15/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
, toClive Rees in the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/feb/19/sixnations2004.rugbyunion1>.

The name appearing in both columns is that of John Dawes, the club’s captain 
from 1965-71 and now the president. Dawes was the captain of the British Lions 
team that went to New Zealand in 1971, beating the All Blacks with a squad that 
included, in addition to himself, six other London Welsh players – still a 
record for a single club. The others were the forwards Mervyn Davies, Geoff 
Evans, John Taylor and Mike Roberts,the full-back JPR Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2006/oct/06/smalltalkjprwilliams> and 
the prince of wings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/interactive/2013/jun/04/rugby-union-50-greatest-british-irish-lions>
, Gerald Davies. All but Evans and Roberts were first choices in the Test XV 
chosen by Carwyn James.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flondon-welsh-liquidation-history-sad-plight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ec5f1b4c76a8239df0585f46b5d5a8dab38f564%2F0_238_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Welsh%E2%80%99s%20plight%20is%20sad%20but%20storied%20past%20means%20all%20is%20not%20lost%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flondon-welsh-liquidation-history-sad-plight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Welsh%E2%80%99s%20plight%20is%20sad%20but%20storied%20past%20means%20all%20is%20not%20lost%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flondon-welsh-liquidation-history-sad-plight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ec5f1b4c76a8239df0585f46b5d5a8dab38f564%2F0_238_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
 London Welsh take on Bristol at Old Deer Park in September. Photograph: 
Allward/JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
“London Welsh was a wonderful club,” a saddened Gerald Davies told me this 
week. “At the time it was a very attractive, almost glamorous team, playing 
wonderful rugby under John Dawes – the kind you dream of playing. To be at Old 
Deer Park was a joy. A wonderful atmosphere, a wonderful surface – such a 
well-organised institution, on and off the pitch. I loved being a part of it.”

Those were the days when bright young Welshmen were drawn to London. “In 
earlier times people had travelled from Wales to London to sell milk,” Davies 
said. “In our day it was students and teachers. We were all teachers of one 
sort or another,except JPR, who was a doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/osm/story/0,,642497,00.html>.”

Davies – who is currently chairman of the Pro12 board – joined the club in 
1968 and stayed until 1974, when he decided to move back to Wales. “When you 
try to describe how we played under John Dawes, you can’t help but fall into 
cliche,” he said. “The players were all skilful and determined to play an 
expansive 15-man game, a game that was about creating space and allowing people 
to express themselves – a game that would excite and satisfy all the players as 
well as the people who paid to sit in the stand.”

London Welsh go into liquidation but hope for semi-professional return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/london-welsh-liquidation-semi-professional-return-rugby-union>
That single stand, a cantilevered concrete and breeze block structure backing 
on to the Royal Mid-Surrey Golf Club, is now a monument to better days, its 
green plastic tip-up seats discolouring and its facilities primitive. With 
hindsight the big mistake London Welsh made was to get promoted to the top 
flight in 2012, the result of an attempt to meet the professional era head on. 
In order to meet statutory requirements, the move up to the Premiership was 
accompanied by a relocation fromOld Deer Park to Oxford United’s Kassam Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/aug/31/london-welsh-exiles-oxford-premiership>
. Marred by a five-point deductionfor giving nine appearances to an ineligible 
player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/18/the-breakdown-rugby-london-welsh>
, and with their hundreds of spectators rattling around in an arena capable of 
holding 12,000,their season ended in relegation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/15/relegation-london-welsh-kassam-stadium>
.

A year later they bounced back into the top flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/04/london-welsh-beat-bristol-promotion-premiership>
, still commuting to Oxford. Then, however, came a season of disaster: the 
unparalleled humiliation of defeat in every single league and cup fixture. Now 
the professional side of the club is simply no more and the operations are 
being taken over by the amateur wing, which has continued to run all the sides 
beneath the first XV – the Druids, the Dragons, the Occies, the veterans, the 
women’s squad and the mini-rugby scheme.

A 20-point deduction and the need to produce a credible business plan and a 
probable £150,000 bond stand in the way of continuing as a semi-pro outfit in 
the Championship next season. If they fail to meet those requirements and have 
to start from the bottom again as an amateur club, they can take heart from the
example of their near neighbours Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/09/richmond-london-irish-championship-rugby>
, the first casualties of full-blown professionalism, who plunged straight from 
the Premiership to the ninth tier after going bust in 1999 and reset their 
sights before making it all the way back to the Championship this season.

At London Welsh, jobs have been lost a couple of weeks before Christmas. But 
at least those who continue to make the pilgrimage to Old Deer Park will have 
the history of a great club to warm them, as well, perhaps, as a set of more 
realistic expectations.
 