
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> commuters were starting to 
battle major transport problems as the most widespread tube strike in decades 
started on Wednesday evening.

The 24-hour industrial action began at 6.30pm, with disruption meaning 
services would not resume until Friday morning. After 6.30pm on Wednesday some 
stations were quieter than usual, with some services still running at 7pm, 
although staff said all services would definitely cease by 8pm.

Prior to the walkout, services were winding down and coming under strain. 
Transport for London (TfL) had warned commuters that therush-hour would be 
particularly busy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/08/tube-strike-apps-get-around-london>
 as many attempted to leave early ahead of the strike.

Images of chaos outside underground stations, including Oxford Circus and 
Victoria, have been posted by commuters on social media. Hundreds of would-be 
tube passengers vented their frustration as crowds swelled outside the 
entrances to the underground with commuters spilling into the streets.
Sophie Murray-Morris (@smurraymorris) 
Fun at Victoria #TubeStrike <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TubeStrike?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/daVZ6bFXl7 <http://t.co/daVZ6bFXl7>
 <https://twitter.com/smurraymorris/status/618823497750589440> July 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/smurraymorris/status/618823497750589440> Francine Beleyi 
(@FrancineBeleyi) 
#London <https://twitter.com/hashtag/London?src=hash> tube strike disruptions 
tonight. oxford circus station temporarily closed. view from a bus
pic.twitter.com/o0G01ueM3Y <http://t.co/o0G01ueM3Y>
 <https://twitter.com/FrancineBeleyi/status/618824497408405505> July 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/FrancineBeleyi/status/618824497408405505> Kate Stent 
(@katestent) 
Tube strike causing havoc at Oxford Circus! #tfl 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tfl?src=hash> #tubestrike 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tubestrike?src=hash> #oxfordcircus 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/oxfordcircus?src=hash> #toomanypeople 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/toomanypeople?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/PI2kX036SQ 
<http://t.co/PI2kX036SQ>
 <https://twitter.com/katestent/status/618824221649715200> July 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/katestent/status/618824221649715200> 
Most rail services, the Docklands Light Railway and the London Overground will 
continue to operate throughout the strike, as will buses and riverboat 
services, but traffic was expected to be heavy.

The strike action by four unions representing almost 20,000 staff, including 
train drivers, is the result of a continuing dispute over pay and rosters for 
the all-night tube services planned to start at weekends in September. Unions 
said further strikes would follow this summer unlessLondon Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> improved its offer.

Talks broke down on Tuesday evening between tube managers and the unions, with 
both sides denouncing the other’s negotiating tactics.

Further rail misery was confirmed when last-ditch talks between the RMT union 
and First Great Western (FGW) to head off a separate 48-hour strike, also 
starting on Wednesday evening, broke down. The strike will see national rail 
services from London to the south-west and Wales – including the Ashes venue, 
Cardiff – severely depleted.

Five key apps to help you get around London during the tube strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/08/tube-strike-apps-get-around-london>
In the capital, TfL said extra bus and river services would run, but increased 
traffic was likely to severely affect all public transport.

It advised passengers to travel outside peak hours if possible on Thursday, and
walk <https://tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/walking-map-london.pdf>or 
cycle – ideally on their own bike, with the cycle hire scheme expected to be in 
strong demand, despite extra docking stations being added in central London.

Passengers can check before they travel at TfL’s website 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/tube-strike> and via Twitter by following 
@TfLTravelAlerts, @TfLTrafficNews and @TfLBusAlerts.

TfL was also deploying travel “ambassadors” and volunteers to assist and hand 
out maps at central London transport hubs. The congestion charge will still 
apply.

Mike Brown, the managing director of London Underground, said the strike was 
“totally unnecessary”, adding: “We have strained every muscle to put together a 
remarkably fair pay offer to reflect the transformation in the service. But the 
leaderships of the unions have refused to respond to this offer … We remain 
committed to talking at any time provided that they are serious about engaging 
with us.


“As well as the damage to real businesses and real people in our city, strikes 
also mean the pointless loss of pay for staff and put a huge dent in our 
income.”

But Labour politicians backed union claims that staff had not been adequately 
consulted nor compensated for the changes to working conditions that the night 
tube would bring. Leadership contender Jeremy Corbyn tabled a Commons motion 
expressing dismay at the imposition of night working, warning that was “being 
rushed in on the back of massive cuts to staffing and strains on the existing 
infrastructure”.

Labour’s London Assembly transport spokeswoman, Val Shawcross, accused the 
mayor of having provoked the strike. “By announcing the night tube without any 
prior consultation or negotiation with the staff he expected to run it, Boris 
Johnson has caused many of the problems we face today,” she said.

Both LU and unions said they would be available for talks on Friday. 

Cricket spectators travelling to Cardiff will be among thousands of FGW 
passengers affected by the 48-hour strike by the RMT over safety concerns and 
job cuts in the introduction of new trains.


The action will disrupt trains to and from London Paddington and close some 
branch lines in Devon, Cornwall and Dorset.FGW warned 
<https://www.firstgreatwestern.co.uk/strike> that its long-distance trains 
would be very busy and have no catering, with only two trains running from 
London in time for the match and the direct services from Bristol Temple Meads 
closed for 48 hours.

FGW said passengers who could make alternative travel arrangements should do 
so where possible.
 