
Thirty years ago next May, Keith Houchen stooped to conquer. A journeyman 
striker with Coventry City, who had nearly missed the1987 FA Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/may/16/fa-cup-final-tottenham-coventry-classic-1987>
 against Tottenham Hotspur because of food poisoning, Houchen scored the 
defining goal of the match with a diving header of acrobatic grace. It was a 
goal that lived on beyond that game and helped seal a glorious chapter in the 
history of Coventry, who lifted the Cup for the first and only time. Today fans 
of the beleaguered club may be forgiven for thinking it was a dream.

Twenty years ago Coventry were a Premier League side. They were managed by 
Gordon Strachan, had David Burrows in defence, Gary McAllister in midfield and 
up front the deadly duo of Dion Dublin and Darren Huckerby. Ten years ago 
Coventry were in the Championship, their long run in the top flight finally at 
an end and with the costs of a new stadium, the Ricoh Arena, hanging around 
their neck. At the end of 2007, the club were bought by the hedge fund Sisu 
Capital.

Now it is fair to say the club are in a state of absolute distress. Sitting at 
the bottom of League One with one victory in 11 games,Tony Mowbray resigned as 
manager on 29 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/coventry-city-manager-tony-mowbray-resigns-winless-run>
, leaving behind a group of players he called “babies in a man’s league”. Their 
last league match at the 32,609-seat Ricoh Arena was watched by a crowd of only 
8,030. “Gates are 25% down on last season already,” says Jan Mokrzycki of the 
Sky Blue Trust, Coventry City’s supporters’ group. “People are either angry or 
just don’t care any more.”

Coventry in crisis and Bob Bradley swans in to south Wales – Football Weekly 
Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/oct/06/coventry-in-crisis-and-bob-bradley-swans-into-south-wales-football-weekly-extra>
Most of the anger is directed at Sisu, which still owns the club through a 
complicated series of companies. Sisu is blamed for a litany of faults, from a 
rent strike at the Ricoh Arena to the still controversial decision to 
temporarily move the club to Northampton, to a series of draining legal actions 
against Coventry city council and, most recently, an announcement that the 
club’s training ground – the club’s only substantial asset – had been included 
in a regional plan as a potential site for 75 new houses.

The most pressing concerns for Coventry, beyond their league position, are 
twofold: what happens when the club’s deal at the Ricoh Arena runs out at the 
end of next season and, more immediately, the continued existence of the club’s 
Category 2 academy, the club’s “lifeline”.

Both of these issues are complicated by the poisonous relations between Sisu 
and the council. It is the latter which owns the freehold on the Ricoh Arena, 
while another company, Arena Coventry Limited, holds the lease. In 2013 ACL was 
half owned by the council and half by a local charity, the Alan Higgs 
children’s charity. It is now owned entirely by Wasps Rugby Club.

After Sisu’s decision in 2012 to withhold rent on the basis the terms were too 
high for aLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
club, ACL fell into arrears and the council agreed to loan the company £14.4m. 
Sisu promptly asked for a judicial review, claiming this amounted to 
inappropriate aid from the state. The subsequent review in the high court found 
in ACL’s favour, with the judge also accusing Sisu of “mismanagement” and 
finding it “had no strategy for maintaining a sustainable football club, except 
one that involved the purchase, at a knockdown price, of at least a 50% share 
in ACL and thus the Arena”. Sisu chose to appeal and this year that bid failed 
as the court of appeal ruled again in ACL’s favour. Sisu is now in the process 
of appealing once again, this time to the supreme court. Legal costs are 
currently thought to total more than a million pounds.

Discussions over a new 20-year tenancy for Coventry at the Ricoh Arena have 
ground to a halt while the legal action continues. Meanwhile, the club are 
unable to guarantee a home for their academy beyond the end of this year. The 
system that has in recent years produced Callum Wilson and the England 
youngster James Maddison is temporarily housed at a local sports centre. The 
council appear set to hand over that land to Wasps as the site of a new 
training centre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcoventry-city-decline-despair-league-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2d97aee13e6fec56b4e8b4efd8884bd9d08857%2F0_54_2583_2087%2F2583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Long%2C%20sorry%20decline%20of%20Coventry%20City%20leaves%20fans%20in%20a%20state%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcoventry-city-decline-despair-league-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Long%2C%20sorry%20decline%20of%20Coventry%20City%20leaves%20fans%20in%20a%20state%20of%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcoventry-city-decline-despair-league-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2d97aee13e6fec56b4e8b4efd8884bd9d08857%2F0_54_2583_2087%2F2583.jpg>
 Coventry’s Jodi Jones, left, during the recent Checkatrade Trophy match with 
Northampton. Photograph: Pete Norton/Getty Images 
When approached, Coventry city council refused to comment, while Sisu did not 
respond to requests for comment.

As for the club, they remain in a parlous position. “The club and its owners 
find themselves in an unprecedented and extraordinary situation,” a Coventry 
spokesman told the Guardian. “A lot of our challenges stem from one fact:
Coventry City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> does not own its 
own stadium. [The club are] unable to commercially benefit from sales of food 
and drink, parking even. It has been this way for many years and we have not 
been able to persuade the various stadium owners to reconsider these 
challenges. We would like a long-term deal that keeps the Sky Blues at the 
Ricoh stadium. But we have not been successful in agreeing a deal that would be 
economically viable for the club.”

As for the academy and training ground, Coventry had the following to say: 
“Our academy site is now controlled by Wasps, which is keen to develop it as a 
training facility for its own players. For this reason, it is likely we will be 
looking for an alternative base to house our academy. We do, however, continue 
to explore alternatives with the help of the Coventry Sports Foundation – which 
is a partner of the city council.

“We have no immediate plans to sell our training ground. Rugby district 
council is in the process of producing a strategic plan for its area, an event 
that happens very rarely, and so we had an opportunity to apply for a change of 
use in the event of a move of our training site. To be clear: we do not plan to 
immediately move but felt this was a prudent piece of long-term contingency 
planning.”

What two interns learned from working at football clubs – in 1989-90 and 
2014-15
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2016/oct/11/working-football-clubs-coventry-city-crystal-palace>
What emerges from talking to people involved in this long sorry saga is a 
feeling of helplessness, that the club’s future is beyond their control. There 
is talk of the club living “hand to mouth” with no tactical, never mind 
strategic, direction of travel.

Last month supporters’ groups announced a plan called the Jimmy Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-maximum-wage-three-points-match-of-the-day>
 Way, named afterthe club’s legendary chairman and manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-pundit-trailblazer-television-football>
. They joined together with theCoventry Telegraph in calling for Sisu to sell up
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/oct/03/football-fans-protest-club-owners-blackburn-coventry-charlton>
. As yet they have had no response – but even if the will was there, any such 
deal would not be a panacea. The club reduced their operating losses to £1.9m 
in their last published results but the success was largely down to cutting 
running costs to the bone. This includes the wage bill. Mowbray nearly got 
Coventry to the play-offs with a team of loanees last season but left admitting 
he had been unable to pull a rabbit from the hat a second time.

“A fair chunk of people have just had enough,” says Mokrzycki. “They’ve gone 
to watch other teams, or they’ve gone to watch Wasps. Once we were respected in 
English football. Once we won the FA Cup. If Jimmy Hill could see where were 
now, he’d be mortified.”
 