
Richard Layard is promoting the idea that better provision of mental health 
services is more important than reducing social inequalities in promoting human 
happiness (Happiness depends on health and friends, not money, says new study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/happiness-depends-on-health-and-friends-not-money-says-new-study>
, theguardian.com, 12 December). This is a false dichotomy. Evidence suggests 
that austerity damages our collective health. Deepening economic and social 
divides, bullying, abuse, misogyny, racism, dehumanisation and consequent 
insecurity, trauma, social exclusion, neglect and despair underpin the current 
tsunami of desolation in the UK and beyond, especially in our children. These 
are largely economic and political matters, requiring cultural, social and 
political solutions. Psychological therapies, humanely delivered to those who 
want them, have a part to play in ameliorating human suffering, and we do need 
more flexible, kind and supportive services. But we must not pathologise those 
who are damaged by the injustices they experience. Degradation by the benefits 
system is now devastating many with long-term illnesses in the UK. To imagine 
that therapy, rather than social transformation, can address or prevent the 
conditions that lead to despair is to be wilfully blind.
Annie Mitchell Clinical and community psychologist, Helen Beckwith Clinical 
psychologist,Jan Bostock Clinical and community psychologist, Anna Daiches 
Clinical psychologist,Suzanne Elliot Clinical psychologist, Danielle Gaynor 
Clinical psychologist, Carl Harris Clinical and community psychologist, 
Jennifer Marris Psychologist, James Randall-James Clinical psychologist in 
training,Eleanor Schoultz Clinical psychologist, Sarah Wolf Clinical 
psychologist in training, Sally Zlotovitz Community psychologist 

• Workplace happiness is not about the trivial (The cult of compulsory 
happiness is ruining our workplaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/cult-compulsory-happiness-ruining-workplaces-office-fun>
, 12 December). Micromanagement, being told what to do and blame cultures are 
the kind of things that make people unhappy at work. Instead, enable people to 
do work they are good at, give them the trust and freedom to do it well, have 
managers who coach rather than tell, and create a no-blame environment. The 
result will be happier staff and more productive organisations.
Henry Stewart
Chief happiness officer, Happy Ltd (founder and former CEO) 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 