
After managerial stints spent working beside the Atlantic (Estoril and 
Sporting Lisbon) and then the Mediterranean (Olympiakos), Marco Silva is now 
set for a North Sea idyll. But might the Hull air prove a little too bracing 
for a coach poised to accept what many people regard as the Premier League’s 
impossible job? There are certainly pressing and wider issues at the division’s 
bottom club.

Hull City set to appoint Marco Silva as manager to replace Mike Phelan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/hull-city-marco-silva-target-mike-phelan-manager>
The manager is not the main problem


Given the bleak context, Mike Phelan did as well as could reasonably be 
expected. WhenSteve Bruce walked out in despair at the end of July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/steve-bruce-leaves-hull>, 
Phelan performed wonders to galvanise the dressing room and, despite having 
only 13 fit senior players, choreographedearly wins against Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/hull-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 andSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/swansea-city-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
. With his squad ravaged by injuries and having lost Mohamed Diamé to Newcastle 
United, he was further damaged when his board recruited too late, and too 
sparsely, at the end of August. The attacking department remains particularly 
under-staffed. Unfortunately Ryan Mason, his £13m record midfield signing from 
Tottenham, has disappointed and, although the dressing room remained largely 
united behind a popular manager until the bitter end, Phelan’s failure to bring 
the best out of the latterly under-achieving Tom Huddlestone proved 
detrimental. Despite presiding over one league win –at home against Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/hull-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 – since late summer, Phelan’s Hull often played attractive, passing football 
while also securing an EFL Cup semi-final against Manchester United.

Hull’s best players are not happy

Robert Snodgrass – or more specifically his richly gifted left foot – is the 
overrriding reason why Hull remain within touching distance of safety. After 
recovering from a career-threatening knee injury,the Scotland winger has been 
outstanding this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/hull-robert-snodgrass-arsenal>
 but knows he is coveted by a clutch of clubs, including Newcastle. 
Disillusioned by events on and off the field at Hull, he declined to sign a 
lengthy new contract and would have had only six months left on his remaining 
deal had the vice-chairman, Ehab Allam, not automatically triggered a clause 
facilitating a one-year extension. The same thing has happened to Abel 
Hernández, Jake Livermore, Michael Dawson, Harry Maguire and Andrew Robertson, 
none of whom had been enthusiastic about voluntarily extending their 
agreements. As Snodgrass recently reflected: “There have been no proper 
negotiations, it’s not been the best. I’ll have to ask the chairman what’s 
going on.” Those words rather beg the question as to how he, and his 
team-mates, might respond to a new coach with strictly limited English. A 
leader off, as well as on, the pitch, the Glaswegian possesses a certain edge 
and does not suffer fools.

Hull’s Robert Snodgrass: ‘I had dark days but now feel I can be better than 
before’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/hull-robert-snodgrass-arsenal>
A new buyer is desperately needed

As the weeks have turned into months and no takeover materialised, the sense 
of stasis has become increasingly destabilising. Far too much is on hold. A 
potential end to the limbo beckoned last spring when Peter Grieve, an American 
businessman, seemed close to buying the Allams out and then, in August, Dai 
Yongge and Dai Xiu Li, a Chinese brother and sister, made a bid which 
subsequently foundered when they apparently failed the Premier League’s fit and 
proper owners test. Meanwhile Chien Lee, the owner of Nice, expressed interest 
in Hull before Greater China Professional Services Limited, advised by former 
Hull chairman Adam Pearson, filed documents to the Hong Kong stock exchange 
stating a prospective £130m deal had been provisionally agreed subject to 
satisfactory due diligence. That, though, was in October and the fact no 
exclusivity deal has since been signed indicates stalled progress. Indeed, with 
the club’s Premier League status seriously at risk, any takeover seems unlikely 
until relegation is either avoided or confirmed. Meanwhile, some Hull fans 
question preciselyhow serious the Allams are about selling up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/11/hull-owner-assem-allam-to-sell-club-if-appeal-against-name-change-fails>
.

The atmosphere at the KCom is toxic

Before Phelan’s sacking and the courting of Silva, fans had planned a boycott 
of Saturday’s FA Cup third-round tie against Swansea at the KCom Stadium. With 
every stay-away supporter urged to give £12 to charity instead, that initiative 
was gaining momentum but may now be scuppered by curiosity at the new manager’s 
expected presence in the home dugout. Despite the team’s dismal record, fans 
have generally stayed behind the players and resisted turning on Phelan, but 
there have been increasing “Allams out” choruses. Such toxicity is exacerbated 
by a controversial new membership scheme abolishing concessions for children 
and pensioners. Resultant supporter anger was manifested when John Oxley, a 
local businessman, paid £2,500 to be a matchday sponsor for the 3-3 draw with 
Crystal Palace last month. Oxley used his on-pitch access before kick-off to 
unfurl a banner declaring: “Bring back concessions. Allams out” before being 
ejected by stewards.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwho-is-marco-silva-the-man-set-to-take-over-at-hull-city-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Marco%20Silva%2C%20the%20man%20set%20to%20take%20over%20at%20Hull%20City%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwho-is-marco-silva-the-man-set-to-take-over-at-hull-city-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Marco%20Silva%2C%20the%20man%20set%20to%20take%20over%20at%20Hull%20City%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwho-is-marco-silva-the-man-set-to-take-over-at-hull-city-video&media=>
Who is Marco Silva, the man set to take over at Hull City? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/04/who-is-marco-silva-the-man-set-to-take-over-at-hull-city-video> 