
On 5 July this year my world was turned upside down. Until then I was an 
average 28-year-old, married with two children and a full-time job, juggling 
the stresses of everyday life.

But that morning I woke up to find my husband Daniel missing. He had suffered 
with his mental health for a long time, but I still did not expect what had 
happened. Daniel had taken his own life.

My world was thrown into a spiral. So many questions were unanswered and an 
uncertain life now faced my family.

Mental health problems are too often​ perceived as a weakness and just ​​not 
talked about

Daniel left a lengthy note, mostly comprised of statements depicting his state 
of mind. But there was one element of his letter which really stayed with me: 
“You weren’t able to save me but you can try and save someone else,” he wrote. 
This sentence swam around in my head and the day after Daniel’s death, I set up 
a charity calledThe DPJ Foundation <http://www.thedpjfoundation.co.uk/> to 
support others suffering from mental health problems in Wales. I wanted to use 
his name to make a difference.

We decided that our work would focus on Pembrokeshire, a rural area with 
particular disadvantages for those suffering with mental health problems. It is 
a community where everyone knows everyone and admitting your supposed frailties 
isn’t an option.Mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> problems are too often 
perceived as a weakness and just not talked about.

I used my negative mental health experience to give hope to others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/oct/31/negative-mental-health-experience-hope-borderline-personality-disorder>
Pembrokeshire also has a huge agricultural community. Agricultural occupations 
carry some of thehighest rates 
<http://www.nuffieldinternational.org/rep_pdf/1476692236Aarun-Naik-report-2015.pdf>
 [pdf] of suicide. Farming is amale-dominated 
<http://www.samaritans.org/sites/default/files/kcfinder/files/Samaritans_Men_and_Suicide_Report_web.pdf>
 [pdf] industry and one of high stress, especially in recent times as rates of 
bovine tuberculosishit crisis level <http://www.bovinetb.info/wales.php> and 
many farmers faceplummeting milk prices 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/wales-sees-136-dairy-farm-11603448>
.

So far the DPJ Foundation has raised £11,000 through donations and fundraising 
events. Initially this money is being used to train people within the 
agricultural sector in mental health awareness. By training vets, feed reps and 
others who work in the industry, it is hoped we can give them the tools to 
support those they see on a daily basis. It is widely known that farmers are a 
stubborn breed and we hope that by taking the support to them, rather than 
waiting for people to seek it themselves, we can provide help for those in need.

The DPJ Foundation is very much in the early stages of its development, but we 
already have plans for counselling support and group support work next year.

'A stranger stopped me killing myself. Now I want to bring hope to others'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/27/stranger-stopped-me-killing-myself-help-others-find-mike>
We hope that another family will not have to suffer the loss mine has. 

In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share, emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 