
Louis van Gaal was delighted Manchester United ended the festive schedule a 
point closer to Chelsea and with a place in the FA Cup fourth round but the 
manager endured more misery on the injury front after Rafael da Silva was taken 
off with a suspected fractured cheekbone and Luke Shaw picked up a knock to his 
ankle inthe 2-0 victory at Yeovil Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/04/yeovil-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Both Da Silva and Shaw were withdrawn at half-time in a game United were 
making hard work of until Ander Herrera’s superb volley in the 64th minute gave 
the Premier League club the lead. Ángel di María then came off the substitutes’ 
bench and, after clearing a header off the line from Joe Edwards, the Yeovil 
captain, at one end of the pitch, the Argentinian put the game to bed at the 
other when he scored in the 90th minute following a fine pass from Wayne Rooney.

While Van Gaal was pleased that his players found a way past a well-organised 
Yeovil side, the fresh injuries are a major concern, given United have been 
without so many players in defence this season. Da Silva, who is believed to 
have been taken to hospital, had not long returned from a spell on the 
sidelines whileShaw’s first season at Old Trafford has been plagued by injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/13/luke-shaw-manchester-united-injured-hamstring>
.

“I think we have a lot of problems in the first half,” Van Gaal said. “Rafael 
da Silva has an injury, a fracture of his bone. So it was fantastic the cuts 
that he played through but I have to change him and also Luke Shaw had an ankle 
problem, so I had to change him also.

“We have to wait and see [with Rafael] because he is now already taken away in 
a car. I don’t know [how it happened], I have to watch the video again. It was 
a duel, also the same with Shaw. It was a very physical game I think. Rafael 
played through because the last weeks he doesn’t play so much any more, now he 
can play and he’s injured.”

Van Gaal was full of praise for Yeovil, who are bottom of League One but 
played with no shortage of spirit and had a wonderful chance to take the lead 
in the second half only for Kieffer Moore to shoot tamely at David de Gea. 
Frustrated with his players for being too impatient to score in the first half, 
Van Gaal reverted to 4-4-2 after the interval and felt that United controlled 
the game much better.

Johan Cruyff tells Louis van Gaal: stop complaining about fixture pile-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/05/johan-cruyff-louis-van-gaal-fixture-pile-up-manchester-united>
Asked whether it should have been so difficult for United against a team so 
far below them on the league ladder, Van Gaal said: “It’s not a matter of far 
below because when you see the performance ofYeovil Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/yeoviltown>, it was fantastic how they 
pressed the ball – always the ball was under pressure. When you have no 
patience like us in the first half, then it is more difficult. In the second 
half we played better I think but it takes also a long time to score the goal.

“It’s not so easy. Everybody thinks: ‘OK, these players are from Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, €100m against 
€5,000’, but it’s not like that. We played also with Holland against teams that 
are much more expensive in the World Cup. When you can organise your team like 
the manager of Yeovil Town has done, and they believe in it, then you can do a 
lot.

“But I am very happy that we have won. I am very happy that we have survived 
this festive period because I don’t have a big selection because of all the 
injuries, so I could not change much and in spite of that we have regained 
ground to Chelsea and we are in the fourth round of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. What more can a manager wish 
for?”
 