
The letter was signed “Mom and Dad” but it was aimed, of course, at the world. 
Mark Zuckerberg’s letter announcing thathe and Priscilla Chan were giving away 
99% of their Facebook shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
 is just over 2,200 words long. That’s room for a lot of detail – and he seems 
to offer it. He specifies the amount of the gift: $45bn at current market 
value. He emphasises the need to adopt long-term solutions over short-term 
fixes. He suggests that his and Chan’s mission of advancing human potential and 
promoting equality “will require a new approach for all”.

The $45bn exceeds the Gates Foundation’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation> current 
endowment. It’s larger than Warren Buffett’s $30bn gift to the Gates Foundation 
in 2006, then the largest charitable gift in history.

The world responded in an understandable manner: we went apeshit with 
excitement. Or, to put a sociological gloss on things, we experienced 
“collective effervescence”, the sociologist Émile Durkheim’s term for rare 
moments of community cohesion marked by mass outpourings of a shared sentiment. 
There were some early sceptics, those quick to impute a selfish motive. But 
they were soon deafened by the global chorus of well-wishers chanting the same 
refrain: thank you, Mr Zuckerberg. Thank you for your revolutionary gift. It 
turns out neither assumption was right. There was no gift. Nor, in contrast to 
what we’ve been hearing over the past few days, is there anything particularly 
revolutionary about Zuckerberg’s new business model.

Whether you call it charity or philanthropy, one thing is clear about 
Zuckerberg’s business transaction: he didn’t surrender anything. He set up a 
new investment company, a limited liability company called the Chan Zuckerberg 
Initiative, and transferred $1bn in Facebook shares to it. As Jesse Eisinger
reported in theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/business/dealbook/how-mark-zuckerbergs-altruism-helps-himself.html?_r=0>
, Zuckerberg simply “moved money from one pocket to the other”.

Wealthy philanthropists shouldn't impose their idea of common good on us | 
Joanne Barkan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/03/mark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-initiative-billionaire-philanthropy>
The global media took an unmerited pummelling for “rushing” out its reports on 
Zuckerberg and Chan’s announcement – why on earth did theNew York Times call it 
“charity”, one wag queried, when it isn’t? The answer is that when a wealthy 
man announces he’s giving away 99% of his fortune it’s reasonable to assume 
that at least some of it must be going to charitable causes.

Then things got really interesting. As if sensing that our newfound 
effervescence had fizzled rather abruptly, a crack team of management scholars 
and business journalists took up arms, manning airwaves and TV stations and the 
open-planned domiciles of new media startups funded by tech entrepreneurs based 
in Hawaii – and tried to cheer us with a single message. You’re right, they 
conceded. It’s not charity. But here’s the thing: it’s better than charity. 
It’s a new, radical movement that we like to call “philanthrocapitalism” – and 
it’s going to make you all rich. How, you might ask? By giving more 
philanthropy to the wealthy.

The most eloquent scribe of the philanthrocapitalism movement is Felix Salmon, 
a once-sceptic turned believer who offered this homage to Zuckerberg’s new 
investment vehicle: “Mark Zuckerberg isn’t going to be satisfied with small, 
visible interventions which don’t scale – feeding the hungry, say, or giving to 
the poor. Such activities improve the world, but they don’t change the world.” 
Zuckerberg, Salmon insists, wants radical change – and giving to the poor won’t 
achieve that.

Salmon’s right to suggest that Zuckerberg and other tech entrepreneurs often 
share an aversion to helping the poor directly. But he’s mistaken in suggesting 
the philanthrocapitalism movement – which includes a dizzying array of new 
techniques for making money out of the poor – is anything novel. On the 
contrary, this phenomenon – a trend you’re likely to hear endless upbeat 
stories about in the coming weeks, months and years – is simply an extension of 
a centuries-long effort to enrol every segment of the known universe into a 
realm where it’s possible for individuals to profiteer from their relationships 
with other people.

There is little evidence of positive outcomes for the poor, and considerable 
evidence such trends enrich the wealthy

The only thing new about the “new” philanthropy is that an older and stronger 
beast that’s been chasing for years after the riches it can smell in the 
non-profit world has finally caught up to its prey and begun feasting. 
Philanthrocapitalism is what happens to charity after capitalists swallow it.

Three trends exemplify the philanthrocapitalist turn: the rise of microfinance 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/11/microcredit-muhammad-yunus-bono-clinton-foundation-global-poverty-entrepreneurial-charity/>
; the growth of impact investing; and the rise of new investment vehicles such 
as Zuckerberg’s new limited liability , which structure themselves as 
for-profits so that they can offer financial grants and investments to 
for-profit recipients without the same disclosure and transparency requirements 
that non-profits face. Even Bill Gates’s foundation – although a traditional 
private foundation and not an LLC – has been ramping up its gift-giving to 
for-profit corporations in recent years: offering, for example, anon-repayable 
$11m grant to MasterCard 
<http://fortune.com/2014/12/03/mastercard-gates-foundation-kenya/> in 2014 to 
help the company expand its operations in Nairobi.

In each of these cases – microfinance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/10/the-microfinance-delusion-who-really-wins>
; impact investing; and growing grants to corporations – there is little direct 
evidence of positive outcomes for the global poor and considerable evidence 
that such trends tend to enrich the wealthy at the poor’s expense.

The best case is microfinance. Study after study has shown that the practice 
has zero or negligible effect on poverty reduction. The UK’s Department for 
International Development published a 2011 study suggesting thatassumptions of 
microfinance’s value for the poor appeared to rest on “foundations of sand” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/10/the-microfinance-delusion-who-really-wins>
. And yet microfinance’s failure to improve poverty in developing regions 
hasn’t dented its profitability for companies that offer loans on a for-profit 
basis. Returns for wealthy investors routinely outperform the S&P 500 index. 
Rebranded as “financial inclusion”, microfinance continues to be championed by 
organisations such as the World Bank and Gates Foundation as a development fix. 
The economist Milford Bateman calls it a “zombie policy, a dead and rotten idea 
that nevertheless keeps rising from the grave”.

Givers that keep on giving: the world's top philanthropists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/02/world-top-philanthropists-mark-zuckerberg-warren-buffett-bill-melinda-gates>
Impact investing – the idea that it’s possible to earn financial returns from 
investing in programmes that offer social benefits – is another “radical” trend 
where visible gains vastly lag behind the hype. One former enthusiast published 
a chastened warning for other investors in the Huffington Post. “Business is 
arguably the most powerful institution on earth …[raising] quality of life 
across the globe. But it hasn’t done so fairly. Massive inequality in wealth is 
the fundamental justice issue of our time. Nor has it done so sustainably,”
Kevin Lynch, a former CEO of the Social Enterprise Alliance, writes 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/kevin-lynch/the-impact-investing-illusion_b_8671024.html>
.

Though Lynch once assumed that impact investing could marry the for-profit and 
non-profit realms for the common good, he soon changed his mind, and now fears 
that the “illusion of impact investing will shift dollars away from 
philanthropy”.

Zuckerberg is being hailed for his “unusual” decision to establish a business 
to channel his wealth into good deeds. But we shouldn’t be dazzled by the 
appearance of novelty. Trying to blend good deeds with good deals is neither 
revolutionary nor unprecedented. It’s simply another step on the dogged march 
to source new supplies of capital. It’s business as usual, rebranding as 
philanthropy, and announced with a deceptive air of selflessness that left us 
near-grovelling in thanks.

Linsey McGoey is the author of No Such Thing as a Free Gift: The Gates 
Foundation and the Price of Philanthropy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337800/>

LEADING PHILANTHROPISTS

Bill and Melinda Gates

Net worth: $79.7bn; US donations $31.5bn

The co-founder of Microsoft and the richest man in the world set up the Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation> in 2000 
with the goal of reducing inequality.

Michael Bloomberg

Net worth $40.5bn; US donations: $3.7bn

The business magnate and former New York City mayor is creator of the 
Bloomberg foundation, which gives primarily to educational, health and 
environmental causes.

Warren Buffett

Net worth: $66.7bn; US donations: $30bn

Buffett, the celebrated investor known for living a relatively frugal life, 
has pledged to give away 99% of his wealth.

Sir Tom Hunter

Net worth: £1.2bn; UK donations: £1bn

The Scottish retail tycoon, who began selling trainers from the back of a van, 
established the Hunter Foundation, an initiative to help educational and 
entrepreneurial projects in Scotland, and sustainable development in Africa.
 