
I was delighted to read Rosie Irvine’s letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/18/why-embrace-hygge-when-you-can-lozzerk>
 (19 December) describing her father’s use of “lozzerk” in the sense of 
“lounging together as a family in front of the television”. I hope Rosie will 
be equally delighted to know that her word is recorded in the magnificent 
English Dialect Dictionary – an extraordinarily comprehensive six-volume 
collection of 19th-century British regional vocabulary edited by Joseph Wright 
and published between 1898 and 1905. Wright lists various spellings, which he 
combines in a single entry at “lozzuck”, defining it as “to lounge; to loll; to 
idle; to chatter”. The entry records that “lozzuck” was (probably still is) 
restricted to Lancashire, Cheshire, Staffordshire and Shropshire, which ties in 
perfectly with Rosie’s description.

As a dialectologist, it’s always a pleasure to see evidence – of which there 
is plenty, despite frequent and exaggerated reports to the contrary – of the 
endurance of local dialect. TheEvolving English WordBank 
<http://sounds.bl.uk/Accents-and-dialects/Evolving-English-WordBank>, created 
by visitors to the British Library’s Evolving English exhibition, confirms this 
continued diversity and, like Wright’s great dictionary, is the result of 
contributions submitted enthusiastically by members of the public aware of the 
importance of vernacular speech to our sense of individual and shared 
identities.
Jonnie Robinson
British Library

• I wonder if there are regional variations of lozzerking? My mother, a 
Cheshire (Northwich) woman, always used it as a term of censure. (“How can you 
say you’re tired when you’ve spent the whole day lozzacking on the sofa?” “Stop 
lozzacking and do something useful for a change.”) My two cousins – daughters 
of two of my mother’s sisters – were able to confirm this interpretation. And 
no, we didn’t need lighted candles, nor hand-knitted socks, to lozzack. Though 
a thick jumper or two was always handy in those pre-central heating days.
Sally Phillips
London 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 