
"My peace, your grief." Palm Sunday in Seville, the start of Holy Week, the 
week that marks this city like no other; a week in which they carry a terrible 
burden on their shoulders and where there are tears and laments and 
celebrations too; a week of parades and penitence, crosses borne and eulogies 
sung, that ends on Resurrection Sunday. ButReal Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> Balompié will not be rolling 
back the rock, not now. The first Seville derby to be played on Palm Sunday in 
28 years ended with a 2-0 victory for Sevilla and virtual relegation for Betis, 
if they had not already departed.

Semana santa starts with Real Betis bottom of the table, 10 points from safety 
with only five games to go. In the two decades since there were three points 
for a win, only three teams have survived on fewer than 40 points and that 
target is beyond them now. The lowest total a team have amassed and survived is 
37 – Celta last year, Málaga in 2010 – and to reach that Betis would have to 
win every game. Five wins out of five for a team who have won five in 33, at 
average of 1.66 wins per manager. A genuine miracle.Or one of those 
end-of-season miracles that smells of suitcases <>. Betis were denied a last 
hope, or even just a last waltz, and bythem. Again.

The start of this season's fourth Seville derby was delayed by three minutes 
as they cleared the toilet rolls from the pitch; one minute 45 seconds later, 
it was delayed again. Still it came, tumbling from the stand. There were miles 
of it everywhere, like someone had released a million Labrador pups. There were 
31 points between the two teams at kick-off and although Sevilla had left five 
players out from the normal starting lineup, including Ivan Rakitic, over the 
last eight games no one in Spain has a better record than them and they cared. 
So perhaps the result was inevitable but it was not until afterwards that Betis 
finally gave up.

Before the game, the club's anthem was bellowed out, green and white 
everywhere, and the home side were roared forward, so forward they went. There 
were five attackers in the team and the first shot didn't take long to arrive. 
Three minutes had gone when Nono's effort was deflected wide. Forty seconds 
later, Léo Baptistão went over in the area. Betis appealed but the referee 
Velasco Carballo said no. At the other end, Carlos Bacca won the ball, beat 
three men and tumbled. This time Carballo said yes. It had in fact been a 
superb tackle. But he reached for his book. Name? Juankar. Right, you're off.

This may just be the best derby in the country and it would get tense and 
edgy. Baptistao was left in tears after one touchline exchange with Sevilla's 
coach, Unai Emery. And then Federico Fazio's header flew off the bar and 
players flew into each other. When the Sevilla full-back Alberto Moreno went 
down, fans chanted: "stamp on him!" But the decision changed the game, as Emery 
admitted. Kévin Gameiro scored the penalty. A goal down, a man down, Betis were 
going down. A second for Gameiro four minutes from the final whistle ended it 
and ended their hope.

"Sí, se puede!" went the chant. "Yes, we can!" Optimism from Betis's 
supporters? Or mickey-taking from Sevilla's? More likely the latter. Afterwards 
it was all the Betis players could say to talk of dignity and holding their 
heads high. Or of conspiracy. No one was talking about survival any more. High 
in the side stand there were 1,500 Sevilla supporters, clapping and singing. 
They'd been noisy all game; now they were noisier. Some of Betis's fans started 
heading sadly for the exits, the away supporters started toolé every pass. A 
sarcastic song began: "Oh what pain! Betis are going down." Among the Sevilla 
fans wasthat banner: "My peace, your grief".

It was all too cruel. Sevilla again. Betis's greatest rivals had all but 
confirmed their relegation. The same team who had hammered them at theSánchez 
Pizjuán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/25/sevilla-real-betis-manita-handful>
 and the same side who had knocked them out of the Europa League. Sevilla's 
celebrating players broke the ceiling in the dressing room but at least that 
could be fixed – and the visitors immediately said that they would pay for it. 
The real damage could not; the real damage was deeper. Betis had been knocked 
out in the most painful way possible, the hope ripped from their hands, 
salvation denied.

The biggest Seville derby, the first time they had met in European 
competition, had ended with Betis winning 2-0 at Sevilla. A week later, Sevilla 
won 2-0 at Betis, sending the tie to penalties. Nonomissed the vital penalty 
<http://www.realbetisbalompie.es/es/equipos/primer-equipo/betis/8/nono> – if 
only they'd signed Sisi,as one wit put it 
<https://twitter.com/duncanbishop84/status/446781217812516864> and, yes, there 
really is a Sisi 
<http://www.osasuna.es/primer-equipo/plantilla/ficha/_/23654-sisi.html> – and 
Betis were beaten. Betis were out, Sevilla were on course for the final. Three 
weeks later, another 2-0 win at Betis. This time Sevilla are heading for a 
Champions League place, closing to three points off Athletic Bilbao (having 
played a game more), while Betis are heading for the Second Division. Sevilla 
had slipped the knife between their shoulder blades.

Not that it was only them. "We're treated like the idiots of the league," 
moaned striker Jorge Molina, "they need to stone us for us to get a penalty," 
defender Amaya added, "they've lacked respect for us all season." And the Betis 
manager, Gabi Calderón, returned to a theme that has been a favourite of his, 
going off on a long rant. "I have never experienced such bad refereeing," he 
said. "If this is Spain's referee at the World Cup then we're not exactly well 
represented. They have no self-criticism at all; maybe that's why they get 
worse instead of better. We compete against everyone, despite having lots of 
injuries, but they took points off us against Athletic, Villarreal … if you 
count them up we would have 10 [points] more. Put yourself in the players' 
shoes with this refereeing. It's shameful. They're so arrogant, they'll make us 
the guilty party."

Marca and AS both run alternative league tables showing where the teams would 
be if it was not for refereeing mistakes – like you can trustthem – and they 
agree that Betis have been unlucky this season but not on how unlucky. Before 
this weekend, AS reckoned they should have eight points more, Marca five. It is 
true that they have improved under Calderón and that they have had a lot of 
decisions go against them lately. But it is not them that saw Betis go through 
three coaches, who put the club in administration or who made the sporting 
director leave, the president leave andeven the judicial administrator leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/20/la-liga-roundup-real-betis-sid-lowe>
. It's not them who sparked a sometimes ugly battle for control. And it's not 
them who created the financial crisis or delivered Prince of Darkness Manuel 
Ruiz de Loperaupon them in the first place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/dec/12/europeanfootball.sport1>.

It was not the referees who provoked tension between board room and dressing 
room, who sacked Juan Carlos Garrido after 47 daysor who signed him in the 
first place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/20/la-liga-roundup-real-betis-sid-lowe>
. It was not them who created a climate of mutual suspicion and ended with a 
club so tense thatsome fans turned up at the training ground to confront the 
players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/04/la-liga-real-betis-malaga>
 and it certainly was not them that sacked Pepe Mel, the man no one wanted 
sacked.

This weekend Betis virtually went down; it will be their second relegation in 
four years and if there is a guilty party it is Betis. It's not the referee's 
fault. It's not even Sevilla's fault. Even if they certainly played their part 
and will enjoy thinking it is.

Talking points

• 3, 2, 1 … A week ago, Barcelona could have won the treble. Three days ago, 
one headline declared their determination to win the double. Now they fear 
winning nothing at all. On Wednesday they play the Copa del Rey final against 
Real Madrid at Mestalla and the fear is overwhelming. Could they be about to 
lose all three trophies in a week? The league is not entirely gone, of course, 
but it just got a whole lot harder with Barcelona losing 1-0 at Granada on 
Saturday. They're four points behind Atlético and one behind Madrid. Madrid's 
run-in is significantly easier: in fact, it would be a surprise if they drop a 
single point.

On one level Barcelona were unfortunate: there were enough chances and shots 
to have won the game comfortably but for the second game in a row Barça did not 
score and there were more glimpses of the slide. Messi was virtually absent, 
Tata Martino's substitutions were more than a little odd, and if you play with 
Alex Song and Javier Mascherano as your central defenders, then surely you know 
you've done something wrong. Fingers are pointing at the players, and even at 
Messi, but the mess that has been made by this administration over the past 18 
months is monumental. Now the blaming and complaining starts and it could get 
brutal.

• And so the Copa del Rey final … Madrid-Barcelona again. If only someone had, 
etc and so on …

• Diego Costa missed a penalty, perhaps put off by the bare arse staring 
straight at him 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Costa+arse&safe=off&client=firefox-a&hs=ymi&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=zORLU5GmBI-O7QbPvoHgCQ&ved=0CAgQ_AUoAQ&biw=1095&bih=958#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=RSdsEc-nNmXR9M%253A%3BIDH5I3zSIn2GvM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fmedia.joe.ie%252Fwp-content%252Fuploads%252F2014%252F04%252Fcostamoon.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.joe.ie%252Ffootball%252Ffootball-news%252Fvine-half-naked-getafe-fan-pulls-a-moonie-to-put-diego-costa-off-taking-a-penalty-and-he-missed-it%252F%3B582%3B389>
, and also went skidding into the post to score Atlético's second goal as they 
defeated Getafe 2-0 to stay top of the table with five game to go. The 
collision opened a huge gash on his shin, with the bone visible below the 
blood. He was carried off on a stretcher, hands over his face. Luckily, it was 
not a big deal. "Relax, [he's] fine," said Diego Simeone's press officer. "Just 
need to fix the post." Afterwards Simeone noted: "Another scar doesn't stop the 
lion." Asked by one radio journalist how Costa was, Simeone said: "fine." Asked 
by another radio journalist how Costa was a moment later, Simeone said: "I just 
said." "Yeah," came the reply, "but could you say it again, we're live now." 
Simeone rolled his eyes and said: "Fine."

• Osasuna 0-0 Valladolid doesn't really do either of them much good. They're 
16th and 17th respectively, three points and one point off the relegation zone. 
Above them Elche, who missed a penalty in their 2-1 defeat at Valencia, are not 
safe on 35 but Rayo are close to safety on 37. They should have more too: an 
88th-minute equaliser from Collotto, thanks to some dreadfully weak 
goalkeeping, cost them a 2-1 win at Espanyol. That is five wins, two draws and 
a defeat in their last eight now. Almería, hammered 4-0 by Madrid, and Getafe 
are the two teams in the relegation zone with Betis.

Results: Osasuna 0-0 Valladolid, Celta 2-2 Real Sociedad, Villarreal 1-0 
Levante, Granada 1-0 Barcelona, Real Madrid 4-0 Almería, Betis 0-2 Sevilla, 
Valencia 2-1 Elche, Getafe 0-2 Atlético, Espanyol 2-2 Rayo.

Tonight: Oh look! Monday night! Guess who's playing tonight? Yes, Athletic. 
This time against Málaga.

• La Liga table <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball/table>
 