
Luis Suárez scored four goals and contributed three assists as Barcelona’s 
stuttering La Liga title charge sparked back to life with an 8-0 thrashing of
Deportivo La Coruña <https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna>.

Three successive defeats had put the breaks on Barcelona’s title hopes but 
Suárez made sure the losing run would not continue when he gave Barça a 
two-goal cushion at the break by scoring in the 11th and 24th minutes.

Real Madrid see off Villarreal as rivals keep up pressure on Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/real-madrid-villarreal-barcelona>
The Uruguay striker then provided the cross for Ivan Rakitic to grab the third 
ithree minutes after the break. Suárez completed his hat-trick five minutes 
later and scored his fourth in the 64th minute. Lionel Messi, Marc Bartra and 
Neymar rounded off the scoring late on.

Barça had drawn their previous two league games with Deportivo and headed to 
the Riazor without their influential defender Gerard Piqué in search of a first 
win in five league games.

Suárez put them on their way by volleying home Rakitic’s corner from inside 
the six-yard box, then added the second with a first-time finish with the help 
of a stylish tee-up from Messi.

The former Liverpool striker laid on the cross for Rakitic to score on the 
half-volley shortly after the break, and completed his treble thanks to another 
assist from Messi. Suárez’s fourth goal was scrappier, following his shot in on 
the rebound after being denied by the Deportivo goalkeeper Manu. He then set up 
Messi to tap in from inside the box in the 73rd minute.

Europe’s top 10 football transfer targets under the age of 23 | Ed Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/europe-transfer-targets-under-23-in-demand>
Arguably the best goal was scored by Bartra, who was making just a fourth 
league start in the absence of Piqué. The centre-back powered his way through 
Deportivo’s defence and into the area before producing a confident finish into 
the far corner in the 79th minute.

There was still time for Neymar to end his drought of five games without a 
goal, the Brazilian turning another pass by Suárez in at the near post to 
complete the rout.

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> later announced 
that Neymar will play in the Olympics in August and will miss the Centenary 
Copa America in the United States in June with the agreement of the Brazilian 
federation.
 