
Luis Suárez grabbed a hat-trick and Lionel Messi scored two goals as Barcelona 
began their quest for a third straight La Liga title with a 6-2 rout ofReal 
Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis>.

Arda Turan, whose two goals against Sevilla helped Barça lift the Spanish 
Super Cup on Wednesday, gave them an early lead at the Camp Nou before Rubén 
Castro equalised in the 21st minute. Barça went back in front thanks to a 
37th-minute goal from Messi before Suárez, La Liga’s top scorer last season, 
made it 3-1 before half-time.

Messi set up Suárez for the Uruguayan’s second in the 56th minute before the 
Argentinian netted again a minute later with a left-foot drive from outside the 
area. Suárez then completed his treble with a 25-metre free-kick eight minutes 
from time. Betis scored again, two minutes later, after Castro struck a 
right-foot shot beyond Claudio Bravo.

Barça were without several injured players including their captain, Andrés 
Iniesta, and Neymar, who isplaying for Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/brazil-honduras-rio-2016-football-match-report>
 at the Olympics. The Chile captain,Bravo, linked with a move to Manchester City
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/pep-guardiola-claudio-bravo-joe-hart-manchester-city-sevilla>
, started in goal with Marc-André ter Stegen out injured. The Barça coach Luis 
Enrique gave league debuts to two of his new signings, Samuel Umtiti and Lucas 
Digne.

Neymar and Gabriel Jesus march Brazil past Honduras and into Olympic final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/brazil-honduras-rio-2016-football-match-report>
The hosts went in front when Messi’s diagonal pass found Jordi Alba and he cut 
a pass back to Turan who beat the Betis keeper, Antonio Adán, from six metres. 
Betis equalised when Bravo got a touch to Castro’s powerful free-kick but could 
not prevent the ball going in.

Messi then hit the bar before going one better minutes later when he pounced 
on Denis Suárez’s pass and shot with venom into the bottom corner of the net.

He carved the Betis defence wide open in the 42nd minute with a pass to Sergi 
Roberto and he set up Luis Suárez, who finished clinically. Betis, under their 
new coach Gus Poyet, struggled to keep up with Barça in the second half.

Messi and Luis Suárez combined before the Uruguayan beat Adán with a tap-in. 
The dynamic Messi then found the corner of the net again before Luis Suárez 
added Barça’s sixth goal.
 