
Perhaps it had to be this way. For so long the heart, soul and spirit of the 
Western Bulldogs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs> side that 
finally broke through for an AFL premiership on Saturday, club veteran Bob 
Murphy suffered the misfortune of being sidelined with injury right as the 
club’s finest hour arrived.

As sports fans, we have a habit of making a big deal out of moments as 
obviously loaded with emotion as one here, when Luke Beveridge draped his Jock 
McHale medal over Murphy’s head on the presentation dais, right when the 
Bulldogs coach might have taken his own bow for the football miracle he’d just 
engineered. It was the kind of sight that reflects the best of these games we 
devote so much of our own hearts and souls to.


There is meaning beyond just the winning. It’s why we remember John Landy not 
just as a record-breaking athlete and one of the great Australians of his 
generation, but as the man who stopped in the middle of a 1956 national 
championship race to pick his opponent Ron Clarke up off the track.

Clarke, on the other hand, is recalled primarily for being unlucky; he won 
neither the race in which Landy lent him a helping hand, nor gold in any of his 
Olympic campaigns. But he did actually get an Olympic gold medal in the end. In 
1966 fellow track great Emil Zatopek walked Clarke to the steps of a plane he 
was boarding in Prague and pressed a package to his hand with the words, “Not 
out of friendship, but because you deserve it”.

Western Bulldogs beat Sydney to claim first AFL premiership since 1954
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/western-bulldogs-beat-sydney-to-claim-first-afl-premiership-since-1954>
Inside was the most meaningful of gifts – Zatopek’s gold from the 10,000m 
event at the 1952 Helsinki Games. The medal Clarke honestly deserved. Away from 
the crowds, hidden from cameras, one gentleman champion was showing mutual 
respect and fraternity with another.
AFL (@AFL) 
What a moment for @BobMurphy02 <https://twitter.com/BobMurphy02>. #AFLGF 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AFLGF?src=hash> https://t.co/xSMujdXJF4 
<https://t.co/xSMujdXJF4>
 <https://twitter.com/AFL/status/782120285956812800> October 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AFL/status/782120285956812800> 
And what better way to describe Luke Beveridge and Bob Murphy than gentleman 
champions? We already knew this of Murphy, because for so long he’s been a 
humble, self-deprecating and even, yes,gentle man in a world dominated by 
extroverted alpha males. The Bulldogs coach has likewise shown that humility 
and plain-speaking dignity have a place in a game that tends to favour those 
with far coarser character traits.

Not that the Bulldogs lacked for grunt today. Veteran Dale Morris was revealed 
after the game to have played with a broken back for the last month of this 
wondrous premiership campaign, and a game in which he so often threw himself 
across the boot of opponents and backed recklessly into packs. “Everyone plays 
through injuries,” Morris said afterwards, as though he’d merely stubbed his 
toe. A Son of the Scray indeed.

There will be an endless party out west now. It’s not a champagne kind of 
suburb, Footscray, but they’ll truck plenty of it in regardless and spray it 
everywhere, which is what they deserve. But if winning is about whooping and 
hollering and letting off steam, it’s also about finding small moments among 
the chaos and respecting the human endeavour it takes from so many individuals 
to create something as grand as what the Bulldogs have done here.

That’s what Luke Beveridge did when he was up on that stage on Saturday. He 
found composure among the mayhem to point out Murphy, remove the medal he’d 
just been presented by the game’s greatest player and selflessly hand it over 
to the man who was operating the Bulldogs’ heartstrings as Beveridge himself 
was playing puppet-master to the arms, legs and heads of the 22 players out 
there in Murphy’s place.

So often this season, as players disappeared onto the injury list and his team 
slid further down the pecking order as a plausible premiership chance, 
Beveridge sat in measured silence after games. Then he’d calmly talk his way 
through the positives and suggest a way forward for his team, with a face that 
hid what is clearly inside; some tranquil estuary at the brink of a raging sea.

Beveridge’s side has made history, that is now plain to see. But the way he 
honoured Bob Murphy – standing back in such silent and undeniable grace as the 
Bulldogs hero and stand-in captain Easton Wood hoisted that long-awaited cup 
into the spring air? That told football fans there are men and moments of which 
the game can be truly proud.
 