
Luke Gale has admitted England’s Test in France on Saturday is his opportunity 
to convince Wayne Bennett he is worthy of a starting role for theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> opener against New Zealand.

The Castleford scrum-half will win his first cap in Avignon as Bennett 
utilises the members of his 24-man squad who have not played for over a month, 
with the seven members of the Warrington and Wigan contingent who played in the 
Super League Grand Final expected to be left out.

Luke Gale and Jermaine McGillvary face anxious wait for England call-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/luke-gale-jermaine-mcgillvary-england-rugby-league-squad>
That hands Gale the opportunity many feel he has deserved during England’s one 
and only warmup game before the Four Nations, having missed out in last year’s 
Test series against New Zealand despite being called up for the first time.

“I’m desperate to get out there at last,” Gale said. “Being in the 19-man 
squad is amazing but my attention has already shifted to getting that shirt on, 
so fingers crossed I get the nod from Wayne.

“This is my chance to impress him, I know that. He’s openly admitted from the 
start that the boys who played in the Grand Final would be left out: so we knew 
we’d get a shot, us lads who haven’t played. It’s up to me to take it and 
convince him I can start in game one against the Kiwis.”

Gale’s case for a starting berth next Saturday in Huddersfield has also been 
strengthened by his inclusion in a new-look leadership group. Headed up by the 
new captain, Sam Burgess, Gale is one of a handful of senior players who have 
been handpicked to smooth England’s preparations for the tournament.

“Wayne spoke to me privately and said he was putting me in it, which is really 
humbling,” Gale said. “There’s five or six people who have been appointed to go 
between the boys, keep everyone happy and if there’s any concerns from some of 
the younger lads, we’ll help them with it.”

Gale insisted England will be taking the game against France seriously, saying 
that despite being ranked as third-favourites for the tournament, winning the 
final at Anfield in November is their only aim.

“Winning it is the goal, 100%,” he said. “We’re our biggest critics but we 
know our destiny is in our own hands; the opposition may be world-class, but so 
are we. It’s a thoroughly exciting group to be part of and I’m humbled beyond 
belief to be involved with it.

“It’s tough to put into words how exciting this opportunity and this group is. 
France will be a tough game but we’re all confident. It was great to be called 
up last year but obviously not getting a run-out at any point was frustrating. 
That has spurred me on to go one better this year.”

In the absence of Burgess, who is serving a one-game ban, James Graham will 
captain the side against France.

England Lomax; McGillvary, Watkins, Percival, Hall; Widdop, Gale; Graham, 
Hodgson, Taylor, Ward, Whitehead, Cooper.Interchange T Burgess, G Burgess, 
Brown, Clark.

France Gigot; Pala, Duport, Garcia, Arnaud; Barthau, Robin; Casty, Pelissier, 
Springer, Simon, Larroyer, Bousquet.Interchange Navarette, Jullien, Da Costa, 
Perez.
 