
Luton Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> have suspended 
their winger Shaun Whalley after he was arrested following the club’s awards 
night on Sunday.

Whalley became the second Luton player to be suspended in 24 hours after their 
striker Ricky Miller was arrested and bailed for an alleged assault.

A statement on the club’s website said 
<http://www.lutontown.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-shaun-whalley-2428653.aspx>
: “Following yesterday’s club statement regarding Ricky Miller, Luton Town 
Football Club can confirm that Shaun Whalley has been placed in police custody 
in connection with the same alleged incident in the early hours of Monday 
morning.

“As a result, Shaun has also been suspended by the club, pending a police 
inquiry. An internal investigation at Kenilworth Road continues and Luton Town 
can place on record once again that any player guilty of misconduct will be 
disciplined appropriately.

“Meanwhile Bedfordshire police have released a statement confirming that Ricky 
Miller has been released on bail until 2 June. The club is unable to comment 
further at this stage.”

A spokeswoman for Bedfordshire Police told luton-dunstable.co.uk: 
<http://www.luton-dunstable.co.uk/Shaun-Whalley-arrested-connection-alleged/story-26400863-detail/story.html>
 “A second man has been arrested in connection with an alleged assault in 
Hockliffe in the early hours of yesterday morning [Monday, 27 April].

“The 27-year-old, from Hitchin in Hertfordshire, was arrested on suspicion of 
assault and is currently in custody at Luton police station for questioning. 
Police are appealing for anyone with information surrounding the incident, 
which took place at around 3.20am, to call the non-emergency number 101.”

Whalley, who is out of contract at Kenilworth Road in the summer, had appeared 
for Luton in the 1-0 defeat at Southend United on Saturday.

The pair will miss Luton’s final game of the season, at home to Stevenage, 
with Luton one place off the play-offs though with a much inferior goal 
difference to seventh-placed Plymouth.
 