
It looks like the Lyon striker Karim Benzema did decide the French title after 
all. The 21-year-old, with only two goals in his last 12 matches, scored twice
as Marseille lost their first home league game 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EamFSligojk> of the year 3–1 to leave Bordeaux, 
3–2 winners over Le Mans, now three points clear at the top with two games to 
go.

This being Ligue 1, there was controversy on and off the pitch on Sunday 
night, withMarseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> having 
some complaints about the result: they hit a post twice and had two penalty 
appeals turned down. "There were two fouls on me that were 100% penalties, I am 
sure of it," said Mamadou Niang, brought down both times by Anthony Réveillère 
when Lyon were already 2–0 up. "We would have grown in confidence and had more 
time to equalise if they had been given."

Benzema came out on top of the battle with his former nemesis Hatem Ben Arfa, 
who did not last an hour, despite coach Eric Gerets' observation that, "Hatem 
has become a new man and a different player, and now understands his 
responsibilities".Benzema's stock, on the other hand, had fallen so low that So 
Foot suggested that "last week he even played like Frédéric Piquionne" 
<http://www.sofoot.com/article-112668-om-ol-benzema-vs-ben-arfa-2-sofoot.html>. 
He opening the scoring from the spot after Brandao, perhaps disturbed at 
reports linking him with an €18m (£16m) move to Manchester City, brought down 
Ederson; and doubled the lead with a cool finish after springing the offside 
trap.Juninho's monster free-kick, his 99th Lyon goal, 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> ended brief hopes of a comeback after Sylvain 
Wiltord had pulled one back.

"We deserved better," said Gerets, who is set to leave the club in a fortnight 
with less of a fanfare than he might have hoped. Any suggestion that his 
decision to quit has affected this title run-in is unfair: Marseille were on 
top for the first half-hour, and could have gone ahead after Niang's shot 
struck the post, while Brandao headed straight at Hugo Lloris with the goal 
gaping. L'OM go to Nancy next weekend, where anything less than a win could end 
the title race.

The Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> president Jean-Michel 
Aulas showed himself as gracious a winner as he is a loser, claiming that 
somehow referee Stéphane Lannoy was "a homer", and hitting back at Pape Diouf's 
claim that Marseille was the capital of French football. "His comments upset me 
but I understand that when you don't win you are bitter," he said. "And tonight 
I am especially sad for the OM fans who once again lost the opportunity to win 
a title. When you see how hard it is to win one, imagine how hard it is to win 
seven…" The result as good as secures Lyon's place in next season's Champions 
League.

Bordeaux are now in pole position, though they did not have things their own 
way against Le Mans, who went ahead through Anthony Le Tallec before Marouane 
Chamakh and Yoann Gourcuff, with his sixth goal in five games, put them ahead. 
Le Tallec levelled again before Gourcuff's shot hit the post and bounced back to
Marc Planus to prod in the winner <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>. This team 
have now won nine in a row, coming from behind in three of their last four 
games.

Gourcuff  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dI0--mM7Ue4>is a certainty for 
France's Player of the Year award <http://www.unfp.org/site/page.php>next 
Sunday, and there is no doubt that Bordeaux would not be in this position 
without him: but the better he plays, the greater the fears that he will be 
following Chamakh out of the door this summer.Bordeaux have first-option to 
sign him for €15m from Milan (they have already paid €1.6m) but that deal is 
contingent on the player agreeing terms with the club, which is proving tougher 
than expected. 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090511_212246_gourcuff-va-negocier.html>
 Negotiations began last week and Bordeaux were surprised at Gourcuff's huge 
salary demands. With the crowd now singing "Gourcuff, à Bordeaux!" at every 
home match and the player single-handedly guiding the team to the title, it's 
going to be tough for them to explain to their fans if they cannot afford him.

"If the president says he is too expensive, I will put my hand in my own 
pocket, and they can take the money out of my salary," said his team-mate 
Souleymane Diawara. 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090515_103544_diawara-pret-a-tout-pour-gourcuff.html>
 "I haven't made any decision yet," said Gourcuff. "I love it here, there's a 
great atmosphere in the squad, but right now I can't tell you what the odds are 
on me staying. We just need to concentrate on the next few important games."

PSG missed the injured Guillaume Hoarau in their 2–1 home defeat to Auxerre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, even though last week's match-winner, Mateja 
Kezman, was given another start, his first at home since throwing his shirt to 
the ground after he was subbed off in February. "The coach still hasn't 
understood what I can do for the club," said Kezman before the game. "I will 
accept any criticism if I'm allowed to play, but right now even Kaka or Messi 
wouldn't have done better. I've asked the coach to let me play three in a row, 
and after that I will take the criticism."

The PSG president Sébastien Bazin is determined to keep Hoarau and Stéphane 
Sessegnon at the club, but reports that the summer recruitment kitty will only 
be €15m have not gone down well withClaude Makelele, who is alleged to have put 
out feelers to Patrick Vieira 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090517_111642_vieira-a-paris-pas-impossible.html>
 and William Gallas about coming to the capital. Makelele will be in Paris next 
season, but not necessarily as a player: there have been discussions that he 
might take on an assistant coaching position, although with no head coach yet 
confirmed, it is early days. It's a sign of the lack of organisation currently 
at PSG that, despite the coaching uncertainty, they have also been linked with 
taking Joël Bats from Lyon as goalkeeping coach.

Antoine Kombouaré is still favourite for the job after admitting that he has 
indeed spoken to Bazin about it 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090518_102248_kombouare-a-parle-a-bazin.html>
. We may know more next week, as Kombouaré takes his team to PSG. "I have no 
agreement with PSG and I hope we stuff them next week to ensure our top-flight 
place," he said after VA's 1–1 draw with Monaco.

They should be safe, but the same cannot be said for Nantes. Les Canaris 
remain three points from safety after conceding a late equaliser in the 1–1 
draw with Rennes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, who are about to appoint 
Nice's Frédéric Antonetti 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090518_083622_antonetti-s-en-va.html>
 to replace Guy Lacombe as coach. Nantes's next match is against relegation 
rivalsSochaux, who lost 2–0 at Caen thanks to two good goals from Steve Savidan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>. "We knew we had to win this game," said 
relieved coach Franck Dumas, whose side face Lyon and Bordeaux next.

Amid all this excitement, one man stands aloof, looking as cool as anyone 
possibly could do with a toothpick almost permanently in his mouth. The 
Bordeaux coach Laurent Blanc, Le Président, is on his way to the title in his 
second season as a coach. "He has such a strong personality, he is always in 
control," says Sir Alex Ferguson of his former player. Just before every game, 
after he has given his team-talk, Blanc retires to a corner of the dressing 
room to work quietly on a crossword. Thanks to an out-of-form young Lyon 
striker, seven letters, first letter "B",Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> could clinch Ligue 1 next 
weekend.

Results, Week 36

Bordeaux 3–2 Le Mans, Saint-Etienne 2–2 Toulouse, Lorient 1–1 Le Havre, Monaco 
1–1 Valenciennes, Grenoble 0–0 Nancy, Caen 2–0 Sochaux, PSG 1–2 Auxerre, Lille 
1–1 Nice,Nantes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes> 1–1 Rennes, 
Marseille 1–3 Lyon
 