
Right on cue Magnus Carlsen’s previously stuttering form came back into flow 
for games three and four of the tiebreaks in New York on his 26th birthday. The 
world champion retained his crown bydefeating Russia’s Sergey Karjakin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/magnus-carlsen-retains-world-chess-title-after-quickfire-tie-breaker>
 3-1 in one-hour rapids after their classical games ended 6-6. The match proved 
enormously popular with online audiences, was a media hit and had the most 
brilliant final move, a queen sacrifice for mate, of any world title series. 
Yet questions remain about the performance of both players.

The biggest mystery is what happened to Karjakin’s preparation. The challenger 
rightly gained plaudits for his tenacious, resilient and at times inspired 
defensive play, particularly in game two of the tiebreak when, despite playing 
for many moves on the three-seconds increment, he found a wonderful resource 
based on a bishop and rook pawn stalemate.

Just soaking up the opponent’s punches is an unlikely planned strategy. At the 
final press conference Karjakin said he had too much to prepare so sometimes 
forgot the details. His preferred opening as White was the d3 Spanish, a quiet 
line with little possibility of unleashing a significant novelty. Yet there 
were claims that Karjakin’s team had a budget of $1m and years before Karjakin 
became the challenger he stated that he had a purpose-built chess computer and 
database but that Carlsen had a still bigger one. The mammoth budget produced 
almost zilch in the field of opening bombs.

Karjakin’s clock management in the one-hour rapid tie-breaks was dreadful. In 
the very routine first game he took most of his time for around 20 moves, 
allowed Carlsen a 15-minute time lead and was lucky that the game petered out 
to a draw. Of course Carlsen noticed his opponent’s weakness and for the 
remaining games he kept ahead on the clock while posing more complex questions. 
It paid off in game three when a rare Karjakin novelty boomeranged and the 
Russian had a passive, though tenable position. Finally the pressure got to him 
and at move 38 he froze. He could have kept in the game by attacking Carlsen’s 
queen but instead let his time run down to two seconds before making a fatal 
capture which lost immediately.

For much of the match Carlsen’s play was uneven, culminating in the eighth 
game where he imploded by impatiently trying to win a drawn position. It was 
only after Karjakin missed a likely chance for a second and probably decisive 
victory in game nine that the Norwegian reasserted control, deciding on a clear 
match strategy of going for 6-6 and tie-breaks which he believed he would 
dominate and did. So why did the Norwegian team have to go to Plan B when on 
all known previous form Carlsen should have won the match in the classical 
games?

My guess is that Carlsen, despite publicly stating that Karjakin was a serious 
opponent, inwardly relaxed because he perceived that he was stronger and had 
easily cruised through his two previous championship matches against India’s 
Vishy Anand. I would also point a finger at Carlsen’s three-hour online blitz 
match against Hikaru Nakamura on 27 October as hardly ideal preparation for a 
classical contest.

But overall the result was right. Carlsen is the world No1, Karjakin, even 
after gaining rating points in New York, is still only No6. Carlsen had a scare 
and will surely take the lesson on board before 2018. Meanwhile he will 
continue to delight chess fans with his virtuoso tournament performances.

The high percentage of draws, some of them routine, in the main match, has led 
to proposals for the reform of the format to reduce the importance of speed 
tie-breaks. The idea I like best is for the fast tie-breaks to be staged before 
the classical games, thus sparking early public and media interest and ensuring 
that one side in the main match would always be under pressure to go for a 
decisive result. Adding a 13th game at the end where the tie-break loser has 
White would make for the desired small imbalance.

However, it’s all theoretical, as the match organisers, Agon, have already 
declared that the format for Carlsen’s next title defence will be the same as 
in New York, right down to the same dates. It may not happen like that, of 
course, since finding sponsors for a multi-million dollar event is never easy 
and much will depend on the nationality of the next challenger. At present 
Fabiano Caruana, the US champion and world No2, is the favourite to qualify and 
other elite grandmasters from the US, France and the Netherlands are also 
serious contenders, along with Karjakin and the ex-champion Vlad Kramnik from 
Russia.

Many journalists provided daily reports. The best were by Jonathan Tisdall, US 
master resident in Norway, whosedaily MattOgPatt articles 
<http://mattogpatt.no/2016/11/30/wtf/> are still an enjoyable and thoughtful 
read.

Sergey Karjakin v Magnus Carlsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen>, third tie-break game

1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O Be7 6 d3 b5 7 Bb3 d6 8 a3 O-O 9 Nc3 
Na510 Ba2 Be6 11 b4 Nc6 12 Nd5 Nd4 13 Ng5?! Bxd5 14 exd5 Nd7 15 Ne4 f5 16 Nd2 
f4!17 c3 Nf5 18 Ne4 Qe8 19 Bb3 Qg6 20 f3 Bh4 21 a4 Nf6 22 Qe2 a5 23 axb5 axb4 24
 Bd2 bxc325 Bxc3 Ne3 26 Rfc1 Rxa1 27 Rxa1 Qe8 28 Bc4 Kh8 29 Nxf6 Bxf6 30 Ra3 e4 
31 dxe4 Bxc3 32 Rxc3 Qe5 33 Rc1 Ra8 34 h3 h6 35 Kh2 Qd4 36 Qe1 Qb2 37 Bf1 Ra2 38
 Rxc7?? Ra1 0-1

3471 1 h5+! If Kxh5 2 Qf6! when 3 g4+ and 4 Qxh6 mate is a winning threat. The 
game ended 1...Kh7 2 Qf6! Qc7 3 Qg6+ Kh8 4 Bf7! and Black resigned as he must 
give up his queen just to delay mate.
 