
Magnus Carlsen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen> looked 
spent. It was Thursday morning in New York, less than a full day after he had 
survived the sternest test of his career to successfully defend the world chess 
championship on his 26th birthday. He’d celebrated into the night with dinner 
and a champagne shower at the BLT Prime steakhouse in Gramercy surrounded by 
family, sponsors and hangers-on. It was a catharsis hard-won.

Magnus Carlsen may be the man to push the barriers for global game of chess | 
Stephen Moss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/01/magnus-carlsen-chess-norweigian-wolrd-champion-sergey-karjakin>
Now the task was accomplished, and he could finally offer a sober assessment 
of the three-week psychodrama which had nearly cost him everything. He spoke 
deliberately from a brown leather wraparound couch at the Ritz-Carlton in 
Battery Park, where sleep had come so sparingly during those interminable 
nights last week when the Norwegian champion, bruised by self-doubt after 
falling behind his Russian challenger Sergey Karjakin in the best-of-12-games 
match, accepted the reality that the title which represented his life’s work 
had “certainly” slipped from his grasp.

“I did not have a positive state of mind,” he recalled. “I felt that even 
though I still thought I was the strongest player that it would be very 
difficult to prove since after all I had only a couple of chances left to win 
games. At that point, part of me still believed in it.”

His voice trailed off.

“But it was very, very difficult.”

The greatest champions are defined not by winning when all the tumblers are 
aligned in their favor, but by how they persist and problem-solve and pull it 
from the bag when they’re not at their best. Serena Williams scratching out 
points at the net when her thunderbolt serve has betrayed her. A flu-stricken 
Michael Jordan, dehydrated and barely upright,willing the Chicago Bulls to 
victory <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4BswHnf0xM> in the NBA finals. The 
great ones don’t merely find a path to victory, they invent it. By that 
measure, Carlsen’s fightback from the brink will be remembered long after the 
chess itself has been forgotten.

•••

The queen sacrifice has been described as the beauty of chess incarnate, a 
tactical flourish that highlights the aesthetic potential of a game that’s 
increasingly – and never more than in the generation sinceDeep Blue v Kasparov, 
1997 <http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chessgame?gid=1070917> – become informed 
by the machinelike objectivity of the supercomputer. Sixty years ago, a gawky 
13-year-old in blue jeans named Robert James Fischer used the willful 
concession of his strongest piece to defeat the leading American master Donald 
Byrne in the Rosenwald memorial tournament at the Marshall chess club in 
Greenwich Village. That game sparked a meteoric ascent that culminated with the 
Brooklyn prodigy’s epochal world championship win in 1972. Yet it was Fischer’s 
extraordinary victory over Byrne that’s come to be known as thegame of the 
century <http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chessgame?gid=1008361>. Style matters.

For nearly three weeks, the freewheeling adaptability that has been Carlsen’s 
calling card – the daring abandon of memorized opening lines in favor of 
chess-playing – had been stifled by a stubborn Russian challenger hellbent on 
transforming this year’s world championship match into attritional war. They 
had drawn all but two of the 12 games in regulation, forcing a tie-breaker 
consisting of four rapid games (in which each player starts with 25 minutes to 
complete his moves) on Wednesday afternoon in the sound-proof studio on the 
third floor of the Fulton Market Building at the South Street Seaport.

They’d drawn the first two with Carlsen missing a win in the second, but the 
Norwegian used his time better in both, and was never in danger of losing. Then 
in the third as Karjakin once again ran short on time, a blunder on the 37th 
move handed the Carlsen the crucial victory. Now the champion needed only a 
draw with the white pieces in the finale to win the title.

But Carlsen, who is also the world’s top-ranked rapid player, had no interest 
in backing into the championship. He took control of the center and forced 
Karjakin backward, tightening his grip on the position and choking off all 
points of escape. Then Carlsen offered to surrender his strongest piece to 
ensnare Karjakin’s king in a mating net, a coup de grâce all the more 
breathtaking given the faster time control of rapid play. “It was the kind of 
move every chess player dreams about getting a chance to make,” commentator 
Maurice Ashley told NRK, the Norwegian public broadcasting network which had 
aired the match in primetime. “That move will be remembered forever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmagnus-carlsen-chess-world-championship-legend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dbb4c25e8fad1387557f9407b57c1c0575540c9%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Magnus%20Carlsen's%20dramatic%20fightback%20from%20'certain'%20defeat%20cements%20his%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmagnus-carlsen-chess-world-championship-legend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Magnus%20Carlsen%27s%20dramatic%20fightback%20from%20%27certain%27%20defeat%20cements%20his%20legend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmagnus-carlsen-chess-world-championship-legend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dbb4c25e8fad1387557f9407b57c1c0575540c9%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Carlsen celebrates with the trophy. Photograph: Mark Kauzlarich/Reuters 
The triumph capped a stunning reversal of fortune for the champion, who nine 
days earlier had found himself on the brink of a humiliation practically 
unthinkable at the outset of the three-week match. Carlsen had arrived in New 
York an overwhelming favorite against Karjakin, a relatively unheralded 
opponent who had earned his place at the board by winning the eight-man 
Candidates Tournament in March, which he entered as a 15-1 longshot. Straw 
polls among grandmasters unilaterally tipped Carlsen, who has been known as the 
‘Mozart of chess’ since before he was a teenager, citing his rating and match 
experience.

The first seven games had been draws, with Karjakin managing spectacular 
escapes in the third and fourth that evoked comparisons to Soviet predecessors 
Botvinnik, Spassky and Karpov. On the other side, Carlsen’s frustrations became 
increasingly evident.

“When he managed to hold those positions early, maybe I should have been more 
focused on that in my preparation, to train for the fifth and sixth, even 
seventh hours of play,” Carlsen said on Thursday. “Because I felt that it was 
very clear that I was better than him in the second and third hours of play. A 
lot better. But then he started to defend and became difficult.”

The difficulty redoubled in the eighth game when Carlsen’s gamble for a win 
with the white pieces backfired. Time became a factor for both players and 
after more than five hours and 52 moves, Carlsen resigned. He declined 
television interviews in the immediate aftermath and then, frustrated by a 
delay before the mandatory post-match press conference, stormed from the stage. 
The incident made headlines from Pravda toDeadspin 
<http://deadspin.com/chess-grandmaster-storms-out-of-press-conference-after-1789314747>
. (“I was just devastated, I couldn’t sit there,” he said. “It’s not my 
proudest moment.”)

This was the tactical equivalent of an outmatched side playing 11 men behind 
the ball with the hopes of sneaking one on the counter for a smash-and-grab 
victory. And it was working. Karjakin needed only hold for draws in five more 
games to complete a stunning upset. Mozart found himself at the tip of 
Salieri’s blade.

Everything Carlsen had worked for – the title he’s held for three years, the 
image of invincibility that he’s traded on for millions in endorsements and 
modeling side gigs – hung in the balance.

“In those moments the important thing is to focus on the process instead of 
the results, but it’s very, very hard,” he said. “Even a bit during the game, I 
was thinking how am I going to win this rather than trying to make the best 
move, which is not a very good strategy.

Karjakin played out his strategy in the ninth game, which ended in another 
lengthy draw, this one after 74 moves. Then came the fateful 10th on 
Thanksgiving Day, when Karjakin missed an early chance to force a draw by 
perpetual check that would have moved him one step closer to the prize. Carlsen 
then dug in for a six-and-a-half-hour grind, ultimately prevailing to set the 
stage for Wednesday’s white-knuckle finale.

Carlsen said on Thursday his focus moving forward will be on controlling the 
emotions that nearly did him in. The Norwegian, who has famously declined to 
work with a sports psychologist, confirmed he plans on enlisting one moving 
forward.

“When everything is under control it’s very, very difficult to beat me,” he 
said. “But obviously my playing strength drops quite a bit when everything is 
not going according to plan. I think I’ll have to work on that more seriously 
in the future. It’s very easy when things are going my way. I’m going from 
victory in one tournament to another and the confidence is there. When it’s not 
there, things fall apart a bit.”

•••

Twelve months ago it would have strained credulity to imagine Karjakin even 
playing for the title, let alone pushing Carlsen to the limit. He was coming 
off a bad year that saw him fell from the top 10 in the world rankings, but he 
defeated a series of higher-ranked opponents in the Candidates Tournament to 
earn the title shot. He came to New York ranked No9 in the world and departs at 
No6.

Leonard Barden on Chess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/magnus-carlsen-overcomes-sergey-karjakin-to-retain-title>
Karjakin offers Carlsen a fascinating foil. He was born in Crimea, where he 
ascended to the title of grandmaster when he was 12, which is still a world 
record. He felt his development was stunted in Ukraine and relocated to Russia 
in 2008, where he was granted citizenship by presidential decree. Perhaps not 
coincidentally, he’s voiced outspoken support of Vladimir Putin and the 
invasion of Crimea, ridiculing western sanctions against Russia. When the US 
supreme court ruled on gay marriage, Karjakindidn’t mince his words 
<https://twitter.com/SergeyKaryakin/status/614489197664169984>: “On this 
‘landmark’ day for America, I rejoiced for the first time in my life that I’ve 
never been there.”

Political overtones have long stoked mainstream interest in chess, never more 
than the cold war proxy battle between Fischer and Spassky. An undercurrent of 
paranoia surfaced in the build-up to this year’s match when it was reported 
that Carlsen had enlisted Microsoft as a cybersecurity consultant, fearing 
Karjakin’s team was out to hack into their preparations or Skype conversations 
with his seconds.

But even more alluring is the idea that a sport’s peerless champion may have 
found a contemporary rival for years to come.

Even before he unseated Viswanathan Anand for the world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/22/magnus-carlsen-vishy-anand-chess>
 with clinical ease in Chennai three years ago, Carlsen, then 22, was already 
regarded as the world’s best player. The match was cast as a passing of the 
torch from Anand, who was 43, a relic of the pre-computer era when elite 
players came of age studying from books and notecards almost exclusively.

Karjakin was born in 1990, the same as Carlsen. Which means this year’s 
championship marked the first ever between players brought up entirely in the 
age of computer chess. The once-clunky machines that spit out nonsensical moves 
developed at an exponential rate. Now there are chess programs that could fit 
on an iPhone that could beat just about any human in the world. These machines 
engender in rising players a sort of objectivity that will make Karjakin a more 
difficult opponent for Carlsen than Anand, a former world champion.

Carlsen will now hold the title for two years before he’s required to defend 
it. Karjakin, as he alluded in Wednesday’s aftermath, will be there waiting. 
But he will rue how close he came here in Manhattan, while Carlsen can take 
heart in his taste for the fight.

“It’s good to know that I can win even if things don’t go my way, since what 
happened up until the 10th game basically was the worst-case scenario,” he 
said. “It’s been a fight throughout. It hasn’t been particularly pretty. Of 
course the finish was pretty, at least from my point of view, but it’s most of 
all been a fight. For me that’s what chess is about and what these matches 
should be.”
 