
Magnus Carlsen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen> was close to 
losing his world title this week until his challenger, Sergey Karjakin, after 
outplaying the Norwegian for the best part of three games, froze at two 
critical moments. After seven straight draws the Russian took the lead in game 
eight, missed good winning chances in game nine, then overlooked two easy 
chances to draw Thursday’s 10th game where he was ground down to a 75-move 
defeat.

The pair are now level at 5-5 before Saturday’s 11th game (7pm start, viewable 
live online) and Monday’s 12th game. If they are tied 6-6, speed chess 
tie-breaks at progressively faster time limits will follow on Wednesday.

Going behind in the match in game eight was a major psychological shock to 
Carlsen, who made several mistakes and overpressed in his efforts to win. One 
of his former aides, the elite grandmaster Ian Nepomniachtchi, described it as 
“berserk mode”. Karjakin won in style, sacrificing his passed pawn so as to 
force mate or win of the queen. Carlsen then walked out of the post-game press 
conference without answering questions, and was fined 10% of his prize money 
according to the rules, reduced to 5% on a Norwegian appeal.

Game nine was a rarity for the series, a theoretical Ruy Lopez where they 
blitzed their first 20 moves before Carlsen produced a novelty. Karjakin was 
unfazed, built up a strong attack but at the crucial moment, after half an 
hour’s thought, sacrificed a bishop for what turned out to be a drawn ending. 
He rejected a queen move which would have won a pawn and put Carlsen on the 
border of defeat.

The turning point of game 10 came when Carlsen, with a minimal edge, allowed 
Karjakin a simple forced sequence which could have drawn by repeated position. 
Despite a long think Karjakin twice missed the idea and instead went into an 
inferior ending where Carlsen had a big space advantage. It may have been 
tenable with optimum play but Karjakin again erred and was lost.

Going into the final two games, Carlsen has a mental edge against an opponent 
who will regret his missed chance, although Wednesday tie-breaks are the most 
likely outcome. They are not new in world championships, as both the 2006 and 
2012 matches were decided in one-hour rapids.

The stakes for both Carlsen and Karjakin are now high – and not only on a 
personal level. Carlsen’s living legend status as the equal of Bobby Fischer 
and Garry Kasparov will be dented if he loses. He is a national hero in Norway 
with personal sponsors, endorsements and his games shown live on prime time 
television. The presence of a world champion from the West is a spark to elite 
tournaments in the US and Europe.

Karjakin’s reputation will be enhanced even if he loses a close fight but 
victory would be a major boost to Russian chess, which in the Soviet era was a 
top national sport. It would also shift the balance of chess political power 
back to the East, help Fide’s beleaguered president Kirsan Ilyumzhinov and be a 
defeat for Fide’s exiled opponent and Carlsen supporter Garry Kasparov.

A massive global internet audience – well into six figures – will watch the 
final two games. They will be easy for ordinary players to understand due to 
move-by-move computer evaluations together with grandmaster commentaries, while 
on the chat pages amateurs will encourage the two contenders in the style of 
soccer fans.

GM Gawain Jones, aged 28, is having a fine spell. He is up to England No3 and 
in the world top 100 in the ratings, was top scorer for England at the world 
Olympiad, was runner-up at Atlantic City and will play in the prestige B group 
at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee in January. He continued with this brilliancy at the 
UK 4NCL league last weekend, where Black sacrifices two pieces for mate. White 
could hold out longer by 24 Re3 but would soon lose to f4.

James Jackson v Gawain Jones

1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O b5 6 Bb3 Bc5 7 c3 d6 8 Re1 Bb6 9 a4 
Bb710 d4 h6 11 Qd3 O-O 12 d5 Na5 13 Ba2 c6 14 Nbd2 cxd5 15 exd5 Ng4 16 Rf1 f5 17
 Qe2 bxa418 h3 Nf6 19 c4 Nh5 20 Qd1 Ng3 21 Re1 e4 22 Nh2 Bxf2+! 23 Kxf2 Qb6+! 24
 Kxg3 f4+25 Kh4 Qd8+ 26 Kg4 Qg5 mate 0-1

3470 1...Rh2+ 2 Kg1 Rh1+! (but not Qd5? 3 Qe8+ and 4 Qh5+ with perpetual 
check) 3 Kxh1 Qd5+ with Qg2 mate.
 