
Mail Online has been forced to pay out £150,000 to a British Muslim family 
over aKatie Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> column 
which falsely accused them of extremism.

The column, published in December last year, said that US authorities were 
right to stop Mohammed Tariq Mahmood, his brother Mohammed Zahid Mahmood and 
nine children from travelling to Los Angeles for a trip to Disneyland last 
year. Hopkins also suggested that the two brothers were extremists with links 
to al-Qaida.

In a correction published at midnight on Sunday, Mail Online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> said: “We and Katie Hopkins 
apologise to the Mahmood family for the distress and embarrassment caused and 
have agreed to pay them substantial damages and their legal costs.”

Hopkins’ article suggested that the reason the family gave for visiting the US 
was a lie, and that she would have stopped them from boarding the flight from 
Gatwick. Her next column a week later also falsely suggested that Mohammed 
Tariq Mahmood’s son Hamza was responsible for a Facebook page that allegedly 
contained extremist material.

The brothers said they were pleased that after “a great deal of dragging of 
their heels” the Mail and Hopkins had accepted the allegations were false.

“Even to this day, the US authorities have not explained the reason why we 
were not permitted to travel; we assume it was an error or even a case of 
mistaken identity,” they said in a statement provided by their lawyers, Carter 
Ruck.

“However, matters are not helped when sensationalist and, frankly, 
Islamophobic articles such as this are published, and which caused us all a 
great deal of distress and anxiety. We are very pleased that the record has 
been set straight.”

Carter Ruck said that while most of the coverage of the Mahmood family’s 
ordeal had been fair and balanced, “there was absolutely no basis for 
suggesting that any of the Mahmoods were or are extremist, and the family were 
simply going on holiday”.

Hopkins tweeted the apology herself at around 2am. She was hired by the Mail 
in September 2015 from the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/24/katie-hopkins-leaves-the-sun-to-join-mail-online>
 where she had regularly come under fire for offensive columns, including one 
where she likened asylum seekers to cockroaches. That article, which has since 
been removed from the Sun website,drew condemnation from the UN high 
commissioner for human rights, Zeid bin Ra’ad al-Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/katie-hopkins-cockroach-migrants-denounced-united-nations-human-rights-commissioner>
.

The Mail’s apology comes just days after it corrected an online article 
claiming that the NUS president, Malia Bouattia, had said young Muslims are 
travelling to join Isis in Syria due to cuts to education.

Mail Online did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
 