
Major flooding in the UK is now likely to happen every year but ministers 
still have no coherent long-term plan to deal with it, the government’s leading 
adviser on the impacts of climate change has warned.

Boxing Day in 2015 saw severe floods sweep Lancashire and Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/dec/26/severe-flood-warnings-in-the-north-prompt-boxing-day-evacuation-fears>
, just weeks afterStorm Desmond swamped Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/07/chaos-cumbria-floods-lake-district-turn-lives-upside-down>
 and parts of Scotland and Wales. The flooding, which caused billions of pounds 
of damage, led to thegovernment publishing a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/flooding-uk-government-plans-for-more-extreme-rainfall>
 in September which anticipates 20-30% more extreme rainfall than before.

But Prof John Krebs, who leads the work on adapting to global warming for the 
government’s official advisers, theCommittee on Climate Change 
<https://www.theccc.org.uk/> (CCC), told the Guardian: “We are still a long way 
from where we need to be, in that there is still not a coherent long-term view.”

UK poorly prepared for climate change impacts, government advisers warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
Lord Krebs said it was important for both government and households to learn 
from the run of floods that have affected many parts of the country in recent 
years. “Almost every year there has been some more or less major flooding event 
and that is a key message,” he said. “We have to now get it embedded that this 
is something that will happen somewhere most years.”

Increased flooding is the biggest impact of climate change for the UK, but the 
CCC has also warned that thenation is poorly prepared for deadly annual 
heatwaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
, water shortages and difficulties in producing food. However, Krebs, who is 
stepping down from his CCC role after eight years in January, said: “There is 
still hope this country will make the progress it needs to make.”

Pressure to act now must continue from the CCC in its watchdog role and from 
the public, he said: “This is not something in the long-term future, this is 
something here and now. But it will also be worse for your children and 
grandchildren than it is for us, unless we do something about it.

“At the extreme end, parts of the world could become uninhabitable and there 
could be mass migration,” Krebs said. “At the more modest end, we are likely to 
experience more extreme weather events in this country and we need to prepare 
for that.”

Krebs also said ministers would regret cutting flood protection measures for 
new homes. New laws passed earlier in 2016 aim to drive the building of 1m new 
homes but Krebs, an independent member of the House of Lords, said he was 
disappointed ministers had rejected proposals to cut the risk of the homes 
flooding and make them cheap to heat.

“The imperative to build more homes was overriding anything that might get in 
the way and I think the housebuilders got at the Department for Communities and 
Local Government to say all of this is going to be costly and difficult,” he 
said.

UK government not funding natural flood prevention methods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/21/uk-government-not-funding-natural-flood-prevention-methods>
“It isn’t [costly] really, but they just want to get on and build homes 
according to the bog-standard, simple template and not have to worry about 
whether the development is sustainable in terms of carbon footprint and flood 
risk. In 20 years time, people will look back and say, ‘What were they 
thinking?’”

The CCC has also warned the government that there are no plans to deliver half 
of the cuts in carbon emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/uk-lacks-policies-to-meet-more-than-half-its-carbon-emissions-cuts-report>
 needed in the 2020s, a caution Krebs likened to a yellow card.

On the third runway at Heathrow, Krebs said the government had not been clear 
whether the plan meant carbon emissions from planes would remain under the 
limit recommended by the CCC. “Is it crazy [to build it]? We don’t know yet,” 
he said.

But if the new Heathrow runway were built and the government stuck to the CCC 
limit, growth at other airports would be severely constrained, he said: “The 
big concern will be for the regional airports where there will be very little 
room for growth. So if Manchester, Birmingham, Edinburgh have aspirations, they 
may be dashed.”

Krebs said rejection of human-caused climate change and its great risks – 
which he calls denial – is a “fringe discourse”, with 114 of the world’s 
nations already having ratified the global climate dealsigned by 194 countries 
in Paris a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
.

But he said: “We shouldn’t be complacent because those dissenting voices are 
well-organised, funded and persistent. One has to be strong in the message that 
the risks are so great that taking out insurance [by acting] now is well worth 
it.”
 