
The recent adverts for Maltesers featuring deaf and disabled actors, first 
broadcast during this year’s Paralympics, have been the cause of much debate. 
After Mars Chocolate UK won acompetition run by Channel 4 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/mars-chocolate-uk-celebrates-diversity-in-new-ad-for-maltesers>
 with the brief “look on the light side of d..isability”, the multinational was 
given £1m-worth of the broadcaster’s commercial airtime for “developing a bold, 
creative idea which puts disability and diversity at the heart of their 
campaign”.

I’m a person with disabilities. Why do I have to be a trailblazer too? | Lucy 
Webster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/person-disabilities-trailblazer-society-convince-life>
Sounds great. So why was I disturbed? I talked to friends at length about the 
ads, on social media, face to face – and it was quickly apparent I had dropped 
a very hot potato into the disability activism lap.

There are three advertisements. In the cheekiest one, a disabled woman (actor 
Storme Toolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/30/disabled-students-university-drama-departments>
) is joking with friends about her spasms, intimating that her boyfriend “isn’t 
complaining”, and ejaculates over her as a result. In another, a chirpy young 
woman (Samantha Renke) makes a joke about running over the bride’s foot, but 
getting “the best man’s number”. The third features adeaf actor (Genevieve Barr)
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/08/deaf-actor-theatre-roles> and 
British Sign Language, in askit about a dog eating a hearing aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/06/channel-4-first-sign-language-only-tv-ad-paralympic-games>
, demonstrated by munching on Maltesers – obviously.

First, without restraint, a big cheer for the actors. Disabled actors – they 
exist after all. And are doing a great job here. Three all at once in an ad 
campaign, coming along just like buses. Out in the shiny mainstream world,Metro 
<http://metro.co.uk/> positively drools and declares the ad has been “widely 
lauded”, and quotes a viewer from Twitter: “Best Maltesers advert ever!!”. On 
theMaltesers YouTube page <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=YgUqmKQ9Lrg>, the 
comments range from hilarious, to worried, to downright weird – perhaps 
presenting a grim equality of sorts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYgUqmKQ9Lrg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYgUqmKQ9Lrg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYgUqmKQ9Lrg&media=>
One of the Maltesers ads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YgUqmKQ9Lrg&app=desktop> 
What these adverts also do is highlight an interesting truth; most disabled 
activists and academics can spot from a wheelchair-mile away when something is 
made to educate others – ie the non-disabled – rather than to present us 
inclusively as three-dimensional human beings.

It’s bound to get messy. It’s about selling a chocolate product after all – 
and is it really worth some of us feeling unhappy? It does grate on me given 
that the advertising industry is part of the capitalist agenda. And sadly, 
featuring a few disabled actors in an advert isn’t really likely to be a major 
skirmish in its downfall. Nor is it likely to explode barriers and negative 
attitudes. Or is it?

Lisa Hammond, who plays Donna Yates in EastEnders 
<http://eastenders.wikia.com/wiki/Donna_Yates>, said: “All of the actors in the 
ads are great … that they are all women makes me happy. The issue is the fact 
that every one of the adverts’ focus is impairment, as part of the story. We’ve 
been banging on about this for years – feels like we are in a perpetual loop! 
And I’m interested in the deeper story.”

I know what she means. I’m always interested in a deeper story. But this has 
parallels with the way that race is always the issue in the representation of 
BAME people on screen. But I don’t want to be forever a bloody issue – only an 
issue – even if it’s just an advert.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fmaltesers-advertisments-disability-disabled-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F744f656682c4c3baf696baacfd891e8bdac31400%2F0_418_5164_3099%2F5164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maltesers%E2%80%99%20ads%20with%20disabled%20actors%20make%20me%20feel%20queasy.%20But%20at%20least%20they%E2%80%99re%20trying%20%7C%20Penny%20Pepper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fmaltesers-advertisments-disability-disabled-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maltesers%E2%80%99%20ads%20with%20disabled%20actors%20make%20me%20feel%20queasy.%20But%20at%20least%20they%E2%80%99re%20trying%20%7C%20Penny%20Pepper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fmaltesers-advertisments-disability-disabled-actors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F744f656682c4c3baf696baacfd891e8bdac31400%2F0_418_5164_3099%2F5164.jpg>
 Genevieve Barr (Eva) and Jonjo O’Neill (The Brute) in Unreachable. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Maltesers might be trying hard, but there is something in the scripts that 
makes me queasy, an uneasiness echoed by disabled academicDr Alison Wilde 
<http://www.leedsbeckett.ac.uk/staff/dr-alison-wilde/>. “The scenarios [in the 
sex one] have an audience of two (presumably) non-disabled people being curious 
about the disabled person’s somewhat ‘naughty’ sexuality, which re-inscribes 
the fact that they have stepped out of role,” she says. “And as for the one 
with a deaf woman – doesn’t it rather trivialise the need for an aid, as 
important as a Malteser?”

Scope was also involved in these adverts. The charity and disabled activists 
do not by and large have a happy relationship. This highlights a situation that 
cleaves many of us apart: Scope is not user-led; disabled people do not control 
or have ownership of it. These ads make that abundantly clear.

But along with my friend the broadcaster/writer Mik Scarlet 
<http://mikscarlet.com>, I can be pragmatic: “I was part of the focus group 
[for the ads] and found that some of the stories were taken but not portrayed 
exactly. This led to the cringey stuff. But disabled people in ads? Big turning 
point, they mark a historic point.”

Most responses settle here: tried hard, not perfect, we want more. A 
begrudging sense of this being better than nothing. I know that until disabled 
creatives are allowed into the fold, all the way up to writing scripts for 
adverts, change will be slow.
 