
Naveed Baloch was crossing a road in central Berlin on the evening of 19 
December, having just left a friend’s house. He was halfway over it when, 
seeing a car heading towards him, he increased his speed. “I then realised it 
was a police car. I stopped when they beckoned to me, and showed them all the 
ID I had on me.”

They let him go but within seconds had called him back. Before he knew it he 
was in the back of the car, its lights flashing as it sped through Berlin. His 
hands were bound behind his back. Later that night, he said, he was blindfolded 
and taken from “one police station to another place” about 10 minutes away. He 
recalls two police officers “digging the heels of their shoes into my feet”, 
and one of the men “putting great pressure on my neck with his hand”.

They undressed him and took photographs. “When I resisted, they started 
slapping me.” They took three samples of his blood. A 24-year-old Pakistani 
identified only as Naveed B was named by German police and the interior 
minister, Thomas de Maizière, just hours after thedeadly attack on a Christmas 
market on Berlin’s Breitscheidplatz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/berlin-truck-crashes-into-christmas-market>
, as their prime suspect.


Speaking exclusively to the Guardian just over a week after being wrongly 
arrested for the attack whichkilled 12 and injured 48 others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-the-victims>
, Baloch is now in hiding, fearful for his life and no longer feeling safe in 
the country in which he sought refuge as a member of a secular separatist 
movement in Balochistan, a province that is a frequent target of religious 
extremists in Pakistan.

Members of his family in Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> 
have been contacted by the security services and have been receiving 
threatening phone calls following the widespread distribution of his photograph 
and name. “My family and I agree we would be safer if we speak out, and the 
sooner the better,” he said.

On the night he was arrested police brought in a translator who did not speak 
his native Balochi, but Punjabi and Urdu (the latter he understands a bit 
though cannot speak it much). Baloch said he was asked whether he knew what had 
happened in Berlin earlier that evening. “I said I didn’t know, and they told 
me: ‘Someone took a vehicle and drove it into a crowd killing many people. And 
you were behind the wheel of that truck, weren’t you?’

“I calmly told them I cannot drive at all. Neither can I even start a vehicle. 
I told them there’s death and war in my country; that’s why I ran away to seek 
help. You inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> are providing 
us with food, medicine and safety. You are like my mother. If you find I was 
doing these things to your country, you should not give me an easy death, you 
should cut me up slowly.”

He said he could only assume they understood his answers, though he could not 
be sure because communication was very awkward.

On being questioned further he told them he was a shepherd by profession, that 
he had arrived from his Balochistan in February this year, and that he was a 
devout Muslim who prayed five times a day. They balked at his concern over a 
looming deadline to pay a fine he owed for fare-dodging on Berlin’s transport 
network days before. “They said to me: ‘You’re worried about paying a fine, 
when many people have been murdered?’ I told them I just didn’t want to get 
into trouble.”

During his time in custody, he said, they only gave him tea and biscuits. “But 
I could not eat. The biscuits were disgusting, and the tea was cold.” He slept 
on a wooden bed without a mattress, his hands bound behind his back on the 
first night. Having told him already on the night of the attack that they had 
doubts he was the man they were looking for – not least because there were no 
traces of blood or injuries on him, despite the bloody struggle that had 
evidently taken place between the driver and the Polish man from whom the truck 
had been hijacked – they told him he was free to go. “They explained to me that 
because I had run across the road when they picked me up, they had reason to 
believe I might be a criminal. I told them I understood.”

By the time Baloch had been told he was off the hook, the police were already 
looking for Anis Amri, a Tunisian whose documents had been found in the 
footwell of the Scania truck that had ploughed into the market and who waslater 
shot dead by police officers in Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-berlin-attack-suspect-shot-dead-milan>
. Like Baloch, Amri was 24 and dark-skinned, but there the similarities ended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fnaveed-baloch-man-wrongly-arrested-berlin-attack-fears-for-his-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890757f18244b083db00bc473abe932e4b73fd1%2F0_209_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20wrongly%20arrested%20over%20Berlin%20attack%20says%20he%20fears%20for%20his%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fnaveed-baloch-man-wrongly-arrested-berlin-attack-fears-for-his-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20wrongly%20arrested%20over%20Berlin%20attack%20says%20he%20fears%20for%20his%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fnaveed-baloch-man-wrongly-arrested-berlin-attack-fears-for-his-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890757f18244b083db00bc473abe932e4b73fd1%2F0_209_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Pictures of Anis Amri released by German police. Photograph: HO/AFP/Getty 
Images 
After his release Baloch was taken to a hotel and told he was not to leave 
unless he informed the police, not because he was still under suspicion, but 
because his life might be in danger, and that he should under no circumstances 
return to the refugee shelter at the disused airport in the south of Berlin he 
had been living in. It had been raided by special forces in the early hours of 
Tuesday 20 December in the search for evidence to link Baloch to the murderous 
attack on Breitscheidplatz. There his friends waited anxiously and in vain for 
him to return.

Baloch agreed to meet the Guardian this week, above all because he now fears 
greatly for his safety, and that of his family back in the village of Mand in 
the Mekran region of Balochistan. He hoped that by telling his story he would 
be better understood – and safer. He fled the area of arid plains and 
mountains, a coastal strip of the Arabian Sea in the very south-west of 
Pakistan, around a year ago because of death threats he said he had received 
for his political activism on behalf of theBaloch National Movement 
<http://www.thebnm.org/>, which strives for the independence of Balochistan 
from Pakistan.

Balochistan is Pakistan’s largest, most mineral-rich but also poorest 
province. Located on the border with Afghanistan, it has been dogged by an 
incessant cycle of violence and underdevelopment since India and Pakistan’s 
partition on gaining independence in 1947. The Baloch people – numbering around 
13 million in Balochistan province – are a unique ethnolinguistic group who 
have been marginalised throughout history and many of whom desire independence 
from Pakistan.

Baloch, whose application for asylum is currently with the German authorities, 
is still waiting for a translator of Balochi, the main provincial language, to 
whom he can give a detailed account of his reason for seeking the legal 
protection of Germany. “When I get my chance, I will tell them that I have 
threats to my life in Pakistan, that some of my cousins who also belong to the 
same political party were killed by the security agencies, who picked them up, 
murdered them and dumped their bodies. Most of the people I worked with have 
been arrested and killed. I knew it was a matter of time before they came for 
me. That’s the reason I came to Germany.”

The Guardian cannot verify his account, but it chimes with reports from groups 
such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch detailing the suppression 
of Balochistanis by Pakistan’s intelligence agency as well asprominent 
massacres of Balochistanis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/gunmen-attack-police-cadet-hostel-in-quetta-pakistan?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 for which Islamic State – which has a strong foothold in the province – and 
other jihadi groups have claimed responsibility.

During the two years before he paid human traffickers to smuggle him into 
Germany, Baloch went on the run, leaving his house one morning at 4am and 
roaming from village to village across the Mekran district, staying at party 
workers’ houses for an average of three to five days before moving on to avoid 
detection by security forces and intelligence. Despite this, he said, he was 
arrested and tortured by Pakistani forces in Balochistan last year, after which 
he left for Germany. His three-month journey took him on foot to Iran, then on 
to Turkey and Greece, before he arrived by train at Munich’s main station in 
February.

It took him three days to realise he was in Germany, a country he knew nothing 
about, he said. Even now, 10 months on, he knows very little about where he has 
landed, only that he would like to find work and learn the language.

Asked why in particular he chose Germany, Baloch replied: “We found an agent. 
It was not my choice; it was the traffickers who chose. I paid the agent 
something upfront, then my family kept paying him in instalments, which we were 
advised was a better method because so many people had been abandoned on the 
way, or had lost their lives.” The money was raised, he said, from the proceeds 
of the sheep and goats of the flock he had tended, which his parents sold once 
he had fled the village, along with a plot of land. Even then they had to 
borrow 100,000 of the total fee of 600,000 Pakistani rupees (£4,680, or $5,724).

Following his arrest it did not take long for the news to reach his family, 
via Pakistani media, that the Balochistani in question was their son.

“When I was released the first thing I did was to contact them,” Baloch said. 
“It was my mum who answered, via WhatsApp. She asked me: ‘Did the police 
torture you?’ I told her no, that I had been caught up in an investigation but 
that it was over now. Never did she suspect I had done anything wrong, despite 
the Pakistani media saying – and continuing to say – the German authorities had 
caught a terrorist from Balochistan.”

Much of the reporting continues to say that Baloch has brought the reputation 
of Pakistan into disrepute, because of German authorities identifying him as a 
Pakistani and failing to mention Balochistan.

Baloch’s non-appearance since his name was cleared has only fuelled 
speculation – both in Germany and Pakistan – that he might have somehow been 
involved in the attack after all. He has already been accused of sexual 
assault, a charge he vehemently denies. He has been told by police in no 
uncertain terms that his life might be in danger if he returns to his refugee 
shelter, possibly from Pakistani nationals there who might view him as an enemy 
of the state, or possibly from German rightwing extremists. He must stay on his 
own in the secret location provided for him by the police for the next two 
months, living on meals-on-wheels and having to inform the police every time he 
steps outside. He is not as concerned for his own safety, he said, as for his 
family – his parents, four brothers and five sisters – who earn their living 
from farming.

“Before the attack for which I was arrested, no one in Balochistan knew I had 
disappeared,” he said, dressed in a navy blue hooded sweatshirt, drinking a 
coffee with a gaunt look in his eyes as he nervously twisted a rolled up 
cigarette in his hand. “Now they all know I fled to Germany, fearful of my 
life, and that I am claiming asylum here. It leaves my family very vulnerable 
and there’s nothing I can do to protect them.”

He has been suffering from insomnia since his arrest, and while he is visited 
by fellow Balochistanis, he said that at night in particular he felt very alone 
and intensely anxious. “There is no knowing what they might do to my family.”

He cited the names of three political activists from his village who had 
applied for asylum in Germany but returned to Balochistan in May because they 
feared for their families, who had been threatened in their absence.

“The mere fact they had left in the first place made them a focus of 
suspicion,” Baloch said. “They were picked up by intelligence agents and they 
are still missing.”

The only solace he and around 10 fellow Balochistanis – asylum seekers from 
aroundEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> who have joined 
him in Berlin to give him support – have, he said, is that the incident might 
help highlight their underreported plight.

“In the meantime I just hope that one day they will stop associating my name 
with that terrible attack,” he said. “Thank goodness they found the man who did 
it.”

• This article was amended on 9 January 2017. An earlier version said Baloch 
was held for two days and one night. The period is contested; German police say 
he was held for 23 hours from 9pm on 19 December until about 8pm the following 
day.
 