
Manchester City are ready to pay the €50m (£39m) release clause to sign the 
French defender Aymeric Laporte fromAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> as Pep Guardiola steps up 
his recruitment drive for next season.

City confirmed the signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-city-confirm-signing-ilkay-gundogan-borussia-dortmund>
 of the Germany midfielder Ilkay Gündogan from Borussia Dortmund on Thursday 
for around £20m but with concerns over the long-term fitness of captain Vincent 
Kompany, central defence is seen as a major priority.As revealed by the Guardian
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/city-go-for-aymeric-laporte> 
in April, Laporte has been identified as Guardiola’s preferred target despite 
the defender being ruled out until August with a broken leg and dislocated 
ankle.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
City are understood to be preparing a contract offer for Laporte and his 
agents – former Spain internationals Carles Puyol and Iván de la Peña – before 
submitting their bid to Athletic.

Having turned 22 last week, Laporte has been a regular for the Basque club 
since 2013 and has now played more than 120 games in La Liga. He is also 
predominantly left footed – a trait that is believed to have been made a 
priority by Guardiola and the sporting director, Txiki Begiristain.

Laporte, who moved to Athletic as a 16-year-old, has signed four contract 
extensions since December 2013 as his status as one of the world’s best young 
defenders has grown.

His potential signing would take the club’s spending on central defenders over 
the last two years to almost £110m, having spent £42m on Eliaquim Mangala in 
2014 and £28.5m on Nicolás Otamendi last summer. City also already have the 
highly rated Belgium defender Jason Denayer on their books, who is expected to 
be given a chance to prove himself in the first team squad after spending the 
last two seasons out on loan.

City are also understood to be interested in signing 16-year-old striker Abel 
Ruiz from Barcelona after his impressive performances in the Under 17 European 
Championship last month, when Spain were beaten in the final by Portugal. Ruiz, 
who has also been tracked by Arsenal in the past, is believed to be open to the 
move having not signed a contract which was offered to him in March.
 