
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
made Leroy Sané, the highly rated 19-year-old Schalke forward, a prime transfer 
target but would hope to pay less than the €40m (£32m) the German club are 
holding out for.

City have been monitoring Sané since December 2013 and have now stepped up 
their interest. Txiki Begiristain, the sporting director, would hope to seal 
the transfer in January but the summer is considered a more realistic prospect.

Premier League club-by-club guide to the January transfer window
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/30/january-transfer-window-premier-league-club-by-club-guide>
Sané is contracted to Schalke until June 2019 after signing fresh terms in July
 <http://www.bundesliga.com/en/league/leroy-sane/>, putting the German club in 
a strong position with regard to any bargaining. Horst Heldt, Schalke’s general 
manager, said on Wednesday that they will resist any approaches for the player 
who has scored four times in the Bundesliga this season.

“We don’t want to sell him and Leroy doesn’t want to leave the club,” Heldt 
told the German newspaper Bild. “Even Man City haven’t got that much money.”

In August Manchester United paid an initial £36m, which could rise to £58m, to 
Monaco forAnthony Martial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/01/manchester-united-sign-monaco-forward-anthony-martial>
, who was then also 19. So Schalke’s £32m valuation of Sané, who recently 
became a senior Germany international and who can break games open in a similar 
fashion to Martial, reflects the market price for a young footballer who is 
considered an outstanding talent but is yet to establish himself among the 
elite.

Sané made his international debut in November in the 2-0 defeat by France at 
the Stade de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/france-germany-friendly-match-report>
. “Leroy has an incredibly good feeling when it comes to running into space 
and, with his speed, he has acquired this very well,” the Germany manager, 
Joachim Löw, said in the buildup. “He has shown the quality that he has in the 
final third and in the Bundesliga matches that we have observed, he has simply 
convinced us.

“He is a player with a special gift and finesse, speed paired with technique 
and strong running – at just 19. He can make the jump with us very quickly.”

Everton close to signing Switzerland Under-21 forward Shani Tarashaj
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/30/everton-switzerland-under-21-striker-shani-tarashaj>
The son of a former Senegal international striker, Sané was at SG Wattenschied 
09 as a youngster before he moved to Schalke for a first spell in 2005. He left 
for Bayer Leverkusen three years later but returned in 2011 and made his 
first-team debut in a 3-1 defeat at Stuttgart on 20 April 2014. He has also 
played in the Champions League for Schalke, scoring a wonderful goal against 
Real Madrid inthe 4-3 win at the Bernabéu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/10/real-madrid-schalke-champions-league-match-report>
.

City already have an abundance of attacking players, including the expensive 
summer signings Kevin De Bruyne and Raheem Sterling, but the club will always 
be in the market for the best young talent. The manager, Manuel Pellegrini, 
also has players such as Sergio Agüero, Wilfried Bony, David Silva, Samir 
Nasri, Jesús Navas, Patrick Roberts and Kelechi Iheanacho at his disposal but 
one or two of those may well leave in the summer.

Considering Sané is likely to cost at least £25m only a few clubs would be 
able to afford to sign him. Real Madrid are among those and they too have been 
scouting him extensively. There have also been reports that Liverpool are 
interested in the player and his team-mate Joël Matip. Manuel Pellegrini said 
on Wednesday that he feels his squad has sufficient depth but did not rule out 
strengthening in the winter window. “No, really I think the squad is complete. 
As always I said that we are not going to close the window but we are not 
really thinking of any special players to bring in.”

Of City’s reported interest in Real Madrid’s Isco, whom Pellegrini coached 
when in charge of Málaga, he said: “I always answer the same for that question. 
I don’t talk about rumours. I am telling you what I am thinking about for our 
squad in this moment.”

Pellegrini believes City’s problematic away form will be solved once his 
players’ finishing improves, with his team having taken three points from the 
past 18 available on the road. City have failed to win away since Crystal 
Palace were defeated by a late Kelechi Iheanacho strike on 12 September. At 
Leicester City on Tuesday they drew 0-0 when a number of chances were spurned, 
including a clear opportunity for Sergio Agüero after the break.

City are at Watford for Saturday’s late kick-off and Pellegrini said: “Maybe 
we have to finish a little bit more [calmly] and improve the important amount 
of offensive moments we have but I think we are in the correct way. If we 
didn’t win the last games that we play away, it is because we must improve.

“It was good to have a clean sheet [at Leicester] but for me the best thing 
from that game was to continue playing the same way we did in the last two 
games. We didn’t win against Arsenal but I think we didn’t play a bad game. We 
played very well against Sunderland and I think we played very well also 
against Leicester.”

Vincent Kompany suffered another calf injury when coming on as a substitute in 
the 4-1 victory over Sunderland on Boxing Day. The captain lasted only nine 
minutes before having to go off. City will again look at every aspect of 
Kompany’s mental and physical regime to try to find a final solution to his 
continuing muscle problems.

“We are trying to do all we can to know how we can help Vincent to try to be 
fit and not to continue with the same calf problems. So everything the club can 
do we are going to do it.”
 