
Schalke’s sporting director has confirmed that Leroy Sané will be leaving the 
club this summer, withManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> confident of completing a 
£42m deal for the Germany international.

The 20-year-old, who has been on City’s radar since 2013, is understood to be 
keen to move to the Premier League despite his father stating on Monday that 
the forward could still move to Bayern Munich or Real Madrid. However, after 
Carlo Ancelotti admitted on Tuesday that Bayern are no longer interested in 
signing him, Pep Guardiola will be encouraged to hear Christian Heidel’s 
admission that Sané is set to leave the Bundesliga side.

Manchester City agree £4m deal for goalkeeper Gerónimo Rulli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/manchester-city-geronimo-rulli-deal>
“Leroy has made it clear he would like to leave this summer,” he told Sky 
Sports. “We will consent to a transfer if Schalke’s conditions are met.”

Initially City were willing to offer only around £35m for the player who made 
his debut for Schalke in April 2014 and has 11 goals and seven assists in 47 
Bundesliga games for the club. But withSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> holding out for their asking 
price of €50m (£42m), it is believed City will submit an improved offer.

The son of the former Senegal striker Souleyman and former German rhythmic 
gymnast champion Regina Weber, Sané was included in Germany’s Euro 2016 squad 
but played only 11 minutes, against France in the semi-final,which Germany lost 
2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/07/germany-france-euro-2016-match-report>
.

Earlier on Tuesday Ancelotti denied reports that Bayern were looking to sign 
him. “The team is very good. All positions are well staffed and we do not need 
new players for this season,” he said.

“We have very good young players here. You have to give them the opportunity 
to show it and to gain experience.”

City have already agreed a £4m fee to sign the Argentinian goalkeeper Gerónimo 
Rulli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/manchester-city-geronimo-rulli-deal>
, with the 24-year-old set to join Real Sociedad on a season-long loan.
 