
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are 
hopeful of completing the signing of the Villarreal defender Eric Bailly after 
agreeing to pay a fee that could reach up to £30m.

With Zlatan Ibrahimovic having agreed personal terms for a one-year contract 
at Old Trafford,José Mourinho’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-stay-three-year-contract>
 attention has now turned to strengthening his central defence and Bailly is 
his primary target. United have offered around £15m up front for the Ivory 
Coast international but a number of performance-related clauses could see the 
eventual fee reach £30m.

That has not been accepted by Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>, although they have indicated 
they would be happy to sell the 22-year-old to United and are negotiating over 
the structure of the deal.

Leicester and Arsenal have also registered an interest in signing Bailly but 
Manchester City are understood to no longer be in the race due to their 
continuing negotiations with Athletic Bilbao overthe French defender Aymeric 
Laporte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-city-aymeric-laporte-athletic-bilbao>
.

Europe’s top 10 football transfer targets under the age of 23 | Ed Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/europe-transfer-targets-under-23-in-demand>
Bailly joined Villarreal for around £4m in January 2015 as a replacement for 
Gabriel, who had been signed byArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. Bailly was not selected in the 
Ivory Coast matchday squad for their Africa Cup of Nations qualifier against 
Gabon on Saturday night (Ivory Coast won 2-1). He played in all six matches 
when they won the tournament last year.

Bailly moved to Spain at the age of 17 after being spotted at a youth 
tournament in Burkina Faso and came through Espanyol’s youth team. He played 
just five times in La Liga for the first team before joining Villarreal but has 
become a regular in the side that finished fourth last season and reached the 
semi-finals of the Europa League.

Bailly was absent due to a thigh injury for the second leg against Liverpool 
at Anfield whenVillarreal were eliminated after losing 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/05/liverpool-reach-europa-league-final-villarreal>
 and has also suffered from shoulder problems in the past. But he is an 
athletic and powerful defender with huge potential who would add competition to 
Daley Blind and Chris Smalling at the heart of United’s back line.
 