
The José Mourinho era at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> began with a 
comfortable 2-0 victory against Wigan Athletic, with goals from Will Keane and 
Andreas Pereira settling a low-key pre-season friendly.

Missing his Euro 2016 contingent, Mourinho still used 22 players on his 
touchline debut with the club and will be content with what, in truth, was 
little more than a glorified training exercise.

United controlled a goalless first half before the goalkeeper Jussi 
Jaaskelainen saw his kick charged down by Juan Mata in the 48th minute and 
Keane nabbed the first goal of Mourinho’s reign. Pereira found the top corner 
nine minutes later to secure the result, though Mourinho will surely have been 
more interested in bright showings from the new arrivalsHenrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-signs>
 andEric Bailly, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/eric-bailly-signs-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-defender>
 as well as the England left-backLuke Shaw’s first appearance in 10 months 
following a double leg fracture. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/13/manchester-united-luke-shaw-comeback-wigan>

Sport picture of the day: the Mourinho era begins at Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/jul/16/sport-picture-of-the-day-the-mourinho-era-begins-at-manchester-united>
The DW Stadium was far from full for Mourinho’s bow but a sizeable contingent 
of United fans had made the short journey, joined by the club’s executive 
vice-chairman, Ed Woodward. Having had disappointing experiences with David 
Moyes and Louis van Gaal, Woodward was present for what he will hope is the 
beginning of a bright new chapter.

Kick-off had to wait for the mandatory airing of “Will Grigg’s on Fire” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/hamburg-fans-petition-sign-northern-ireland-cult-hero-will-grigg>
 in honour of the Latics’ Northern Ireland striker, but once the whistle blew 
it was only a matter of seconds before Mourinho’s name was bellowed from the 
away end.

United lined up in a 4-2-3-1 formation, with Mkhitaryan given licence to roam 
behind the striker. He was quick to impress with some neat touches around the 
box, but Stephen Warnock went in hard and fair on Memphis Depay and Jesse 
Lingard to set out Wigan’s stall.

United dominated a goalless 45 minutes but created just two clear chances, 
Mkhitaryan teeing up Memphis to poke wide before hooking over himself from 10 
yards following Lingard’s cross. Wigan’s best response saw Grigg lay off for 
Emyr Huws, whose shot was bravely blocked by Bailly.

United made seven changes at the break and two substitutes combined for the 
opener – Mata charging down Jaaskelainen’s kick and squaring for the former 
Wigan loanee Keane to roll into a vacant net.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmanchester-united-beat-wigan-jose-mourinho-first-game-luke-shaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5a1fa33ef2264ea1a71c15750c682a3e0be9cf%2F0_85_2928_1757%2F2928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United%20beat%20Wigan%202-0%20in%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%E2%80%99s%20first%20game%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmanchester-united-beat-wigan-jose-mourinho-first-game-luke-shaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%20beat%20Wigan%202-0%20in%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%E2%80%99s%20first%20game%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmanchester-united-beat-wigan-jose-mourinho-first-game-luke-shaw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5a1fa33ef2264ea1a71c15750c682a3e0be9cf%2F0_85_2928_1757%2F2928.jpg>
 Will Keane tucks away an easy opener. Photograph: Matt 
West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Having broken the deadlock a second goal arrived in short order. This time 
Ashley Young’s free-kick was mis-hit by Ander Herrera and fell for Pereira, who 
buried his shot into the top corner from 12 yards.
 