
Luke Shaw expects to make his comeback from a broken leg sustained last 
September at Wigan Athletic on Saturday in José Mourinho’s opening game as the
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
manager.

Shaw suffered a double fracture of his right leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/psv-eindhoven-manchester-united-champions-league>
 in United’s Champions League defeat at PSV Eindhoven on 15 September. It ruled 
him out for the rest of the season and caused him to miss England’s Euro 2016 
campaign.

The 21-year-old has returned to full training and the left-back feels ready to 
play again. Shaw is one of a diminished first-team squad Mourinho has been 
training during his opening two weeks in charge, because many players are on a 
break following involvement in the European Championship or the Copa América.

Wayne Rooney: working with José Mourinho will give me extra motivation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/12/wayne-rooney-working-under-jose-mourinho-will-give-me-extra-motivation-manchester-united>
Phil Jones is among those training and has been told by Mourinho he has a 
long-term future at the club. Jones, as has been the pattern during his United 
career, struggled with injury last season and last featured inthe 2-1 defeat of 
Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/manchester-united-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
at Old Trafford on 2 January.

Mourinho views him as the potential regular partner for Chris Smalling in 
central defence and Jones is expected to start the new campaign as a first 
choice.

Jones may feature at Wigan with Ander Herrera, Ashley Young, Juan Mata, 
Timothy Fosu-Mensah, Daley Blind, Michael Carrick, Memphis Depay, Jesse 
Lingard, Guillermo Varela, Andreas Pereira, Adnan Januzaj and James Wilson. The 
new signingsHenrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-signs>
 andEric Bailly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/eric-bailly-signs-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-defender>
are also under consideration, having started training on Wednesday.

United fly to China on Tuesday to start their summer tour. They face 
Manchester City and Borussia Dortmund there before travelling to Gothenburg to 
play Galatasaray on 30 July.

Wayne Rooney’s testimonial against Everton at Old Trafford follows on 3 August 
before the Community Shield match against Leicester City at Wembley four days 
later. United begin their Premier League season at Bournemouth on 14 August.
 