
Manchester City are going ahead with plans to make Aymeric Laporte one of Pep 
Guardiola’s first signings despite theAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> centre-half being ruled 
out until August with a broken leg and dislocated ankle.

Europe’s top 10 football transfer targets under the age of 23 | Ed Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/europe-transfer-targets-under-23-in-demand>
Guardiola has identified Laporte among the players he wants to bring in this 
summer – a list that also features Ilkay Gundogan from Borussia Dortmund – and 
sees the 21-year-old as an upgrade on Martín Demichelis, who will leave on a 
free transfer, at a time when there are also concerns aboutVincent Kompany’s 
recurring injury issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/vincent-kompany-could-miss-most-of-manchester-citys-run-in-with-injury>
.

With Demichelis coming to the end of his contract, Kompany missing several 
chunks of the season with calf problems and the persistent doubts about the 
suitability of Eliaquim Mangala and Nicolás Otamendi, Guardiola is adamant that 
City need to bring at least one more centre-half to the Etihad Stadium.

Laporte’s chances of playing in the European Championship finals this summer 
were ended last month because of theinjuries he sustained in an under-21 game 
for France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/manchester-city-aymeric-laporte-injury>
 against Scotland, but City are still trying to negotiate a deal for a player 
who will turn 22 in May. It will not be cheap, with Laporte’s release clause 
reputedly worth £39.6m, but there are so few high-calibre centre-backs on the 
market this summer there is an acceptance among the more financially powerful 
clubs that players operating in that position will be more expensive than usual.

City have been monitoring John Stones’s potential availability at Everton, 
acutely aware that bothChelsea and Manchester United would like to tempt him 
away from Goodison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/chelsea-40m-everton-john-stones-centre-back>
, but Guardiola’s belief is that Laporte can play at the highest level for the 
next 10 years. Laporte has captained France at every level from under‑17s to 
under-21s and there have been reports in Spain about Barcelona wanting to take 
him to the Camp Nou.
 