
Manny Pacquiao says that he respects Nike’s decision to sever ties with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/manny-pacquiao-gay-comments-nike-boxing>
 over his comments about gay relationships but remains opposed to same-sex 
marriage and added he’s happy that “a lot of people were alarmed by the truth”.


 Nike said on Wednesday that it will no longer have any business dealings with 
the former Filipino world champion, adding that it found his comments 
“abhorrent.” Nike says it strongly opposes any kind of discrimination.

 “Whatever decision Nike makes is its decision and I respect that and its 
sponsorship of me now only involves my clothes for my fight,” Pacquiao told 
reporters on Thursday. “Our contract has already ended aside from sponsoring 
the boxing.”

Manny Pacquiao provokes storm by calling gay people ‘worse than animals’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
 Pacquiao is an evangelical Christian and has publicly declared his opposition 
to same-sex unions. “It’s just common sense,”Pacquiao said in an interview 
earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
. “Have you seen any animal having male-to-male or female-to-female relations?” 
Animals, he said, were better because they recognize gender differences, and 
“if you have male-to-male or female-to-female [relationships], then people are 
worse than animals.”

 Among those who reacted strongly were popular gay celebrities in the 
Philippines some of whom declared they have lost their respect for the fighter.

 Even his American boxing promoter Bob Arum has criticized Pacquiao. “What 
he’s saying is diametrically opposed to what I believe,” said Arum, who is 
promoting Pacquiao’s upcoming fight with Timothy Bradley. “I’m in favor of gay 
rights and same-sex marriage. I’m apologetic personally to the gay movement in 
the United States.”

 Pacquiao added he did not intend to condemn gay people. “I am not condemning 
the LGBT,” Pacquiao said. “What I am condemning is the act. I’m happier because 
I’m telling the truth ... It’s worse if we will hide the truth,” he said. I’m 
happier that a lot of people were alarmed by the truth.”
 