
Manny Pacquiao <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> says he is 
thinking about fighting for the Philippines in the Olympics this summer if the 
boxing competition is open to professional fighters.

His promoter, though, thinks the idea of any pro fighting in Rio – much less 
the eight-time world champion – is a terrible idea.

Top professional boxers to be eligible for Rio Olympics under Aiba plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/professional-boxers-eligible-rio-olympics>
“The idea you’ll allow professionals into the Olympics at this short notice is 
absolutely insane,” the promoter Bob Arum said. “These people ought to have 
their heads examined.”

The head of the International Boxing Association (Aiba) has proposed allowing 
pros in the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/professional-boxers-eligible-rio-olympics>
, though it is doubtful if the plan would be implemented by Rio because 
qualification tournaments are either under way or have already been held for 
boxers in most countries.

Pacquiao, who fights Timothy Bradley next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/31/manny-pacquiao-april-fight-timothy-bradley>
 in his first bout sincelosing to Floyd Mayweather Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
 last May, said on Friday that the idea of boxing for a gold medal intrigues 
him.

“I’m not saying I’m going to fight or saying I’m not,” Pacquiao said. “I’m not 
closing the door. I’m thinking about it.”

Pacquiao is running for the senate in his native Philippines and a win in the 
elections next month could put an end to his boxing career as he concentrates 
on politics. But the possibility of fighting for his country in the Olympics 
could also be used to help him win votes in the campaign.

No Filipino has ever won a gold medal in the Olympics, though boxers have won 
five silvers and bronze. A gold medal for Pacquiao would, if anything, cement 
his status forever as the country’s greatest sports hero.

His trainer, Freddie Roach, said he believes the 37-year-old Pacquiao has been 
re-energised in training for Bradley and still has fights left in him. Pacquiao 
has said he planned to retire after fighting Bradley but has since wavered.

“He asked me if I would train him if they let pros in the Olympics,” Roach 
said. “I said of course I will.”

Pacquiao and Bradley meet for the third time at the MGM Grand in a fight that 
will pay him $20m. Bradley won their first fight in a controversial decision 
and Pacquiao dominated him the second time they met.

Pacquiao is currently a congressman in the Philippines and there is talk of 
him some day becoming a presidential candidate should he win a seat in the 
senate.

Arum said he cannot imagine Pacquiao fighting teenage amateurs in what would 
surely be mismatches in the Olympics.

“Pros can play basketball in the Olympics, yes,” Arum said. “But in basketball 
you just dunk over somebody. It’s not a hurt game. If you put experienced pros 
in with rank amateurs there will be serious health consequences.”

Even if pros are not allowed in Rio, the boxing will resemble the pro game 
more, with a 10-point must scoring system and no head protection for the first 
time.
 