
Manny Pacquiao’s 9 April bout with Timothy Bradley came under a cloud on 
Monday when the Philippine elections commission was asked to stop the Las Vegas 
match because it would give the Filipino senatorial candidate huge publicity.

Manny Pacquiao's anti-gay rhetoric permanently mars his legacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/18/manny-pacquiaos-anti-gay-rhetoric-permanently-mars-a-hard-won-legacy>
Walden Bello, a former member of the house of representatives of the 
Philippines who is also a senatorial candidate in the 9 May elections, said in 
his petition that allowing the welterweight fight to proceed during the 
campaign period would violate a law giving candidates equal access to media 
publicity and a ban on TV and radio programmes favouring a candidate.

Bello, a left-wing politician who has not fared well in polls, said the fight, 
which Pacquiao declared would be his last, should be postponed until after the 
elections.

Pacquiao, 37, has not fought since losing to Floyd Mayweather Jr last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/04/floyd-mayweather-manny-pacquiao-boxing-new-era>
 in the richest fight ever. Pacquiao reportedly made more than $100m for that 
fight, and is guaranteed $20m to fight Bradley.

The eight-division champion is the Philippines’ most famous athlete. He has 
represented Sarangani province in the Philippines’ house of representatives 
since May 2010, though he has drawn criticism for seldom showing up for 
legislative duties.

Timothy Bradley beats Manny Pacquiao with controversial split points decision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/10/timothy-bradley-manny-pacquiao-split-decision>
Pacquiao will face Bradley in Las Vegas, completing a trilogy between two of 
the world’s top welterweights. Bradley won a disputed split decision over 
Pacquiao in their first meeting in June 2012, but Pacquiao won by unanimous 
decision in the April 2014 rematch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fmanny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-las-vegas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b423e3cb2cd6f9959c0f20faffe64ae05c14cb5%2F0_33_3573_2147%2F3573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manny%20Pacquiao%20election%20rival%20calls%20for%20Timothy%20Bradley%20bout%20to%20be%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fmanny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-las-vegas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manny%20Pacquiao%20election%20rival%20calls%20for%20Timothy%20Bradley%20bout%20to%20be%20stopped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fmanny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-las-vegas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b423e3cb2cd6f9959c0f20faffe64ae05c14cb5%2F0_33_3573_2147%2F3573.jpg>
 Manny Pacquiao’s election rival Walden Bello holds document seeking to 
postpone the 8 April fight in Las Vegas. Photograph: Bullit Marquez/AP 
Pacquiao has been embroiled in controversy for saying that people in same-sex 
relations are “worse than animals” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
. He made the comment when asked by a local TV network about his views on 
same-sex marriage, and video of his response was posted on the network’s 
website last week.

In response to the remark, Nike said that it would no longer have any business 
dealings with Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/manny-pacquiao-gay-comments-nike-boxing>
, with the sponsor saying it found his comments “abhorrent”.

Pacquiao has apologised to people hurt by his comments and said he respects 
Nike’s decision. But he has stood by his opposition to same-sex marriage, 
saying that“a lot of people were alarmed by the truth” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/manny-pacquiao-says-people-alarmed-by-the-truth-about-gay-marriage>
 about it. He also posted a quote on his Instagram account that appeared to 
back up his comments. “If a man has sexual relations with a man as one does 
with a woman, both of them have done what is detestable. They are to be put to 
death; their blood will be on their own heads.”

Manny Pacquiao’s Nike contract terminated after homophobic slurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/manny-pacquiao-gay-comments-nike-boxing>
Bello said he was not seeking Pacquiao’s disqualification as a senatorial 
candidate, but was asking the elections commission to take action on the 
complaint. “I imagine if they rule in our favour, which I believe they will, 
then they will have to tell Manny that he would have to comply with it,” Bello 
said, adding that if Pacquiao refuses to comply, disqualification from the 
election could be a logical outcome.

Bello’s petition said that if the spirit and intent of the Fair Elections Act 
were to be strictly followed, then Pacquiao should be required to go on leave 
from his profession during the campaign period. “He has all the rights to 
exercise his boxing profession after the elections, but to schedule his boxing 
bout during the campaign period and close to the elections is obviously taking 
advantage of his personality and his profession, extending undue benefit to his 
candidacy,” the petition said.

It was not clear when the commission on elections would decide on the issue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fmanny-pacquiao-people-in-same-sex-relationships-worse-than-animals-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manny%20Pacquiao%3A%20people%20in%20same-sex%20relationships%20worse%20than%20animals%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fmanny-pacquiao-people-in-same-sex-relationships-worse-than-animals-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manny%20Pacquiao%3A%20people%20in%20same-sex%20relationships%20worse%20than%20animals%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fmanny-pacquiao-people-in-same-sex-relationships-worse-than-animals-video&media=>
Manny Pacquiao says people in same-sex relationships are ‘worse than animals’. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-people-in-same-sex-relationships-worse-than-animals-video> 