
Marco Fu withstood one of the Crucible’s finest fightbacks to book his place 
in the semi-finals of the World Championships for the second time in his career.

His opponent, Barry Hawkins, trailing 9-1 after losing the first two frames of 
the morning session, launched a stunning recovery to move within one frame of 
levelling their last-eight match in Sheffield.

Hawkins, who had edged a nail-biting final-frame win over Ronnie O’Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/ronnie-osullivan-beaten-by-barry-hawkins-in-world-championship-thriller>
 in the previous round, won five frames in a row as he came back to 10-9 but Fu 
somehow held himself together to edge over the line 13-11.

The 38-year-old from Hong Kong had seemed a certainty to reach the last four 
for the first time since 2006 after building on his 7-1 overnight advantage to 
move within four frames of victory.

Ronnie O’Sullivan beaten by Barry Hawkins in world championship thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/ronnie-osullivan-beaten-by-barry-hawkins-in-world-championship-thriller>
But after Hawkins clawed back the deficit the decisive frames became 
increasingly pressure-filled until a nerveless break of 74 from Fu in the 24th 
frame – in response to a 60 from Hawkins – saw him home.

Meanwhile the 45-year-old Alan McManus reached his first Crucible semi-final 
in 23 years after winning the last four frames against his compatriotJohn 
Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-higgins> to triumph by the same 
score.

It was a remarkable performance from McManus, who stuck doggedly to Higgins 
throughout the match before producing some superb break-building in the final 
frames as the four-times champion Higgins was first to wilt.

McManus will face Ding Junhui in the last four and Fu will take on the world 
No1, Mark Selby, after the Leicester man secured his own passage with a 
comfortable 13-8 win over the rising star Kyren Wilson.

Selby, the 2014 champion, had resumed Wednesday’s morning session with a 
commanding 10-6 lead and a pair of swift half-centuries set him on his way to 
victory.

Mark Selby vows to play better after close win against Sam Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/24/mark-selby-beats-qualifier-sam-baird-snooker-world-championship>
Despite his defeat Wilson believes he has the ability to win the world title 
one day. “Without a doubt I will win this event in the future. I completely 
believe in myself and this hasn’t dampened my confidence.

“I will have a bit of a rest and will be back working very, very hard to make 
sure next season is even better than this one.”

Wilson had the consolation of a 143 clearance which looks set to land him the 
highest break prize and he added: “I hope not [it won’t be beaten] because my 
cue might be in pieces if it is.

“It was a nice break but at 12-6 down I’m sort of out of the match so it’s a 
nice little consolation prize and hopefully it will stand.”
 