
Mark Selby <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mark-selby> had to dig deep to 
emerge a 17-15 winner against Hong Kong’s Marco Fu in a gripping, and at times 
controversial, World Championship semi-final.

Ding Junhui beats Alan McManus to reach his first world snooker final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/ding-junhui-alan-mcmanus-world-championship-mark-selby-marco-fu-crucible>
Now, as his beloved Leicester City bid to win an improbable Premier League 
title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/30/leicester-city-fantastic-foxes-premier-league-elite-lesson>
 against Manchester United at Old Trafford on Sunday, Selby will belining up 
against Ding Junhui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/ding-junhui-alan-mcmanus-world-championship-mark-selby-marco-fu-crucible>
in his third Crucible final.

He lost to John Higgins in 2007 but beat Ronnie O’Sullivan to claim the trophy 
in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/05/mark-selby-ronnie-osullivan-world-snooker-final>
, and after dashing the prospect of an all-Asian final it will be Selby 
standing in the way of Ding.

It is a match-up which should make for a fitting finale to the tournament, but 
will have to go some to match the drama witnessed in this famous arena on 
Saturday evening as Selby and Fu slugged it out.

The controversy arrived when Fu appeared to touch a red with his index finger 
early in the 27th frame when bridging to play a safety shot. Referee Brendan 
Moore spotted nothing amiss, and Fu showed no sign of having noticed he nudged 
the ball.

But replays indicated the ball moved and that was immediately spotted by TV 
commentator John Parrott, the 1991 world champion, who said on BBC Two: “That’s 
a foul there. The red definitely moved there. It’s not been called but that’s a 
foul. It’s his finger [that] moves the red. [The] referee’s missed it, so has 
the player. He moves it forward, touches the red, and it’s a foul. Bit 
surprised both of them missed it.”

Six-times world champion Steve Davis found it hard to believe Fu would not 
have noticed he touched the ball. “I think everybody in the world of snooker 
probably would suspect you could have felt that,” Davis said. “There’s no way 
of getting out of that, that you probably did feel it.”

John Virgo apologetic after being heard swearing on BBC during snooker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/john-virgo-apologetic-swearing-bbc-snooker>
Stephen Hendry, seven times a world champion, added: “You don’t want to start 
pointing fingers at people or anything but you know when you’ve touched it, 
you’ve got nerves in your finger and you know when you’ve touched something.

“You can only say perhaps Marco’s engulfed in the situation, there’s so much 
tension out there.”

It made little difference in the end, but had the match ultimately swung the 
other way, there might have been more searching questions asked. Having resumed 
the evening session tied at 12-12, Selby found it a struggle to shake off Fu’s 
close attention.

The final frame of the day’s opening session between the pair had lasted a 
draining one hour, 16 minutes and 11 seconds – the longest in tournament 
history.

Selby and Fu took an hour over the closing frame of the match too, with a 
number of fouls and misses ratcheting up the tension even further, before it 
went the way of the man hoping for a double title celebration this Bank Holiday 
weekend.
 