
Mark Taimanov, who has died aged 90, reached the top of two separate 
professions.As concert pianists, he and his first wife, Lyubov Bruk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivMGiG6MOo8&list=PLNvFpvXNK_TLLuRJoKhPsPjlqFR89H1Fh&index=8>
, were among the best international duettists of their time; as a chess 
grandmaster, Taimanov won the competitive USSR championship and was twice a 
world title candidate.

Paradoxically, the most significant incident of Taimanov’s life was a crushing 
defeat. The American player Bobby Fischer defeated him 6-0 in their candidates 
quarter-final in Vancouver in 1971, and scandalised Soviet officials 
immediately sought a political explanation. They regarded it as inconceivable 
that a representative of the golden USSR generation could be wiped out by an 
American by normal means. A border search was ordered on Taimanov’s return, and 
it proved incriminating. He was carrying US dollars, payment for an article for 
a Dutch magazine written by his friend and trainer Salo Flohr, and worse, a 
book byAleksandr Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia2>.

The USSR sports committee ordered immediate sanctions which, said Taimanov, 
“changed my life into hell”. He was deprived of his civil rights, prohibited 
from travelling abroad and pilloried in the press. He lost his state salary and 
was banned from social activities. The resulting stress proved fatal to his 
marriage, and Bruk left him, simultaneously ending their piano partnership.

Taimanov was only rescued at the Leningrad 1973 chess world title interzonal, 
for which he automatically qualified, as a 1971 candidate. To exclude him from 
an official international event in his home city would have provoked widespread 
criticism, so on orders from the Communist party central committee his case was 
closed. The bureaucrat who informed the grandmaster of his rehabilitation drily 
explained that “we had the choice between hammering the nail in the coffin 
until the end or pulling it off altogether”. Years later Taimanov wrote a book 
entitled How I Became Fischer’s Victim.
 Anatoly Karpov v Mark Taimanov, Leningrad 1977 

Facing the reigning world champion at the height of his powers, Taimanov 
looked right up against it. Karpov is a pawn up, and his b6 pawn is only two 
squares from queening. But Taimanov found the artistic finish 1...Ng3+! 2 hxg3 
(if 2 Qxg3 Rxb1 and Black wins easily on material) Ra8! and Karpov, with no 
defence to Rh8 mate, resigned 
Taimanov was born in Leningrad, one of four children. His father was an 
construction engineer who built several theatres in the city, and his Ukrainian 
mother was a musician who taught her son the piano. When Mark was studying at 
music school, he was offered the part of a young violinist in the filmBeethoven 
Concerto (1937) <http://www.allmovie.com/movie/beethoven-concerto-v235513>. 
With no prior prior knowledge of the instrument, he had to learn all the 
movements and positions from scratch, but the film was a success and was 
awarded a prize at a 1937 Paris cinema festival.

A few months later the newly famous boy was invited to the official opening of 
the Leningrad Pioneers Palace, where he was asked to select an activity. “An 
inner voice whispered chess to me,” and so he joined the Leningrad chess 
school, whose director wasMikhail Botvinnik 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary--mikhail-botvinnik-1618645.html>
, later the world champion. Taimanov was the city’s best junior by 1941, when 
the school closed because of the second world war and he was evacuated before 
the German siege began.

In 1945 he resumed his music studies at the Leningrad Conservatory, where he 
met Bruk, a fellow student. They formed a piano duo, fell in love and married a 
year later. By 1953 Taimanov had become a grandmaster and world championship 
candidate – finishing in midfield in that year’s candidates’ tournament in 
Zurich – while he and his wife had advanced from concerts across the USSR to 
performances abroad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3GpSt-I4WqY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3GpSt-I4WqY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3GpSt-I4WqY&media=>
 Lyubov Bruk and Mark Taimanov playing Brasileira, from Darius Milhaud’s suite 
Scaramouche 
Their recordings with the Leningrad Chamber Orchestra during this period were 
released half a century later by Philips as part oftheir series Great Pianists 
of the 20th Century 
<http://www.gramophone.co.uk/review/great-pianists-of-the-20th-century-bruk-taimanov>
.

Taimanov won the USSR championship in 1955, but though he could not match the 
world top pair, Botvinnik andVasily Smyslov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/mar/28/vasily-smyslov-obituary>, he was 
content to be a valued member of the Soviet golden team that dominated the 
international game. He was popular, optimistic, respected and a chessboard 
diplomat.

In 1954, when the Soviet team outclassed Britain 18.5-1.5 before a stunned 
audience at Caxton Hall, London, I was paired with Taimanov. Our first game 
soon reached a level position with queens exchanged, so I decided to propose a 
draw. Our only common language was German, so I enquired “Remis, grossmeister?” 
“Moment, bitte”. He went over to his hatchet-faced captain, Dmitri Postnikov, 
they conferred gravely, Taimanov returned to the board, and I waited 
expectantly for “Ja” or “Nein”. Instead he replied “Ein paar zuge”, an original 
and tactfully phrased put-down. The “few moves” turned out to be another 30 
before I resigned.

Taimanov’s dual career continued at a high level throughout the 1950s and 60s. 
His recipe for combining his professions was never to mix them, but to 
alternate between the two. He liked to say that when he gave concerts he was 
taking a rest from chess and when he played chess he was resting from the 
piano. His musical preferences were for romantics such as Chopin and 
Rachmaninov. He also tried for an artistic style at the chessboard.

In 1970, at the age of 44, Taimanov controversially became a world title 
candidate for the second time. His final round opponent at the Palma 
interzonal, the Yugoslav Milan Matulović, played feebly and at great speed, and 
Taimanov won easily. A rumour sprung up that Matulović had sold the point for 
$400, though most blamed Soviet officials rather than Taimanov himself.

In an interview before his quarter-final with Fischer, Taimanov boldly 
declared that the American’s game was rather ordinary and routine. When play 
began in Vancouver, Fischer quickly led 2-0, but Taimanov had what he thought 
was a winning position in game three, only to find his attack stalled. 
Frustrated, he avoided a critical line and lost.

Ten years later, he finally worked out how he could have won. When the 
prospect of a whitewash loomed at 0-4, Taimanov and his seconds, Alexander 
Kotov and Yuri Balashov, became desperate to save the fifth game, which was 
adjourned in an unclear queen and rook ending. During the interval, the Russian 
trio started to analyse the position. As their hands banged the pieces to and 
fro, Taimanov looked increasingly bemused, to the great amusement of Fischer, 
who was watching from a distance. Two moves after the resumption, Taimanov 
blundered a rook and resigned.

Fischer later admitted that 6-0 flattered him, but for Taimanov the match, let 
alone its aftermath, proved traumatic: “The terrible feeling that I was playing 
against a machine which never made any mistake shattered my resistance.”

After his 1973 rehabilitation, Taimanov built a new career as a solo pianist 
and achieved new chess successes. In his 60s, after the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, he played more tournaments than in his best years; and he won the World 
Senior Championship for over-60s in both 1993 and 1994. At the age of 87, he 
launched a St Petersburg academy for young talents, and in December last year, 
at 89, he played a four-game match in Zurich againstViktor Korchnoi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/06/viktor-korchnoi-obituary>, then 
84. At 173 years, it was the oldest combined total for a match between two 
grandmasters.

He liked to give impromptu piano recitals at closing ceremonies, sometimes 
accompanied as a singer by his friend Smyslov. Taimanov was a gifted and 
prolific writer on chess. He authored several books on opening play, including 
a work on the Taimanov Defence, an original plan based on unusual placing of 
the black knights; and he wrote commentaries for the Russian press on all five 
title matches betweenGarry Kasparov <http://www.kasparov.com> and Anatoly 
Karpov.

Taimanov had a son with Bruk, and in the 70s was briefly married to Jane 
Averbakh, daughter of one of his Soviet grandmaster colleagues,Yuri Averbakh 
<http:>. Those two marriages ended in divorce. He was 78 when he and his fourth 
wife, Nadezhda Bakhtina, had twins, Misha and Dima.

• Mark Evgenievich Taimanov, chess player and pianist, born 7 February 1926; 
died 28 November 2016
 