
Mark Hughes has strongly defended his record as Stoke City manager and 
insisted he has total faith in the players’ ability to climb the table, with 
the Welshman dismissing reports of dressing-room unrest after apoor start to 
the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/mark-hughes-stoke-city> and 
claiming there are no parallels to be drawn with hisdismal experience at Queens 
Park Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2012/nov/23/qpr-sack-mark-hughes-harry-redknapp-video>
.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/23/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Anchored to the bottom of the Premier League with only one point from five 
matches, Stoke have made their worst ever start to a campaign. They have 
conceded 14 goals across those league fixtures and on Wednesday night lost 
against Hull in the EFL Cup, throwing the spotlight on Hughes’s position and 
prompting the manager to admit that some people “think there’s a smell of blood 
in the air”.

Yet the Stoke manager was in defiant mood as he highlighted the three 
successive top-10 finishes he has delivered since his appointment in 2013, 
recognised the support he has within the board room – the 52-year-old is not 
under pressure of losing his job – and pointed out how a win against West Brom 
on Saturday would put the club in a better position than at the same time last 
year, when they ended up ninth.

It was the mention of his time in charge at Queens Park Rangers, however, that 
prompted the most withering response. Asked about that period, which culminated 
in him losing his job after presiding over a run of 12 Premier League matches 
without a victory from the start of the 2012-13 season, Hughes said there were 
no similarities with Stoke whatsoever. “It’s a completely different situation 
at all levels. We’ve been here three years, for goodness’ sake. I know the 
talent that we have in the group, the group is strong, it’s a completely 
different situation to what I faced there.”

At Stoke, Hughes has the full backing of Peter and John Coates, the chairman 
and vice-chairman. “I have great support from the ownership. It’s one of the 
best ones I’ve been involved with,” he said – and from the manager’s point of 
view, his track record is there for all to see. “I think I’ve proved in my time 
here that I can take this club in the direction that we all want to be, which 
is the top half of the Premier League, which is what I set out to do when I 
first got the job. We’re consistently a top-10 side now.”

Hughes, nevertheless, accepts results need to improve quickly, and probably 
the last thing he needs right now is Tony Pulis,the man he replaced at Stoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/21/tony-pulis-stokecity>, 
marking his 1,000th game in management with a victory over him. “We’ve got a 
little bit of noise around us, because we haven’t got our first win,” Hughes 
said. “But the reality of the situation is, if we win against West Brom, which 
we’re more than capable of, we’ll have made a better start than we did last 
year, so there needs to be a little bit of reality to the situation we’re in.

How football fans can deal with falling out of love with former icons | Paul 
Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/manchester-united-stoke-farewell-favoufrites>
“At the moment, for whatever reason, people think there’s a smell of blood in 
the air and think there’s an opportunity to add pressure. We add pressure 
ourselves, we’re disappointed at the moment because we hoped for a better 
start.”

The goals against column highlights where the biggest problem lies for Stoke. 
Jack Butland’s absence through injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/jack-butland-stoke-city-mark-hughes-england-sam-allardyce>
 has not helped and nor has the fact that the back four has chopped and changed 
so much. Confidence has been hit and Hughes acknowledged that some players are 
struggling for form. Giannelli Imbula,the £18.3m club-record signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/stoke-giannelli-imbula-porto-record-fee-18m>
, was dropped forthe 4-1 defeat at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/crystal-palace-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 last Sunday and Wilfried Bony is still waiting for his first goal after 
joining on loan from Manchester City.

Hughes was quick to reject claims, however, that Bony’s attitude is a problem 
and has affected the harmony within the squad. “Let’s nip that in the bud 
straight away,” the Stoke manager said. “Unfortunately at the moment we are a 
little bit fair game for easy headlines. It’s all very predictable: player 
unrest, problems in the dressing room – they all come up at this time. It’s 
totally untrue. Wilfried’s come in and had a really positive impact on the 
group and we are delighted with his character.”
 