
Marlon James has revealed the first details of his forthcoming fantasy 
trilogy, expected to begin appearing next year. Inspired by a row over The 
Hobbit and the desire to “geek the hell out of something”, the ManBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> winner is steeping himself in 
ancient African mythology with a view to creating a detailed, Tolkienesque 
fictional world.

James said the first of the three novels in the Dark Star sequence – titled 
Black Leopard, Red Wolf – should appear in autumn 2018. The following novels 
will be called Moon Witch, Night Devil and The Boy and the Dark Star.

Speaking to Entertainment Weekly 
<http://ew.com/books/2017/01/10/marlon-james-dark-star-fantasy-trilogy/>, the A 
Brief History of Seven Killings author said the books will draw on the rich 
heritage of African legend and language in the same way JRR Tolkien drew on 
Celtic and Norse mythology to create The Lord of the Rings.

“The very, very basic plot is [that] this slave trader hires a bunch of 
mercenaries to track down a kid who may have been kidnapped,” he told the US 
magazine in an interview. “But finding him takes nine years, and at the end of 
it, the kid is dead. And the whole novel is trying to figure out: ‘How did this 
happen?’”

Each book will take the form of an eyewitness testimony that counters the 
previous book until the truth is revealed in the final instalment, he added.

The row over The Hobbit concerned the lack of diversity in the cast of the 
film adaptation. “It made me realise that there was this huge universe of 
African history and mythology and crazy stories, these fantastic beasts and so 
on, that was just waiting there,” he said.

A self-confessed “sci-fi geek”, the trilogy is a departure from the 
Jamaican-born writer’s three previous books, historical novels that deal with 
the colonial legacy. His last novelA Brief History of Seven Killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
, which scooped the 2015 Man Booker prize, follows the attempt to assassinate 
singer Bob Marley in 1976 and its aftermath, through the crack wars of New York 
in the 1980s and back to Jamaica in the 1990s.

“I just became really fascinated with real, old, epic storytelling,” he said 
of the decision to move genres. “There are African epics that we still talk 
about – some of which are as old as Beowulf. Others, likeThe Epic of Son-Jara 
<http://literaturesandforeignlanguages.blogspot.co.uk/2008/10/epic-of-son-jara-african-literature.html>
 andThe Epic of Askia Muhammad 
<http://www.iupress.indiana.edu/product_info.php?products_id=20763>, I’ve been 
researching for years. When I started to really dig in to it, the book almost 
started writing itself.”

James said he had wanted to write a historical novel. “I wanted to go back to 
being a fantasy geek. I don’t know who I told this, butI said 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/features/novelist-marlon-james-jamaicas-rebel-son-20160106>
, ‘I just want to geek the hell out of something’.”

The books are set in a fantasy world in an indeterminate period after the fall 
of the Roman empire, and will be set in ancient African kingdoms including Kush 
and Songhai.

James admitted he is enjoying creating a comprehensively imagined world. 
Though the 46-year old had “not yet” followed Tolkien’s lead by inventing a 
language, he was studying African languages with a view to doing so.

Marlon James: ‘I’ve been threatening to write a Viking novel for almost 10 
years’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/20/observer-faces-of-2015-marlon-james-threatening-to-write-a-viking-novel>
He told EW that each novel in the series will have a substantial appendices 
with maps and guides to countries and languages. “I love that Tolkien just 
created Elvish. I also like that he didn’t bother to translate it,” he said. 
Already he has started drawing maps to accompany the texts. “I just wanted to 
build this whole thing,” he said.
 