
The Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> may be 
the fourth most-watched league in Europe, but received wisdom is that, for a 
footballer’s international future, it’s a black hole. The Premier League, or at 
least one of Europe’s premier leagues, is thought of as the place to be in 
order to further one’s ambitions. But for QPR midfielder Massimo Luongo, that’s 
not necessarily the case.

Luongo has been linked with moves to several top-flight sides this season, but 
does he think he needs to make such a move to serve the Australian national 
team the best? “I don’t look at it like that,” says the 24-year-old. “I don’t 
look at it like everything I do in my club career is for my national team – I’m 
doing it for myself. Obviously I want to do well for QPR and Australia, but 
that’s not my lifetime goal, just to be a goodAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> player – I want to be a good 
player for everyone.

Socceroos left with more questions than answers after spirited Thai 
performance | Richard Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/socceroos-left-with-more-questions-than-answers-after-spirited-thai-performance>
“I was the player of the tournament in the Asian Cup [in 2015], and I was 
playing in League One – now I’m playing at a higher level but not playing every 
game for Australia, so what does that tell you? If you’re a good player and 
bring that to the national team, then that’s all the Australia manager can ask 
for. If [Ange Postecoglou] was like all our previous managers who only looked 
at the first leagues of every country, I would never have played.”

It’s refreshing to hear a player – who presumably still wouldn’t turn his nose 
up at the Premier League – be assured enough to know there’s no rush to crack 
the top division. Luongo has emerged this season as one of the better 
midfielders in the Championship, cementing his place in the first team under 
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink before the Dutchman’s sacking earlier this month, and 
also nailing down a regular position in which he’s happy.

“I see myself as a box-to-box midfielder rather than a No10 or a 
defensive-minded player,” says Luongo, who’s been asked to fill those latter 
roles before. “I think I’ve shown this season I can do both sides of the game. 
I’ve put that responsibility on myself, to think ‘they’re depending on me to do 
something, to make a tackle, or create something special’.”

Hasselbaink’s replacement, Ian Holloway, has thus far lived up to his public 
reputation (“You never have a boring day atQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> now...”) but is also encouraging 
Luongo to continue along a similar path. “He wants me on the ball as much as 
possible, to do what I do best. He just wants me to express myself, and I’m not 
saying previous managers didn’t do that, but their styles needed a little bit 
more discipline from me, more of a ‘team’ job. He’s allowing me quite a lot of 
freedom in middle.”

That freedom can only be good news for Australia, adding more to the clutch of 
talented midfielders currently available to Postecoglou. As well as Mile 
Jedinak and Celtic’s Tommy Rogic, Aaron Mooy is proving similarly impressive in 
the Championship, the stand-out player in Huddersfield’s surprisingly 
eye-catching start to the season. “We all know Aaron’s strengths,” says Luongo. 
“He keeps the team ticking, and he does make it easy for other players to play 
alongside him.” And then there’s Tim Cahill, the elder statesman and wise old 
Socceroos sensei, who at nearly 37 is no longer an automatic choice with the 
national team, but Luongo is clear that he still has plenty to offer.

“When I first started, he made that transition to the national team easy. Now, 
even if he doesn’t play, just having him around and knowing that if he comes on 
or he starts, the other team are scared of him in the box. So having that 
person in the team, that x-factor player, does help a lot with morale and 
confidence. It’s someone to rely on, if you need it. I don’t know how much 
longer he’ll be around [playing football], so I think we need to find other 
players who can step into that role.”

They might need that sooner rather than later, too. Australia are currently 
third in their World Cup qualifying group after disappointing recent draws with
Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/socceroos-held-by-cagey-japan-in-world-cup-qualifying-stalemate>
 andThailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/australia-draw-world-cup-qualifier-away-thailand-socceroos>
, with the dread-inducing possibility of a playoff against a Concacaf team 
looming should they not finish in the top two. A familiar prospect, but not one 
they would want to repeat in a hurry.

Luongo missed the Thailand game but he, along with most others, regards the 
draw as a “missed opportunity”. Nonetheless, he remains confident about 
Australia’s prospects. “I could tell what the manager was thinking just from 
watching,” he says. “But he never looks at qualifying or the ‘end goal’, he 
just looks at another game when we can better ourselves, practice what we do 
and build on what we’ve been doing. People will say the Japan game was a good 
draw, but I know the performance wasn’t there as much as he’d like, which is 
disappointing. But we’ve got a lot of home games coming up, so we can make up 
the position we’re in.”

Massimo Luongo wears the new Atomic/Barracuda New Balance Football Visaro 
boots. To find out more about New Balance Football go tonewbalance.com/football 
<http://newbalance.com/football> or follow @NBFootball onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/NBFootball> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/nbfootball/?hl=en>, @nbfootballofficial on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/nbfootballofficial/> and NB.Football on Snapchat
 