
The agony of Jordan Spieth admitted the ecstasy of Danny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett>. One hour which surely 
imposed psychological scarring on the 22-year-old Texan shaped a path for 
Willett to etch his name into the record books. That a 28-year-old vicar’s son 
from Rotherham walked it without so much as a wobble is worthy of immense 
credit.

More importantly for Willett, Masters champion, it befits winning a Green 
Jacket. The cruelty element is that Spieth was obliged to present it to him.

Masters champion Danny Willett toasts mind-boggling Augusta triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/masters-2016-champion-danny-willett-augusta>
This fairytale began on 30 March, when Willett became a father. Owing to that 
unpredictable but impending circumstance there had been a question mark as to 
whether or not he would even take part in this tournament. Less than a 
fortnight after the arrival of baby Zachariah James, daddy was at the epicentre 
of one of the most jaw-droppingly exciting afternoons in Masters history. Bare 
statistics of Willett’s final-round 67, five-under total and three-shot win 
belie exceptional stuff.

Willett is only the second Englishman to win the Masters, the first European 
to take that prize since 1999 and he is suddenly catapulted into a level of 
scrutiny completely alien even when he was in the hitherto hardly insignificant 
placing of 12th in the world.

No tale of this event, though, can pass without deep mention of Spieth’s 
tribulations. Shortly after 5pm on Sunday the defending champion reached seven 
under and held a five-stroke lead. Spieth subsequently bogeyed the 10th, which 
barely registered with the crowds, but a dropped shot on the 11th combined with 
Willett’s birdie three holes ahead prompted collective cries of “hang on”.

Spieth, 20 years on from Greg Norman’s epic capitulation to Nick Faldo here, 
was to featurein an uncharacteristic horror show of his own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/jordan-spieth-loses-masters-amen-corner>
. The 12th provided 155 yards of abject terror for Spieth and the first 
quadruple bogey of his professional career. Willett was three clear by the end 
of it. American golf fans checked Wikipedia.

Typically, as befitting a champion, Spieth summoned the only instinct he knows 
but he was to fall short; tied second for a second time in three years will 
offer absolutely no consolation. His closing stretch became painful to watch.

As the defending champion battled in vain, Lee Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood> and Dustin Johnson did 
likewise. Westwood, who shares a management company with the champion, was also 
Willett’s playing partner and will take heart from evidence that the claiming 
of a major title is still not beyond him but elements of jealousy and hurt 
would be only natural. He shared second place with Spieth.

Jordan Spieth loses Masters title at Amen Corner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/jordan-spieth-loses-masters-amen-corner>
On an inside wall of the Augusta National clubhouse a series of bronze plaques 
show the celebratory poses of Masters winners. Willett’s image will join them 
and the fact that it will would have defied belief from the moment Spieth made 
the 50-yard walk from 9th green to 10th tee, cheered every step of this narrow 
corridor by adoring crowds. They thought they were acclaiming the 2016 champion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fdanny-willett-on-winning-the-masters-its-crazy-its-surreal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Danny%20Willett%20on%20winning%20the%20Masters%3A%20'It's%20crazy%2C%20it's%20surreal'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fdanny-willett-on-winning-the-masters-its-crazy-its-surreal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Danny%20Willett%20on%20winning%20the%20Masters%3A%20%27It%27s%20crazy%2C%20it%27s%20surreal%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fdanny-willett-on-winning-the-masters-its-crazy-its-surreal-video&media=>
Danny Willett on winning the Masters: ‘It’s crazy, it’s surreal’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-on-winning-the-masters-its-crazy-its-surreal-video>
The improbability of a Spieth meltdown to anything like what transpired will 
resonate. He showed no mercy when sealing Masters success one year ago, just as 
glory at the US Open two months later demonstrated the matching of God-given 
ability with ferocious competitive spirit. When Spieth leads, he wins; he had 
been in front at Augusta since Thursday. The breaking of that run came in front 
of an astonished audience.

And yet traces of impending trauma had been visible. Spieth did not seem 
wholly content all week – and rose to the top of the pile when clearly 
displaying his B game – to the extent that he called back his coach, Cameron 
McCormick, from Dallas between rounds three and four. On each of those 
instances Spieth had appeared on site three hours before tee time to iron out 
flaws. His driving had proved erratic, as offset by a recurring ability to pull 
off escape acts.

There had been routinely good fortune, such as at the 4th on Sunday when a 
horribly carved tee shot, apparently bound for a different zip code, instead 
rebounded from a tree into semi-rough. Spieth was to make par. This was far 
from an isolated incident; begging the obvious questionas to how long he could 
continue unscathed.

Willett was the man to take advantage when Spieth’s wheels flew off. Any 
onlooker could only admire the nerveless manner in which he played the last two 
holes, with straight pars after making birdie at the 16th, when doubtless aware 
of the life-changing prize within view. Willett grasped opportunity with 
confidence.

Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> found himself in 
the unusual position of being an afterthought to this incredible drama. The 
Northern Irishman’s Masters quest was ruined on Saturday in reality but a 
dropped shot on the opening hole of round four seemed to emphasise his fate. 
The 26-year-old had too much ground to make up and too many players in his way. 
He shot a fourth round of 71 for a share of 10th and the knowledge that a clean 
sweep of majors must wait at least another year. He was candid as to why. “I 
don’t think it’s anything to do with my game,” McIlroy said. “I think that’s 
more me mentally, I’m trying to deal with the pressure of it and the thrill of 
the achievement if it were to happen. I think that’s the thing that’s really 
holding me back.”

A spellbinding afternoon was not only so for events at the top of the 
leaderboard. Shane Lowry’s dance of delight was something to behold after 
notching the tournament’s first hole in one, at the iconic 16th. The USA Ryder 
Cup captain, Davis Love, then matched Lowry’s effort.

One of the most bizarre aces ever seen in professional golf ensured three 
holes in one for the first time ever in an entire Masters, let alone one day. 
Louis Oosthuizen, again on the 16th, watched his seven-iron tee shot cannon off 
the ball of his playing partner, JB Holmes, before rolling into the cup. It was 
a madcap precursor for what was to come; in fact, by close of play, it seemed 
barely worthy of mention. Those who insist golf is boring have been delivered 
the strongest argument in years.
 