
How many liberties can you take when adapting a real story? The question has 
become increasingly pertinent toMasters of Sex 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/masters-of-sex> as we progress through an 
uneven but still enthralling second season.


Where the first season hewed relatively close to events in Thomas Maier’s 
biography of sex pioneers William Masters and Virginia Johnson, season two has 
begun to tell its tale with increasing freedom: its creator, Michelle Ashford, 
admittedin a recent interview with Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/masters-sex-showrunner-sex-scenes-651145>
 that she was fascinated in “these huge areas that remains blank … there are so 
many things that we’ll never know but we get to imagine them.”

Thus this season has seen Bill’s wife Libby undergoing her own form of 
awakening – a growing political conscience – while the lives of playboy doctor 
Austin Langham and former prostitute Betty Di Mello have been further fleshed 
out.

There will be some viewers who dislike the way Masters of Sex blurs the line 
between fact and fiction – certain characters, such as Beau Bridges’ tormented 
Dean Scully – are composites rather than drawn entirely from life. But Maier 
has given the show his approval,telling the New York Daily News 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv/masters-sex-author-thomas-maier-feels-showtime-series-hits-sweet-spot-article-1.1953895>
 that “it’s been fun for me to see how they’ve taken this material and tried to 
plumb the emotional truths, the real depths of their relationship. I think they 
have brought an even greater depth to my story.”

Certainly there have been moments when this show can make a convincing claim 
for being one of the best dramas onUS television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television> right now: the 
heartrending scene in the season’s opening episode, in which Barton Scully 
realised he simply couldn’t live a lie; the cancer-stricken Lillian DePaul’s 
harrowing end in episode six and, most recently, Bill’s painful confrontation 
with his brother Francis in which both men admitted the extent to which they 
had tried to run from the devastation of their shared past.

Francis was played by Christian Borle, late of Smash, and his wonderful 
performance highlighted another of this show’s strengths: its outstanding guest 
stars. Last season the honours belonged to Bridges and Allison Janney as his 
repressed wife, but this season has produced superb turns from Borle, Breaking 
Bad’s Betsy Brandt as the sexually dysfunctional Barbara, Sarah Silverman as 
Betty’s former girlfriend and Courtney B Vance as Dr Charles Hendricks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBQHU3hB0oEw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBQHU3hB0oEw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBQHU3hB0oEw&media=>
The latter’s arrival paved the way for one of this season’s more complicated 
storylines: an attempt to tackle race relations in the US. The episode in which 
it came to a head, Blackbird, should be commended for its willingness to show 
Bill’s flawed attitudes towards race and for the way in which it addressed
America’s history of racist medical experiments 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/05/AR2007010500180.html>
. Unfortunately, while the scenes between Hendricks and Masters were tightly 
written and well-acted, the over-stuffed nature of the rest of the plot meant 
that this important storyline wasn’t given quite the time it deserved.

This tendency to rush through storylines is Masters of Sex’s biggest flaw. In 
Blackbird alone we dealt with Masters and Hendricks’s confrontation, followed 
by Lillian’s slow disintegration and Virginia’s refusal to accept it, took time 
out to see what was wrong with Betty’s marriage, and learned about Libby’s 
growing fixation with her nanny’s brother. All of these storylines were 
sensitively written and beautifully played but the cumulative effect was to 
give them less weight than they might otherwise have had. It’s a shame, because 
whenMasters of Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masters-of-sex> 
slows down, it’s nearly perfect.

Thus Asterion, episode seven, delivered a masterclass in how to move time on 
without dropping the narrative ball. Over the course of an hour there were 
three time-jumps through almost three years, ending up in October 1960. At no 
point did viewers feel jolted by the switches in time – instead, a clever 
combination of Lester’s clapboard, recurrent motifs (people smoking), video 
footage and clothes and styling moved us swiftly through time without ever 
making us feel hurried. It was as neat a way of covering a long period as I 
have seen on television and one that felt true to the show’s slightly 
melancholy atmosphere.

Yet ultimately this is a show that works not because of narrative tricks but 
because the relationships at its heart are beautifully written and brilliantly 
played. Lizzy Caplan has been outstanding this season, making Virginia warm and 
likeable even at her worst moments, while Sheen continues to shine as the 
repressed Bill, desperately inching his way towards humanity yet never quite 
able to let his guard down when it counts.

It is this central pairing that gives the show its strength. Yes, we care 
about the supporting cast – I am desperate to know what has happened to the 
Scullys in the three years since we last saw them – but without the complex and 
compelling relationship at its centre, Masters of Sex would fall apart.

Have you been watching Masters of Sex? Do you think the second season has been 
as good as the first? Let me know, without spoilers, in the comments below.
 