
The fact that three-quarters of women experience a negative or discriminatory 
effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/31/mps-urge-better-job-protection-for-expectant-and-new-mothers>
 of their pregnancy at work, as areport from the women and equalities select 
committee shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/31/mps-urge-better-job-protection-for-expectant-and-new-mothers>
, isn’t a huge surprise to me.

Seven years ago I was pregnant for the first time and emailed my employer’s 
human resources department to ask whether I would accrue bank holidays during 
my maternity leave. It’s not a life-shatteringly interesting question, but 
something I felt I needed to know to consider how long I could afford to be at 
home with my newborn. Instead of clarification I received a sharp email 
instructing me that maternity leave was intended to be for “recuperating from 
childbirth and spending time with my baby”. It was not a way of greedily 
storing up holiday. Chastened and naive, I didn’t ask again. Those bank 
holidays I was indeed entitled to disappeared into the ether, and I didn’t go 
back to that job.

Rise in women facing discrimination on taking maternity leave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/21/rise-in-women-facing-discrimination-on-taking-maternity-leave>
Since then, as chief executive of the human rights in childbirth charity 
Birthrights <http://www.birthrights.org.uk/>, I’ve worked with many women 
facing a range of violations during or due to pregnancy and childbirth, and I 
know how lucky I am. In my case the stakes were pretty low. I could just about 
afford not to battle but could have battled if necessary. And when I realised 
that my much-loved job wouldn’t accommodate work life and family life I was 
able to do something else.

For others maternity discrimination is more than an inconvenience – it is a 
matter of life and death, of basic survival versus thriving. The committee 
estimates that 53,000 women each year are being discouraged from attending 
antenatal appointments by their employers, despite permanent employees having 
the right to time off for these crucial check-ups. I’ve seen the result of this 
while sitting in hospital waiting rooms – sometimes for hours – with women 
attending vital appointments for their high-risk pregnancies. As the minutes 
tick past at the overstretched unit, their slots get pushed back later and 
later. They weigh up upsetting their employer against missing a key check-up. 
It’s a choice between yours and your baby’s physical safety now, and knowing 
you’ll have a job to go back to and can put food on the table when that bump is 
a squawking toddler demanding three meals a day.

Banging the drum for the rights of pregnant women is often portrayed as an 
occupation for the privileged. Defending women’s rights to choose how and where 
they give birth or insisting that employers make careers possible for working 
mothers has cleverly been placed in a box marked “entitled”. Hiding behind that 
label is a truth that although these issues affect all women (whether they plan 
to have children or not), it is those at the vulnerable end of the spectrum who 
often face the most profound consequences of having a uterus and daring to take 
it to work.

Those with the fewest legal protections are casual, agency and zero-hours 
contract workers – anexpanding group in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/uk-workers-on-zero-hours-contracts-rises-above-800000>
 due a scarcity of permanent jobs. This is also, unsurprisingly, a group in 
which women areover-represented 
<https://www.google.com/url?hl=en-GB&q=http://www.workingmums.co.uk/women-more-likely-to-be-on-zero-hours-contracts/&source=gmail&ust=1472723477444000&usg=AFQjCNHzgiTbO0sDKhW0IfS_fctJFql4bg>
. These individuals, often on the minimum wage, can represent some of those 
most likely to be exposed to difficult pregnancies and births. Women at the 
lowest end of the socioeconomic spectrum face a greater risk of dying in 
pregnancy, their babies have a higher risk of being stillborn ordying after 
birth 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/childhoodinfantandperinatalmortalityinenglandandwales/2014#socio-economic-classification>
 and both mothers and babies stand a significantly greater chance of suffering 
complications. Insisting they can get to their midwife is no entitled plea – it 
is a plea for basic human rights.

When I went on maternity leave, my employers made me feel invisible | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/maternity-leave-employers-invisible>
Yet with the current mindset, one that allows us to become complacent about 
the rights of those at the edge of a precipice of disadvantage, the government 
is permitted to make woolly promises with no timeframe. The media continues to 
report this as simply an economic problem and out come the arguments about the 
difficulties maternity rights pose for small business or the ideological 
discussions about whether women could or should “have it all”.

Four out of five women experience pregnancy and, whether we intend to use it 
or not, our capacity to become pregnant sits at the root of every woman’s 
unequal treatment in society. This is not a discussion that needs to stay in 
the boardroom. Without progress in pregnancy and childbirth we cannot make 
enough progress in women’s broader rights. And those made more vulnerable 
because of their precarious low-paid, low-status jobs will continue to find 
pregnancy a gateway to the food bank.

The report criticises the Equalities and Human Rights Commission for its 
belief that maternity discrimination is simply an issue of misinformation that 
can be corrected with a few well-placed facts. The ECHR’s spokesperson asserts 
this is “not bigger picture stuff”, but I (like the select committee) strongly 
disagree. In the broader context of reproductive rights, where the most 
vulnerable in society are punished at every level with life-altering 
consequences, maternity discrimination cannot be anything but the very biggest 
of big pictures.

• Why Human Rights in Childbirth Matter 
<http://www.pinterandmartin.com/why-human-rights-in-childbirth-matter.html> by 
Rebecca Schiller is published on 15 September
 