
Mathias Cormann <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann> 
has refused to say if the Turnbull government still has confidence in Dr Alan 
Finkel after the chief scientist warned Australia would not meet its emissions 
reduction target under the Paris agreement with current federal policy settings.

“Look at our track record,” Cormann told Sky News on Sunday. “People thought 
that we couldn’t meet the 2020 emissions reduction target based on our policy 
settings and indeed we are exceeding those targets.

“We are very confident that with our policy settings we are able to meet the 
2030 emissions reduction targets.”

Asked if he had lost faith in Finkel, given Finkel warned clearly last week 
that the government’s policy settings had to change if it wanted to meet its 
2030 emissions reduction target under the Paris agreement, Cormann said: “My 
answer is pretty self-evident.”

Alan Finkel warns investment has stalled over climate policy uncertainty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/09/alan-finkel-warns-investment-has-stalled-over-climate-policy-uncertainty>
The Turnbull government is still reeling from a major policy backdown from the 
environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, last week, when Frydenberg signalled a 
review of the government’s Direct Action policy would consider whether an 
intensity scheme for electricity was an optiononly for him to fold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
 within 36 hours afteran angry backlash from backbench conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/malcolm-turnbull-direct-action-carbon-trading-climate-change>
.

To calm his colleagues, Frydenberg said the Coalition would not contemplate 
either a carbon tax or carbon trading – comments that pre-empted the findings 
of his own Direct Action review and the independent Finkel review released 
later in the week.

Finkel’s report, handed to the prime minister before Friday’s Coag meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/09/alan-finkel-warns-investment-has-stalled-over-climate-policy-uncertainty>
, said investment in Australia’s electricity sector had stalled because of 
“policy instability and uncertainty”. It also gave implicit endorsement to an 
emissions intensity trading scheme for the electricity industry to help manage 
the transition to lower-emissions energy sources.

Following the Coag meeting on Friday, the South Australian premier, Jay 
Weatherill, who supports an emissions intensity scheme, publicly rebuked the 
prime minister for pre-emptively killing off the debate.

Cormann said on Sunday the government’s review of its Direct Action policies 
should only be considered a “housekeeping review” because the Coalition’s 
climate change policies were settled before the 2013 election.

“Our policy settings in relation to action on climate change have been settled 
for some time,” he said. “There is a review taking place consistent with the 
terms of reference that have been released by the minister. This is really, you 
should be looking at this review as a housekeeping review. This is very much 
routine.

“This was never designed to be a review to question again, or fundamentally to 
reopen and revisit, questions that have previously been resettled after very 
lengthy and intensive debate [inside the Coalition].”
 