
The warmest of congratulations to cinema’s Matthew McConaughey, whose first 
opus as“creative director” of Wild Turkey bourbon 
<http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/matthew-mcconaughey-wild-turkey-s-creative-director/305263/>
 is already upon us. It was only last month that the bourbon brand announced 
the Oscar-winning star had signed a multi-year deal to “serve as the chief 
storyteller for Wild Turkey both behind the camera and in front of it”.

I wouldn’t like to hazard how much Wild Turkey Matthew had in him to make the 
following statement, but it’s good to learn how much of Matthew there seems to 
be in Wild Turkey. “Wild Turkey has the history and qualities of a brand that 
depicts the dedication of someone to do something their own way,” he announced 
solemnly, “even if that way isn’t always the most popular.”

Well quite. This is a bourbon still prickly about having spent most of the 
noughties imprisoned in second-tier romcoms with Kate Hudson, or defending its
naked bongo-playing arrest 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/38901/matthew-mcconaughey-dazed-and-arrested>.

And so to Matthew’s first commercial distillation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9aiwpAiUol4> of the brand, which is unlikely 
to win any prizes for originality, given that it opens with him drawling “We’re 
not in a rush to be most popular …” Well, of course not. It is, after all, an 
immutable advertising law that dictates this type of hard liquor must always be 
styled as the laconic choice, the laidback choice, the almost insufferably 
slow-moving choice. And yet, as anyone who has ever had a proper night on the 
stuff will tell you, this could scarcely be more at odds with the user 
experience. The one thing you can bet your pickup truck on is that they’re 
sweeping up teeth come chucking-out time in Jack Daniels Hollow, where a mere 
naked bongo arrest must surely be regarded as having had a quiet one.
 