
Mauricio Pochettino said that Tottenham had to win their remaining Champions 
League group ties, against Monaco and CSKA Moscow, if they were not to say 
“bye-bye” to the competition, as he nursed what he described as an 
“embarrassing” feeling after the1-0 defeat against Bayer Leverkusen at Wembley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/tottenham-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
on Wednesday night.

Mauricio Pochettino seeks improved mentality from Tottenham strikers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-strikers-leverkusen>
Tottenham have now lost each of their ties at the national stadium – they were 
beaten 2-1 by Monaco in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-v-monaco-champions-league-live>
 – but Pochettino refused to blame the club’s temporary home for European 
games. Instead, he turned the focus inwards and what was clear was that his 
team would have to improve quickly for Sunday’s Premier League derby at Arsenal.

Harry Kane is fighting to return at the Emirates Stadium, after an 
ankle-ligament injury, but Pochettino said that it would be “difficult” for 
Toby Alderweireld to recover in time from a knee problem.

“We must win in Monaco, or else we can forget the Champions League and if we 
win in Monaco, we must beat CSKA Moscow or bye-byeChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>,” Pochettino said. “We 
can make a lot of excuses but a psychological block with Wembley? If I wanted 
to make an excuse, I would say yes. But it is not true. Tell me one place 
better to play than Wembley? We had 85,000 fans watching us and it was 
embarrassing for me.

“You cannot blame Wembley. We need to show more. We need to put ourselves in 
front of the mirror and say: ‘Come on, we must improve.’

“The first game at Wembley may have been an accident but to do it again, 
something must be wrong, and we need to find out what. We are in a bad moment 
and we need to be critical and honest.

“The problem was not the attitude – it was that we did not show our quality. 
We are much better than we played today. Maybe it is taking my players time to 
manage the Premier League and Champions League – the two toughest competitions 
in the world. It is good to see how we react.”
 