
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
is confident that Toby Alderweireld’s knee injury is “not a big issue” and the 
Tottenham Hotspur manager even suggested the defender may be back in contention 
for selection next week.

Pochettino is expected to replace Alderweireld with Eric Dier in the middle of 
his back four against Bayer Leverkusen here in Champions League Group E on 
Tuesday night. But he offered an upbeat bulletin on the Belgian international, 
who hurt himself on Saturday duringthe 1-1 Premier League draw at West Bromwich 
Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/west-bromwich-albion-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 after taking an accidental kick from his central defensive partner, Jan 
Vertonghen, after a corner.

Son Heung-min became a global brand at Leverkusen but still faces difficult 
return | David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/tottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league>
It appears that Alderweireld was caught on a nerve in the knee, which made the 
knock extremely painful. But the hope is that the full results of the scan, 
which he underwent on Monday, will reveal nothing serious and the club have 
also pointed out that it was a good sign the Belgian was able to walk out of 
The Hawthorns under his own steam.

“We need to wait for the scan but we believe it’s not a big issue,” Pochettino 
said. “He got a knock on his leg but it was better yesterday and today. In the 
moment he went down, it was tough and, from our position, it was difficult to 
see what had happened. But it wasn’t a big issue. It was a big knock, a heavy 
knock in his leg, but we hope it’s not a big problem for the next week.”

Pochettino replaced Alderweireld with Dier at West Brom, after the player who 
he has converted into a defensive midfielder had started on the bench. Victor 
Wanyama has established himself as Pochettino’s first choice in the 
holding-midfield role and the manager’s switch to a 4‑1‑4‑1 formation appears 
to have made it difficult for him to start Dier and Wanyama in midfield.

Kevin Wimmer, who stepped into the centre of defence last season when 
Vertonghen was injured, will be bitterly disappointed if Pochettino does prefer 
Dier. Wimmer has made only one appearance for Tottenham this season – in the 
EFL Cup win against Gillingham. But Pochettino, who indicated that a game of 
this magnitude would come too soon for the 18-year-old centre-half Cameron 
Carter-Vickers, said that he had faith in Dier.

“The important thing is we trust in him,” Pochettino said. “It’s not important 
the position he will play. Midfield, centre-back or full-back – we believe and 
trust in him. We trust him as a person and his skills. For me, Eric is a player 
who can develop his game in different positions.”

Pochettino continues to be without the striker Harry Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/harry-kane> because of ankle ligament 
damage and, at various times this season, he has missed other key players – 
chief among them, the midfielder Mousa Dembélé. But Tottenham have coped 
because, Pochettino believes , they have a deeper and sturdier squad.

“Injuries can always happen,” Pochettino said. “Always, the squad is important 
– 25 players. The competition between them is important. That’s the power of 
the team. Everyone believes he can play and fight for his place in the starting 
XI in different competitions. If we want to achieve big things, it’s important 
to keep that mentality in our squad.”

Tottenham opened their Champions League campaign with a 2-1 defeat against 
Monaco at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 but they bounced back towin 1-0 away against CSKA Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-match-report>
. Pochettino now sees the away-and-home fixtures against Leverkusen as decisive.

“We must win this game against Leverkusen,” he said. “If we want to go to the 
next round, it is key to take three points from this game, and then to play 
against them at Wembley in the same way. The next two games against Leverkusen 
hold the key to the next round.”
 