
Harry Kane trained with the Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> squad on Tuesday 
morning, before the Champions League tie against Bayer Leverkusen at Wembley on 
Wednesday night, and it had been no low-key thing. The media were in 
attendance, having been invited to watch the opening 15 minutes of the session, 
and, as the pictures went out, a major narrative line looked to have been 
established.

Tottenham have struggled for cutting edge in front of goal in recent weeks but 
Kane, even if he were to be only a substitute against Leverkusen, would stand 
to offer the remedy. It has been difficult to ignore the correlation between 
the absence of the striker, who has beenout with ankle ligament damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/tottenham-await-harry-kane-scan-result-ankle-ligament-damage-fear>
 since the middle of September, and how the team have misfired. They have 
scored only three times in their past five matches.

Harry Kane could return for Tottenham in Arsenal derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/harry-kane-tottenham-could-return-arsenal-weekend>
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
would quickly reshape the storyline. Kane, the Spurs manager reported, had 
completed only half of the session, before he moved off to do some specific 
work. The expectation was that he will train fully on Thursday for the first 
time since the injury and be ready to play a part in the derby at Arsenal on 
Sunday. He would not feature against Leverkusen.

And so, in what promises to be a crucial fixture in this tightest of Champions 
League groups, Pochettino will have to eke greater productivity from his other 
creative players. His principal selection dilemma concerns whether to stick 
with Vincent Janssen up front or switch Son Heung-min to the role and bring in 
Moussa Sissoko on the right flank. Sissoko’s three-match ban forelbowing 
Bournemouth’s Harry Arter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/moussa-sissoko-charged-violent-conduct-harry-arter-elbow-incident-tottenham-bournemouth>
 applies only on the domestic front.

Either way, Pochettino needs something to change; a penny to drop with one of 
the players he entrusts with carrying the fight to a Leverkusen team who looked 
pretty slick during the second half of the0-0 draw with Spurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/bayer-leverkusen-tottenham-champions-league-match-report>
 at the BayArena two weeks ago.

Pochettino said his team were “creating the same chances as before” and he 
accepted that something was going wrong. Normally he would work tirelessly in 
training to stamp out any imperfections but, with Spurs in the throes of an 
unforgiving schedule, he said there had not been the time. The visit of 
Leverkusen is Tottenham’s sixth game in 19 days. Then again, Pochettino 
suggested that the issues were more psychological than technical.

“The problem is we don’t have time to train too much,” Pochettino said. “The 
priority is to rest and recover. We are watching a lot of clips and videos 
because it’s good for people to realise, but it’s more about mentality – to be 
aggressive with your energy. The players know how to shoot. Sometimes it’s more 
about freedom and when you have the chance to shoot, you shoot, rather than 
trying to pass and build the action more. It’s mentality more than work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmauricio-pochettino-tottenham-strikers-leverkusen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6edfa80f1af957e5aa78579c16a628b48e904da7%2F223_142_4940_2964%2F4940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauricio%20Pochettino%20seeks%20improved%20mentality%20from%20Tottenham%20strikers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmauricio-pochettino-tottenham-strikers-leverkusen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauricio%20Pochettino%20seeks%20improved%20mentality%20from%20Tottenham%20strikers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmauricio-pochettino-tottenham-strikers-leverkusen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6edfa80f1af957e5aa78579c16a628b48e904da7%2F223_142_4940_2964%2F4940.jpg>
 Harry Kane with Eric Dier during training before Tottenham’s Champions League 
game against Bayer Leverkusen but the striker is not set to return until 
Sunday’s north London derby. Photograph: Mark Pain/Rex/Shutterstock 
Kane’s comeback has long been pencilled in for the derby at the Emirates 
Stadium and it would be a surprise if he were not included in the squad. 
“Maybe, maybe,” Pochettino said, when asked whether he would pick him.

If Pochettino did so, it would raise the prospect of Kane being named by 
Gareth Southgate in the England squad that faces Scotland and Spain on 11 and 
15 November respectively. Pochettino would have no issue with that, as Kane’s 
fitness would have been demonstrated and he would never block an international 
call-up for any player.

But Pochettino would want Southgate to handle Kane with care and it sounded 
significant that he brought up the recent case of another of Tottenham’s 
England contingent – Danny Rose.

The left-back was injured on England duty against Slovakia on 4 September and 
he returned to action for his club against Manchester City in the game before 
the October internationals. Rose then played 71 and 90 minutes for England 
against Malta and Slovenia respectively and Pochettino felt that he had to rest 
him in Tottenham’s first game after the break at West Bromwich Albion.

Mauricio Pochettino needs Spurs’ creative players to join hunt for goals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/30/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-leicester-city>
“The good example, for you, is Danny Rose,” Pochettino said, on the subject of 
the risk of setbacks on international duty. “He was available to play against 
Manchester City after his injury with the national team. Then, they used him in 
nearly two full games. We can only advise. They can use the player and it’s not 
in our hands to manage the national team.”

Pochettino has other injury concerns. Toby Alderweireld is still out with knee 
trouble and Pochettino suggested that the centre-back may have had a setback. 
“With Toby, we are not sure – we have some slight problems,” he said, when 
asked when Alderweireld would return to full training. It did not sound as 
though he would be fit for Arsenal. The winger Érik Lamela felt his hip in 
training on Tuesday and will not feature against Leverkusen.

Pochettino has generally overseen an excellent fitness record at Tottenham and 
it felt unusual to hear him being forced to talk at length about injury 
absentees. He merely wants those who are available at Wembley to seize their 
opportunities – particularly in front of goal.
 