
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has caved in to 
pressure to publish a plan for Brexit by the end of March, but laid down a 
challenge to MPs to vote in favour of triggering article 50.


Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and rebel Tory MPs 
declared victory after No 10 accepted an opposition motion calling on the prime 
minister to reveal the government’s Brexit aims before starting the formal 
process of leaving the EU.

The government’s move was designed to stave off an embarrassing parliamentary 
revolt for May, asabout 20 Tory MPs 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/2016/dec/05/pressure-mounts-on-may-over-brexit-strategy-article-50>
 had been prepared to defy her by voting with Labour.

However, No 10 insisted it had always intended to publish a Brexit plan and 
mounted an attempt to turn the debate to its own advantage by tabling an 
amendment to Labour’s motion, calling for article 50 to be triggered before the 
end of March.

This will ask MPs to “respect the wishes of the United Kingdom” by agreeing to 
the government’s timetable for Brexit, with the aim of flushing out any who do 
not want to vote in favour of starting the process of leaving the EU.

No 10 will also be hoping that a majority of MPs in favour of triggering 
article 50 will allow it to claim more of a parliamentary mandate for Brexit, 
although it is only a non-binding motion.

It will not be enough to satisfy legal demands if the government loses its 
appeal in the supreme court and is forced to publish an act of parliament 
before starting the formal Brexit process.

That requires full legislation to pass through both the Commons and Lords, and 
could allow parliamentarians to pass amendments about the type of Brexit the 
government will seek.

Labour and most of the Tory MPs pushing for the UK to stay in the single 
market in a “soft Brexit” will accept the government amendment, as they do not 
dispute the idea of triggering article 50.

However, they still intend to cause a headache for May during the debate by 
pushing for a comprehensive white paper – an official pre-legislative paper – 
detailing her plan for Brexit before the end of January.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-i-want-a-red-white-and-blue-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20a%20red%2C%20white%20and%20blue%20Brexit%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-i-want-a-red-white-and-blue-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20a%20red%2C%20white%20and%20blue%20Brexit%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-i-want-a-red-white-and-blue-brexit-video&media=>
Theresa May: ‘I want a red, white and blue Brexit’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-i-want-a-red-white-and-blue-brexit-video>
Neil Carmichael, a Tory MP who had been thinking about rebelling, said he 
would now vote with the government amendment. “It is a victory for us because 
the government is now committed to producing a plan,” he said. “The question is 
what it looks like.”

He said that “soft Brexit is gaining ground”, not only among Tory MPs but in 
government following a recent softening of language by the secretary of state 
for exiting theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, David 
Davis. Carmichael admitted that one or two of his colleagues were worried about 
the amendment meaning MPs would be agreeing to article 50 being triggered by 
March.

However, he said: “I’ve never seen article 50 as the key point. I think the 
key point will be between the implementation of article 50 and towards the end 
of our negotiation period.”

Anna Soubry, the former Tory business minister and another potential rebel, 
also described it as “very good news ... and a great opportunity for the 
government to make sure that parliament scrutinises its plan”.

Labour said May’s move was a “welcome and hugely significant climbdown from 
the government”.

Only a handful of Tory and Labour MPs are likely to oppose the amendment if it 
gets pushed to a vote, such as Ken Clarke and David Lammy, but the SNP and the 
Liberal Democrats have stated they would definitely do so. The Lib Dems will 
also put forward their own call for a second referendum on the final EU deal, 
while challenging Labour to oppose the government on triggering article 50.

The timetable for Brexit has been taking shape since May declared at the 
Conservative party conference that she would formally notify the EU by the end 
of March, firing the starting gun on two years of negotiations with a view to 
leaving by early 2019.

The SNP’s Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> spokesman, 
Stephen Gethins, accused the government of being “shamefully silent” on its 
preparations for Brexit, and warned that the “vacuum has resulted in absolute 
chaos at the heart of Downing Street”. His party will welcome the debate but 
block May’s amendment because it fails to respect the votes in favour of 
remaining in the EU in both Scotland and Northern Ireland.

Nicky Morgan, the Conservative former education secretary who has been 
campaigning to stay in the single market, is also likely to back the government.

Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, said the government must commit to 
publishing the plan for leaving the EU by January.

“For the last two months Labour have been pushing the government to put their 
plan for Brexit before parliament and the public. Without that plan, we have 
had unnecessary uncertainty, speculation and a running commentary on the 
government’s likely approach,” he said.


“The government have now agreed to publish that plan, and to do so before 
article 50 is invoked. Labour will hold the government to account on this. We 
will also push for a plan to be published no later than January 2017 so that the
House of Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, the 
devolved administrations, the Brexit select committee and the British people 
have a chance to scrutinise it.”

The text of the Labour motion “calls on the prime minister to commit to 
publishing the government’s plan for leaving the EU before article 50 is 
invoked”.

Downing Street sources said May had always intended to set out the overarching 
aims of her Brexit strategy before article 50 was triggered and denied that the 
government’s position had shifted significantly.

So far, the prime minister has refused to set out much about her Brexit 
strategy, other than saying greater control on immigration from the EU would be 
a priority and that the UK wants the best trading relationship it can achieve 
for businesses.
 