
Theresa May is planning a shakeup of social care provision after Downing 
Street acknowledged services were under threat in some areas.

The prime minister’s official spokeswoman said the issue was discussed in a 
cabinet meeting on Tuesday, with an agreement that this week’s local government 
settlement would contain measures to help ease the pressure.

At the meeting, May also emphasised the “importance of finding a long-term 
sustainable way of addressing the issue”, raising the prospect of a more 
comprehensive shakeup.

It comes after Philip Hammond, the chancellor, was criticised for failing to 
mention or address social care funding shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/tory-mps-press-philip-hammond-over-nhs-and-social-care>
 in his autumn statement.

There have been numerous warnings from local councils, including 
Conservative-led authorities, and Sarah Wollaston, the chair of the House of 
Commons health committee, that the system is at tipping point and putting 
unsustainable pressure on the NHS. The Daily Mail launched a campaign for the 
proper funding of social care with a front-page story on Tuesday.

May’s spokeswoman said cabinet ministers had discussed the “particular 
challenges facing the adult social care system”.

She said: “There was an agreement that in some areas the ability to provide 
social care is under threat. Thursday’s announcement will address this issue 
while making clear the need for reform.”

The Guardian believes that the plan will be to reform an existing policy, 
which allows local authorities to charge a 2% “precept” on council tax each year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/12/council-tax-hike-being-considered-to-cover-social-care-costs>
. They are likely to allow the percentage for each year during the parliament 
to be frontloaded, with a larger increase in the tax possible immediately.

The move comes after the Local Government Association called on ministers to 
use the autumn statement to pluga £1.3bn black hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/social-care-system-needs-rescue-package-save-nhs>
 in a system that they claimed was in a perilous situation.

Underfunded and overstretched – the crisis in care for the elderly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/care-for-elderly-crisis-how-to-improve-quality-of-life>
A freedom of information request by the Labour MP Jess Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/social-care-spending-falling-postcode-lottery>
 also showed that in 2015-16 many local authorities spent well below the £554 a 
week on residential care recommended as a “floor” price by the LGA. The figures 
also showed a postcode lottery, which was highlighted by the MP in parliament.

Picking out two councils with varying levels spent, Phillips asked: “Are nans 
and grandads in Buckinghamshire worth more than they are in Yardley?”

The issue caused tensions between ministers and councils, after May’s 
spokeswoman told journalists that the crisis was not about simply money but 
also under-performance by some councils.

Speaking on Monday, she said: “More broadly we know money alone is not the 
solution. Many councils are providing high-quality social care services within 
existing budgets. It is the worst 10% of councils that oversee delayed transfer 
of care rates that are 20 times worse than the top 10 local councils and half 
of all delayed discharges are in 20 local authorities. This isn’t just about 
funding, it’s also about how we deliver an effective and efficient system.”

Isobel Seccombe, the LGA lead on social care, rejected the claims, saying 
councils had been praised for innovation in delivering services but simply 
needed more cash following years of cuts.
 