
It might not be quite as all-encompassing as last year’s General Election, but 
elections are taking place across the UK on the 5 May.

129 MSPs will be elected to the Scottish Parliament, alongside 108 and 60 
representatives for theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and Welsh assemblies 
respectively.


London decides its new mayor, as well as London assembly members, after a 
sometimes controversial campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/03/london-mayoral-election-sadiq-khan-zac-goldsmith>
. There are also local council and police and crime commissioner elections 
across England (and Wales, for the latter).

There are also two Westminster by-elections.


This is the place to share your stories from wherever you are on polling day 
in words, pictures or video. Show us what’s been happening in your community 
and at polling stations around the country. If you’re following the election 
from outside of the UK, tell us how and why.

What are the most important issues in these elections where you are? What 
needs to change in your area, and do you think anything will change as a result 
of them?

Whether it’s your first time voting or you’re a veteran of the ballot box, we 
want to hear about your day.


Remember that sharing pictures of yourself or what’s happening before you go 
into or after you leave the polling station are great, but please don’t take 
pictures or video of yourself inside the polling station, as publishing it to 
GuardianWitness or social mediacould be a breach of the law 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1983/2/section/66>.

You can share your stories by clicking on the blue ‘Contribute’ button on this 
article. You can also use theGuardianWitness smartphone app 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 or email us at guardian.witness@theguardian.com


 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others.  