
The mayor of the major northern port city of Tianjin is being investigated on 
suspicion of corruption, China’s ruling Communist party said on Saturday, the 
latest senior official to be caught up in a war on deep-seated graft.

Huang Xingguo, 61, was suspected of “serious discipline breaches”, the party’s 
central commission for discipline inspection said, using the party’s normal 
euphemism for corruption.

Huang, who is also Tianjin’s acting Communist party chief, became mayor in 
2008.

Tianjin is an important port city about an hour’s drive from Beijing that has 
ambitions to become a financial hub for northernChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

It is one of four conurbations – along with Beijing, Shanghai and Chongqing – 
termed a municipality, giving it the same high status as a province.

'It's getting worse': China's liberal academics fear growing censorship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/06/china-xi-jinping-crackdown-liberal-academics-minor-cultural-revolution>
 In August last year, a series of massive explosions at a chemicals warehouse 
in Tianjin killed about 170 people, sparking anger nationwide that it had been 
built so close to residential areas.

 Last month, the party announced it was investigating Yin Hailin, a long-time 
city planning official who became Tianjin’s deputy mayor in 2012, also on 
suspicion of corruption.

Dozens of senior people have been investigated or jailed since President Xi 
Jinping assumed power almost four years ago,vowing to go after corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/chinas-feud-over-economic-reform-reveals-depth-of-xi-jinpings-secret-state>
 and warning, like others before, that the problem threatens the party’s grip 
on power.

 Huang’s fall from grace appears to have come out of the blue.

 On Saturday, the official Tianjin Daily covered his visit to a middle school 
on its front page and praised teachers for their work.

 Critics have accused Xi of using the corruption campaign as a cover to root 
out political rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/not-fit-to-lead-letter-attacking-xi-jinping-sparks-panic-in-beijing>
, though he has denied this.

Last year, a Chinese court jailed former domestic security chief Zhou Yongkang 
for life for bribery, leaking state secrets and abuse of power.

 He was the most senior Chinese official to be ensnared in a graft probe since 
the party swept to power in 1949.

It was not possible to reach Huang for comment and unclear if he had retained 
a lawyer.
 