
A turbulent season for Scottish teams on the European stage continued last 
night, Nancy's slick display proving more thanMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> could handle. With the French 
side already leading 1-0 from the first leg, two early goals in five minutes 
ended the hosts' dreams of progression to the Uefa Cup's group phase.

But for a merciful approach from Nancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> in the latter stages, this could 
have descended into embarrassment for the home side. Given Rangers' early 
elimination, only Celtic are left to carry Scotland's torch now; not a simple 
concept, given their current Champions League struggles.

Pre-match needle for Motherwell's first hosting of a European tie in 13 years 
had been supplied by their manager, Mark McGhee, who accused Nancy of a 
disrespectful attitude before and during the first leg in France a fortnight 
ago. Never one to mince his words, McGhee pointedly asked his players to "kick 
Nancy in the teeth" at Fir Park.

A rare capacity crowd had similar thoughts when David Clarkson's header was 
cleared from his own goal-line by Andre Silva within 15 minutes. Such 
aspirations of glory were short-lived, however. From a needless Paul Quinn 
foul, Graeme Smith could only parry Benjamin Gavonon's free-kick to the feet of 
Mark-Antoine Fortune, who duly slotted home. Gavonon then went one better, 
curling his next set play directly beyond Smith from just inside Nancy's left 
touchline.

Motherwell rallied in the second period, despite their undoubted awareness 
that four goals were more than they were likely to muster against such 
well-disciplined opposition. Stephen Hughes and Jamie Murphy came close; Alfred 
N'Diaye should have compounded McGhee's misery but shot wide and Nancy were 
also denied an apparent penalty as Michel Chr√©tien was tripped by Clarkson.

Yet Nancy, like the vast majority of the home fans, had long since realised 
the inevitability of the outcome.
 