
“For the major media, almost all the campaign reporting focused on the 
candidates and polls. Almost nobody bothered to talk to the voters. The Chicago 
Tribune, the midwest’s biggest newspaper, doesn’t even have a midwestern beat 
any more and seldom sends reporters outside the Chicago metro area. Yet this 
was where the election was decided.” Reading your article (The rust belt 
strikes back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/disaffected-rust-belt-voters-embraced-donald-trump-midwestern-obama>
, 21 November), I was reminded of the great days when the Guardian and other 
major papers had northern desks and northern editors.

I’m a lifelong Guardian reader and paid-up supporter who was born in 
Manchester and has lived in the north all my 72 years. In my day job as a 
standup comedian and folkie I saw what was happening to the great industrial 
cities and smaller towns here, from the once-busy ports of Hull and Goole to 
the coal towns of the Dearne Valley; from rust belt cities like Sheffield and 
Middlesbrough to the cotton towns of Lancashire.

Nothing of that managed decay and decline was understood inside the London 
bubble. A kind of cognitive dissonance settled on the media. A few 
documentaries and the occasional opinion piece appeared over the years but 
there were no howls of protest, no shock at the millions north of the 
Severn/Wash line dumped by laissez faire unfettered capitalism. The referendum 
was won by snake oil millionaire salesmen who convinced the benighted of the 
post industrial wastelands that the problem was Europe not London. The media 
didn’t see this coming because, fixated on polls and personalities and with no 
real presence north of Watford they hadn’t a clue what was happening in the 
wastelands  (John Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johnharris> and 
Owen Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/owen-jones> excepted).

The (ex-Manchester) Guardian and other major media voices need to build a 
northern (and a Welsh, a Scots and a Midlands) presence. They need feet on the 
street and ears in the pubs and clubs and they need writers who understand the 
lives of the people that they are among. Otherwise we will end up in a JG 
Ballard world where shadowy figures stumble round a decayed hinterland while, 
snug in their rural fortresses and southern citadels, the higher orders sleep 
safe. And as for that much trumpeted “northern powerhouse” – don’t get me 
started – ask the man or woman on the Bury tram what he or she thinks about it 
and the answer will be a colloquial term for testicles.
Mike Harding
Manchester

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 