
Journalist Megyn Kelly, <https://www.theguardian.com/media/megyn-kelly> who is 
under armed guard after receiving death threats, has accused Donald Trump’s 
social media director of stirring hatred on the internet.

The Fox News host urged Dan Scavino, 
<https://twitter.com/DanScavino?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 a member of the presidential transition team’s leadership staff, to stop 
encouraging hostile and abusive elements online.

“The vast majority of Donald Trump supporters are not at all this way,” Kelly 
told an audience in Washington. “It’s that far corner of the internet that 
really enjoys nastiness and threats and unfortunately there is a man who works 
forDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> whose job it 
is to stir these people up and that man needs to stop doing that. His name is 
Dan Scavino.”

Scavino was director of social media for Trump’s bitterly divisive election 
campaign. He is devoutly loyal to the billionaire businessman who reportedly 
first spotted himas a 16-year-old cleaning golf clubs, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/04/29/politics/donald-trump-tweets-daniel-scavino/> 
got him to caddie and eventually promoted him to general manager at one of his 
courses. Now in his 40s, Scavino has speculated that he might become the White 
House photographer or run its Twitter account.

He and Kelly have clashed in public before. In October, after a heated 
exchange between the presenter and Trump ally Newt Gingrich, Scavinoissued an 
ominous tweet: 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-megyn-kelly-newt-gingrich-threat-senior-aide-video-a7381381.html>
 “Megyn Kelly made a total fool out of herself tonight – attacking Donald 
Trump. Watch what happens to her after this election is over.”

Scavino did not reply to a request for comment from the Guardian.

Members of the audience at Monday’s night’s event, organised by the Politics 
and Prose bookshop <http://www.politics-prose.com/>, were required to undergo 
body and bag searches by security staff.

Kelly said: “The worst part is the security threats that I’ve had to face and, 
as much as I try to avoid some of that online vitriol, I get lots of it and I 
really hate it. I find that stuff just soul-killing.”

The journalist has had an up and down history with Trump. She recalled that 
she had been “friendly” with the New York property tycoon until August last 
year when she aired allegations about his divorce from Ivana Trump.


She said Trump raged at her over the phone, quoting him as saying: “You’re a 
disgrace! You ought to be ashamed of yourself! You’re a disgrace! I almost 
unleashed my beautiful Twitter account against you and I still may.”

A few days later, as a moderator at the first Republican primary debate, Kelly 
asked Trump about past comments he had made disparaging women. He subsequently 
launched a social media blitz against her, branding her “overrated”, “angry”, 
“crazy” and “a bimbo”. In an interview, he later implied that she had been 
hostile to him because she was menstruating, saying she “had blood coming out 
of her eyes,blood coming out of her wherever 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/08/politics/donald-trump-cnn-megyn-kelly-comment/>”.

Kelly described it as “an attempt at bullying” that failed, thanks to the 
support of her team atThe Kelly File. 
<http://www.foxnews.com/shows/the-kelly-file.html> “It was hard to hold the 
line night after night after night and not cover him too harshly, because my 
life was being threatened, and not cover him too gently, because I wanted him 
to stop the nonsense or to please him.”

She received death threats and obscene phone calls, she continued. “When 
Donald Trump comes after you, it isn’t just a tweet – ‘oh wow, he’s tweeting 
about her’, and I understand he’s a fighter, he’s a counter-puncher, I get all 
that – but even then he has such power that a single tweet can unleash hell in 
somebody’s life.

“I’ve been under armed guard for 16 months and my children have been under 
armed guard and it’s not an appropriate price to pay for hard-hitting 
journalism.”

Kelly’s new memoir, Settle for More, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/books/review-megyn-kelly-tells-tales-out-of-fox-news-in-her-memoir-settle-for-more.html>
 has received particular attention for its account of Roger Ailes, the longtime 
chairperson of Fox News, who wasforced to resign in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-leaves-fox-news-sexual-harassment-claims>
 over allegations of sexual harassment by several women. Kelly writes that, in 
2006, Ailes made numerous sexual comments to her and tried to grab her and kiss 
her on the lips.

She has since done numerous “annoying” interviews, she said, in which she is 
challenged over why she did not speak out against Ailes sooner. “It’s like, why 
didn’t you come forward earlier? And it’s like, you know what, can I swear 
here? Fuck you for saying that!”

Ailes, she recalled, was a mentor and often a positive influence on her 
career, but also made “highly inappropriate sexual references” which she tried 
to shrug off.

“In the book I could have filled four pages with the comments he made. I 
didn’t want to go there. I included enough so you can decide for yourself 
whether it was sexual harassment. I submit to you that it was unambiguous.”

Kelly described a “terrifying” six months in which she understood that her 
career at the conservative cable news network was on the line. She claims that 
eventually, Ailes made a physical advance in his office. “I’d been with the 
company for 18 months by that point: I’m not theMegyn Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/megyn-kelly> of today, I have no power, I 
mean zero, and he was on the cover of industry magazines as the most powerful 
man in news.

“As soon as we had that physical confrontation in his office and I did not do 
anything, I ran out of his office, I hired a lawyer and, for the record, I did 
tell a supervisor, which is what you are supposed to do.”

But years went by and Ailes remained unassailable. “I had convinced myself, 
based on what my supervisor had told me, that he’s not a bad man, he’s just 
smitten, he might be having a marital difficulty.”

Then the anchor Gretchen Carlson went public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-fox-news-ideology-conservative-baby-boomers>
 with an accusation of harassment against Ailes. Kelly, sensing that he would 
seek to shut down the investigation, decided to come forward. “Honestly, I just 
said, this will not happen to one more woman at Fox News ever.

“I told them the good and the bad about my relationship with him. I didn’t 
want them to think he was some monster. I just wanted them to know this is real 
and you need to take an honest look into his behaviour. That’s all I wanted, 
just an honest review. I figured if there was nothing there, they would 
exonerate him, and if he went down, he would only have himself to blame. And I 
believe that’s where things wound up.”

Several other women broke their silence to accuse Ailes, leading to his 
resignation. Kelly condemned observers who have sought to blame the victims. 
“To the haters who look at those of us with our false eyelashes and our cute 
little dresses and say, like, ‘You asked for it,’ again, fuck you for saying 
that. It’s nothing to do with how we dress.”

During the election race, according to Kelly, Ailes was in daily contact with 
Trump, whose similarly facedallegations of sexual assault, harassment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
 or unwanted advances from a dozen women, threatening to derail his campaign.

Kelly’s contract at Fox News is up next year. The 46-year-old said she was 
considering a change due to a desire to spend more time with her husband,
Douglas Brunt, <http://douglasbrunt.com/> a novelist, and their three children, 
aged seven, five and three. “They mean too much to me. I refuse to miss their 
childhood just so I can do a job that I love.”
 