
The footballing career of Mel Charles, who has died aged 81, was inevitably 
compared with that of his more illustrious brother, the Leeds United and 
Juventus heroJohn Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/feb/23/guardianobituaries.football>. The 
brothers shared some attributes: both were tall and powerfully built, and both 
could operate as successfully at centre-half as at centre-forward. But when it 
came to what was then the finest performance ever given by a Welsh 
international team, in the 1958 World Cup quarterfinal in Gothenburg between 
Wales and the eventual winners, Brazil, it was Mel who played and excelled.

John had been injured in the previous game against Hungary, a bruising 
play-off in which he figured at centre-forward. There were those who believed 
that had John been able to play in Gothenburg,Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> might even have won, since they put over 
more high, searching crosses that day than in any previous game, and John was 
formidable with his head.

As it was, Wales mounted a largely holding action. Brazil were missing their 
first-choice centre-forward,Vavá 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/apr/05/guardianobituaries.football>; but 
José (“Mazzola”) Altafini, the 19-year-old striker just signed expensively by 
Milan, was a dangerous alternative. Mel, the most uncompromising of stoppers, 
was more than a match for Mazzola in the air, and was quick to counter him on 
the ground.

With the lanky Spurs left-back Mel Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/27/mel-hopkins-obituary> 
countering the dynamicGarrincha 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/7197754.stm> better than any other 
player in the tournament, andJack Kelsey 
<http://www.arsenal.com/history/profiles/373/jack-kelsey> resilient in goal, 
the Welsh held out until well into the second half, when Pelé’s deflected shot 
at last squirmed past Kelsey. Later, Pelé would call it the most important goal 
he scored in his career.

Mel was born in Swansea, son of Ned Charles, who was employed at a local 
steelworks, and his wife, Lil. He attended Manselton school in the town, but 
abandoned his education at 14 to follow John toLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>, where he worked as one of 
the ground staff at Elland Road. In 1952, after returning to Wales, Mel joined 
his hometown club, Swansea Town (now Swansea City). He did his national service 
in the army, turning out for Swansea’s second division team when he could.

There are many endearing anecdotes about him, and his happy, casual ways. One 
Saturday afternoon he turned up at the Vetch Field, Swansea’s stadium, and 
entered the dressing room, only to be confronted by the reserve team trainer. 
“What the hell are you doing here?” asked the coach. “Playing at home, aren’t 
we?” asked Mel. “No we’re bloody not,” came the reply. “We’re playing United, 
in Sheffield.” “Can I have a game here, then?” asked Mel, unruffled.

Those who played with him in his Swansea days felt that centre-half was his 
best position, since it imposed an automatic discipline. When, on occasion, he 
was deployed at wing-half, he tended to run out of position. As a 
centre-forward, he may not have been the equal of John, but he was still highly 
effective, with his courage, dash and strength in the air.

Altogether, he won 31 caps for Wales, to John’s 38, the first coming against 
Northern Ireland, as a Swansea Town player, in 1955. He established himself as 
an international after moving toArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in 1959, and he gained four more 
caps after joiningCardiff City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> in 1962. After finishing his 
playing career withPort Vale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale>, 
Mel retired to live in Swansea, where he ran a wholesale food company. In 2009 
he published an autobiography, In the Shadow of a Giant.

He is survived by a son, Jeremy, a versatile player who won 19 caps for Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, and daughter, Catherine, from his 
marriage to Vera, which ended in divorce.

• Melvyn Charles, footballer, born 14 May 1935; died 24 September 2016
 