
Melbourne Storm <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/melbourne-storm> are to 
snub the 2017 World Club Series, along with most of their NRL counterparts. The 
annual World Club Challenge was expanded two years ago to a six-team tournament 
featuring the top three Super League clubs against their Australasian rivals.

However Melbourne’s chief executive, Dave Donaghy, confirmed on Monday that the
NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> Grand Final runners-up have 
declined their place in order to give their players the best possible 
preparation for next season and, according to reports in Australia, another 10 
clubs have also turned down invitations from the Rugby Football League.

It means that, unless Super League Grand Final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/warrington-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
 runners-up Warrington and Challenge Cup winners Hull are prepared to travel to 
Australia, the format will most likely revert to a single one-off match between 
the two champions, Wigan and Cronulla.

“As a club, we’ve decided that staying in Australia will provide our team with 
the best possible preparation for the 2017 NRL season,” Donaghy said. “Having 
treasured past visits to the UK in 2008, 2010 and 2013, we thoroughly value the 
concept of the World Club Challenge.

“However, a regular NRL season is already incredibly taxing and, as a 
non-Sydney team, our players travel more than most. We have committed to 
playing two trial matches in Australia which we believe will serve as a better 
lead-in for the team ahead of next year’s opening round.

“We wish Cronulla all the best as the NRL’s representative against the 
champion team of England, Wigan.”

The World Club Series was due to take place in England over the weekend of 
February 16-17. The NRL clubs completed 3-0 whitewashes in each of the first 
two years of the concept. The actor and South Sydney co-owner Russell Crowe 
skipped the Oscars in 2015 to watch his team beat St Helens at Langtree Park.
 