
Melbourne withstood a stunning second-half revival by the Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> to hold on for a 29-20 win in 
their NRL clash at AAMI Park. The Storm looked on track for a crushing win, up 
26-0 at half-time with second rower Felice Kaufusi bagging a double among their 
four tries.

But the second half was all Tigers as they ran in four unanswered tries and 
came within a metre of catching the Storm, with electric fullback James Tedesco 
brought down just short of the tryline with 12 minutes left on the clock.


Bulldogs thrash Broncos, Cronulla edge Warriors as Saints win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/dragons-too-good-for-nrls-hapless-knights>
Melbourne halfback Cooper Cronk, sealed the result with a field goal with four 
minutes remaining, capped by a late penalty strike by Cameron Smith who was 
also backing up from Queensland’s State of Origin win.


The statistics at the break made for awful reading for Wests Tigers coach 
Jason Taylor with Melbourne controlling 65% of possession, completing 83% of 
sets compared to the Tigers’ 58 and the home side clocking up 823 run metres 
compared to 335.


They were all the more impressive with Storm fullback Cameron Munster (ankle) 
and five-eighth Blake Green (calf) missing from the line-up. But two very 
different sides ran out for the second half as the Storm struggled to hold on 
to their lead.

Tedesco was first on the scoreboard three minutes in as he stepped and jinked 
his way through the defence to touch down. Halfback Luke Brooks was next in, 
quickly followed by centre Tim Simona, with the Tigers taking advantage of a 
Storm penalty for their marker not being square on the last tackle.

Winger David Nofoaluma then capitalised on a defensive error by Melbourne 
centre Cheyse Blair to put the Tigers within a converted try before Cronk’s 
field goal and the late penalty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcanberra-raiders-hold-off-gold-coast-titans-fourth-nrl-win-in-last-five-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F848505ed7c2abd190adf79dc1b123d37d770dd1e%2F0_127_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20Storm%20hold%20off%20Wests%20Tigers%E2%80%99%20stirring%20second-half%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcanberra-raiders-hold-off-gold-coast-titans-fourth-nrl-win-in-last-five-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20Storm%20hold%20off%20Wests%20Tigers%E2%80%99%20stirring%20second-half%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fcanberra-raiders-hold-off-gold-coast-titans-fourth-nrl-win-in-last-five-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F848505ed7c2abd190adf79dc1b123d37d770dd1e%2F0_127_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Canberra captain Jarrod Croker continued his love affair with Gold Coast with 
a double in the Raiders’ win over the Titans. Photograph: Matt Roberts/Getty 
Images 
Earlier on Sunday, Canberra moved back inside the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> top eight with a 30-22 victory over 
Gold Coast at Robina. The Raiders picked up their fourth win from their past 
five matches in a game marred by a serious injury to Nathan Davis, who was 
trapped at the bottom of a pile of players midway through the first half and 
was taken from the field to hospital with a suspected broken ankle.

Davis’s injury overshadowed a tight first half where Raiders captain Jarrod 
Croker continued his love affair with the Gold Coast – his double helped the 
Raiders to an 18-10 half-time lead and means he now has seven tries in eight 
matches at CBUS Super Stadium.

Brenko Lee picked up a double of his own after the break, including an 85 
metre intercept try scored when team-mate Josh Hodgson was stricken on the 
floor after copping a brutal hit by Titan Luke Douglas. Hodgson was one of 
several players who had to undergo concussion tests during the match and 
Raiders utility Kurt Baptiste and Titan Eddy Pettybourne both failed to finish 
the match due to their head knocks.

Greg Bird’s frustrations boiled over towards the end of the match when a jab 
to Joe Tapine’s face sparked some push and shove. The NSW State of Origin 
forward was sin-binned in the resulting set when he again appeared to target a 
Raider’s face, the referee having no hesitation in forcing Bird to sit out for 
10 minutes.

Despite the one-man disadvantage against them the Titans scored when Ryan 
James crossed over for his seventh four-pointer of the season. Nene McDonald 
completed the third double of the match with two minutes to go but it was too 
little, too late for the Titans.
 