
Melbourne humiliated Sydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> in a record-breaking 46-0 
win to all but end the Tricolours’ finals hopes and lift the Storm to the top 
of the NRL ladder. Cooper Cronk scored two second-half tries to lead the Storm 
rout after the visitors led 18-0 at halftime at Allianz Stadium on Saturday 
night before 8,499 fans.

Storm winger Suliasi Vunivalu claimed three tries, with fullback Cameron 
Munster also starring for Melbourne. The loss was the Roosters’ biggest-ever 
loss at Allianz Stadium, Melbourne’s biggest win over them, and the first time 
the Storm have kept the Tricolours scoreless. The Roosters now need to win at 
least nine of their last 11 games to qualify for the finals, which is a highly 
unlikely proposition given their form.

Calls for James Tedesco State of Origin call intensify after Tigers' victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/calls-for-james-tedesco-state-of-origin-call-intensify-after-tigers-victory>
The huge winning margin will likely keep Melbourne at the top of the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder after round 14 on percentages, 
even if Cronulla defeat North Queensland on Monday.


The Roosters were minus stars Mitchell Pearce, Boyd Cordner, Shaun 
Kenny-Dowall and Dylan Napa, and the gap in class was evident, even after Storm 
playmaker Blake Green was ruled out with a calf injury.


Vunivalu scored his first – his eighth in seven games – in the eighth minute 
to open the scoring for the visitors. He followed with his second soon after, 
tiptoeing down the touchline to put the home side ahead 12-0 after an 
eye-catching sideline conversion from captain Cameron Smith, who slipped over 
as he kicked the ball but still put it over the black dot.

One of the Roosters’ few try-scoring chances came in the 29th minute when 
Blake Ferguson tripped over and spilt the Steeden with the tryline beckoning 
after cleanly picking up a Jake Friend kick. The Storm made the Roosters pay 
for that mistake when Cronk put Kevin Proctor over a minute later to put the 
lead out to 18-0.

The second half was little more than a procession for the Storm as Cheyse 
Blair crossed in the 55th minute and Cronk scored in the 58th and 64th. Munster 
scored a deserved four-pointer in the 68th minute before Vunivalu claimed his 
third to finish the rout five minutes from full-time.

In Ben Cummins’ first match officiating the Roosters since coach Trent 
Robinson’s extraordinary Anzac Day spray of the referee, the home side won the 
penalty count 5-4.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12230b8bc32a1ed57bd77ba5daf5472618bbe375%2F0_105_3618_2171%2F3618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20Storm%20thrash%20Sydney%20Roosters%20and%20rise%20to%20top%20of%20NRL%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20Storm%20thrash%20Sydney%20Roosters%20and%20rise%20to%20top%20of%20NRL%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12230b8bc32a1ed57bd77ba5daf5472618bbe375%2F0_105_3618_2171%2F3618.jpg>
 Parramatta’s Bevan French embraces former team-mate Nathan Peats of Gold Coast 
after the Eels’ victory over the Titans in Darwin. Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty 
Images 
Parramatta won their first NRL game since being rocked by salary cap 
allegations on Saturday, edging in-form Gold Coast 22-12 in Darwin. Just a day 
after the club responded to show-cause notices for alleged cap rorting, star 
Corey Norman and Kaysa Pritchard lifted the Eels to their eighth win of the 
season.

Down 8-0 after just 13 minutes, Parramatta responded with 22 straight points, 
ending the Titans’ four-game winning streak and leaving them hanging on to 
eighth spot. The Eels had lost all three games since allegations surfaced of 
salary cap breaches, which are likely to see them stripped of 12 competition 
points, all but ending any hope of a 2016 finals appearance.


In front of a crowd of 7,722 at TIO Stadium, the Eels led 20-8 in the 64th 
minute on Saturday when Nathan Peats was penalised for dissent, gifting his 
former team two points. The indiscretion came moments after Norman sliced 
through a tiring Titans defence in the 60th minute and handed off to Kaysa 
Pritchard to finish a 55-metre movement and seal victory.


Earlier, Parramatta shrugged off a slow start to take a 12-8 lead into 
half-time. In-form Titans halfback Ashley Taylor laid on two tries for his side 
in the opening 20 minutes, including a no-look cutout pass for Anthony Don in 
the sixth minute.

Taylor again linked up with his right winger five minutes later – this time 
through the boot – with Don tapping back for Agnatius Paasi to pounce. The game 
turned when the former Brisbane talent almost set up a third try in the 27th 
minute. A pass intended for Josh Hoffman was picked off by opposite centre 
Clinton Gutherson, who then offloaded for Bevan French to race 80 metres to 
score against the run of play.

Norman orchestrated his team superbly, while Pritchard’s injection in the 
second half was also key, although the hooker was put on report for a 
second-half high shot on Will Zillman.


For the Titans, Taylor and prop Luke Douglas tried hard in a losing team, 
while mid-season recruit Konrad Hurrell, in his first game for the club, 
struggled in the warm conditions and failed to see out the match.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb94a75d66d8658542e4fce0f4f5697e41070a93%2F0_82_2838_1703%2F2838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20Storm%20thrash%20Sydney%20Roosters%20and%20rise%20to%20top%20of%20NRL%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20Storm%20thrash%20Sydney%20Roosters%20and%20rise%20to%20top%20of%20NRL%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fdavid-fusitua-scores-four-tries-as-warriors-hammer-knights-in-nrl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb94a75d66d8658542e4fce0f4f5697e41070a93%2F0_82_2838_1703%2F2838.jpg>
 David Fusitua of the Warriors scores his first of four tries in the win over 
the Knights in Newcastle. Photograph: Darren Pateman/AAP 
A four-try haul to winger David Fusitua helped New Zealand Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-zealand-warriors> demolish last-placed 
Newcastle 50-14 and move a step closer to the NRL top eight. The Warriors right 
edge attack caused Newcastle headaches all afternoon on Saturday as Fusitua 
crossed four times, including a three times during a 10-minute period in the 
second half that put the game out of reach.

The Knights were held scoreless in the second-half at Hunter Stadium and 
crashed to their eighth straight loss. It was the third time they conceded 50 
or more points through 14 rounds in 2016.

The pivotal moment came shortly after half-time when bench prop David Saifiti 
dropped the ball with the line open after Knights debutant Brendan Elliot had 
plucked a bomb out of the air. The Warriors went the length of the field in the 
ensuing set, with Fusitua touching down in the corner to make it 28-14.

Fusitua then scored twice more in the next 10 minutes before Solomone Kata 
finished off some nice work from Warriors back-rower Ryan Hoffman. Albert Vete 
grabbed his second try with five minutes to go as the floodgates opened in 
front of a crowd of 12,222.

The Warriors were coming off their best performance of the season, a dominant 
36-18 win over the Broncos at Mt Smart Stadium, and were keen to string 
back-to-back wins together for only the second time this season. 
Coincidentally, the other occasion involved the lowly Knights, who the Warriors 
thumped 40-18 in round four.

The Warriors led 22-14 at half-time after tries to Albert Vete, Fusitua, Manu 
Vatuvei and Bodene Thompson. Elliot was one of the Knights’ best, scoring a try 
from a Jack Cogger kick and saving another during a five minute period in the 
first half, but the Knights made too many errors coming out of their own end 
and their attack lacked the polish to stick with the slick Warriors outfit.

The win puts the Warriors on 14 competition points and leapfrogged them into 
ninth place on the ladder, behind the Titans and Bulldogs on for-and-against. 
The Knights have been left languishing at the bottom of the ladder, five points 
adrift from the Roosters.
 