
In less than 12 months, two prime ministers have chosen to start their year 
with major speeches about mental health, committing themselves and their 
governments to a transformation of the mental health landscape. But as so many 
of the statistics and personal stories bear witness; the landscape is not 
changing fast enough.

In her speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/the-shared-society-prime-ministers-speech-at-the-charity-commission-annual-meeting>
 earlier this month, Theresa May talked about the critical importance of 
relationships and the role of government to “encourage and nurture” them.


Related: Construction project rebuilds lives after brain injury and mental 
illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/nov/16/construction-project-rebuilds-lives-brain-injury-mental-illness>

This relational approach was reflected in May’s focus on the mental health of 
children and young people and the welcome recognition that left untreated 
mental distress can “blight lives, and become entrenched”. Half of lifelong 
mental illness has its first signs in the teen years, yet just 70p out of every 
£100 theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> spends goes towards 
children’s mental health services. It’s time the resources followed the 
rhetoric. Otherwise we will keep on missing the opportunity to reduce the 
burden of life long mental illness.


May said she would hold NHS leaders to account for the £1bn David Cameron 
promised for mental health 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-pledges-a-revolution-in-mental-health-treatment>
 in January 2016. But it still remains unclear what has become of the 
commitment made in March 2015 to invest£1.25bn to transform children and young 
people’s mental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/14/uk-budget-to-include-extra-money-for-mental-health-services-say-lib-dems>
. Reports from the frontline suggest the money isn’t getting through everywhere 
<https://www.nhsproviders.org/media/1945/nhs-providers_hfma_mental-health-survey.pdf>
. Getting a grip on the money is essential; it ought to be part of the Care 
Quality Commission/Ofsted thematic review of children and young people’s mental 
health services mentioned by May.

In her speech, May suggests that tackling stigma is more important than 
resources. I think this misses the point: underinvestment in mental health is 
itself a symptom of stigma at an institutional level. Of course, less stigma is 
a good in itself, especially if it enables more people to seek help. But if the 
help isn’t there because of a lack of parity, then the results are the same.

Taking a life course approach, looking beyond conventional mental illness 
services, emphasising the importance of addressing mental distress early: these 
are all to be applauded. A whole-system response is needed to make real May’s 
ambition. Her recognition of the role of schools is very welcome.

Related: Children's mental health services are struggling. Can teachers help? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/09/childrens-mental-health-services-are-struggling-can-teachers-help>

 May also acknowledged the need to look at what “can be done to prevent mental 
health conditions” and “build resilience”. I believe a new paradigm is required 
that looks to address the causes of mental distress and illness. For example, 
the growing evidence of the critical importance of the first 1,001 days of a 
person’s life and the role of couple relationships in laying down the 
foundations on which so many of their life chances rest.

Plans for green paper on children and young people’s mental health to services 
in education and for families offer opportunities and pose threats too. But my 
worry is it delays or derails the implementation ofFuture in Mind 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/414024/Childrens_Mental_Health.pdf>
, the review by the coalition government committed to by the Conservative 
government just two years ago.

May’s speech is important if only because it is the prime minister talking 
about mental health. She recommitted government to the goal I set in 2011 of 
parity of esteem between mental and physical health. While the road to parity 
is paved with good speeches, it needs good deeds even more.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 