
Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, will use her new year 
message to tell Germans that their country is stronger than terrorism and the 
government will do everything to ensure “security in freedom”.


Merkel is expected to say in her annual televised address, to be broadcast on 
Saturday, that 2016 has been “a year of severe tests”, the toughest of them 
being Islamic extremist terror. She will add, however, that she is “confident 
for Germany”.

Western cities tighten New Year's Eve security as terrorism fears persist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/western-cities-tighten-new-years-eve-security-terror-attack-fears-persist>
On 19 December, 12 people were killed when a Tunisian man, Anis Amri, drove a 
truck into crowds of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
 at a Christmas market in Berlin. The Islamic State group claimed 
responsibility for that rampage, as it did fortwo attacks in Bavaria in the 
summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/ansbach-explosion-syrian-asylum-seeker-was-due-to-be-deported>
 in which the assailants – who also came to Germany as asylum seekers – were 
killed and a total of 20 people were wounded.

“It is particularly bitter and sickening when terror attacks are committed by 
people who claim to seek protection in our country,” Merkel will say.The 
chancellor has faced criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/pressure-grows-on-angela-merkel-to-start-closing-germanys-open-door>
 for her decision to allow in large numbers of migrants in 2015.

However, “in going about our life and our work, we are telling the terrorists: 
you are murderers full of hatred, but you will not determine how we live and 
want to live,” she will say, according to the text released by the government 
ahead of the message’s broadcast. “We are free, considerate and open.”

Germany is sending the same message by saying, in the face of pictures of the 
devastated Syrian city of Aleppo, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
 “how important and right it was for our country to help those who really need 
our protection find their feet here and integrate” Merkel will add.

The chancellor will also talk about Germany’s democracy and values as being 
the opposite of the “hate-filled world of terrorism” and “stronger than 
terrorism”.

“We are stronger together. Our state is stronger. Our state is doing 
everything to guarantee its citizens security in freedom.”

She is also expected to promise that in 2017 her government will take action 
“where political or legal changes are necessary”.


German election: Angela Merkel to rally party ahead of fight with far right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/german-election-angela-merkel-to-rally-party-ahead-of-fight-with-far-right>
Merkel is seeking a fourth term as chancellor in an election expected in 
September, and has said she believes she is facing her toughest campaign yet. 
She will call for “an open view of the world and self-confidence, in ourselves 
and our country”.


She also plans to mention the effect of Brexit on the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/german-minister-takes-hard-line-over-britains-eu-commitments-post-brexit>
, talking about “distorted pictures” of the EU and of parliamentary democracy. 
While acknowledging that Europe is slow and difficult, she will say that it 
should concentrate on “what it really can do better than the national state”.


“We Germans should never be deceived into thinking that a happy future could 
ever lie in going it alone nationally,” she will say.
 