
Michael van Gerwen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-van-gerwen> had 
to be at his best to see off a spirited Cristo Reyes in the last 16 of the 
World Darts Championship at Alexandra Palace.

After a three-day break play resumed on Tuesday and the final match of the 
evening provided a thrilling climaxas the Dutch world No1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/michael-van-gerwen-pdc-darts-world-championship-alexandra-palace>
 saw off his Spanish opponent 4-2. Reyes had a three-dart of average of 106.7 – 
the highest ever by a losing player – as he gave the Dutchman a real scare.

Michael van Gerwen ready for another tilt at PDC world darts championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/michael-van-gerwen-pdc-darts-world-championship-alexandra-palace>
Phil Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-taylor> and Raymond van 
Barneveld both cruised through their second-round matches with straight sets 
victories. The 16-times world champion Taylor began his match against Kevin 
Painter with a magnificent 167 checkout and never looked back as he dropped 
only four legs in a routine 4-0 triumph.

Van Barneveld dropped only two against Alan Norris in his 4-0 success and the 
five-time world champion hit seven 180s and averaged over 103 in a classy, 
dominant display.

Mark Webster, Daryl Gurney and Dave Chisnall all progressed to the third 
round. The former BDO world champion Webster held off a fightback to win 
against the No8 seed, Mensur Suljovic. The Welshman led 3-1 but was forced all 
the way to a deciding set which he took 3-0.

Gurney will meet Webster on Thursday after overcoming Robert Thornton in 
another match that went to a deciding set. Gurney got off to a flying start, 
winning the first six legs without his opponent getting a dart at a double but 
Thornton hit back to lead 3-2 in sets.

However, Gurney refused to be denied his first appearance in the last 16 as he 
won six of the last seven legs to progress.

Chisnall also won six of the last seven legs against the debutant Chris Dobey, 
checking out with 110 for the victory, and will play either Jelle Klaasen or 
Brendan Dolan in the third round.
 