
When The Passion 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/apr/24/the-passion-port-talbot-review> 
finally drew to a close on Aberavon seafront in Port Talbot on Sunday evening, 
there was a sense not just that the town of Port Talbot had been transformed by 
the experience, but also the future of large-scale participatory theatre. Aside 
from its mix of tenderness and mucky grandeur, its majestic sweep and careful 
attention to small, everyday details, one of the most thrilling things about
National Theatre Wales <http://nationaltheatrewales.org>'s and Wildworks 
<http://www.wildworks.biz/>' production was the way that it operated in so many 
spaces simultaneously. It raised not just the ghosts and future hopes of the 
town, but the spectre of how and where theatre happens – and how it might 
connect with a hyper-connected 21st-century audience, particularly those who 
seldom go anywhere near a theatre building.

For many people, The Passion was an epic piece of theatre experienced in real 
time and real space over a 72-hour period in different locations across Port 
Talbot. Undoubtedly that was the core of the experience, and so it should be: 
without that core everything else would count for nothing. But just as The 
Passion could be accessed both by payment or completely for free, there were 
many entry points, too:online <http://port-talbot.com/>, through posters and 
leaflets,via YouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QBmkUFcRN2M>, through 
tweets and live streaming, as anovelisation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/23/owen-sheers-author-author-passion>
, even through rumour, conjecture and whispers. What was interesting was the 
way that all these platforms came together. Although you could follow The 
Passion using just one way in, using several of them at once resulted in a 
richly layered and rewarding experience. From the moment pictures began 
appearing online of something taking place on the beach at 5.30am on Friday 
morning, long before the official start of the piece at 3pm, the show generated 
a real buzz in the town with many chasing not just the scheduled performances 
but the more elusive moments too. Those canny enough to follow Michael Sheen's 
Jesus-like Teacher off the beach at Aberavon were rewarded by seeing him gather 
the fisherman Peter to his side. Later on, lights glimpsed up on the hill on 
Good Friday evening gave rise to stories that spread like wildfire through the 
town.

"I remember," was the Teacher's cry at the Crucifixion. In most theatre, there 
is the event and then there is thememory of the event 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/theatreblog/2011/apr/20/theatre-memory-past-performance-plays>
 – but seldom has a theatre piece been as well-documented as The Passion both 
by professionals and audience. This was a show that was watched not just 
through the human eye but through the lens of the cameraphone; another thing I 
found really intriguing was that people often made no distinction between the 
bits they saw live-streamed and the bits they saw played out in front of them. 
Many of those who weren't inside the Seaside Social and Labour Club as Sheen's 
character broke his sandwich in half and shared it with his followers, or when 
the Manic Street Preachers were arrested on stage, thought that they had been. 
I suspect that the fact that they felt that they owned The Passion had a great 
deal to do with their receptiveness, perhaps also the fact that Wales has a 
strong participatory arts tradition.

National Theatre Wales 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/mar/01/national-theatre-wales> has always 
framed itself as a community, and this was community in action. Over the year 
of its inaugural seasonNTW has worked using many different platforms to present 
many different kinds of theatre in many different formats and places 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/aug/13/the-persians-review-brecon-beacons>
. It felt as if The Passion – the final show in the first season – not only 
pulled together the people of Port Talbot, but also all the different strands 
and ways of delivering theatre that NTW has been investigating from the start. 
As such it's not the end of something, but very much the beginning.
 