
Nothing happens in a vacuum – but strip away the spin, turn down the white 
noise, and you have a chance to re-examine the narrative. Or at least to give 
voice to the actual story.

I have lately borne witness to this, during the making of The Face of an 
Angel, Michael Winterbottom’s new movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/04/amanda-knox-face-of-an-angel-michael-winterbottom>
. It’s loosely inspired by my experience writing a book about the murder of
Meredith Kercher <https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher>. Or, as 
many people know it better,the trial of Amanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amanda-knox>. I had followed the case from 
the day of the murder, reporting for Newsweek and later forthe Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com>, watching as Kercher’s name sank lower and lower 
in the copy each time a story was published. On TV bulletins, her name often 
wasn’t mentioned at all.

It was one of the biggest media circuses in recent memory, and we reporters 
often felt just as manipulated as our readers. We sensed that we were jumping 
through hoops, feeding an apparently insatiable appetite. Others felt we had 
become the ringleaders, and that we were setting the agenda. Whatever the 
truth, there is one main reason why Knox became the central figure, and the 
star: she was still alive.

The supporting cast were more self-selecting. Knox’s parents were devoted to 
her innocence, travelling from Seattle to Italy for the trial hearings, eager 
to tell the media their daughter’s story. Their availability made them 
irresistible. Kercher’s parents, meanwhile, understandably mourned their 
daughter’s death privately, in dignified silence. There was less need to 
address the press, to tell Meredith’s story. She was gone. What could they say?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427392227173%2Fcrop_KP_143255_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Face%20of%20an%20Angel%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-face-of-an-angel-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427392227173%2Fcrop_KP_143255_640x360.jpeg>
 The film team review The Face of an Angel 
So I was worried that any movie about the case would erase Meredith for good. 
Winterbottom, fortunately, shared that fear. He wasn’t interested in a film 
about Knox, her innocence or guilt. He was interested instead in the issues 
that had confronted and confounded me: the motivation of those covering the 
case, and those following it.

He wanted to use the story as a vehicle to examine society’s widespread 
fascination with death, and explore a Dantean model of hell, purgatory and 
heaven, which would divide the film into sections. Given the complexity of the 
crime, it seemed to make sense.

I went to Perugia with Winterbottom and his researcher and screenwriter, and 
introduced him to the peripheral characters: the prosecutor, local journalists, 
a blogger who knew every detail of the murder. Soon Winterbottom and his crew 
were arguing about the case just as the journalists had. The mysteries of the 
crime easily lend themselves to discussion; that the crew saw early on that 
there were no clear answers was important.

Yet when I read the script a few months later, I was shocked. I thought I was 
fact-checking; actually I was reading a story about familiar figures, including 
myself. InThe Face of an Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-face-of-an-angel>, an American journalist 
(played by Kate Beckinsale) writes a book about a famously heinous and 
polarising crime that is ultimately unsolvable. A film-maker (Daniel Brühl) 
writes a script for a movie based on the book – he arrogantly begins thinking 
he can be objective, but slowly becomes part of the story.

I went to Siena – which doubled for Perugia for some of the filming – with 
Nick Pisa, who had covered the trial for the Daily Mail, and later for Sky. We 
had become unlikely friends, drawn together in part by watching how Kercher’s 
family suffered. Pisa was one of the few journalists I knew who frequently 
reached out to her mother for comment, rather than relying only on Knox’s.

We both had cameo appearances, playing journalists in a scene in which two 
non-journalists played us. For the few days we were there, the actors milled 
around in clothes we would wear, saying things we would say to each other, 
while we felt oddly out of place. I couldn’t wait to get out of town.

But watching the final movie, my disquiet evaporated. I had worried that a 
Meredith Kercher <https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher> movie 
could only be about the violence of death, and be painful to her family. 
Instead, I saw a love story of sorts – paternal, romantic and platonic – where 
fictional aspects gave distance and perspective. The scenes that do mirror real 
life serve as a poignant reminder that while the lives of three young people 
were turned upside down, the real victim is the young woman whose life ended 
entirely.

• The Face of an Angel premieres at the Toronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> in September
 