
Is Michael Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> planning 
to stop acting to launch a political career following Brexit and the election 
of Donald Trump? There were a flurry of reports suggesting he might be about to 
ditch the stage for social activism following a newspaper magazine interview on 
Saturday, but now, it seems, he might not.

The Los-Angeles-based Welsh actor, who has spoken of his dismay at the “global 
rise of anti-democratic forces”,told the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/michael-sheen-quits-acting-for-activism-gs7x9b5l8>
 on Saturday that his desire to respond to the “demagogic, fascistic” drift of 
politics meant “that I would work less as an actor, and possibly stop”.

But just a few hours later on Sunday he said he was not “quitting acting and 
leaving Hollywood”.

Sheen, a leftwing political campaigner who starred in the television series 
Masters of Sex and has a role in the new Chris Pratt and Jennifer Lawrence 
sci-fi film Passengers, told the newspaper he had been asking himself: “How can 
I be most effective? What am I going to do?

“It’s not going to look like this in 10 years’ time,” he said of the political 
landscape. “Everything has shifted … the dice are being rolled again. Once I’m 
in, I’m fully in, and this is big. It will be a big change for how people 
relate to me.”

But after his comments sparked headlines suggesting he was moving to full-time 
political activism, he tweeted <https://twitter.com/michaelsheen>: “Before this 
gets ridiculous, I said I’m thinking I might start acting less and maybe even 
stop for a while at some point but don’t know yet.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Michael Sheen: ‘Brexit’s message appealed to abandoned communities’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/nov/01/michael-sheen-brexit-owen-jones-video-interview>
He wrote in a blog 
<http://mchshe2.tumblr.com/post/154616648590/what-i-did-not-say> expanding on 
the point: “I DID NOT declare that I’m ‘quitting acting and leaving Hollywood’ 
to go into politics. I said I have become more involved with community issues 
back at home over the last few years, and because of the political situation, 
it’s something I would like to focus on more. The interviewer asked me what 
that meant for my career, and I said it might mean I work less as an actor and 
maybe even stop for a while AT SOME POINT. But I don’t really know yet.”

He continued: “I certainly did NOT equate people who voted for Brexit or Trump 
with a fascistic ‘hard right’ that must be stopped. The majority of people in 
the UK, including my hometown of Port Talbot, voted for Brexit. That is the 
will of the people and is to be respected. That is democracy. Given the 
concerns around the economy in the area I come from and its industrial history, 
I totally empathise with the dissatisfaction with the status quo that the vote 
was partially an expression of.”


Sheen’s political interventions so far have includes a speech at a St David’s 
Day march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians>
 in 2015 to celebrate the NHS and its founder, Aneurin Bevan. He noted the 
politician’s “burning hatred for the Tory party” and attacked Margaret 
Thatcher’s infamous claim that there was no such thing as society.

His anger was also aimed at the timidity of Labour politicians and the party’s 
record in office. “There is never an excuse to not speak up for what you think 
is right,” he said. “You must stand up for what you believe. But first of all, 
by God, believe in something!”

He told the Times on Saturday he wanted to resist the “re-emerging spectre of 
fascism in the west. Our democracy must be defended and each of us needs to 
decide how we can contribute to that effort.”
 