
Waking up before the alarm goes off can be irritating, especially when there’s 
still another 90 years to go until you need to get out of bed. This is the 
situation in whichJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> and Chris Pratt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-pratt> find themselves in the new 
science-fiction adventurePassengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/20/passengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video>
, when they are roused prematurely by a system malfunction a quarter of the way 
into their journey through deep space. At least there is one thing on board 
their spacecraft that will assuage any intergalactic disorientation: an offbeat 
British character actor.

In this instance, it’s Michael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen>, who provides drinks and 
gentle banter in a sleek, deserted bar. A pan down to the nuts-and-bolts of 
this bartender’s lower half reveals that he happens to be an automaton, which 
explains how he glides so effortlessly between the optics and the countertop 
without spilling a drop. Perhaps among the branches of his family tree, or the 
microchips of his motherboard, there is a connection to other British robots in 
fantasy cinema — the sinisterIan Holm in Alien 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS3612EIcF4>, Jude Law 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LuVQWech6N0> as the slick Gigolo Joe in AI: 
Artificial Intelligence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/sep/21/1>, the 
urbane Michael Fassbender inPrometheus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7lVPBAhveyc> (who is Irish-German, 
British-trained), or the Star Wars stalwart C-3PO, played byAnthony Daniels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/the-secrecy-has-been-ludicrous-star-wars-actor-anthony-daniels-on-the-new-film-and-his-life-as-c-3po>
 as a tin version ofTom Courtenay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/03/tom-courtenay-on-my-radar-david-foster-wallace-brooklyn-strictly-come-dancing-hull-city>
 from The Dresser. No matter how remote the reaches of the galaxy, there is 
usually a kooky or creepy Brit there to accentuate the peculiarity of an 
unfamiliar world. In the most extreme case,Alien 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/alien-neill-blomkamp-sigourney-weaver>
, there’s an entire planet populated by the bleeders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fef8acf0ac3d90e1fd61bb0c50b8ef39419ac99%2F0_134_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Sheen%2C%20Passengers%20and%20why%20Hollywood's%20hottest%20leads%20need%20a%20quirky%20Brit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Sheen%2C%20Passengers%20and%20why%20Hollywood%27s%20hottest%20leads%20need%20a%20quirky%20Brit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fef8acf0ac3d90e1fd61bb0c50b8ef39419ac99%2F0_134_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Droll droid … C-3PO, played by Anthony Daniels, in Star Wars Photograph: AP 
The monopoly that British actors have on memorable villainous roles in US 
cinema is well-known (Anthony Hopkins in The Silence of the Lambs,Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> in Die Hard) but this country’s 
performers are hired by Hollywood to do more than just the occasional bit of 
moustache-twirling. Most big-budget US spectaculars, whether they’re set on 
other worlds or our own, need someone lower down the cast to supply those 
idiosyncrasies that tend to be ironed out of performers once they advance to 
the A-list; it’s the seasoning necessary for the main meal. In one 
snaggle-toothed smile, unpredictable vowel or tremor of cowardice, a Brit can 
offset the blemishless swagger of the leads without undermining them. Witness 
how much more heroicTom Cruise <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> 
looks whenever he is placed next toSimon Pegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/03/simon-pegg-its-terrible-i-have-become-the-very-thing-i-feared-star-trek-beyond>
 in the Mission: Impossible movies. The function is to point up the lead’s 
perfection, in much the same way that the presence of a gay character 
reinforces the hero’s heterosexuality.


Sheen has form in this sort of part. He provided the eccentricity quota in 
Tron Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/05/tron-legacy-film-review>, where 
he played a cane-twirling nightclub owner styled as a walking Bowie compendium; 
a kind of Thin White Ziggy Sane. In that movie, he seemed all set to be the 
villain of the piece, and Sheen hammed it up accordingly, referring to the 
fetching hero, Garrett Hedlund, as “Pretty miss” and strutting around to Daft 
Punk, only for the film to give him his P45 after one scene.


For the star to truly shine, the character actor must be standing nearby

If Passengers has any sense it will let him come along for more of the ride. 
After all, stars need people like him. How would we know that Lawrence and 
Pratt really are all they’re cracked up to be if there were no oddballs like 
Sheen against whom to compare them? For the star to truly shine, the character 
actor must be standing somewhere nearby. Occasionally the two categories 
overlap, though it almost never happens with British actors in Hollywood; only 
the silver-spooners, such asBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>, Tom Hiddleston, 
Eddie Redmayne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne> and Hugh 
Grant, graduate to above-the-title billing. The likes of Tom Hardy, Fassbender 
and Daniel Day-Lewis (memorably described by the comedianAdam Riches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/adam-riches> as “the greatest actor never to 
have appeared in anyone’s favourite films”) are character actors who just 
happen to have achieved stardom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef4cdb98af99d4df82b0d4013ca5ad49c89dcd9%2F0_199_1600_1998%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Sheen%2C%20Passengers%20and%20why%20Hollywood's%20hottest%20leads%20need%20a%20quirky%20Brit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Sheen%2C%20Passengers%20and%20why%20Hollywood%27s%20hottest%20leads%20need%20a%20quirky%20Brit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpassengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef4cdb98af99d4df82b0d4013ca5ad49c89dcd9%2F0_199_1600_1998%2F1600.jpg>
 ‘A kind of Thin White Ziggy Sane’ … Michael Sheen in Tron: Legacy Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney 
Americans cherish the sort of training that is commonplace with British 
actors. Last year,Michael Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/michael-douglas-american-male-actors-asexual-film>
 noted a disparity in technique between the performers of the two countries. 
“There’s a crisis in young American actors right now,” he said. “Everyone’s 
much more image conscious than they are about actually playing the part. 
Clearly, it breaks down on two fronts. In Britain they take their training 
seriously while in the States we’re going through a sort of social media image 
conscious thing rather than formal training.”

Eddie Marsan, Timothy Spall, Jim Broadbent … all have benefited from the 
unlikely conveyor belt that stretches directly from the sets of Mike Leigh 
movies and into the studio backlots of Los Angeles. There’s something to be 
said for a distinctive, lived-in face that has seen more than just the inside 
of casting rooms and orthodontists’ offices. Long before Steven Spielberg 
struck up a fruitful working relationship withMark Rylance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-rylance> on Bridge of Spies and The 
BFG, that film-maker championedPete Postlethwaite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jan/03/pete-postlethwaite-obituary>, 
whom he cast in Amistad and The Lost World: Jurassic Park, as the best actor in 
the world.

Pete Postlethwaite's acting tutor said he had a face like a stone archway

Postlethwaite, who died in 2011, liked to joke that what Spielberg really 
meant was: “Petethinks he’s the best actor in the world.” But then he wasn’t 
short on humility, or an understanding of his own oddness. In his autobiography,
A Spectacle of Dust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/23/spectacle-dust-pete-postlethwaite-review>
, he cheerfully recalls various attempts to describe his distinctive face. One 
critic said he resembled an unmade bed or a bag of spanners. An acting tutor, 
who waived Postlethwaite’s fees at the Bristol Old Vic theatre school, remarked 
on his “face like a fucking stone archway”.


In the lack of pressure to conform to a physical ideal, the character actor 
has a freedom unavailable to those on the A-list, and a British accent in 
Hollywood can only contribute to the aura of strangeness. “I have friends who 
are leading men,”Eddie Marsan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/01/actor-eddie-marsan 
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/01/actor-eddie-marsan> has said, “and 
they’re only ever allowed to play leading men of a certain type. But as a 
character actor, there’s a wider variety of projects available.” That subtle 
difference can be evident even as the character actor is doing his bit and 
making the stars seem more glamorous. When Sheen gives Pratt and Lawrence the 
once-over in Passengers, his knowing smile seems to say: “Although you command 
a fee many times greater than mine, I enjoy a creative freedom that is now 
precluded for you by your innumerable agents, managers, publicists and 
wranglers. Another drink?”


 * Passengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/20/passengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video>
 is released 21 December. 
 * This article was amended on 8 December 2016 to make it clear that Michael 
Fassbender is Irish-German, although trained and based in Britain  