
The actor Michael Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> 
has spoken out against comments by the government’s school behaviour expert 
criticising films being screened for children during teaching time. Sheen 
described the “profound and lasting effect” that movies he was shown in classes 
had on him.

The Observer reported last Sunday on a growing row over remarks by Tom Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/27/tom-bennett-behaviour-schools-teaching-hunger-games>
 – who was appointed last year to chair a government committee on improving 
behaviour in schools – made in a column in theTimes. At the same time Bennett 
condemned teachers who set role-playing and poster-making work, triggering an 
angry response on social media from critics including the author and former 
children’s laureate Michael Rosen.

Now Sheen, known for his portrayals of Tony Blair, David Frost and Brian 
Clough, has weighed in with a passionate, personal account of the significance 
of film as a tool in education. He described how movies can inform and inspire 
young people, especially those who struggle with traditional academic work.

“Film sparks conversation and curiosity and very quickly leads to discussion 
of fundamental and important issues without feeling like it’s ‘schoolwork’,” he 
told theObserver.

Should pupils watch movies in class? Discuss …
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/27/tom-bennett-behaviour-schools-teaching-hunger-games>
“The American film critic Roger Ebert once described films as ‘empathy 
machines’. They can allow us to see the world through the eyes of others, 
experience other cultures, other viewpoints, other lives. And, crucially, not 
just get an intellectual understanding but actually feel what it’s like.”

Sheen said the educational benefits of film should not be underestimated. 
Describing his childhood growing up in the Welsh steel town of Port Talbot, he 
said movies had allowed him to “travel to other worlds”.

“Ultimately, it is not the alien worlds and exotic otherness of films like 
Star Wars that touch us the deepest, but the recognition of ourselves and our 
own struggles and victories in the journey of Luke or Rey.

“I was on that motorcycle when Steve McQueen jumped the barbed-wire fence in 
The Great Escape. I felt the rush of air on the back of my neck as the house 
collapsed around Buster Keaton. I got drowsy with Dorothy in the field of 
poppies on the outskirts of the Emerald City. I didn’t observe these things; I 
experienced them – and they became a part of my life.”

Sheen – along with actress Carey Mulligan – is a supporter of Into Film, an 
education charity that promotes the use of movies in school 
<https://www.intofilm.org/> and has disputed Bennett’s suggestion that films 
should be the sole preserve of media courses. Known for her roles inAn Education
 andSuffragette, Mulligan has described how film gave her “a way into learning” 
as a child.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Ffilms-classroom-aid-learning-michael-sheen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164780d2c4d99ec9ee5bafb59a7fd7a6cca461fa%2F777_0_1997_2496%2F1997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Sheen%20enters%20row%20about%20showing%20films%20in%20class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Ffilms-classroom-aid-learning-michael-sheen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Sheen%20enters%20row%20about%20showing%20films%20in%20class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Ffilms-classroom-aid-learning-michael-sheen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164780d2c4d99ec9ee5bafb59a7fd7a6cca461fa%2F777_0_1997_2496%2F1997.jpg>
 Actress Carey Mulligan says film gave her ‘a way into learning’. Photograph: 
Stevie and Mada/for the Observer 
Paul Reeve, the charity’s chief executive, said Bennett was wrong to suggest 
that films don’t benefit students’ academic studies. “A well-chosen film 
[including short-form films used by many teachers] used well can help to bring 
learning to life, stimulating thought and understanding and acting as a 
springboard for lively classroom discussion and debate. And this applies to 
just about every subject, curriculum area or issue you care to name,” he said.

Reeve pointed to research that suggests that film can help the development of 
literacy skills in children and young people. The Leeds Partnership Project: 
Improving Literacy Through Film, a small-scale study of 47 schoolchildren, 
found that when pupils regularly engaged with film their average progress in 
reading almost doubled in one term. Children’s progress in writing and their 
attitude to learning also improved.

Roxy Prust, a teacher at Park View primary school in Leeds, who has worked 
with Into Film, said her students’ Sats results had improved after she 
integrated film into her lessons: “Many of our pupils have few experiences of 
the world around them and their imagination is limited. Film has helped to 
increase their understanding of the world and boost their imagination.” Film’s 
significance as an art form, as well as its usefulness as a teaching tool, 
should also be reflected by the curriculum, Reeve added: “Film is an art form, 
arguably the most influential of the last century. It depicts great stories 
from our histories and of contemporary life and is a central part of our shared 
cultural heritage. So we hope Mr Bennett isn’t suggesting that film shouldn’t 
have a place in the core classroom learning of children and young people, just 
as we trust that he wouldn’t suggest music, visual art, drama or dance don’t 
have a place.”

In his column Bennett had written: “Outside of a media course, the only place 
for a full movie is a film club or similar. Otherwise you’re just lighting 
cigars with fivers made out of children’s opportunities.”
 