 Miley Cyrus and the Flaming Lips' new video 
Name: Miley Cyrus.

Age: 21.

Appearance: Unconscious in bed surrounded by empty pill bottles.

That doesn’t sound good. Don’t worry, it’s only for a music video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/08/watch-miley-cyrus-video-with-flaming-lips>
.

I see. Remind me what stage we’re at now in her reinvention as a credible 
artist?I’ve lost track, I’m afraid.

Can you describe this video? A collage of garish imagery and visual effects 
with a soundtrack 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/videos/see-miley-cyrus-and-flaming-lips-insanely-trippy-superfreak-video-20140707>
 that could only be called music by the most generous possible definition.

That doesn’t sound good. It’s a collaboration with veteran psychedelic rock 
band the Flaming Lips, and actually there is a storyline if you’re prepared to 
follow it.Moby <https://www.theguardian.com/music/moby> is the leader of an 
evil cult …

That’s no way to describe veganism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/may/12/foodanddrink.features12>! 
Sorry, I mean Moby is in the video and he plays a cult leader who instructs a 
naked young woman to steal a pink gel brain from a sleeping Cyrus. On waking, 
Cyrus finds the brain gone and begins swearing. A Father Christmas and a 
Bigfoot go off in hot pursuit. There is a lot of smoking, costumes, dye in 
water, tinsel, capering, etc. Then the naked young woman is put into a car and 
the brain ends up with a rodent.

Tell me, why does the free flow of psychedelic images always end up with naked 
young women?Who knows? That’s part of the mystery of the unconscious. Although 
Cyrus, in perhaps the most shocking move of her career so far, remains fully 
clothed. Mind you she was in hospital recovering from an allergic reaction to 
antibiotics at the time the video was made.”

. Cyrus, in perhaps the most shocking move of her career so far, remains fully 
clothed. Mind you she was in hospital recovering from an allergic reaction to 
antibiotics at the time the video was made.

May I ask why Cyrus and the Flaming Lips have made a psychedelic video without 
music?Who says they need a reason? They’ve been friends since late 2013 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/miley-meets-the-flaming-lips-inside-their-unlikely-collaboration-20140509>
 when Cyrus’s dog died. They’ve played on stage together, written songs 
together, recorded Beatles covers together, and lately Coyne, his girlfriend 
Katy Weaver and Cyrus all gotmatching dog tattoos 
<http://www.nme.com/news/the-flaming-lips/78392?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=flaminglips>
 together, sending pictures to all their followers on social media.

How partly sweet and yet mostly annoying. “Our shows are very childlike, like 
kids on acid, and hers are too,” Coyne says. “We’re so much alike in believing 
art is supposed to be fun.”

Fun for who? He didn’t say.

Do say: “I think it’s really important to challenge social norms and artistic 
conventions …”

Don’t say: “… in the exact same way that people were challenging them 40 years 
ago.”

• This article was amended on 8 July 2014. The original version stated that 
Katy Weaver appears in the film.

 