
Ben Cockayne has labelled the Million Pound Game concept a “disgrace” and 
warned the Rugby Football League players’ welfare will be a major issue in the 
fallout of the sudden-death match between Hull KR and Salford on Saturday for 
the final place inSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> 
next season.

Cockayne will be in the Hull KR side aiming to preserve their top-flight status
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/hull-kr-huddersfield-super-league-match-report>
 atthe expense of Salford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/salford-batley-match-report> at 
the KC Lightstream Stadium but he has hit out atthe one-off Million Pound Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/wakefield-trinity-wildcats-bradford-bulls-super-league-qualifiers-match-report>
 which, for the first time in its short history, will guarantee a Super League 
side will be relegated to the Championship.

The RFL’s welfare team have reached out to both clubs to prepare them for the 
possibility of relegation but Cockayne has criticised a concept which could 
leave some players unemployed come Saturday night.

“I think the concept is a disgrace, to be honest,” he said. “On Sunday morning 
there will be a group of people without a job, that’s the top and bottom of it 
– and I’m not just talking about playing staff.

“At the end of the game there’s nothing to celebrate; if you’re on the winning 
side you’re faced with a bunch of people that you respect who you play a tough 
sport against numerous times a season who will be out of a job. Or if you’re on 
the losing side you’re out of a job yourself. It’s something that needs looking 
at.”

Cockayne also believes the off-field drama the game provides for players also 
creates issues for the sport’s governing body to address. “We talk about mental 
health a lot in our sport; well, this isn’t good for your mental health, I can 
tell you.

“We talk about promoting good mental health in rugby league but there are 
people who will either lose their jobs or get their salary chopped and see 
their families in all sorts of financial trouble.”

The full-back said if he would not be celebrating if Rovers win. “I’d be 
disappointed if my team-mates were jumping about if we won because at the end 
of the day, people will wake up Sunday morning and be without a job. They [the 
RFL] think it’s good and it’s good for the neutral I’d imagine – but everyone 
involved with the two clubs isn’t excited.”
 