
I was going to write about headlines this week, if only to establish the truth 
or otherwise of the tale that many years ago this newspaper, above a story 
about a celebrated explorer's departure for the south pole, employed the 
headline: "Fuchs Off To Antarctic".

However, I was distracted by an email from a reader taking my colleagues to 
task for apparently ignoring last week's column: "To h*** with codes of 
practice and self-regulation: only the wimps take any notice of them, while the 
rest get on with business as usual. Here'sDavid Marsh writing in Monday's 
Guardian about lazy journalists and 'snowclones' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/01/gate-language-scandal-cliche>
, and then the very next day we've gotFred Pearce scouring his imagination for 
just the right word, and coming up with 'climategate' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/feb/01/dispute-weather-fraud> in 
his very first sentence.

"There comes a point when encouragement and setting of good examples and 
similar approaches are just a waste of breath. No more Mr Nice Guy: just make 
it an unequivocal rule for the Guardian's subs [subeditors] that ANY '-gate' 
suffix, apart from the one and only original, is banned, and that persons 
attempting an offence will be shot at dawn on an empty stomach. With despairing 
regards … "

As the person who generally gets the blame for our misuse of language, it 
makes a pleasant change to find someone taking my side. And I can't deny that 
on occasion – such as last week whenthe headline "Why we're bored of keeping 
calm" found its way into the paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/feb/02/corrections-clarifications>
, or when wecontrived to spell Giacometti three different ways in the same story
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/feb/05/corrections-clarifications>
 – I have been tempted to take a ruler to the knuckles of the perpetrator, or 
possibly chop one hand offpour encourager les autres.

But I reluctantly draw the line at making the commitment of grammatical or 
stylistic errors a capital offence. A brisk email, with perhaps a hint of irony 
or sarcasm to make me (if not the recipient) feel better, seems more 
appropriate. We prefer co-operation to coercion: it's one of those "Guardian 
values <https://www.theguardian.com/values/>" we like to claim makes us 
different from other places. And I have learned to be patient. More than a 
decade since our style changed to prime minister (lower case), a day rarely 
goes by without one of my colleagues writing "Prime Minister".

In any case, my well-intentioned supporter may be putting the wrong person in 
the line of fire. If the editor insists on calling the latest scandal 
Climategate, what is ahumble subeditor 
<http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=2532016771> to do? She or he has quite 
enough to worry about. The2007 edition of Guardian Style 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852650868>
 defined the sub as "a journalist who designs pages, edits, checks and cuts 
copy, and writes headlines, captions and standfirsts". To that list may be 
added, in the new world of integrated print and web publishing, an 
ever-widening range of multimedia and technical skills. It's a far cry from the 
image of the old-style sub as a bearded,perma-cardiganned, pipe-smoking 
curmudgeon <http://blogs.pressgazette.co.uk/greycardigan/> (and you should have 
seen the men), striking fear into the hearts of young reporters with their 
well-chewed blue pencil and beer-stained copy ofFowler's Modern English Usage 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199535347>
.

If you are ever shipwrecked with a journalist, God help you, Charlie Brooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/charliebrooker> might be funnier and Polly 
Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee> better at explaining 
the advantages of the alternative vote system, but trust me: you will be much 
better off with a sub if you need an all-round journalist to write, edit and 
produce the desert island newspaper and website.

Given the indispensable contribution that they make, it seems perverse that 
the role of subs has been questioned, albeit mainly from those more interested 
in the cost of everything than the value of anything.

A professor of journalism, no less, claimed last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/23/subeditors-cost-cutting-newspapers>
 that "subeditors will be eliminated" as a result of the "digital revolution", 
seemingly placing his faith in bloggers' self-publishing talents. Such nonsense 
not only serves to encourage half-baked plans by some companies to cut back or 
"outsource" essential sections of their workforce; it also ignores what five 
minutes' acquaintance with the blogosphere will confirm: lots of writers need 
some editing, and some writers need lots of editing.

Subs, of course, also write brilliant headlines – of which more next week.

style.guide@theguardian.com <mailto:style.guide@theguardian.com>
 