
Ministers have dropped controversial plans to gag charities and universities 
as a condition of receiving public money after widespread alarm from academics 
and the voluntary sector.

The government announced the “anti-advocacy clause” without consultation in 
February, presenting the proposal as a ban on taxpayers’ funds being used for 
political lobbying.

The move prompted a furious reaction from charities and scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/17/britains-scientists-must-not-be-gagged>
, who said it was an attempt to muzzle criticism from experts on political 
issues from climate change to changes to the welfare system. Ministers 
responded by announcing a partial U-turn and now the idea has been abandoned.

Outlining its new standards on its £117bn annual grants budget, ministers said 
universities and charities could not use grants to pay for professional 
lobbyists, but they could continue to advise and inform government policy.

The original anti-lobbying proposals had prompted fears experts would be 
banned from advising ministers and MPs.

The new guidance spells out that this is no longer the intention 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-standards-in-government-grants>, and 
reaffirms the right of charities to campaign. It says: “The new approach 
includes clear guidance for research grant managers that activities such as 
responding to select committees and consultations are appropriate for inclusion 
in their research grant terms.”

An advice panel will be set up to ensure grants are spent appropriately by 
recipients.

Charities see the latest move as the official demise of a policy that was 
already in tatters.In April, ministers bowed to intense pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/19/ministers-back-down-on-rule-gagging-scientists>
 from scientists and academics by announcing that the clause would not be 
inserted into most academic research grants, effectively providing an exemption 
for universities.

Shortly afterwards the then cabinet office minister, Matthew Hancock, said the 
clause, which was due to be implemented from 1 May, was being “paused” while 
the government – which had not consulted on the policy beforehand – considered 
representations from the charity sector.

Announcing the full climbdown 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-standards-announced-for-government-grants>
, Rob Wilson, minister for civil society, said the new system would “better 
protect the role of charities to speak out on behalf of their beneficiaries 
whilst ensuring taxpayers’ money is used as intended”.

Chris Skidmore, the minister for the constitution, said the standards had been 
developed “through a constructive and collaborative process”.

Association of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations head Asheem Singh 
welcome the climbdown as a “victory for democracy”. The National Council for 
Voluntary Organisations chief executive, Sir Stuart Etherington, said it came 
after “robust” discussions with ministers.

Bob Ward, the policy and communications director at the Grantham Research 
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of 
Economics and Political Science, who organised apetition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/122957> against the original plan, 
said: “I am glad that the government has backed down over its threat to prevent 
researchers from using grants to inform policymaking.

“There were many within the academic community who recognised that the 
draconian new rules would have [in effect] gagged researchers, damaging 
academic freedom and the public interest.”

The anti-advocacy clause, which ministers claimed was introduced after 
extensive research, was based on three slim pamphlets published by the 
rightwing Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) thinktank. It argued that many 
charities were “sock puppets” in effect paid by government to justify the 
introduction of new policies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fministers-ditch-anti-lobbying-proposals-for-charities-and-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8adf2e63d6850ba3708f269c6062aafb4cee5465%2F0_533_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ministers%20ditch%20anti-lobbying%20proposals%20for%20charities%20and%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fministers-ditch-anti-lobbying-proposals-for-charities-and-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ministers%20ditch%20anti-lobbying%20proposals%20for%20charities%20and%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fministers-ditch-anti-lobbying-proposals-for-charities-and-universities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8adf2e63d6850ba3708f269c6062aafb4cee5465%2F0_533_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
 Sir Stuart Etherington, chief executive of the National Council for Voluntary 
Organisations, welcomed the climbdown. Photograph: PR 
But the clause was attacked and ridiculed by opposition politicians, charities 
and academics. The Labour MP Margaret Hodge, at the time the chair of the 
public accounts committee, said the clause “smelled of Stalinism”.

Ward called for an inquiry into how the thinktank persuaded the government to 
float the gagging idea. He said: “The research community was shocked by the 
original proposal in February to prevent research grants from being used to 
inform policymaking, after the Cabinet Office was lobbied by the IEA.

“I am glad that the research community has petitioned and overturned the 
wrong-headed regulations. There should now be an inquiry into why the Cabinet 
Office drafted such poor regulations in response to a campaign by a group of 
free market fundamentalists who keep their sources of funding secret and whose 
research is nothing more than propaganda for their extreme ideological agenda.”

In a blogpost on the change 
<http://blogs.ncvo.org.uk/2016/12/02/a-resolution-to-the-anti-lobbying-clause/>
, Etherington said: “Our principal concern with the original clause was that it 
wascounterproductive 
<http://blogs.ncvo.org.uk/2016/02/06/anti-advocacy-clause-is-counter-productive/>
 and would have meantgrant-funded charities were unable to provide policymakers 
with crucial insight 
<http://blogs.ncvo.org.uk/2016/02/10/3-types-of-grant-funding-that-will-be-affected-by-the-new-anti-advocacy-clause/>
 that improves legislation, regulation and public services.

“This fundamental flaw has been recognised by government and the new guidance 
is crystal clear in saying that activities such as raising issues with 
ministers and civil servants, responding to consultations and contributing to 
the general policy debate are not only permitted but actively welcomed.”

 