
The government could force supermarkets to state on labels whether their fresh 
food is from Britain and to agree to long-term contracts with farmers as part 
of plans to address the crisis in the dairy industry.


Elizabeth Truss, the environment secretary, said an emergency meeting between 
ministers and farming leaders on Monday was encouraging.

The talks were arranged after the National Farmers Union (NFU) warned there 
was a state of emergency in farming due to a 25% fall in the farmgate price of 
milk in the past year.

Aldi, Lidl, Asda and Morrisons agreed last week to increase the amount 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/milk-row-aldi-morrisons-asda-raise-price>
 they pay for milk after farmers blockaded distribution centres andbrought cows 
into supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/09/farmers-herd-cows-asda-protest-low-milk-prices>
 in protest at the price they were receiving.

Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>, Britain’s biggest 
retailer, will hold talks with campaigners on Tuesday after protests about the 
amount of milk it is importing from outside the country for use in cheese, 
yoghurts and other dairy products.

Truss claimed that less than half the butter and cheese eaten in Britain is 
made from British milk and called on retailers to clearly label where their 
product was sourced so customers know what they are buying.

She said: “I want to see better branding and clearer labelling of dairy 
products in supermarkets, retailers and throughout the catering industry so 
that people know when they are buying British, and we have agreed to have 
further discussions with the food industry on this.”

The angst over milk is about the future of our countryside | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/13/farmers-protests-milk-prices-alarm-rural-economy>
Meurig Raymond, the NFU president, said a many farms are on the brink of 
closure but the latest meeting showed the government recognised the scale of 
the problem.

He said: “The most important thing was a recognition of the crisis and that 
the supply chain needs to work better so that farmers are not the only ones 
carrying the risk at times of volatility [in milk prices].

“Cashflow is very tough. Farmers will be making decisions in the next two 
months. We need to get more money to farmers before they make a decision to 
leave.”

Raymond said it was debatable whether laws could be introduced that forced 
retailers to state on packaging where their food had been sourced. But he said 
the Groceries Code Adjudicator, the supermarket watchdog, has a role to play.

As well as calling for changes in packaging, farmers want retailers to agree 
to longer-term supply contracts that protect them from sharp movements in 
commodity prices.

Truss has agreed to create a new working group to discuss how contracts can be 
overhauled. At a meeting of European agriculture ministers next month, she will 
also push for the creation of a new futures and insurance market in dairy 
products that could shield farmers from fluctuations in prices.

She said: “It was an encouraging meeting and I believe we can help build 
stronger foundations that give the industry the long-term stability and 
commercial opportunities it needs to manage global volatility.

“I recognise the seriousness of the current situation for the dairy industry 
and for farming as a whole. Our hardworking farmers and the £100bn food and 
farming industry are vital for our economy and our countryside.

“It is in everyone’s interest that supermarkets, caterers and the food 
industry have a secure supply of milk. That’s why I am pleased to see some 
supermarkets share the risk with farmers over price fluctuations. We are 
urgently setting up a new working group with the UK farming ministers and the 
Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board to develop best-practice models 
with the industry.”

Tesco’s agreement to hold talks with farmers came after campaigners blockaded 
distribution centres at Avonmouth and Widnes on Sunday to protest against the 
supermarket group’s dairy imports.

Representatives of the campaign group Farmers For Action 
<http://www.farmersforaction.org/> are to meet with Matt Simister, Tesco’s 
commercial director for fresh food.

A spokesman for the supermarket said: “We are aware of an incident that took 
place at our Avonmouth and Widnes depots. There was a limited amount of 
disruption and the distribution centres are now operating normally.”
 