
The mistle thrush is vanishing from UK gardens, wildlife experts warned as 
they urged people to take part in an annual survey to monitor how birds are 
faring.

Results from the RSPB's annual Big Garden Birdwatch 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birdwatch/> survey have shown that mistle thrushes are 
now being seen in less than half the number of gardens they were spotted in 10 
years ago.

The RSPB <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rspb> is urging the public 
to take part in this year's survey, which takes place this weekend, to help 
gather important information on how mistle thrushes and other garden bird 
species are doing.

The event, described by the conservation charity as the world's biggest 
wildlife survey, is now in its 34th year.

Since starting in 1979 it has helped highlight dramatic declines in some 
garden birds.

Starling numbers have fallen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/29/starlings-uk-gardens-decline-rspb>
 from an average of 15 per garden in 1979 to just three in 2012, while house 
sparrow numbers have fallen by two-thirds in the same period, although the two 
species are still the most commonly seen.

Some birds have seen their fortunes improve, with garden birds such as blue 
tits, great tits and coal tits on the increase since 1979.

Goldfinches were absent from the Big Garden Birdwatch in its early years but 
have featured regularly in the top 15 species spotted since 2004.

Martin Harper, RSPB conservation director, said:

"Mistle thrushes are already on the amber list of conservation concern and are 
closely related to the threatened song thrush.

"The rate of decline we've seen throughout Big Garden Birdwatch suggest both 
these species are in need of help."

Last year almost 600,000 people, including 90,000 pupils and teachers at 
schools,took part in Birdwatch activities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/29/starlings-uk-gardens-decline-rspb>
, counting 9 million birds between them.

People can take part by spending an hour at any time this weekend counting 
birds in their garden or park, noting the highest number of each bird species 
seen at any one time and submitting the results to the RSPB.
 