
You had to imagine it in the first place to believe it, but that is precisely 
the kind of foresight Steve Smith brought to the MCG today in conjuring a 
dramatic Australian win in the second Test. It was to the credit of the 
Australian captain that a day of cricket which initially promised little 
provided such riches.

The statistical record of this game will reflect something far less enticing 
than the madcap scenes of the final day, where Australia had an innings in hand 
but competed against the clock as much as their brittle opponents, finally 
sealing victory as shadows covered the arena in the final hour of play.

Nic Maddinson dropped as Australia recall Agar and O'Keefe for SCG Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/nic-maddinson-dropped-as-australia-recall-agar-and-okeefe-for-scg-test>
Smith had a notable co-conspirator today in the form of Mitchell Starc, who 
started and finished his side’s remarkable comeback. Any memories of the 
paceman’s lethargic opening four days in this game will be quickly forgotten. 
Not even Keith Miller could have dominated in the two primary disciplines of 
the game the way he did today for 84 runs and four wickets. Yasir Shah was the 
final Pakistani batsman to depart amid chaotic celebrations when he spooned 
Starc to Jackson Bird at mid-on.

At various points Pakistan looked capable of hanging on in this game. There 
were 18 overs remaining in the day and 28 runs to play with when Sarfraz Ahmed 
stood undefeated on 43, looking good to establish a small, potentially 
game-saving lead for his side. But again it was Starc who snaked one through 
the defences of Pakistan’s only remaining hope. Wahab Riaz followed for a 
five-ball duck – also bowled by the left-arm quick – before the last rites were 
enacted.

Friday’s play began with few competitive prospects outside of a punishment 
session for Pakistan’s bowlers, but in the end it was their batsmen who 
suffered the greater reputational damage, having crumpled in a heap to lose a 
Test they had dominated for two full days.

If Smith and Starc will take all the plaudits for this result, Australia’s 
off-spinner Nathan Lyon was also a star. Earlier in the day’s play, talk around 
the nation had turned to spinner’s possible exclusion for the Sydney Test. An 
hour before lunch on day five that manifested in speculation as to the precise 
whereabouts of his New South Wales team-mate Steve O‘Keefe, whose travel 
itinerary was being tracked as though he was Edward Snowden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmitchell-starc-leads-australia-to-dramatic-melbourne-test-win-over-pakistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4d205ab12ad0afa4b60e11f62358f060be6f38%2F0_0_5000_3240%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitchell%20Starc%20leads%20Australia%20to%20dramatic%20Melbourne%20Test%20win%20over%20Pakistan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmitchell-starc-leads-australia-to-dramatic-melbourne-test-win-over-pakistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitchell%20Starc%20leads%20Australia%20to%20dramatic%20Melbourne%20Test%20win%20over%20Pakistan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmitchell-starc-leads-australia-to-dramatic-melbourne-test-win-over-pakistan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4d205ab12ad0afa4b60e11f62358f060be6f38%2F0_0_5000_3240%2F5000.jpg>
 Australian team-mates swamp Jackson Bird after he took the catch that sealed 
Australia’s win. Photograph: Andy Brownbill/AP 
But the incumbent delivered, rubbishing his critics by removing in the space 
of three deliveries Pakistan’s batting perennials Younus Khan and Misbah-ul-Haq 
to leave the tourists 63-4. He also nipped out Brisbane Test hero Asad Shafiq, 
each of his wickets snared to the soundtrack of sharpening knives.

Josh Hazlewood got things rolling at the outset, confirming the wisdom of 
Smith’s early declaration by forcing Sami Aslam to play on in the second of the 
four overs available before lunch. The lanky paceman swooped down the pitch in 
the aftermath with both arms extended, approximating both the shape and actual 
wingspan of a light airplane. From the very first ball after resumption, Starc 
trapped Babar Azam in front and cause genuine panic among the tourists at 6-2.

There were heroes everywhere. When Shafiq charged Lyon and played an 
uncharacteristically loose flick towards leg, it was the anticipation, reflexes 
and juggling skills of Peter Handscomb at short leg that sealed the deal as 
much as the bowling. Jackson Bird delivered one vital wicket too, castling an 
unusually restrained Mohammad Amir.

The crucial breakthrough of the day was always going to be the removal of 
Azhar Ali, and Hazlewood delivered that too after tea by trapping the first 
innings hero in front for 43. The batsman could not be faulted for reviewing 
umpire Ian Gould’s decision, for by that point he had withstood Australia’s 
bowlers for a touch over 12 hours for an aggregate of 248 runs, and had reason 
to believe he’d never be beaten on this Melbourne tarmac.

That we revelled in such giddy scenes at all today owed to Australia’s 
enterprising batting in the morning, namely the calculated onslaught from Starc 
and his skipper. The French modernist architect Le Corbusier was famed for his 
theory that houses were machines for living in. Its doubtful he ever perused 
the pages of Wisden, but if he could do so now he’d conclude that cricket 
stadiums around the world were machines for Steve Smith to bat in.

As Starc rained down an MCG-record seven sixes, the Australian captain reached 
an undefeated 165 and pushed his Test average further beyond Sobersian 
measurements as the supporting cast of a result-enabling 154-run partnership.

Smith reached 150 by skipping down the track to Yasir Shah and lofting the 
beleaguered leg-spinner over long-on for a resounding six, before spearing him 
to the fine leg fence with what could only be described as a forehand sweep. 
It’s a tough day at the office when batsmen are actually inventing new ways to 
punish you. Starc’s blazing knock was simply decisive, allowing Australia to 
declare at 624-8. The dimensions of their 181-run lead planted seeds of doubt.

Australian cricketers being targeted by bookmakers via social media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/australian-cricketers-being-targeted-by-bookmakers-via-social-media>
Even in victory, changes loom for this Australian side. Whether it qualifies 
as a genuine dilemma or not, selectors will ponder another spinner with both 
O’Keefe and Ashton Agar included alongside Hilton Cartwright in a 13-man squad 
for Sydney, while Chadd Sayers is sent back to domestic ranks. The national 
selection panel was forced to admit an error in their batting reboot owing to 
the struggles of Nic Maddinson, who has also been dropped. Two out of three 
ain’t bad.

The wicketkeeping dilemma will also not go away. Australia hasn’t lost since 
they called upon the incumbent for his moxie and supposed prowess with the 
willow, but they’ve done little more than rob Peter to pay Wade. But those are 
minor concerns for at least one night.

As Mitchell Starc was swamped by his team-mates at the conclusion of this win, 
it was hard not to think back to the conclusion of day two, when Pakistan were 
set fair at 310-6 from 101.2 overs. At that point it was said by wise observers 
that the only guaranteed part of the result was that the tourists couldn’t 
lose. Yet again they found a way to make us and themselves look foolish, and 
honestly, bless them for that.
 