
The MK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> manager, Karl 
Robinson, has called for Charlton Athletic’s Yaya Sanogo to be banned for the 
remainder of the season after his off-the-ball elbow on Antony Kay in Tuesday’s 
0-0 draw at The Valley.

An already damaging evening for the south London side was worsened by Sanogo’s 
dismissal. Charlton remain 23rd in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with 10 games to play after 
failing to beat the Dons, who are 21st and seven points in front of them.

Burnley’s Sean Dyche delighted with Andre Gray after win at Fulham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/09/burnley-sean-dyche-andre-gray-fulham>
The striker Sanogo, on loan from Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, will be suspended for three 
games after being given a straight red card by the referee Charles Breakspear 
for the incident in the sixth minute of second-half stoppage-time, and Robinson 
angrily said: “It was disgusting. He should be banned for the rest of the 
season.

“He’s clearly, off the ball, had a go and then a second one. Rob Hall too was 
clotheslined on the far side of the pitch. Some of the tackles were borderline 
assault. I was expecting to see the police in the tunnel at full-time.

“I know it’s about the fight and competing for survival in one of the most 
difficult leagues in Europe, but there has to be an element of control.

“It’s not acceptable. He could have broken his jaw. Their manager [José Riga] 
didn’t shake my hand until we were in the tunnel either, so it ended on a 
bitter note for me. But we were the better team.”

Riga, whose team set an unwanted club record by going a 10th home league game 
without a win, said in the post-match press conference that he had not yet seen 
the Sanogo incident but added: “He did something silly, apologised, so I 
suppose he did something. We don’t need this in our situation, certainly not. 
We are all nervous about the situation. [To not win) against a direct opponent, 
it’s two times more difficult [to survive].”
 