
Sir Mo Farah has brushed off his surprise defeat at the Great Edinburgh 
International XCountry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/mo-farah-seventh-edinburgh-xcountry-cross-country>
 on Saturday, promising that it will fire him up for the rest of the season and 
telling his fans: “Don’t worry, Mo knows.”

Sir Mo Farah seventh as Leonard Korir wins Great Edinburgh XCountry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/mo-farah-seventh-edinburgh-xcountry-cross-country>
Farah was off the pace during the 8km race around Holyrood, finishing well 
back in seventh – 46 seconds behind the American winner Leonard Kiror, whose 
desperate late sprint took him past Scotland’s Callum Hawkins, who was a 
valiant second. But afterwards Farah insisted that a spell of indifferent 
training, rather than a lack of motivation afterwinning 5,000m and 10,000m gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/mo-farah-gold-medal-5000m-double-double-history>
 at last year’s Olympics, was the root cause of his subdued performance.

“It definitely fires me up, it gives me a little wake-up call,” he said. “It 
shows me that even if you are the Olympic champion and world champion, if you 
haven’t done the work, you will get beat. It’s as easy as that and the last 
couple of weeks haven’t gone as well as I wanted.

“But there is no change in myself. I know what I want, I know what I have to 
do. I just have a little bit more work to do than usual. I was 80% last year
when I finished second in this race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/mo-farah-great-edinburgh-cross-country>
, and I was 65-70% this year.”

It was the first time the 33-year-old had lost an official race to a Briton 
since the world heavyweight boxing champion Anthony Joshua beat him over 100m 
in Superstars in November 2012 – while it had been seven years since he had 
lost a distance race to a compatriot, when he came thirdbehind both Ricky 
Stevenson and Steve Vernon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/10/mo-farah-edinburgh-international>
 in Edinburgh in January 2009.

But Farah insisted that four to six weeks of hard altitude-training in 
Ethiopia – which he says will take place either before or after the Birmingham 
Indoor Grand Prix meeting next month – will put him right. “I’ve got four kids, 
but you have to say to yourself what works the best for you. And the thing that 
works for me is being in training camp, isolating myself, get back to basics.

“At the same time, what time of year is it? It’s January, it’s early on so you 
have still got quite a lot of time. Don’t worry, Mo knows.”

And Farah, who will end his track career at the end of 2017 to concentrate on 
the marathon, insisted he has every intention of retaining his world 5,000m and 
10,000m titles in London during August. “I want to be able to finish my career 
on a high,” he said. “I don’t want to finish second or third on the track.”

Meanwhile the impressive Hawkins, whose bold front-running tactics came so 
close to bringing him victory, has warned Farah that he is looking forward to 
taking him on again in the marathon in 2018. “That will be a good battle,” he 
said. “I’ll enjoy that.”

Laura Muir targets European and world medals in 2017 after relay victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/laura-muir-edinburgh-cross-country-athletics>
When it was put to Hawkins that Farah would probably take his mantle as the 
best marathon runner in Britain, he replied: “Not without a fight. Even if he 
is SirMo Farah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>.” However the Scot, 
who is trained by the British marathon record holder Steve Jones, said he would 
not read too much into his victory over Farah on Saturday.“I’d rather beat him 
at his best,” said the 24-year-old. “He wasn’t 100%. I don’t want to beat 
people for the sake of it – I want to beat people because they are the best 
competitors. I’m sure he’ll be back up there in London.”

But Hawkins rued the fact he was unable to hold off Kiror, despite appearing 
to make a decisive break with 400m to go only to be reeled in just before the 
line. “I watched the American Olympic trials so I knew he was a quality 
athlete,” he said. “But I thought I had it won before the last hill. Coming 
over the burn, I slipped a bit but thought: ‘You’re still not going to get me.’ 
I could hear him coming. That’s racing.

In the mixed 4x1km, Laura Muir continued her strong recent form by anchoring 
Britain to victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/laura-muir-edinburgh-cross-country-athletics>
 – and afterwards promised more was to come. “I wasn’t used to being the one to 
watch before but it’s great that people are recognising that I’m running fast 
and I just want to try and keep that up,” she added.
 