
As you know, it’s mandatory these days that the Anglophone world be obsessed 
by one Scandinavian lifestyle concept or another. In 2016 it washygge 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/the-year-of-hygge-the-danish-obsession-with-getting-cozy>
, a Danish word that somehow simultaneously is a) untranslatable and b) means 
“cosiness” – and which last year was the topic of approximately two billion 
different coffee-table books (along witha splendid takedown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
 in this newspaper by Charlotte Higgins, from which it should never recover). 
In 2017, the signs are that the Fashionable Scandinavian Concept will belagom, 
a Swedish word meaning just the right amount; not too much, or too little. This 
moment in history – days before the inauguration of an unstable US president 
who rode to power on a wave of anger and conspiracy theories – might not seem 
hospitable to the spirit of moderation. But maybe that’s exactly why we need it.

The problem with moderation, Peter Wehner argued in a recent New York Times 
essay 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/17/opinion/sunday/one-way-not-to-be-like-trump.html>
, is that it’s seen as intrinsically lily-livered, a lukewarm compromise 
between more resolute extremes – “a philosophy for tender souls”, as Jean-Paul 
Sartre said of liberalism. I don’t want to bemoderately opposed to dishonest, 
misogynistic, quasi-fascist politicians; when extremists run the world, we 
should be extremely committed to their defeat. Yet on the other hand, deep down 
I know that a victory for My Team over Their Team at the next election or 
referendum won’t solve much in the long term, either: humiliating the other 
side simply ensures they’ll come roaring back, more furious than ever, until 
they regain sufficient power to humiliate me.

Related: From mangata to kilig: 10 untranslatable words - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/jan/12/from-mangata-to-kilig-10-untranslatable-words-in-pictures>

Is there a way out of this dilemma? Wehner argues there is, that we should 
think of moderation as “a disposition, not an ideology”: not a set of views, 
but a way of relating to your views, and to those who disagree. Moderates “do 
not see the world in Manichean terms that divide it into forces of good (or 
light) and evil (or darkness)”, writes the political scientist Aurelian 
Craiutu, ina new book, Faces Of Moderation 
<http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/15561.html>, which Wehner quotes. True 
moderation doesn’t mean you’ve got to split the difference between your 
opinions and other people’s (for example, to concede that racism might have 
something to be said for it); but it does mean conceding that nobody’s 
unreachable or irredeemable. This is a difficult distinction to live by; I 
don’t claim to be any good at it myself (especially on Twitter). But it’s 
definitely not pathetic or weak-willed; it’s far more tough-minded than the 
low-effort option of just writing off the opposition.

Honestly, from the Swedes I’ve talked to, I’m not sure lagom encompasses this 
kind of muscular compassion for your foes: it’s more about a Swedish preference 
for modesty and not standing out. Then again, isn’t the whole point of these 
borrowed Scandinavian terms that they can mean whatever we want? So when it 
carpets every bookshop later this year, we might at least infuselagom with a 
bit of defiance – a hard-nosed alternative to the easy extremism of the age.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 