
So, remember I said we’d found out my 
great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandmother on my father’s side was 
related to Anne Boleyn’s lady-in-waiting? No, not the one who owned most of 
Lancashire – that was her second cousin who died in childbirth who they think 
could be Shakespeare’s Dark Lady. I mean the one whose niece was a famous 
courtesan who married a marquis then ran away with a humble apothecary and had 
14 children who died before the age of seven, except for one girl who was going 
to be burned at the stake for witchcraft but escaped on the Mayflower and 
married a Native American chief, they say she was the real Pocahontas, her US 
descendants think they’ve identified the tree where she carved her initials in 
Central Park.

Modern tribes: the box set bore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/box-set-addict-modern-tribes>
Right, so, interestingly, it turns out that’s the wrong family? We searched 
the graveyard for Smiths, and they spelled it Smythe, so, interestingly, the 
earliest I can get is the 1841 census where my great-great-grandmother, that’s 
Eliza Smith, is listed as a washerwoman, which is weird, because my 
great-grandmother Smith used to treasure these slippers from the days when her 
mother was a famous Spanish dancer whose beauty inspired Thomas Hardy, which 
explains our dark hair, and great aristocrats fought a duel for her hand in 
marriage, and, interestingly, the census mentions four children, when we knew 
of only three, Robert, Flossie and junior Eliza, but there was probably another 
one, John. I wonder if he was the family black sheep, because if my hunch is 
correct and he was deported, he could be the famous highwayman that someone in 
Australia thinks is an ancestor of Kate Middleton. We found this picture where 
she looks identical to my great-great-uncle?

Interestingly, the Australian Smith seems to have committed bigamy with a 
half-Huguenot astronomer from a family line it has traced back to Arthurian 
times – apparently you canStreet View <https://www.instantstreetview.com> the 
cottage where she discovered Pluto before they hushed it up. It’s unbelievable 
what you find if you keep digging.
 