
“A weekend at Walshy’s” say the T-shirts of staff working at Mofo, the music 
and art festival held at Tasmania’s Museum of Old and New Art (Mona). “Walshy” 
referrs toMona founder David Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/14/monas-david-walsh-now-im-the-arbiter-of-good-taste-the-thing-i-abhor>
, who resides at the gallery complex and opens its doors every summer, 
Gatsby-style, for a three-day party.

Antonio Sanchez's Birdman live score review – New York's volatile tempos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/antonio-sanchezs-birdman-live-score-review-new-yorks-volatile-tempos>
In the festival notes, curator and Violent Femmes bassist Brian Ritchie 
insists: “Mofo does not like to be formulaic”. If there is any thematic thread 
connecting shakuhachi flutes, the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra Chorus and the 
Flaming Lips, we have yet to find it. Instead, Ritchie reverts to the abstract: 
this year’s festival focuses on “the solo percussionist as heroic figure, the 
word and girl power, as well as our trademark intergalactic musical 
eclecticism”.

Mona <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mona> was never intended as a 
music venue and as a consequence performers are installed in the weirdest of 
places. Take the wine cellar-turned-concert hall, for instance, or saxophonist 
Mats Gustafsson, who wanders through the gallery halls like a devilish Pied 
Piper, blowing and squelching abrasive, violent sounds as he collects a trail 
of onlookers.

James Chance and the Contortions

To see James Chance – a notable figure of New York’s experimental jazz scene 
and one of the innovators of the no-wave movement – is an absolute treat. He 
takes the stage at Mofo’s nightly dance party, Faux Mo, dressed in a 
dishevelled, oversized suit that seems to envelop his slight body. Chance 
commands the saxophone and, at times, the keys, and is backed by the talents of 
the Contortions, with whom he released his first album, No New York, in 1978. A 
solid hour of antagonistic, rapid and flawless avant-garde jazz ensues.

The band lineup may have changed throughout his career, but Chance himself has 
remained consistent and exudes a timeless quality. On Saturday he looks as 
though he may well have stepped straight out of 1970s New York, his raspy voice 
crooning stories of heroin addiction and dangerous love.

Chance is a man of few words (audience banter isn’t his thing), but that’s 
fine: his music says it all. – MD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4971d0e92075a1495affd727900e0249772815%2F0_135_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mofo%202016%3A%20the%20avant-garde%20comes%20to%20Hobart%20for%20a%20Gatsby-style%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mofo%202016%3A%20the%20avant-garde%20comes%20to%20Hobart%20for%20a%20Gatsby-style%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4971d0e92075a1495affd727900e0249772815%2F0_135_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
 Flaming Lips frontman Wayne Coyne croons from inside a bubble. Photograph: 
Rémi Chauvin/Mona 
The Flaming Lips

Never is the adage “no art exists in a vacuum” truer than at the Flaming Lips’ 
performance on Friday. With musicians and fans around the world still reeling 
from the loss of David Bowie, the band makes a moving tribute by covering the 
rock legend’s 1971 hit Life on Mars.

It’s not difficult to find connections between Bowie and the Lips: both have a 
fascination with space and a predilection for spectacle. Flaming Lips frontman 
Wayne Coyne is the clown to all of our inner five year olds, with his shock of 
frizzy grey hair and silver pants encrusted with multicoloured pom-poms. 
Mid-set Coyne name-drops Miley Cyrus, the pop artist he has become a mentor to 
, and perhaps the most famous example of the new crop of artists with a taste 
for spectacle.

The Flaming Lips <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-flaming-lips> begin 
sets the way other bands end them: behind a curtain of glittering lights, 
confetti shot out of cannons and blow-up dancing aliens. Plenty of new songs as 
well as classics like Fight Test, Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots Part 1 and 
She Don’t Use Jelly make for a sparkly, rainbow-filled start to the weekend.– MT

The Flaming Lips review – sound issues fail to burst Wayne Coyne’s bubble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/10/the-flaming-lips-review-sound-issues-fail-to-burst-wayne-coynes-bubble>

Katthy Cavaliere: exploring grief and mortality in a poignant retrospective
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/17/katthy-cavaliere-exploring-grief-and-mortality-in-a-poignant-retrospective>
Ariana Reines

Ariana Reines – a poet, playwright and singer-songwriter from New York – feels 
she owes us an apology. She begins by admitting to the blissed-out audience 
sprawled on the sun-drenched lawn before her that her songs of angst may seem 
somewhat jarring. In a strangely worded act of encouragement, an audience 
member promptly tells her to “fuck off”, and Reines, feeling more at home, 
settles into a dark set of spoken word and song.

Fierce and raw, Reines embraces the messiness of her life and recounts it with 
honesty. “You have got to goad yourself toward a becoming that is in accordance 
with what you are innate,” she recites. “You have got to sometimes become the 
medicine you want to take.”

Spoken word before a large crowd can sometimes feel a little awkward, or 
stilted. With Reines, it is haunting. – MD

Ensemble Offspring

The dark, cool depths of Mona’s underground Nolan Gallery is a fitting stage 
for two of Australia’s most skilled percussionists, Claire Edwardes and Bree 
van Reyk. The beating of their drums and eerie tones of the xylophone bounce 
off the gallery walls, enveloping the crowd. Edwardes and Reyk energetically 
jump between instruments, their strong arms in a frenzied dance as they perform 
their take on 1 + 1 by American composer Philip Glass. And then they blindfold 
themselves, a wild duo with only intuition and touch to guide them.

Ensemble Offspring may be classically trained, but they have used this 
training to push the boundaries of sound with true innivation, leaving 
audiences wide-eyed. The pair frequently tour Australia, sometimes joining 
other artists; keep an eye out for any opportunity to witness these powerful 
women in full flight. – MD

Beckett Triptych review – three acts of listening but not enough light
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/beckett-triptych-adelaide-festival-review>
Matthew Goddard


There aren’t too many festivals that would invite the principal timpanist from 
the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra to perform a solo set in the barrel-filled 
bunker beneath a wine bar – but that’s exactly the sort of left-field offering 
one can expect from Mofo.

Playing several classical and avant-garde compositions, Matthew Goddard 
exposes the full gamut of what these bowled drums have to offer, whether struck 
by hand, wood or felt-headed sticks, and with pedals that warp pitch.

The timpani is a grandiose instrument – a single strike sounds like a 
bellowing giant – but the pieces picked by Goddard also show its more delicate 
side. Take Rhythm Gradation (1993) by experimental music composer Toshi 
Ichiyanagi (who, incidentally, was once married to Yoko Ono). It is studded 
with pops created by tapping the side of the kettle. I’m not convinced the 
concrete walls do the music justice; notes that should hang in the air with 
perfect clarity shoot off the walls and bounce back, making for a muddy 
experience.– MT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4469452cf909f650fbbc0eeccdc3f535938eeaa2%2F0_0_7020_4212%2F7020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mofo%202016%3A%20the%20avant-garde%20comes%20to%20Hobart%20for%20a%20Gatsby-style%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mofo%202016%3A%20the%20avant-garde%20comes%20to%20Hobart%20for%20a%20Gatsby-style%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmofo-2016-the-jay-gatsby-of-hobart-opens-his-doors-to-the-avant-garde%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4469452cf909f650fbbc0eeccdc3f535938eeaa2%2F0_0_7020_4212%2F7020.jpg>
 A still from Stephen Page’s first feature-length film, Spear. Photograph: 
Jacob Nash/Mofo 2016 
Spear

Spear is an exquisite-looking film; for his first feature-length work, 
Australian choreographer Stephen Page has taken a 2000 work by Sydney’s 
Bangarra Dance Theatre and adapted it for the screen. The settings are striking 
backdrops for the dancers – the stark red dust of the Northern Territory; 
pyramids of black stone set against sapphire-blue waters on the New South Wales 
coast – but where Page demonstrates a truly painterly eye is in his ability to 
capture beauty in urban environments: heavy traffic becomes a blur of abstract 
red lights; escalators in a train station are drawn in hard geometric lines.

And yet for all its beauty, I confess to snoozing a couple of times. Page has 
stayed true to the spirit of contemporary dance and its refrain from literal 
storytelling, which means the film’s themes – cultural alienation, alcoholism, 
incarceration, connection to country and spiritualism – are evoked through 
dance sequences rather than narrative. But without the vitality of live 
performance, the film makes for a challenging, but not unworthy, experience.– MT

Gilbert & George: 'The rightwing press may be unpleasant but they're polite'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/30/gilbert-george-the-rightwing-press-may-be-unpleasant-but-theyre-polite>
 * ‘It’s no Samson and Delilah’: Stephen Page on the film adaptation of Spear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/its-no-samson-and-delilah-stephen-page-on-the-film-adaptation-of-spear>

 * Spear review – a weird, wonderful milestone of a dance movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/spear-review-a-weird-wonderful-milestone-of-a-dance-movie>

Brett Newski

With Hobart’s rolling hills as a backdrop, US folk singer-songwriter Brett 
Newski’s set plays out like a diary of his travels through Asia, America and 
Germany. Accompanied by his acoustic guitar, he sings of wanting to throw it 
all in to go live in Berlin where people “make art that nobody sees” and “trade 
hugs for spliffs”. He plays self-effacing songs of heartbreak and loss, and 
cute ditties about a life spent on the road, broke, playing to tiny and 
unappreciative crowds. All are delivered with a warmth and humour that have 
those gathered in front of the outdoor stage in the palm of Newski’s hand.

If you enjoy the urban storytelling of Australia’s Darren Hanlon or are a fan 
of introspective sister-duo CocoRosie, then check out Newski, whose 
tour-intensive lifestyle has provided fodder for his art. – MD
 