
About 55,000 migrants who were not eligible for asylum or were refused it left 
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> voluntarily between January 
and November 2016, up by 20,000 from the number who left voluntarily in 2015, a 
newspaper reported yesterday.


Germany has toughened its stance in recent months, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/german-government-approves-bill-to-stop-eu-migrants-claiming-benefits>
 prompted by concerns about security and integration after admitting more than 
1.1 million migrants since early 2015.


Last week a failed asylum seeker who had sworn allegiance to Islamic State 
killed 12 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/berlin-anis-amri-shootout-european-arrest-warrant>
 when he rammed a truck into a Christmas market in Berlin, fuelling growing 
criticism of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s immigration policy.

Deadly attack on German soil is worst fear for Angela Merkel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/angela-merkel-supporters-fears-berlin-attack>
The Süddeutsche Zeitung newspaper quoted government data showing the number 
who returned to their homes in the first 11 months of the year. Most returned 
to Albania, Serbia, Iraq, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iran, the newspaper said. 
Those leaving are eligible for one-off support of up to €3,000 (£2,550).


German security officials previously told Reuters that the number of those 
deported after their asylum requests were rejected rose to almost 23,800 from 
January to November – up from almost 20,900 in all of 2015.


There has also been a rise in the number of refugees turned away at the 
borders. A report by the Neue Osnabrücker Zeitung daily said police had turned 
back 19,720 refugees in the first 11 months – up from 8,913 in all of 2015. 
Most were from Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq and Nigeria. They had been registered 
in other EU countries.


As public support for her pro-refugee policies wanes ahead of September’s 
federal election, Merkel has said it is vital to focus resources on those 
fleeing war, and to keep public support by deporting foreigners to countries 
where there is no persecution.


A string of attacks and security alerts involving refugees and migrants this 
year hasboosted support for the anti-immigration Alternative for Germany party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/frauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview>
, which could damage Merkel’s re-election hopes.
 