
With tears in her eyes and her voice cracking with emotion, the self-declared 
“mom-in-chief” stepped off the public stage on Friday with her final speech as 
first lady, urging young Americans to believe in the “power of hope”.

Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>, who began 
her White House years pursuing the typically soft subjects that have often 
limited the wives of presidents, ended with a clarion call for diversity and 
vowing to make it her life’s work to help disadvantaged children get to 
college, a personal mission that has its roots in her own Chicago childhood.


In a deeply emotional reflection on what lies ahead for the US in the era of 
President Donald Trump, she sent a clear message to young people to rise above 
division, anger and bigotry, no matter what they look like, their background or 
religion.

 “My final message to young people as first lady is simple. I want our young 
people to know that they matter, that they belong ... Don’t be afraid, be 
focused. Be determined. Be hopeful. Be empowered. Empower yourself with a good 
education ... then build a country worthy of your boundless promise.”

The sign-off in the East Room of the White House ended with her being engulfed 
in hugs from school counsellors from across the US whom she celebrated for the 
crucial support they give to students in their darkest moments.

It was also a moment to mark the eight-year journey she has made to become an 
impassioned political figure in her own right. She has never stood for office, 
but there were times in the final weeks of the US election campaign when it 
seemed possible that she could run for president and win.

She had taken the fight to Donald Trump, telling a Hillary Clinton rally in 
New Hampshire that his boasts about sexually assaulting women hadshaken her to 
her core 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
. “This is not normal. This is not politics as usual. This is disgraceful. It 
is intolerable,” she said in a speech which revealed a toughness and an ability 
to connect with an audience to rival her own husband’s gifts.


Speaking in Philadelphia from the same platform as Bill Clinton, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, Bernie Sanders and Hillary 
Clinton, she emerged as the true star of the Democratic convention, moving the 
audience to tears as she spoke about the possibility of the first female 
president, and her own family’s journey from slavery to the White House.


Drawing powerfully on her own family history – her great-great-grandfather 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/chi-obama-slavery-01-dec01-story.html> 
lived as a slave – she spoke of “the story of generations of people who felt 
the lash of bondage, the shame of servitude, the sting of segregation, but who 
kept on striving and hoping and doing what needed to be done so that today I 
wake up every morning in a house that was built by slaves.


‘She found her voice’: Michelle Obama’s DNC speech hailed as her boldest yet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-democratic-national-convention-speech>
“And I watch my daughters, two beautiful, intelligent, black young women 
playing with their dogs on the White House lawn.”


Ever since Martha Washington complained that she felt like a state prisoner, 
the role of the first lady has traditionally been seen as a confining one, 
where elegance comes first and controversy is best avoided.


And Michelle Obama’s White House years began typically – as a self-styled 
mom-in-chief, with two daughters aged 10 and seven, advocating a healthy-living 
agenda.


She turned a far corner of the White House grounds into a vegetable garden and 
brought children from some of Washington’s poorest schools to help her plant 
broccoli. She also delightful with her irreverent willingness to drop 
convention – joining in with anEvolution of Mom Dancing  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hq-URl9F17Y>routine on the talkshow Late Night 
with Jimmy Fallon, to promote her Let’s Move fitness push and later, getting in 
the passenger seat forCarpool Karaoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ln3wAdRAim4> with James Corden to promote her 
Let Girls Learn global education campaign.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1a8a0759b81d213b70852eec2aba2328accb174%2F0_27_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20'mom-in-chief'%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20bows%20out%20as%20dynamic%20first%20lady&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20%27mom-in-chief%27%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20bows%20out%20as%20dynamic%20first%20lady&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1a8a0759b81d213b70852eec2aba2328accb174%2F0_27_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
 Michelle Obama joined by Washington DC school children as they harvest the 
White House Kitchen Garden. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP 
If some felt disappointed by the gentle subjects she adopted initially, it 
became clear there was a golden thread running through her efforts as she began 
to focus on more substantial issues that reflected her own childhood growing up 
in Chicago.


She joined the debate on gun violence after the death in 2013 of Hadiya 
Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/feb/10/michelle-obama-hadiya-pendleton-video>
, the Chicago teenager who was killed by a stray bullet days after she returned 
home from taking part in the president’s inauguration celebrations with her 
high school marching band.


Speaking later that year in Chicago, Obama said her mission and her passion 
lay in “ensuring the health and development and success of young people in this 
city”.


Describing her own childhood, she said: “Back then, our parents knew that if 
they loved and encouraged us, if they kept us off the streets and out of 
trouble, then we’d be OK. They knew that if they did everything right, we’d 
have a chance.


“But today, for too many families and children in this city, that’s simply no 
longer the case. Today, too many kids in this city are living just a few stops, 
sometimes even just a few blocks, from shiny skyscrapers and leafy parks and 
world-class museums and universities, yet all of that might as well be in a 
different state, even in a different continent.


Michelle Obama’s 10 best fashion moments - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-best-fashion-moments-in-pictures>
“Because instead of spending their days enjoying the abundance of riches this 
city has to offer, they are consumed with watching their backs. They’re afraid 
to walk alone, because they might get jumped. They’re afraid to walk in groups, 
because that might identify them as part of a gang and put them at risk.”


 She said: “Hadiya’s family did everything right, but she still didn’t have a 
chance. And that story – the story of Hadiya’s life and death – we read that 
story day after day, month after month, year after year in this city and around 
this country.”

The Reach Higher initiative she has championed aims to inspire every student 
to carry on past high school – building on the healthy start she promoted, by 
creating conditions for teenagers to get to college, and then find support on 
campus to help them succeed.


She was still Michelle Robinson, daughter of a secretary and a pump worker at 
a Chicago water company, when her teachers told her that she was aiming too 
high by setting her sights on Princeton, the Ivy League university. But she 
made it, and went to Harvard Law School too, although as she said decades 
later: “I still hear that doubt ringing in my head.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbda3b3aacb79407098e4ff8c4cf7155695554c5%2F0_19_3756_2253%2F3756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20'mom-in-chief'%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20bows%20out%20as%20dynamic%20first%20lady&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20%27mom-in-chief%27%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20bows%20out%20as%20dynamic%20first%20lady&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-legacy-first-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbda3b3aacb79407098e4ff8c4cf7155695554c5%2F0_19_3756_2253%2F3756.jpg>
 Michelle Obama campaigned for Hillary Clinton during her presidential run. 
Photograph: Chuck Burton/AP 
The commencement addresses she has delivered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jun/03/michelle-obama-commencement-speeches-excerpts>
 each year at college graduation ceremonies during her time at the White House 
have seen her turn to her own personal struggles, including the death of her 
father, to force home the message that education is the single biggest driver 
of success for young people. She told Virginia Tech students: “I came to 
realize that the best way for me to honor my dad’s life was by how I lived my 
own life. I realized that the best way to fill the hole he had left was to do 
for other young people what he had done for me. So I left that fancy law firm, 
and I wound up ultimately running a nonprofit organization that trained young 
people for careers in public service.”

She has taken her aspirational message to young girls across the world – 
including pupilsfrom an inner-city school in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/25/michelle-obama-london-schoolgirls-oxford>
, some of whom went with her on a fact-finding mission to Oxford University and 
were later invited to the White House. “We are counting on you, we are counting 
on every single one of you to be the best that you can be,” she told their 
school assembly.

Why Michelle Obama is unlikely to run for president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/michelle-obama-run-for-president-politics>
If Barack Obama’s presidential legacy hangs in the balance with the start of 
the Trump administration, it is possible that as a family, the Obamas have 
achieved something of lasting significance which cannot be erased. They have 
shown young African Americans that they too can have ambition and success.


Rictor Craig was a school principal at Friendship Woodbridge elementary and 
middle school in one of the poorest wards of Washington when some of his 
scholars were invited to help Michelle Obama plant her White House kitchen 
garden in 2014.


Now director of academics at the nine schools of Friendship Woodbridge, he 
said the visit – and the simple fact that the Obamas made it to the White House 
– had a transformative effect on pupils.

“Ultimately it allowed my kids to see that they have a possibility, that 
people who look like them, that they are able to relate to, can one day aspire 
to get into the White House.


“Seeing Michelle Obama and the first family in the White House really 
motivated our scholars because they know that both the parents are college 
educated, they know that Malia and Sasha are going to college and these are 
things that they get to see on a daily basis, that they can then equate to 
their own story. It’s huge.”


Michelle Obama it seems, never will run for office. “If I were interested in 
it, I’d say it,”she told Oprah Winfrey in her big exit interview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4AxYF-L3KE> last month. “People don’t really 
understand how hard this is. And it’s not something that you cavalierly just 
sort of ask a family to do again.”


But as she tried in vain to wave away her tears at the end of her last speech, 
she made clear that the struggle to get children a better start and a great 
education will remain her life’s work. “I will be with you, rooting for you for 
the rest of my life.”
 