
Federal authorities are taking most humpback whales off the endangered species 
list, saying they have recovered enough in the last 40 years to warrant being 
removed.

The National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) said on Monday that nine of the 
14 distinct populations of humpbacks would be removed, while four distinct 
populations remain listed as endangered and one as threatened.

“Today’s news is a true ecological success story,” said Eileen Sobeck, 
assistant NOAA administrator for fisheries. “Whales, including the humpback, 
serve an important role in our marine environment.”

Kayaker captures video of humpback whales feasting in San Francisco Bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/whales-seen-san-francisco-bay-golden-gate-bridge>
Last year the NMFS, an office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (Noaa),proposed that humpbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/20/humpback-whales-noaa-population-segments-endangered-list>
 be split into 14 population segments, allowing for 10 populations to be 
removed from the endangered list.

It said populations of the animals had steadily grown since the international 
community banned commercial whaling nearly 50 years ago.

When Noaa made its proposal in April 2015, Regina Asmutis-Silvia, executive 
director and senior biologist forWhale and Dolphin Conservation North America 
<https://uk.whales.org/users/reginaasmutis-silvia>, noted that the public 
should be interested in the issue because of the humpback whale’s role in the 
ecosystem and economy.

“They have an economic value. Internationally, they are probably the No 1 
species targeted by whale watching,” she said. “So, there’s a vested interest 
in making sure that these populations are maintained and healthy.”

Humpback whales that frequent California, the Pacific north-west, Mexico and 
Central America will continue to receive Endangered Species Act protections.

Marta Nammack, the fisheries service Endangered Species Act listing 
coordinator, said the Mexico population numbered just 3,200. The Central 
American population is estimated at only about 400.

In contrast, more than 11,000 humpback whales breed in Hawaii waters. They are 
being taken off the list.
 