
Australians overwhelmingly support calls for the federal government to send a 
customs ship to monitor Japanese whaling in the Southern Ocean, a poll 
commissioned by the anti-whaling activist group Sea Shepherd indicates.


The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has 
previously beenaccused of backing away from a pre-election commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/03/whaling-sea-shepherd-accuses-coalition>
 to tackle whaling in the Southern Ocean, after refusing to send a specialist 
customs patrol vessel and insteadsending aircraft to monitor the whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/22/japan-whale-hunt-antarctica-plane-ship>
, which Japan claims is for scientific purposes.

Japanese PM's website hacked by whaling protesters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/japanese-pms-website-hacked-whaling-protesters>
Of the 1,002 people questioned 
<http://www.seashepherd.org.au/images/news/2015/news-151222-1-0-Japanese-Whaling-SMS-Pulse-Poll-Report.html>
 by SMS, by the polling company Roy Morgan, 76.9% said they wanted the 
government to “send a ship to oppose the whaling by Japan”.


A majority of Greens, Labor and Coalition voters were in favour of sending a 
ship. About a third ofCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> voters opposed the 
proposal.

The Greens senator Nick McKim said the Coalition was backing away from the 
monitoring commitment made in opposition and the prime minister, Malcolm 
Turnbull, had refused to expressanything stronger than “disappointment”  
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-18/australia-disappointed-that-japan-has-resumed-whaling,-turnbull/7041052>
about whaling on his recent visit to Japan.

“Unfortunately now that they’re in government they seem to have changed their 
position entirely,” McKim said.

“He might be interested to learn that nearly 70% of Liberal voters agreed that 
a vessel should be sent.”

The poll comes at the end of a fraught year on the issue of whaling, in which 
the Japanese whaling company Kyodo Senpaku was fined $1m for “wilful contempt” 
of the Australian federal court after breaching an order to stop killing whales.

The decision to resume whaling also flies in the face of a 2014 international 
court of justice (ICJ) ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
 that concluded the program had no basis in science and should be halted.

Malcolm Turnbull tells Shinzo Abe he's disappointed about whaling resumption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/19/malcolm-turnbull-tells-shinzo-abe-hes-disappointed-about-whaling-resumption>
Sea Shepherd’s managing director, Jeff Hansen, told Guardian Australia that 
Australia should be commended for takingJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> to the ICJ, and now needs to take 
responsibility for enforcement.

“Absolutely, we have done some incredible work in the past cleaning up to the 
illegal toothfish trade,” he said.

“[But] when it comes to Japan, because they’re a rich trading partner they 
turn a blind eye.”

Earlier this month the Australian government indicated it would consider legal 
action and the environment minister,Greg Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/greg-hunt>, and the foreign affairs 
minister, Julie Bishop, described Japan’s decision as “deeply disappointing” in 
a demarche letter issued with other nations.

Nevertheless, Japan plans to catch a reduced number of minke whales: 333, 
instead of 1,000.

A spokeswoman for the environment minister, Greg Hunt, said: “The government 
has made representations at the highest level to urge Japan not to resume 
whaling and we will continue to do so.

“We will also continue our efforts in the International Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Commission to strongly oppose 
commercial whaling, and to promote whale conservation.”

In 2013, when in opposition, Hunt strongly supported having a customs vessel 
in the Southern Ocean.

Were whaling to occur in Australian waters it would be an “utter failure in 
Canberra”, he said in 2013. “We’ve got blood in the water and a blind eye in 
Canberra. It’s completely unacceptable.”

Activists, including Sea Shepherd, accused him of backing down after the Ocean 
Protector 
<http://www.customs.gov.au/webdata/resources/files/SouthernOceanPatrolVesselACVOceanProtectorFactSheet.pdf>
 was repurposed for border control in Australia’s north and another ship was 
not sent to replace it.
 