
Ewan McGregor and his chum Charley Boorman are wandering through the market in 
Ulaanbaatar when they bump into a grey-haired western man wearing glasses and 
an old brown leather jacket. He looks as if he wants to run away, but McGregor 
grabs him. "This is Ted Simon," he says. "Our hero and guru, and the reason why 
we're all here."

Ted Simon is a hero. In 1973 he set off from Britain on his Triumph Tiger. 
Four years later he returned, having ridden 53,000 miles through 54 countries. 
The book he wrote, Jupiter's Travels, is a travel classic, a wonderful 
motorcycling odyssey.

It was Jupiter's Travels that inspired McGregor and Boorman to set off on 
their own trip. But they're doing things a little differently. For one, in 
spite of calling their adventureLong Way Round  (Sky One), they're travelling 
just 20,000 miles through 12 countries, and they're doing it in 115 days.

Then there's the way they go about it. Ted Simon's trip was one man on two 
wheels and the open road. It was about all the cliches of motorcycle travel - 
the freedom, the loneliness, the feeling of being in something rather than 
watching it through the TV screen that is the car window. It had a bit of the 
spirit of Che Guevara, and of Robert M Pirsig. And it was wonderful.

You can tell that McGregor and Boorman's trip is different just by watching 
the credits at the end of each episode. After all the thank yous - motorcycles 
furnished by BMW, flights furnished by British Airways, Sat-Coms furnished by 
AST ("furnished by" I think means "blagged from") - it says: Â© Long Way Round 
Ltd 2004. That's what this is: not a road trip but a limited company. And quite 
a big company. It's not just McGregor and Boorman. There's Claudio the 
cameraman (on-board cameras furnished by Sonic). Then there's the back-up crew, 
in three 4x4 vehicles furnished by Mitsubishi and stuffed full of 
fashionable-looking TV producers, doctors and motorcycle maintenance people 
(not very Zen though). They've all got sat phones and GPS navigation systems, 
and most probably their own satellite following up above. The bikers have 
cameras mounted on their bikes and microphones in their helmets. The whole 
thing is a massive mobile media machine with a movie star at its heart. No 
wonder Ted Simon looks as if he wants to run away in that Ulaanbaatar market.

For all that, though, Long Way Round is actually quite good fun. For a start, 
Mongolia is stunning, brown and barren. But the real joy comes from the fact 
that, despite all the fancy equipment - because of it, to some extent - they 
are totally hopeless. All of them. Those beautiful BMW motorcycles turn out to 
be useless on Mongolia's non-roads, especially given all the heavy kit they're 
carrying. So McGregor and Boorman fall off into the mud or the sand or the 
river or whatever. Again and again. And the bikes break.

The back-up crew is no better. You'd think it would be quite hard to flip over 
a car without crashing it into anything else, but somehow they manage. The 
whole thing is a spectacular display of incompetence.

At one point it's almost too much for McGregor. "It's hard here, it's really 
hard," he says. "But it's also very beautiful. Maybe we're going to have to 
concentrate more on the beauty and less on the hardship. No one said it was 
going to be easy..." Immediately the soundtrack fades in to that Coldplay song: 
"Nobody said it was easy." That's handy, almost as if he'd said the line just 
so they could do that.

McGregor's role is to be quite charming and wowed by the place and the people 
in a hippyish kind of way, and to say silly things. For instance: "I felt just 
a freedom being in that landscape, with those people who were living in tents, 
who still live in tents, and they move around the countryside, it's just a 
complete way of life, and I was so struck by the simplicity of it."

When, after falling off one too many times, they have to make a decision about 
whether to press on through Mongolia or to go north on to the better roads of 
Siberia, it's McGregor who makes the decision after a conversation with the 
producer. "I had a long chat with him about what Mongolia means, and how it 
feels, and what a cultural and spiritual place it is," he says. "And it's 
beautiful and it would be a terrible shame to miss that on this trip of a 
lifetime just because the roads are difficult."

It's a shame that long chat about what Mongolia means wasn't on camera. I 
would have liked to listen in on that one.
 