
Exactly what Sebastian Coe knew about corruption inside the International 
Association ofAthletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
Federations before he became president last year will come under fresh scrutiny 
on Tuesday when MPs question Dave Bedford about an email he sent warning Coe of 
an extortion racket involving senior figures of the sport’s governing body.

In December 2015 Coe appeared to indicate to the culture, media and sport 
select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/dec/02/sebastian-coe-faces-grilling-from-mps-over-athletics-doping-scandal-live>
 that he had been unaware of the scale of the corruption within the IAAF until 
a series of revelations from German TV were broadcast in late 2014, implicating 
the IAAF marketing executive Papa Massata Diack, the son of the then president 
Lamine Diack, and the IAAF treasurer Valentin Balakhnichev as well as a number 
of other key figures. Both Massata Diack and Balakhnichevhave since been banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/07/iaaf-bans-four-officials-doping-papa-massata-diack>
 from the sport for life.

IAAF’s Athletics Integrity Unit to be launched in April 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/iaaf-athletics-integrity-unit-april-2017>
It has since emerged that Bedford, who was then the head of the IAAF’s 
road‑running commission, emailed Coe in August 2014 telling him how senior 
figures close to Lamine Diack had forced the Russian marathon runner Liliya 
Shobukhova to pay €450,000 to conceal a positive drug test only for her to then 
be sanctioned.

Coe, who was the IAAF vice-president at the time, does not dispute receiving 
the email, but in June 2016 the IAAF communications director Jackie Brock-Doyle 
insisted he had forwarded it on without opening it. “He did receive an email 
from Dave Bedford that said: ‘The attachments relate to an issue that is being 
investigated by theIAAF <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> Ethics 
Commission,’” she said. “This was enough for Seb Coe to forward the email to 
the ethics commission. He did not feel it was necessary for him to read the 
attachments.

“You may think this shows a lack of curiosity,” she added. “He, and we, would 
argue that it shows a full duty of care – ensuring the right people in the 
right place were aware of allegations and were investigating them.”

Bedford, who set the 10,000m world record in 1973, is also likely to be 
questioned about various doping cases while he was the race director of the 
London Marathon – including Shobukhova,who was stripped of her victory from 2010
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/07/russia-liliya-shobukhova-stripped-london-marathon-doping-ban>
 due to abnormalities in her athlete biological passport.

Meanwhile the Ethiopian Kenenisa Bekele will be the star name in the men’s 
elite race at this year’sLondon Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-marathon> on Sunday 23 April.

Bekele, the world record holder in the 5,000m and 10,000m, showed his ability 
over 26.2 miles when he became the second fastest marathon runner in history at 
Berlin in September, missing the world record by six seconds as he finished in 
a time of 2hr 3min 3sec. “London is the greatest marathon in the world and I 
would love to win there,” he said. “The field is always the best and victory 
means so much. After finishing third last year, I know what I need to do to 
win.”

In the absence of the Olympic champion Eliud Kipchoge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/eliud-kipchoge-callum-hawkins-feyisa-lilesa-olympic-marathon>
, who won the race in 2014 and 2015, the Kenyan Stanley Biwott is likely to be 
Bekele’s main rival. The 30-year-old, who won the 2015 New York City Marathon, 
finished runner-up in London in 2014, fourth in 2015 and second again last year 
in a personal best of 2:03:51.

The field also includes the Olympic silver medallist and Tokyo Marathon 
champion Feyisa Lilesa, who made international headlines whenhe crossed his 
wrists above his head at the finish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/medallist-feyisa-lilesa-fails-to-return-to-ethiopia-after-olympics-protest>
 in Rio – a protest against the Ethiopian government’s persecution of the Oromo 
ethnic group in the country. The 2016 Dubai and Hamburg champion Tesfaye Abera 
also competes as does Abel Kirui, the surprise winner of the 2016 Chicago 
Marathon last October.

The former European 10,000m silver medallist Chris Thompson will be targeting 
a place in Britain’s team for the 2017 world championships in London. The 
35-year-old was 11th on his debut in London three years ago but could only 
finish 16th last year, when he missed out on Rio selection.

However, Callum Hawkins, the Scottish athlete who finished ninth in the 
marathon at the Rio Olympics andbeat Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/mo-farah-great-edinburgh-xcountry-callum-hawkins>
 at the Great Edinburgh International XCountry at the weekend, will miss London 
as he has already qualified for the world championships and wants to focus on 
that.
 