
The day after the Queen celebrated her 90th birthday, the Obamas came for 
lunch. Prince Philip, almost five years older than his wife, got behind the 
wheel of a Range Rover to drive the president and his wife Michelle to the door 
of Windsor Castle.

What has this got to do with economics? On the face of it, not much. For many, 
the news coverage to mark the start of Her Majesty’s 10th decade was a blessed 
relief from rising unemployment and the partial nationalisation of the steel 
industry. Newspapers pushed the debate about the EU referendum on to inside 
pages in favour of pictures of the Queen as she is now and how she was way back 
when.

Yet the Queen exemplifies a trend that will have a profound economic effect in 
the years to come, namely that we are all living longer. There was shock last 
week that Victoria Wood and Prince died last week at the age of 62 and 57 
respectively, and with good reason. Those who make it to 60 today can expect to 
live for another 30 years. Wood and Prince have had their lives cut short, but 
they are the exception to the rule.

By coincidence, the Office for National Statistics published its latest 
estimates of the “very old” last week. 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/ageing/bulletins/estimatesoftheveryoldincludingcentenarians/2015-09-30>
 In 2014, the last year for which data is available, there were more than 
500,000 people aged 90 and over in the UK. Thirty years ago, 2% of the 
population aged 65 and over was 90 or above. In 2014 it was 5%. It is the same 
across the developed world. Longevity is at its most marked in Japan, followed 
by Italy and France.

The ONS data only captures the half the story. In their forthcoming book, The 
100 Year Life, Lynda Gratton and Andrew Scott note that today’s 20-year-olds 
can expect to live until they are 105. We have got used to the idea that 
populations are greying, with the balance shifting between those of working age 
and those who have retired. Longevity, however, requires a fundamental rethink 
of the way we organise our lives and order our societies.


For a start, it means that people are going to have to work longer – a lot 
longer, in fact. The government has already raised the state pension age, and 
employment growth since the global recession of 2008 has been fastest among the 
over 65s.

If you are one of the twentysomethings who can expect to live until you are 
100, at what age can you expect to retire? If you put away 10% of your earnings 
into a pension and expect to live on 50% of your final salary, the answer is 
that you will have to work into your early 80s.

This raises all sorts of other issues, not least what sorts of job people are 
going to be doing in the future. One of the other big driving forces of the 
modern economy is disruptive technology. Computers are getting smarter year by 
year, and that threatens to hollow out the labour market. Put simply, robots 
are going to do more of the routine tasks that have traditionally offered 
stable full-time employment, and some professional jobs as well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flongevity-queen-life-expectancy-older-people-working-retirement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc6559d1209ac6450cc2e9642f763f8ed748bec%2F0_0_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Much%20like%20the%20Queen%2C%20we're%20all%20going%20to%20be%20working%20a%20lot%20longer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flongevity-queen-life-expectancy-older-people-working-retirement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Much%20like%20the%20Queen%2C%20we%27re%20all%20going%20to%20be%20working%20a%20lot%20longer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flongevity-queen-life-expectancy-older-people-working-retirement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc6559d1209ac6450cc2e9642f763f8ed748bec%2F0_0_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
 Employment growth since the global recession of 2008 has been fastest among 
the over 65s. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Economists assume, on the basis of the evidence of the past two centuries, 
that technological change creates rather destroys jobs. There is deep mistrust 
of the so-called “lump of labour” fallacy, the idea that there is only so much 
work to go round.


To take one example, René Böheim of the Johannes Kepler University in Linz has 
found that delaying retirement 
<http://wol.iza.org/articles/effect-of-early-retirement-schemes-on-youth-employment>
does not lead to fewer jobs for young workers. On the contrary, the evidence is 
that policies which encourage the employment of older workers lead to stronger 
demand for younger workers as well.


It is possible that the disruption to the labour market that robots and 
artificial intelligence will causedwarfs anything that has been seen in the 
past. As machines have taken over from humans in the manufacturing sector there 
has been rapid employment growth in the service sector to compensate. In future 
many of these routine white-collar tasks will also be performed by robots.

What seems certain is that the person who gets a job in their early 20s and 
remains in it for the next five or six decades is going to be a rarity. Until 
now, lives have been sliced into three distinct segments - education, work and 
retirement. This model is tidy and convenient for companies, but it is not 
going to be fit for purpose in a world where more and more people live until 
they are 100. They are going to start work later, take career breaks and spend 
time in their 60s and 70s acquiring new skills.

Some of the challenges are obvious. The education system has to focus more on 
lifelong learning and on teaching people how to learn. The NHS has to live up 
to its name and become a genuine health service, because there is no real point 
in people living longer if they are going to be too ill or infirm to enjoy 
their 80s and 90s. More of what theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 does will focus on encouraging individuals to take responsibility for their 
own wellbeing, not just eating healthily and taking more exercise but ensuring 
that minds are kept active and boredom fended off.

Governments will need to promote policies that encourage workers in what we 
now considered to be late middle age to find new jobs when their first career 
comes to an end. The Labour MP Frank Field has proposed a wage top-up for those 
in their 50s forced into lower-income work, paid for out of national insurance 
contributions. This is precisely the sort of initiative that will be needed if 
people are going to continue working into their 70s and 80s.

Last but not least, inequality needs to be tackled. The trend towards living 
longer is not uniform and the gap in longevity between rich and poor is 
growing. Among some groups in the US, for example, life expectancy is actually 
falling. Those who are doing hard, physical work or repetitive tasks are 
probably looking forward to the day when a robot takes over and they can put 
their feet up.

It would be a mistake to be daunted. Life expectancy has already doubled in 
the past 200 years, during which time it has increased by two years each 
decade. Sure, longevity poses challenges that need to be addressed urgently, 
and if we fail to prepare properly, living longer could become a curse. As 
Gratton and Scott say in their book, however, if we get it right longevity will 
be a great blessing, the chance to live longer and better lives.

 * This article was amended on 25 April 2016. The ONS figures for people aged 
90 or over in 1984 and 2014 were a percentage of people aged 65 and over, not 
of the population as a whole. This has been corrected.

The 100 Year Life will be published by Bloomsbury in early June.

 