
I’m about as agnostic as you can be, but throughout my life it’s as if 
Muhammad Ali <http://muhammadali.com/> has saved me. We shared a birthday, 17 
January. When, as a young child, my mum died, I was nearly catatonically 
depressed, I didn’t speak with anyone. But just watching Ali on television 
lifted me out of that. Partly because of that experience, Ali influenced me to 
become a writer, and for much of the last 30 years that I have known him, he 
has been my principal subject. Without Ali I might be selling cars.

He always needed to pull up the carpet of the universe and see what was 
underneath

There are many people who felt like that about him. At the beginning of 
December, six months after he died, I had an email from his wife,Lonnie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/muhammad-ali-estate-family-finances>
, just sharing memories. She had been in love with Ali since she was a kid – 
their mothers were friends. They first met when she was six and they stayed 
close over the years. She told me just before his death that she knew at the 
age of 19 she’d be the last person he would be with, that he would die with 
her. She didn’t seek that, she just knew it would happen. I think Ali would 
have probably died five or 10 years before, had it not been for Lonnie. She 
gave him the largest life she could. She dealt with the users and abusers 
around him, saved what was left of his fortune and did what she could do with 
his health.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmuhammad-ali-remembered-by-davis-miller-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fb978aee0745401b5c9204857bb1f257cc1371d%2F67_105_1923_1922%2F1923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Muhammad%20Ali%20remembered%20by%20Davis%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmuhammad-ali-remembered-by-davis-miller-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Muhammad%20Ali%20remembered%20by%20Davis%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmuhammad-ali-remembered-by-davis-miller-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fb978aee0745401b5c9204857bb1f257cc1371d%2F67_105_1923_1922%2F1923.jpg>
 Davis Miller and Muhammad Ali at Ali’s home in Berrien Springs, Michigan, 
September 1992. Photograph: Len Miller 
She allowed him to be what he always was, which was a transcendent figure. I 
think he became an even greater man in his later years. I spent thousands of 
hours with him and I never once heard him complain about his illness, apart 
from one time, when he turned to me and said: “Man, just think what I could be 
doing if I didn’t have this!” But that was it. He went from superman to 
everyman. With the Parkinson’s, he became everyone’s ailing family member and 
he had that disease for over 30 years. His trainer,Angelo Dundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/02/angelo-dundee-dies-muhammad-ali>
, told me that he always thought Ali would beat his illness and, in effect, 
that’s what he did.

His great gift was to be able to step up and outside himself, and make other 
people do that too. You could see it even in those late fights when he seemed 
to purposely take a tremendous pounding. Even in the midst of it he could step 
away from it for a moment, as if to say: “Look at me, I’m the world’s greatest 
punchbag, but you can’t hurt me.” By the time I met him, in 1988, he was 
proving that every day. I asked him: “What does it feel like to be a great man 
not allowed to be great?” He said simply: “You don’t question God. He is 
showing me and showing you that I am just a man like everyone else.”

There is a perception that he became a Buddha-like figure in those years, but 
in reality he was no less Ali than he had ever been. I have seen him be 
insanely narcissistic, as much as Donald Trump, the difference being that Ali 
had the capacity to let you know that he could be just as interested in anyone 
around him. Every time I was in public with him, it was the same. He would get 
out of the car and stand on the street, and in two minutes there would be 500 
people, all wanting to make contact with him. He would look deeply at them in 
return and let them know that connection meant something to him. There must be 
tens of thousands of people all over the world who will never forget that look.

Preparations for Muhammad Ali's greatest fight – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/aug/08/muhammad-ali-greatest-fight-in-pictures>
The last time I saw him was in September 2015. I had seen him a few months 
before and he looked horrible, and that hit me very deeply. But in September, 
Lonnie had made sure he gained 20lb and he looked more like Ali. He was 
playful, doing magic tricks for children, doing the routines, being Ali. He 
never tired of that, and he knew people wanted it. He was, even then, this kind 
of cosmic brat: he always needed to pull up the carpet of the universe and see 
what was underneath. He is a genuinely mythological figure, I think, though not 
in a pop star way. He is not Madonna. He is not even the Beatles. He is someone 
the poet Homer would have liked to get hold of.

At the memorial service, I was sitting between Yusuf Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/15/yusuf-islam-interview> 
(Cat Stevens) andSteve Wynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jul/21/art.artsfeatures>, the 
casino billionaire. Afterwards, I walked out in Louisville and there were all 
these people who looked like they had just come from the burning bush. They 
wanted to share stories of how they had met Ali at Chicago’s O’Hare airport in 
1966 or whatever. I got talking to a few of those people. One or two had ended 
up going to lunch with him. That’s what he was like. If anyone had gone up to 
his door even six months ago, if he felt OK, he would have invited you in, fed 
you a meal, just like he did with me those years ago. If his grandkids were 
there, he would have insisted you played with them, and finally you would have 
stayed the night. He did that every day, and a lot of those people turned up to 
his memorial, not just to be there, but because they felt they knew him.

Main photograph by Action Images/Reuters
 