
It’s noon in Murmansk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/dec/17/murmansk-russia-sun-polar-night-40-days-in-pictures>
, but the sky is dark. Chunky silhouettes can just be made out scurrying along 
Lenin Street, swaddled in furs. This is a polar night, and it will be more than 
a month before anyone here sees the sun again.

When the Soviet Union collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
, this city – by far the world’s largest settlement within the Arctic Circle – 
went into steep decline, its population tumbling from nearly half a million to 
barely 300,000.

Now, however, many here are anticipating a renaissance, driven by the 
Kremlin’s belief in thestrategic importance of the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/01/arctic-city-new-route-china>, 
and melting Arctic ice caused by global warming.

The principal hope revolves around the northern sea route 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/09/arctic-shipping-passage-still-decades-away>
, a passage through the Russian Arctic from Murmansk in the west toKamchatka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/surfing-in-siberia-icy-waves-russia-kamchatka>
 in the east. West to east journeys are one-third shorter via this transit 
route than through the Suez Canal. It will also be used to transport the vast 
oil and gas resources in the Russian Arctic to internal and international 
markets. Currently a nuclear icebreaker is needed to accompany vessels 
travelling along the route, but as the ice melts – and it’s melting fast – that 
could change.

Arctic warming 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T15:16:33/embed.html>
“We have all the conditions here to become a major international hub,” said 
Vasily Osin, the region’s acting transport minister. He said a major project to 
renovate Murmansk’s port would be completed in the coming years, and Moscow has 
announced a programme to construct or renovate 10 ports in the RussianArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> in order to facilitate a revival of 
the northern sea route.

Murmansk was founded in 1916 in the twilight of the tsarist empire, and was 
developed as the Soviet gateway to the Arctic, mainly due to the year-round 
ice-free port. The frigid temperatures that would be expected at this latitude 
are tempered somewhat by the last whispers of the Gulf Stream, and the city has 
always experienced unpredictable weather – it can rain in January and snow in 
July. This had led many locals to be sceptical of global warming as a 
phenomenon – indeed many dismiss it as a western myth.

But there is no doubt that something is changing. Satellite pictures show 
record low ice levels, and navigation is becoming possible for longer periods.

Murmansk: the city where the sun doesn't rise for 40 days – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/dec/17/murmansk-russia-sun-polar-night-40-days-in-pictures>
“Three years ago boats could only go out into the Kara Sea in the end of July, 
but this year it was in the middle of July,” said Maxim Belov, a member of the 
regional parliament and the chair of its economics committee.

Belov, 35, is a fourth-generation Murmansk resident, innately hardy to the 
conditions dictated by the latitude. He dreams of a time when an Arctic region 
of newly built ports might assure easy passage for thousands of transit ships.


“Of course, it’s a matter of 10 to 15 years away, but the more shipping 
companies realise that there are these big savings to be made, maybe they’ll 
think it doesn’t cost that much more to equip their vessels to make them 
ice-class.”


For now, traffic on the route is a trickle – a fraction of the levels at the 
end of the Soviet Union. In 2011, Putin gave the northern sea route his 
backing, predicting that with time it would become “an international transport 
artery that will rival traditional trade lanes in service fees, security and 
quality”.

Putin has also stepped up Russian military activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/21/russia-arctic-military-oil-gas-putin>
 in the Arctic, renovating a series of Soviet-era military bases in the region.

Now Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is building new 
icebreakers, the first of which, the Arktika, will come online next year and at 
173 metres long will be the biggest in the world and capable of tackling ice up 
to three metres thick.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23ebee67b9222ac14699af28f847dbca8fc09ca9%2F0_0_3904_2598%2F3904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murmansk's%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murmansk%27s%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23ebee67b9222ac14699af28f847dbca8fc09ca9%2F0_0_3904_2598%2F3904.jpg>
 The evacuation of the drifting scientific seasonal station the North Pole on 
the Captain Dranitsyn ice breaker, August 2015 in Murmansk region, Russia. 
Photograph: Alexander Petrosyan/Kommersant/Getty Images 
The warming Arctic should also theoretically improve conditions for oil and 
gas exploration, though here both the economics and ethics are on shakier 
ground.


In the short term, with falling oil prices and US sanctions on Russia, many of 
the difficult-to-access Arctic resources have begun to look less attractive in 
the past few years.


Arctic ice melt 'already affecting weather patterns where you live right now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/19/arctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now>
For years, the Shtokman gas field, one of the world’s biggest, was seen as the 
potential future driver of the region’s growth.Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/norway-arctic-new-oil-drilling-licences>
’s Statoil dropped out of the project in 2013 and French Total followed suit 
last year. Shtokman is one of the largest gas deposits in the world, but 
accessing it in Arctic conditions requires technological breakthroughs and 
appears unlikely to be profitable any time in the near future.

Currently the largest scale natural resource project in the Russian Arctic is 
a liquefied natural gas plant at Sabetta, in the estuary of the Ob river. It is 
due to come online next year, with gas shipments going along the northern route 
toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

But ice melt has prompted warnings from environmentalists about the perils of 
prospecting for hydrocarbons in the Arctic. Vadim Krasnopolsky, oil and gas 
projects coordinator at WWF, says that global warming and reduced polar ice may 
not be entirely positive news for shipping in the area.

“For the next decades, there’ll definitely be ice in the Arctic, and even if 
the ice melts more, this can lead to moving ice sheets, and icebergs. Also, in 
the last decade, the number of dangerous weather situations doubled. Even if 
the temperatures warm up, it’s still the Arctic,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a69cc094d992899779ca3014227ba5299918e55%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murmansk's%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murmansk%27s%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a69cc094d992899779ca3014227ba5299918e55%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Murmansk was developed in 1916 as the Soviet gateway to the Arctic due to its 
year-round ice-free port. Photograph: Lev Fedoseyev/Getty Images 
Life in Murmansk is not easy. In common with the Soviet-subsidised economy, 
Russian law provides benefits for those people who live in the far north, to 
compensate for the hardships of climate and latitude. State workers are paid 
significantly more than their counterparts in other parts of Russia. Statutory 
holiday days are also higher, and every resident receives a free return plane 
ticket once every two years to take a holiday somewhere warmer within Russia’s 
borders.

Russian Arctic city hopes to cash in as melting ice opens new sea route to 
China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/01/arctic-city-new-route-china> 
In summer, the town experiences a polar day of nearly two months, during which 
the sun never sets, while in winter, a polar night lasts 40 days. On clear days 
at both ends of the 40-day polar night, there is at least a three-hour period 
when the sun lurks just below the horizon, in which orange streaks light up the 
sky and the snowy cityscape gently glows with an ethereal pinkish hue. On 
overcast days closer to the winter solstice, there is merely an hour or two of 
grimy twilight around one in the afternoon.

Some in Murmansk say polar nights are a breeze compared with a polar day, when 
the round-the-clock sunshine leads the body to produce endless stocks of 
serotonin, leading to insomnia and burnout.

But for all the climatic difficulties, Murmansk is a place to which its 
residents grow strangely attached, and as in other parts of the extreme Russian 
north, people display a warmth and friendliness not always seen in other parts 
of the country.

“We don’t have sunshine, so we have to warm each other up with smiles,” said 
Irina Ryabakova, a teacher.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2651933e0d7c5c8376b922ddc8610a5ef16aea9b%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murmansk's%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murmansk%27s%20silver%20lining%3A%20Arctic%20city%20expects%20renaissance%20with%20ice%20melt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmurmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2651933e0d7c5c8376b922ddc8610a5ef16aea9b%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Lunchtime at a school in Murmansk during a polar night in December. 
Photograph: Shaun Walker for the Guardian 
During the oil boom of the first Putin decade wealthtrickled down to cities 
such as Murmansk. While much of the city’s housing stock has been battered by 
time and climate, there are new shopping malls and multiplex cinemas, and a 
brand new philharmonic hall opened in November. High-concept restaurants serve 
Arctic treats including grilled reindeer tongue and ice-cream made with local 
seaweed. And while many people are keen to leave Murmansk, they often end up 
returning.

“I wanted to leave, I even bought a flat in Voronezh [in central Russia], but 
then I spent some time there, and realised the people are so different, and 
decided I couldn’t leave here,” said Marina Myzheritskaya, a Murmansk-based 
psychologist.

The odds might be stacked against Murmansk, but Russia has an almost visceral 
attraction to the Arctic and a desire to resurrect the area economically and 
militarily, whatever the costs. A monument to “the conquerors of the Arctic” in 
central Murmansk takes in a range of dates, from Vitus Bering’s great northern 
expedition from 1733-1742, through Valery Chkalov’s solo flight over the north 
pole in 1937, to Artur Chilingarov’s 2007 north pole mission, during which the 
Russian flag wasdemonstratively placed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/aug/02/russia.arctic> on the seabed 
under the pole.

“I love the Arctic and I believe in the Arctic,” said Belov. “We have to make 
sure life in Murmansk flourishes.”

 