
“I remember coming back from playing football that evening – people were out 
on the streets crying and there were police everywhere,” says Mustapha Carayol. 
“I asked my mum what had happened and she told me a 10-year-old boy had been 
stabbed. The whole community was shut down for the next few weeks. No kids were 
allowed to play out any more and the parks were empty because all the parents 
were obviously worried about their children’s safety. It hit the community 
hard.”

Next week marks the 16th anniversary of Damilola Taylor’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2000/nov/29/socialcare.crime> on the 
notorious North Peckham estate.On Friday night, 
<http://www.damilolataylortrust.co.uk/all-project-list/the-damilola-taylor-memorial-lecture/>
his father Richard will deliver the first in a series of Damilola Taylor 
Memorial Lectures on the issue of violent youth crime that still plagues the 
streets of south-east London.A BBC dramatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/07/our-loved-boy-damilola-taylor-murder-bbc>
 of Damilola’s story was televised this month and provoked an outpouring of 
tributes from the local community and beyond on social media, including a 
heartfelt tweet from Carayol, who is a winger with Nottingham Forest.

“Because of Damilola Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/damilola-taylor> 
Centre I’m doing what I love today! And for that I’m forever grateful. R.I.P 
Damilola #DamilolaOurLovedBoy,” he wrote.

Carayol, 28, is one of three current players in the Football League to have 
come through the centre – renamed on the first anniversary of Damilola’s death, 
having previously been known as Wickham Park, and now run by Southwark council. 
Under a scheme called Mad About Football which he helped set up, Dominic Welch 
has also coached Preston North End’s Daniel Johnson and the Oldham Athletic 
defender Charles Dunne and still helps to run a junior club, Southwark Allstars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30cf04e10c6b1f64482d5329aaa1d9686882d3fe%2F0_198_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mustapha%20Carayol%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20learned%20everything%20at%20Damilola%20Taylor%20Centre%2C%20not%20just%20football%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mustapha%20Carayol%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20learned%20everything%20at%20Damilola%20Taylor%20Centre%2C%20not%20just%20football%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30cf04e10c6b1f64482d5329aaa1d9686882d3fe%2F0_198_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
 The Damilola Taylor Centre in Peckham, south London Photograph: Nicholas 
Bailey/Rex/Shutterstock 
“I used to go there as a kid and play in five-a-side tournaments,” Welch says. 
“Just because of the way I was on the team with the younger guys I started 
working as a coach at 16 and I’ve been there ever since.”

It was only a year later that Welch met Damilola, who had arrived from Nigeria 
with his mother Gloria and siblings Tunde and Gbemi.A keen Manchester United 
supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-2005-alex-ferguson>
, the 10-year-old became a regular at the centre that would one day bear his 
name. “In that summer when he first came over he was there every day. He was 
always asking: ‘Uncle Dom, can we go and play football?’ and was such a lovely 
kid.”

The day after the killing, Carayol was one of several local children to be 
questioned by police. He was born in the Gambia but moved to England aged six 
and attended the same primary school as Danny and Rickie Preddie, brothers who 
would espend eight years in youth custodyfor the manslaughter of Damilola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/aug/09/ukcrime.jamessturcke>.

“We all used to hang around in the area and the North Peckham estate was known 
for gang culture,” he says. “The police found it hard to monitor because it was 
spread across so many floors and people they were chasing would always get 
away. It was like a maze – we knew every little alley or shortcut.

“They knocked on the door of every house in a certain radius to speak to us. 
That was the end of my freedom. From then on, I had to come straight back from 
football and not hang about with my friends. It was such a senseless killing of 
a boy who had come here for a better life. What could they have been trying to 
rob from a 10-year-old? But that’s what Peckham was like in those days.

“Things changed after that and everyone tried to be more positive and take an 
active role in the community,” Carayol adds. “Richard Taylor’s legacy made it 
better for us growing up because they refurbished the centre and started 
putting on new events for everyone to go to. It brought the community together. 
I learned how to do everything there and not just football. A lot of the people 
who helped were volunteers who were around the same age as us that we knew from 
around the estate. Otherwise who knows, I could have ended getting into trouble 
as well. It was about educating us to try to stay away from situations that 
could easily spiral out of control.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b45d54996b48517fe7226fa594778dd6bed6be2%2F0_22_1758_1055%2F1758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mustapha%20Carayol%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20learned%20everything%20at%20Damilola%20Taylor%20Centre%2C%20not%20just%20football%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mustapha%20Carayol%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20learned%20everything%20at%20Damilola%20Taylor%20Centre%2C%20not%20just%20football%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b45d54996b48517fe7226fa594778dd6bed6be2%2F0_22_1758_1055%2F1758.jpg>
 Tony Blair and his wife Cherie meeting Richard and Gloria Taylor, the parents 
of Damilola, in 2001 Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/PA Archive/PA Images 
A year after Damilola’s death, Tony Blair and his wife Cherie visited the 
North Peckham estate <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/nov/27/ukcrime.london>
 to open the refurbished youth centre less than 100 yards from the stairwell 
where his body had been found. Still only a teenager himself, Welch pleaded 
with Blair to ensure there was no repeat of the events of that November night 
in 2000. “The refurbishment of this centre is good news for Peckham’s young 
people but I’ll be honest, it’s not nearly enough,” he implored.

The estate was flattened in 2004 and replaced by a £300m development of flats 
and houses. Welch is justifiably proud of the achievements of Carayol, Johnson 
and Dunne but he warned there is still plenty work to be done in the area. “One 
of the things I called for was more provisions for young people – that was the 
main message,” he says. “They kind of did but 16 years down the line we’re 
going back to the same thing. As the years have gone on there’s been a few cuts 
in staff and budgets so things have slightly changed. There’s still a lack of 
opportunities for young people due to some of the cuts. I’m hoping it may 
change and things will pick up again.”

A new 3G pitch was installed at the centre in 2014 and it has recently 
received a new grant from Children in Need that will go towards supporting 
volunteers and buying new equipment. Carayol, who began his professional career 
at MK Dons and had spells at Bristol Rovers and Middlesbrough before joining 
Forest in August, remains a regular visitor.

“I still spend a lot of time there – it’s just what I know,” he says. “I’ve 
lived in some expensive houses in really nice areas but I will always prefer 
going home to my mum’s house and kicking my little brother out of my old room. 
When I’m home for the summer I still meet up with my old friends and go down to 
the Damilola Taylor Centre on Fridays for a kickabout so there’s no way we can 
forget his name. That’s his legacy.”
 