
When I decided to fund a TV commercial on Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Day, I didn’t realise it 
would lead to the start of a campaign to ask large businesses to change their 
approach to charitable giving and support small charities.

Here’s how that came about.

After I was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia, which left me in need of a 
gruelling stem cell transplant, I spent the best part of 2014 in hospital. 
While there I benefitted from the amazing work that charities do, so when I 
left hospital I wanted to give something back.

I not only wanted to give the gift of funding but of awareness. I settled on a 
Christmas Day TV advert to highlight the work of a specific charity, as well as 
advertising on product packs. But when I approached some of the UK’s leading 
charities, I was shocked to be made to feel as if I had to prove myself and my 
brand to earn their approbation. Sadly I was too small for them, and they were 
too big to care.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fblack-farmer-christmas-day-tv-ad-small-charities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94fb12718c01701c6910e03641e5997d1939b6f6%2F329_0_1969_1969%2F1969.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20Black%20Farmer%20Christmas%20Day%20TV%20ad%20will%20shine%20a%20light%20on%20small%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fblack-farmer-christmas-day-tv-ad-small-charities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20Black%20Farmer%20Christmas%20Day%20TV%20ad%20will%20shine%20a%20light%20on%20small%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fblack-farmer-christmas-day-tv-ad-small-charities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94fb12718c01701c6910e03641e5997d1939b6f6%2F329_0_1969_1969%2F1969.jpg>
 Wilfred Emmanuel-Jones. Photograph: The Black Farmer 
The experience made me look beyond these big, well-known charities to the 
smaller ones doing extraordinary work on a shoestring. They are overlooked when 
it comes to big corporate giving but their work is just as important, if not 
more so. I vowed then and there to do something to help.

I have written and directed a two-minute TV commercial (with no mention of the 
products I sell) and have secured a prime time spot on Channel 4 on Christmas 
Day, timed to air just after the Queen’s Christmas broadcast. This is the 
advert I wantto use to shine a light on these small-time heroes.

I approached a small, Tetbury-based national charity called Hope For Tomorrow, 
<http://www.hopefortomorrow.org.uk/> which works tirelessly to provide mobile 
chemotherapy units to local NHS Trusts so patients don’t have to travel for 
hours for treatment. The charity leapt at the chance to work with me because 
such opportunities to raise awareness of their work don’t come their way often, 
and I was thrilled to be involved with such a great cause.

But I was shocked by the huge gap between big and small organisations in the 
charity sector. The larger charities get the lion’s share of corporate giving, 
leaving the smaller ones scrabbling for scraps.

This is a flaw in the charity sector, and much of the problem comes from an 
unbalanced relationship with business. Large organisations mainly work with 
large charities that already have a global level of awareness. It’s almost as 
though businesses are glory hunting when it comes to charity partnerships, to 
the detriment of smaller charities.

 I have launched a campaign calling for large corporations to support small 
charities and shout about the ones they are already supporting. So whatever 
your cause, please signmy pledge <http://bit.ly/2gNI3EO> and help to make a 
change this Christmas.

I have also dedicated a page on my Black Farmer website 
<http://www.theblackfarmer.com/charities> to help businesses and small 
charities find each other. As businesses, it’s important to show that we care 
for bigger things than just the products we sell.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 