
I stood in front of the ambulance bay door. My badge clutched in my hand, 
knuckles white, jaw clenched. I questioned my attempt at returning to work on 
this day. I stood in front of the doors grappling with a burning feeling in the 
pit of my stomach. I knew then, right there, that my career in the emergency 
department was over.

A quiet swollen presence of pain ran down every corridor. The night before, we 
lost a colleague to suicide. Some of us found the body. Some of us carried out 
the post mortem care. Some of us stood there as family filed in to the room. 
Some of us made the calls alerting fellow staff. Some of us, all of us, changed 
forever that night.

For some vocations, a bad day at the office means: “I dropped a carton of 
eggs” or “I broke the copier”. Some are more serious of course: “I really 
messed up a haircut” and the infamous “I crashed the company car”. In medicine, 
however, a bad day usually means, “We lost a toddler”; “A young family lost 
their baby”; “She will never walk again”; and “Time of death …”. The list could 
go on and on; the point is, the magnitude at which we affect the world of each 
individual person in healthcare is far different than most jobs. We take on the 
world, we attempt heroic measures, forgetting, we are indeed, so very human.

By the end of my first year as a doctor, I was ready to kill myself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jan/05/doctor-suicide-hospital-nhs>
We study for years, sometimes decades, focusing our skill, perfecting it, to 
heal, to save, and to comfort. The team we do all these things with becomes a 
sort of family. You are all present on the worst days together. You share the 
sorrow, the shock, and the deep regret that everything you have dedicated your 
life to studying has failed you. You failed together. You failed in the worst 
way, but you have one another. You can share that dark humour, the memory of 
this fleeting moment. You can share together the memory of watching the doctor 
whisper something comforting, or that nurse hold the deceased family member’s 
hand. Each of you knows what it feels like, to pronounce a patient dead in one 
room, and in the very next room, moments later, help a three year old change 
into a hospital gown so that they can be evaluated thoroughly. You do all this 
with a smile on your face, never for a second letting on that in the next room, 
a tragedy they can’t imagine has just unfolded.

Eventually, it eats little holes in your soul. Sometimes there are nightmares, 
other times you stand in a quiet trauma room and feel the presence of every 
lost soul standing behind you as you scrub down a stretcher. Bigger and bigger 
it creeps, into you, never though are you afforded the right to go and lament 
to your friends over drinks, or weep at your place of worship. Never can you 
post on public media and share your sorrow. Never can you truly convey what it 
feels like to have dedicated your life to becoming an expert, but when you have 
a bad day, someone dies. You cannot ever make someone, who isn’t sunken knee 
deep into the profession, understand what that means.

The kinship you establish with those with whom you share this camaraderie 
cannot be duplicated. They are a family that knows all your secrets of trauma 
and sorrow. There is something indescribably comforting in having these people 
know you at your worst moments, exhausted, angry, and sad.

The secrets within the hospital walls bonding us together are the same web, 
that when one of us succumbs to the beast of depression, is torn apart forever. 
None of us knows what cost our colleague and dear friend their life, it was 
never made clear. But our family, if you will, was severed to the core, doing 
the thing we did well together, without them, to them.

I still practise, in a different forum. I think of emergency department life 
every day. Now I realise how human each of us really is, there are no 
superheroes among us. Now when my team is becoming saturated, I actively seek 
out ways to alleviate that pressure, for myself, and for my team. On good days 
someone gets to live another day, but this doesn’t make the really bad days any 
easier.

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>. If 
you would like to contribute to ourBlood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>. If you’re a healthcare professional 
affected by the issues raised in this article, help and support is available 
fromSupport 4 Doctors <http://www.support4doctors.org/index.php>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 