
24 December 2016 


So here we are – Christmas proper is upon us and I have to drive to the Isle 
of Wight to see the kids and lots of their aunties, uncles and cousins. I’ve 
got over the disappointment of the rather exciting clinical trial I was lined 
up for but, at the last minute, couldn’t join.

So it was back to the chemo for another full cycle with another equally 
exciting-sounding clinical trial waiting in the wings. Which meant that the 
chemo would run right through the Christmas period, and explains why my 
consultant, the ever-amazing Dr Starling, was a bit nervous about my trip to 
the Isle of Wight. No suggestion that the NHS there wouldn’t be able to deal 
with any acute needs – like an infection needing intravenous antibiotics within 
hours – but well and truly outside the embrace of the LondonCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Network, should anything more 
sophisticated be needed. Anyhow, she relented and off I went to the land that 
time forgot…

25 December


The big day has arrived. Ordinarily, on these big bash-type Christmases – this 
time it was 19 people – I’d help out with roasting the turkey and the 
traditional rib of beef, which usually meant getting up very early indeed. But 
the effects of the chemo were, unfortunately, very much in evidence. I’d found 
that the first two days after every infusion – usually on a Thursday – are OK 
but on Sundays and Mondays, I am the most fatigued. I guess you could call it 
Sod’s law. So I help out with the meat but can’t lift it out of the oven and 
have to sit down every 10 minutes.

Presents are chaos, as always, but the undoubted star of the show is a video 
my boys made for me featuring contributions from much-loved friends, family and 
colleagues all over the world. Actually, I’m welling up even as I write about 
it now.

Anyhow, my favourite meal of the year, Christmas dinner with all the 
trimmings, beckons. I take a forkful and guess what? Wet cardboard! As well as 
giving me fatigue, split fingernails and a sore mouth, the chemo has destroyed 
by ability to taste most things and reduced my appetite so severely that, over 
the Christmas week, I lose nearly two kilos. But it’s a real disappointment not 
to be able to taste the moist turkey, rare roast beef and sprouts – overdone, 
just as I like them – and roast potatoes covered in lots of top-class gravy. As 
I say – Sod’s law strikes again!

26 December


It’s Monday and Eddie Mair is, unexpectedly, presenting the PM programme on 
Radio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>, and he’s asked me if I’ll 
consider doing one of our regular interview sessions – albeit on Boxing day and 
via a pretty shaky Wi-Fi setup at the house on the Isle of Wight. As 
transmission time approaches, the other 18 people in the house disappear and 
the chat with Eddie goes ahead via Skype and the dodgy WiFi. Only as the 
broadcast ends does it become clear why the whole house has gone quiet – 
they’re all listening to it go out live. Cue much merriment!

28 December


This being Wednesday, it’s Media Show day on Radio 4. This year it’s an 
extended interview withPiers Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan>. I think Piers is a really 
interesting character who has ended up in some pretty interesting places – and 
who has probably achieved his childhood ambition of becoming Britain’s 
best-known journalist. Anyhow, I think the interview plumbs depths not usually 
seen and is well worth a whole half-hour. Given Piers’s millions of Twitter 
followers, the social media response to the show is huge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-hewlett-cancer-diary-christmas-chemo-and-new-year-a-and-e-dash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d678f42eea967f8bdb9f53d4771087d1d4ae229%2F0_86_2166_2706%2F2166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20cancer%20diary%3A%20tasteless%20dinner%20on%20the%20Isle%20of%20Wight%20and%20a%20dash%20to%20A%26E&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-hewlett-cancer-diary-christmas-chemo-and-new-year-a-and-e-dash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20cancer%20diary%3A%20tasteless%20dinner%20on%20the%20Isle%20of%20Wight%20and%20a%20dash%20to%20A%26E&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-hewlett-cancer-diary-christmas-chemo-and-new-year-a-and-e-dash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d678f42eea967f8bdb9f53d4771087d1d4ae229%2F0_86_2166_2706%2F2166.jpg>
 Piers Morgan’s millions of Twitter followers generated a huge response to The 
Media Show on 28 December. Photograph: Mike Marsland/WireImage 
31 December


New Year’s Eve. Treatment went well on Thursday but it’s now Saturday, so I’m 
feeling it a bit. To try to avoid the evening rush, we decide to go for lunch 
at Roka on Charlotte Street in central London. It’s an Asian-fusion restaurant 
and I eat as much as I can, which brings on another frequent side-effect of 
treatment – stomach discomfort. Which then starts moving up into my chest area. 
We leave the restaurant hoping a brief walk might see it off. It doesn’t and a 
call to the 24-hour Marsden Macmillan helpline leads to the instruction to dial 
999 immediately in case I’m having a heart attack or pulmonary embolism. So I 
do. And despite everything we hear about the NHS’s problems, I have barely 
finished talking to the controller when we see the flashing blue lights coming 
up the street.

The ambulance crew are great and decide a visit to University College Hospital 
A&E is in order. The staff there couldn’t be more helpful, especially with the 
New Year’s Eve alcohol deluge building.

After blood tests, ECGs and waiting for the results of a second test, I am 
discharged around 2am, pretty sure that, whatever it was, it wasn’t a heart 
attack. But have you ever tried getting a cab at that time on New Year’s Day in 
central London? Have to take a crowded free tube. Poor old Dr Starling would 
have a fit if she knew.

3 January 2017 


Happy new year! I’m back at the Royal Marsden. First, a CT scan will reveal 
whether the chemo is having any effect on the cancer and its offshoots – and 
whether it has spread. Then blood tests (after 10 months of treatment, my veins 
are nearly shot and my hands and arms are now really rather like pincushions). 
And then there’s the critical question of whether to stick with the chemo or 
sign up for the new trial with immunotherapy drugs.

Dr Starling arrives with the scan and I can tell she’s not unhappy. Unlike the 
last time, when the news was all bad, this time the chemo has been working and 
my cancer is stable and has not spread anywhere else, along with some promising 
signs of shrinkage and reduced density – which I don’t really understand but Dr 
S was particularly pleased about – in the liver metastases.

So what about the trial? It’s new and prestigious – with only 120 participants 
at 50 centres across the world – which I guess means I’ll be lucky to get on 
it. We discuss the options and agree that the trial – which at the very least 
will give me access to Nivolumab (the immunotherapy drug that AA Gill probably 
didn’t get soon enough) – is the best option..

So I sign the consent forms and the system goes into overdrive. A new 
endoscopy to collect fresh biopsies from my tumour, blood tests and a full 
medical exam are all scheduled in no time at all, with the aim of starting the 
new treatment in about a week.

The thing about times like new year, and especially Christmas, for me is they 
make you wonder if you’ll ever see another. But here I am, in a new year I 
wasn’t certain I’d see, embarking on a revolutionary treatment – which may not 
work but, if it does, opens up huge possibilities. So my resolution for 2017? 
Not to waste any of it.
 