
At the start of her medical career, Val Wass never imagined that she would 
amass such a range of experiences or such a lengthy CV. Medical school 50 years 
ago was a hugely different era; the specialty a doctor trained in was a career 
for life. “You imagined being in a job for the rest of your career,” she says. 
There weren’t many women practising medicine, and there was very little 
exposure to primary care.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fgeneral-practice-careers-val-wass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39898ab5620189bc7c3c37662a2acaeb4ce5ad49%2F0_180_1400_1749%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20career%20in%20general%20practice%20opened%20up%20a%20world%20of%20possibilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fgeneral-practice-careers-val-wass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20career%20in%20general%20practice%20opened%20up%20a%20world%20of%20possibilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fgeneral-practice-careers-val-wass%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39898ab5620189bc7c3c37662a2acaeb4ce5ad49%2F0_180_1400_1749%2F1400.jpg>
 Prof Val Wass: ‘I love general practice, really enjoyed it, but a portfolio 
career gave me flexibility.’ Photograph: Health Education England 
Her proudest achievements include her appointment as head of the school of 
medicine at Keele University <https://www.keele.ac.uk/medicine/> and becoming 
the first woman elected to the medical schools council executive. She has 
worked in more than 25 countries, chaired the Royal College of General 
Practitioners international committee for six years, and for 10 years led a 
college project to develop accreditation of family medicine doctors across 
south Asia.

She has had the model “portfolio career”, where doctors choose to move away 
from the traditional one job for life, but instead have a portfolio of 
employments, inside and outside of clinical practice

She started her career in medical research in paediatric renal medicine before 
later moving to adult care. It was during this time she realised she wanted to 
be a holistic doctor. “Looking after chronic patients, you begin to realise 
that it’s not just about their illness – they’ve other concerns; whether they 
can have children, their ability to work, their family,” she says.

It was this desire to care holistically for patients and their families that 
brought Wass into general practice, a specialty she would practice in for the 
rest of her career. She loved being a GP, and says she heard many interesting 
stories from patients. “You’re holding all these little confidences and you 
feel so privileged that people are sharing their lives with you.”

Looking back, Wass says she didn’t expect that a career in general practice 
would also “open up a whole world”. The flexibility it offered allowed her to 
seize new opportunities, including a move to London as a senior lecturer in 
primary care, where she worked in a medical school and helped raise the 
standard of inner city general practice. A move to Manchester followed, where 
Wass helped to shape the curriculum and assessment of medical students with a 
focus on training more in the community, among other roles.

‘Being a GP and trying to solve patients’ problems is a privilege’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/being-gp-trying-solve-patients-problems-privilege>
“Being a GP really helped me transfer into these roles,” says Wass. “You were 
able to put the patient narrative much more into everything you did. You can 
put the GP experience into exams for example, so that doctors see the patient 
in their own environment.”

Despite these opportunities, Wass believes general practice is still looked 
down upon, posing its biggest challenge. “It’s really hard to get primary care 
valued by other doctors ... but the truth is that with co-morbidity, an ageing 
population, the complexities of a modern day population, general practice 
really will need the brightest doctors.”

To help improve this, Wass has led on work at Keele University to help 
students and academics realise just how important general practice is, 
including introducing GP role models and encouraging medical students to 
balance their practice with academic research. However, she believes that more 
needs to be done to raise primary care’s status and is working with Health 
Education England to report on how general practice is perceived as a career in 
medical schools.

She argues that as primary care is changing, what doctors want from their 
future has changed. “The thing that is putting them off from general practice 
is the thought of doing the same thing for their entire life – you can’t tell 
young people that they need permanence. They’re looking at working for a long 
time and they want flexibility to follow their own career path, and often to 
change course along the way.”

This, she believes, is where general practice is letting itself down – for 
many, particularly grassroots GPs, general practice is a career for life. There 
should be more flexibility both in being able to develop skills in other 
specialties and allowing doctors to enter general practice when they are more 
mature and feel ready to deal with the challenges of primary care.

“You don’t have to go straight into it. As a GP, anything could happen; it can 
be very challenging and requires a special personality, often an individual 
type of personality,” she says.

“Not everyone can do it. My experience of research and other training really 
prepared me for general practice. There’s nothing wrong with doing something 
first, to get your confidence up and build up your maturity – we should be 
embracing that.”

Doctors in training should also be encouraged to take up the opportunities 
that general practice offers because it is flexible and allows doctors to build 
their own portfolio career: “I love general practice, really enjoyed it, but a 
portfolio career gave me flexibility, to be always able to do different things 
and keep the balance right.”

“If I had one piece of advice to foundation doctors, it would be to think 
about your whole career, one that allows you to seize opportunities and follow 
your own interests. Think big.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced by NHS England and Health 
Education England

 