
I called him Mold, because when I was a toddler they tried to teach me the 
Norwegian pronunciation of his name (“Roo-al”, with a regal, long stretched 
“Roo”; “al” like the end of mall; silent D), but my baby tongue couldn’t get to 
grips with it, and instead Mold he was, ever after. Sometimes Moldy. He smoked 
Dunhill cigarettes (he called them “gaspers”), and he smelled of West Indian 
Limes shaving soap and the air outside. He had a voice as familiar and warm as 
the creak on a floorboard, the beginnings of a fire.

What do Roald Dahl and his stories mean to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/13/what-do-roald-dahl-and-his-stories-mean-to-you>
My mum became pregnant with me as an unmarried teenager, and a lot of my early 
childhood took place at his home, Gipsy House, in Buckinghamshire. Before 
health and safety, there were old decaying cars in the orchard, which my 
14-year-old aunt, Ophelia, would tear around in as I cheered, and a goat called 
Alma would wander in and out of the house, shitting everywhere, often chased by 
a bellowing Mold. In most of the pictures from this era, my mum, aunts, Uncle 
Theo and I all seem to be wearing dungarees. Mold was in his uniform of Aertex 
shirt, trousers and cardigan.

A meal at Gipsy House was never just a meal; it was instead a recipe from a 
prince in Dar es Salaam, rescued from the jaws of a hungry python, at the 
crucial moment, by my grandfather. (In this story and its variants, Mold was 
always the blue-eyed interloper diverting the disasters he stumbled upon.) So 
grateful was the fictitious prince, he gave the lanky Englishman his treasured 
recipe for crab-stuffed baked potatoes. (Or toast with bacon and marmalade, or 
whatever else happened to be on the menu in rainy Buckinghamshire that day.)

He had all the accoutrements of magic: Amaretto biscuits whose wrapping papers 
you lit and watched shoot into the sky

Mold had all the accoutrements of magic, like a proper magician should. 
Amaretto biscuits whose wrapping papers you lit and watched shoot into the sky 
like titchy hot air balloons, falling back to earth in a wispy question mark of 
ash; a miniature steam train, that huffed and puffed round the dining room 
table if you filled it with water; the house dotted with Witch Balls – ancient, 
mirrored spheres that hung from a window so that, should a witch be so bold as 
to come knocking, she would be confronted with her own hideous reflection and 
flee, never to darken the door again. Mold was famous for writing the names of 
his children, and later on, me, in the grass with weed killer while we slept. 
“The fairies have been,” he’d say over breakfast. “Let’s go and see what 
they’ve been up to.”

There were few things more magic than the red Tupperware box that appeared at 
the end of lunch or dinner, heralding the most important and longed for bit of 
the meal. It was a medium-sized rectangular box. The box itself was kind of 
irrelevant, and it could have been blue, green or see-through. But its postbox 
redness lent an air of jaunty dissolution to the proceedings, and ultimately 
became part of its own myth. If you had been good at the table, not too much of 
a bore, eaten things without a fuss, you could collect the box from its home in 
the kitchen and bring it to the dining room while the grownups were having 
their coffee.

The Tupperware contained chocolate. Lots of chocolate, in appealing 
child-sized bars, nothing fancy but always compelling. And it was here, over 
this rectangular plastic box, that Mold and I did a great deal of communing. We 
bothloved chocolate. Our taste in the stuff was similar. Cadbury’s Flake, Aero, 
Curly Wurly, Crunchie, Kit Kat and the Dime bar, a Scandinavian crunchy 
concoction that Mold delivered to me with great ceremony after a book tour in 
Sweden. Maltesers, Rolo, Fruit and Nut; a mutual horror of the Creme Egg. We 
were partners in a quest for the ultimate bite (light, airy, possibly featuring 
almonds). His knowledge of chocolate was encyclopedic. He could recall specific 
dates and years of invention with the glee of a patriotic child recalling the 
kings and queens of his country.

Mold grew up fatherless, in an era before chocolate was readily available. His 
father died of pneumonia when he was three – a few weeks after Mold’s sister 
Astri died of a burst appendix – leaving their Norwegian-born mother to care 
for four young children on her own in Wales. Sweetshops peppered his boyhood 
and boyhood writing: lemon sherbets, bootlaces, gobstoppers and toffees; 
hard-boiled sweets served by boot-faced proprietors. Chocolate was later, the 
stuff of dreams, exotic and faraway.

Magic and food permeated his books, and so did orphans, real or metaphorical. 
James Henry Trotter, who escapes his loveless, lonely life in a giant flying 
peach, and the gutsy girl protagonists ofThe BFG 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bfg-9.html> and Matilda 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/matilda.html>. This is Mold’s legacy for my 
daughters, and for countless other children: heroines and heroes who are brave, 
sometimes scared, funny and always innovative in the face of adversity. 
Survivors. He writes of Matilda, who is ignored by her parents but “Nurtured by 
the voices of all those authors who had sent their books out into the world 
like ships on the sea. These books gave Matilda a hopeful and comforting 
message: You are not alone.”

A few weeks ago, I met a Syrian teenager from Daraa, a refugee, who had just 
finishedJames and the Giant Peach 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/james-and-the-giant-peach-7.html>. It was the 
first English-language book he had read. My friend Andrew, who is dyslexic and 
struggled to engage with reading, says that he loved my grandfather’s books 
because they don’t patronise, they don’t dumb down the fear that we all feel 
sometimes. Often, they celebrate it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Try%20and%20be%20a%20Dinketysnipsy%20girl'%3A%20Ian%20McKellen%20reads%20two%20letters%20by%20Roald%20Dahl%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Try%20and%20be%20a%20Dinketysnipsy%20girl%27%3A%20Ian%20McKellen%20reads%20two%20letters%20by%20Roald%20Dahl%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video&media=>
‘Try and be a Dinketysnipsy girl’: Ian McKellen reads two letters by Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2016/jul/20/try-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video>
“I will not pretend I wasn’t petrified. I was. But mixed in with the awful 
fear was a glorious feeling of excitement. Most of the really exciting things 
we do in our lives scare us to death. They wouldn’t be exciting if they 
didn’t.” So says the boy hero ofDanny, the Champion of the World 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/danny-the-champion-of-the-world-5.html>, on a 
moonlight joyride on country roads.

My grandfather loved the countryside. He loved the green hills of the 
Chilterns, the woods that spilled behind his house. His garden was beautiful. 
When his seven-year-old daughter Olivia, my mum’s older sister, died suddenly 
from measles encephalitis, he spent many weekends with his other children 
planting a detailed alpine garden on her grave. He met loss after staggering 
loss with written words, a thirst for answers, and his hands in the earth.

It’s so easy to fetishise the dead. We rose-tint or villainise them, and so 
often in the retelling they are saints or sinners, rather than flawed humans 
muddling along like the rest of us. My family is as complicated as the next 
family. We have our joys and our tragedies, and we bear both with a black 
humour that is in our genes. My grandfather,Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>, was born on 13 September, 100 
years ago this week, and he died when I was 13, on 23 November 1990, aged 74, 
which seems, now, so young.

I miss him very much.

• See roalddahl.com <http://www.roalddahl.com/roalddahl100> for details of 
Roald Dahl 100.
 