
It’s hard to believe that 2017 is already over. But we must believe it. Or, if 
not quite believe it, at least entertain the notion for the next few minutes.

2017 certainly hasn’t been as bad as 2016’s worst doom-mongers would have had 
us believe. After all, a human still lives to write this, and several others to 
read it. So it’s been much better than many expected. And even a real 
glass-half-empty type would have to admit that, regrettable though events on 
the international stage have been, what we’ve just undergone was really quite a 
small nuclear war.

I’m joking of course, because, as we know from our recent attempts to have a 
nuclear war, nuclear weapons turn out never to have existed – or only briefly. 
It seems the original plans for the atom bomb were destroyed to prevent them 
falling into the hands of the Area 51 alien, who didn’t actually have any 
hands, just sort of suckers, and was subsequently discovered not to be an alien 
but an incredibly inaccurate model of the Michelin man constructed out of cork 
by a midwestern garage owner based on instructions he’d been given on a crackly 
phone line in French.

The irrefutable fact is that the remake is the most profitable form of film. 
So they’ve got to be released first

So, for most of the nuclear age, the notion of the weapons themselves was just 
a conspiracy by the rulers of the world’s leading nations to siphon off large 
sections of their respective defence budgets to spend on canapés. As a rogue 
CIA agent confessed on a YouTube video he released just before disappearing 
into the Cloud via a bizarre human-body-uploader he’d made out of a Portaloo, a 
liquidiser and a modem: “There are only two secrets you need to know: nuclear 
weapons don’t exist and unicorns do. Their livers can be made into 
stratospherically expensive pate.”

Needless to say, this has made 2017 nearly as embarrassing for conspiracy 
theorists as 2016 was for opinion pollsters. “Heaven forbid that you’d suspect 
anythingnice!” remarked Ian Hislop on Have I Got News for You in October. “Oh 
no! It’s all got to be ‘No one’s really landed on the moon!’ or ‘Princess Diana 
was murdered’ or ‘The world’s run by a secret cabal of lizards’ by which you 
basically mean Jews but it goes down better if you say lizards. But when it 
turns out nuclear weapons don’t exist and unicorns do, you missed it because 
you were too busy looking for evidence that 9/11 was actually aTop Gear stunt 
that got out of hand!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmy-grateful-dispatches-from-the-end-of-2017-nuclear-weapons-michael-gove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd172eb5dd9271d7bbd4b991b7785e08990ad95%2F0_0_2480_3337%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20grateful%20dispatches%20from%20the%20end%20of%202017%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmy-grateful-dispatches-from-the-end-of-2017-nuclear-weapons-michael-gove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20grateful%20dispatches%20from%20the%20end%20of%202017%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmy-grateful-dispatches-from-the-end-of-2017-nuclear-weapons-michael-gove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd172eb5dd9271d7bbd4b991b7785e08990ad95%2F0_0_2480_3337%2F2480.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
It’s unclear how many times President Trump had pressed the nuclear button 
before admitting that nothing seemed to be happening, but he gave several 
speeches throughout the spring with a noticeably reddened thumb. Military 
historians will be debating the consequences of the anticlimactic third world 
war for decades, and its impact on the dystopian fiction genre is incalculable, 
but here are some of the lighter news events of the year that may have escaped 
your attention.

Truth comes at a price on Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>
From September onwards, the first search result that came up for anyone 
Googling the word “truth” was a paid-for ad defining it as an “outmoded and 
discredited concept”. The cybergiant refused to disclose who was financing the 
ad on the basis of “professional ethics”, a phrase that, if itself Googled, 
gives the result: “lucrative non-disclosure agreement”. Julian Assange was 
initially suspected but he said that it couldn’t be him because “the embassy 
has changed the Wi-Fi code again. I’ve been trying to guess it for weeks.” 
Michael Gove also denied that he had anything to do with the ad, claiming: “I’m 
desperately trying to dissociate myself from all that and get some TV formats 
away.”

Sir Richard Branson launches new item of cutlery
“It’s been an awkward threesome for centuries,” said Branson at the launch of 
the Any-Tine. “Knife, fork, spoon. It’s as wobbly as a three-legged stool. 
Let’s bring some balance.” Described as “a breakthrough in the field of 
scooping prongs”, the Any-Tine looks like a double-corkscrew, with strange wide 
sections ending in three vicious sharp points. “I wanted to get inside 
cutlery’s DNA – and how better to do that than with a piece of cutlery that 
looks like the structure of DNA?” the billionaire asked. Lawyers for the 
Any-Tine effusively denied they’d had any initial discussions with the owners 
of the patent for the spork.

Channel 4 buys the Queen’s speech
The BBC and ITV were left with egg on their faces when Channel 4 signed a £60m 
100-year deal with the newly formed Royal Palaces plc to make and broadcast the 
sovereign’s Christmas message. Confusion arose, however, when Her Majesty 
announced her intention to remain with the BBC. “I wish the show well, but my 
loyalties lie with non-commercial broadcasting,” said the Queen, who was 
believed to be in the running for a new reality format featuring Michael Gove 
and being developed by Endemol. “Working title:Gove Fucks It Up,” said the 
company’s head of development. “Each week, the Queen sends Gove on an important 
mission and he does what he does best: ruins everything.”

Hollywood to release remakes first
“It is a work of accounting genius,” explained a Hollywood insider. 
“Statistically, remakes do the business. They make much more money, on average, 
than films that aren’t remakes. Perhaps not quite as much as the films that 
warrant being remade but that’s a detail. The irrefutable fact is that the 
remake is the most profitable form of film. So they’ve got to be released 
first. We make a film, bury it, remake it, release the remake – then we can 
stick the original on YouTube or as a DVD extra, who cares? It is literally 
innumerate to claim this will not work.”

Britain becomes last member state of the European Union
Our former European partners stole a march on us in February by all 
simultaneously triggeringarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> and leaving the EU a 
fortnight later, leaving Britain the only remaining member of an organisation 
it long ago resolved to leave. “Brexit means Brexit,” said Theresa May as 
usual. “We will leave. We’re determined to leave. But obviously it now falls to 
us to wind down its various institutions first. Needless to say, this will all 
be very expensive. I would cancel Trident but, as you know, we rather blew all 
that on unicorn liver pate for President Trump’s state visit.”
 