
In 1977, I saw Allen Ginsberg read poetry for the first time in New York City. 
I was 18 and already familiar with poems such as“A Supermarket in California” 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/supermarket-california>, but nothing could 
prepare me for the sheer human power of his presence and delivery. Allen’s 
voice had an expressive range and gravity that attested to his belief that “the 
only poetic tradition is the voice out of the burning bush”. Allen seemed like 
the happiest, most awake middle-aged man I had ever seen. I immediately made an 
internal vow to be wherever he would be the following summer, helping him 
however I could, and I made good on that vow, becoming his apprentice at Naropa 
Institute in Colorado while taking classes with other Beat heroes of mine such 
asWilliam Burroughs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamburroughs> and 
Gregory Corso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/20/guardianobituaries.books1>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmy-hero-allen-ginsberg-steve-silberman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446733181465%2Fb2ea8fa4-9101-4604-8bcc-dd8603f7e668-1596x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20hero%3A%20Allen%20Ginsberg%20by%20Steve%20Silberman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmy-hero-allen-ginsberg-steve-silberman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20hero%3A%20Allen%20Ginsberg%20by%20Steve%20Silberman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmy-hero-allen-ginsberg-steve-silberman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446733181465%2Fb2ea8fa4-9101-4604-8bcc-dd8603f7e668-1596x2040.jpeg>
 Allen Ginsberg in 1981. Photograph: Christopher Felver/Corbis 
Ten years later, Allen invited me to become his teaching assistant. Though he 
was often portrayed in the media as a kind of Jewish Bodhisattva, Allen was not 
a saint. He could be cranky, caught up in his own fame, and had the unfortunate 
habit of overlooking his female students in favour of wooing the handsome young 
men who eagerly leapt into his bed. But throughout his career, he used 
the precision of language to oppose social inequality, defy despots worldwide 
(“Stand up against governments, against God,” he once wrote), and assist people 
to accept their own eccentricities, helping to heal human suffering in whatever 
form he found it.

One thing that few people know is that Allen worked very much like 
a journalist, collecting voluminous file cabinets of information on the issues 
that obsessed him, such as his suspicion that the CIA was involved in opium 
trafficking in south-east Asia (he was correct).

My own book, NeuroTribes, was very influenced by Allen’s mission and practice. 
My version of the filing cabinets that lined his Lower East Side apartment is 
an electronic folder that contains 13 gigabytes of data on how people on the 
autism spectrum have been systematically mistreated by the same psychiatric 
establishment that subjected Allen’s schizophrenic mother, Naomi, to brutal 
shock treatments and devastating drugs, as chronicled in his epic poem “Kaddish”
 <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/179391>.

Allen died in 1997. Days after his terminal cancer diagnosis, he called me to 
say goodbye. I asked him how he felt and he replied: “Exhilarated.” I can only 
hope to meet my own end with such equanimity.

• NeuroTribes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328725/s/neurotribes/>
 by Steve Silberman is the winner of the 2015Samuel Johnson prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samueljohnsonprize>.
 