
 Newspapers:  It's important to know what's going on in the world so I keep 
abreast with the papers at every opportunity. I enjoy reading the Independent, 
Daily Telegraph, the Guardian sports and society sections, and black community 
newspapers, the Voice and New Nation. I find in the tabloids, gossip aside, 
that the sports writers are incisive whilst the general news is tight and 
succinct. That's great if you're often on the move and just want a fingertip 
glance at what's happening. The weekend broadsheet sections are great for 
dismantling and selecting what you want to read.

 Magazines:  I flick through boxing magazines and Inside Sport, Total Sport, 
Sports Illustrated, and enjoy men's magazines like GQ, FHM, Esquire. Black 
men's lifestyle magazine Untold is aspiring and stylish. For escapism, I enjoy 
perusing glossies like Wallpaper and OK! magazine which looks great and is a 
good read, particularly on the plane.

 Books:  I prefer autobiographies of giants like Muhammad Ali, and real life 
to fiction. I've recently read a great spiritual adventure called The Celestine 
Prophecy.

 Films:  My all-time favourite is Scarface. I'm a bit of a science-fiction and 
action junkie and also rate the Godfather series and, of course, all the Star 
Trek movies. One of the last films I saw was The Matrix. The special effects 
are amazing.

 Television:  I never get bored of watching The X Files and documentary 
programmes that explore science, man and nature.

 Radio:  I love all sorts of music, from reggae, soul, jazz to house and 
garage. As I travel a lot I can't listen to any one station religiously 
although I tune into GLR, Radio 4, Capital Radio and Choice FM.

 Ads:  I'm biased but it has to be the one that I'm currently in for the water 
energy saving campaign, "Are you doing your bit?" The Mars "ears" boxing ad and 
Yellow Pages "cleaner" ads are also very funny.
 