
Six days after our first baby was born, it was confirmed that he had Down’s 
syndrome. The news was devastating: I assumed a lifetime of “difference” and 
exclusion, all my aspirations for my child seemingly in tatters. I had never 
known anyone with Down’s syndrome, so I threw myself into researching the 
condition. Everything I read listed possible problems, physical differences and 
challenges we could face, and I felt overwhelmed and weighed down by his 
diagnosis.

The reality could not be further from that bleak vision. Bit by bit, the hurt 
began to lift as I fell in love with my baby. Eventually I stopped seeing 
Down’s syndrome and realised that Seb was simply my son.

While a diagnosis is essential in explaining certain characteristics 
and behaviours, as well as ensuring access to support, early intervention and 
best teaching practice, it can also label a child with out-of-date assumptions 
and often misses the colour and dimension of reality.

So, here are 10 things a diagnosis of Down’s syndrome didn’t tell me about my 
son, who is now eight:

1. He is an individual. There is a very common misconception that all people 
with Down’s syndrome are the same. This may have been true at a time when 
babies with Down’s syndrome were sent away to institutions, were dressed the 
same, given the same haircuts, and were not nurtured or allowed hobbies and 
interests or enabled to reach their fullest potential.

Thankfully, today, babies with Down’s syndrome are brought up in their own 
families, educated and included in their communities and lead lives very 
typical of any child. Seb is bright and witty and mad about football. He is a 
reflection of his upbringing and life experiences.

2. He would have a high emotional intelligence. One thing that seems to be 
common in people with Down’s syndrome is a high level of emotional intelligence 
and incredible empathy. Seb is highly attuned to the needs and feelings of 
others, something that was evident from a very early age. When he was a 
toddler, if he heard another child cry, he would cry too. I have seen the most 
tender moments between Seb and his siblings if either of them has been upset – 
and if his younger sister, who is five years his junior, is getting a telling 
off, he often stands up for her as a mark of solidarity, support and loyalty. 
He also has the incredible skill of engaging with people of all ages.

3. He would be the boy I always imagined I was having. I found out we were 
having a boy when I was 20 weeks pregnant. For some reason, I had assumed we 
were having a girl but, after a flicker of surprise, I began to picture what 
our lives would be like.

I imagined a tall, handsome, sporty boy, popular and an all-round good kid, 
hanging out in our kitchen with his mates, helping himself to food from the 
fridge, chatting about his day at school before heading off to a game of 
football or a concert.

It seems ridiculous now, but when a doctor delivered those two words, Down’s 
syndrome, all the aspirations I had once held for my son, and our family life, 
were shattered. Suddenly, I faced a future of unknowns.

Eight years later and I look back and laugh at the ridiculousness of it all. 
Seb is one of the sportiest kids I know, his teacher says he is one of the most 
popular children in his class, if not his school. He is bright and witty and 
I couldn’t be more proud of him.

4. He would see the value in everyone and everything. Seb is so interested and 
in tune with the world around him. He tends to live in the moment and sees the 
value of every interaction. A typical walk to school involves stroking dogs, 
saying hello to strangers, picking flowers, balancing on walls and cooing over 
babies. I love how he doesn’t dwell on the past or fret about the future.

Earlier this year, we were strolling along a marina in Portugal and a family 
passed us – a mother, father and daughter. The girl was profoundly disabled, in 
a wheelchair. Stopping in his tracks, Seb went over, picked up her hands and 
stared into her eyes.

“Hello,” he said gently. “What’s your name?”

“Her name is Agatha,” said the dad.

“Agatha,” Seb repeated. “Hi, I’m Seb. How old are you?”

“She is 29,” the dad answered, “but she is more like a little girl. She is our 
girl. She cannot talk, she can only talk with her eyes,” he added.

And at that moment, the girl’s eyes flickered and set on Seb’s smiling face.

The chat carried on a little longer before we said our goodbyes and I walked 
off with a lump in my throat. Scores of people in that marina that night just 
walked past this woman, every one of us assuming she had nothing to offer, no 
value, but Seb saw so much more.

5. We would become part of an incredible network of support. Over the years, 
and thanks to the power of social media, I have made some deep friendships with 
people who just “get it” and know what to say, friends I can be brutally honest 
with, who won’t judge me.

The Down’s syndrome community is a wonderfully diverse mix of people from all 
walks of life. It makes for an incredibly strong and powerful group, with a 
rich diversity and pool of knowledge and talents. We have also experienced the 
support of family, friends, neighbours, carers and professionals, who 
all champion our cause and really, genuinely care about Seb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fmy-sons-downs-syndrome-does-not-define-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ab4ab93b263809075df534035f54dac7c8f84d%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20son%E2%80%99s%20Down%E2%80%99s%20syndrome%20does%20not%20define%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fmy-sons-downs-syndrome-does-not-define-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20son%E2%80%99s%20Down%E2%80%99s%20syndrome%20does%20not%20define%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fmy-sons-downs-syndrome-does-not-define-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ab4ab93b263809075df534035f54dac7c8f84d%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Seb (left) with his sister Polly, aged three, and brother Dominic aged six. 
Photograph: Adrian Sherratt for the Guardian 
6. He will reach his goals. Seb is very driven and strives for success. I see 
him tirelessly practising his football skills in the garden and taking time and 
care to improve his handwriting or learn his spellings, and I know that this 
drive to succeed will mean he will reach whatever goals he sets himself. 
I fully expect Seb to grow up and get a job, live an independent life, maybe 
with support, meet a partner and settle down. He may need a little extra help 
at times, but there is no reason why he won’t achieve his goals in life. Above 
all, my hopes and aspirations for Seb are just the same as they are for his 
siblings – that he grows up to be a nice person and is happy in life.

7. We would lead a typical family life. School, homework, tag rugby, football, 
choir, swimming lessons, cinema, birthday parties, eating out. That probably 
sums up a fairly average week in this house. As a family, we share the same ups 
and downs, celebrate the same achievements and experience the same frustrations 
as any other family.

8. He would shape all of us for the better. Seb has taught me so much and 
undoubtedly shaped me into a better, more tolerant person. Where once I might 
have judged someone or made a snap decision on my viewpoint, I now think things 
through a lot more. I appreciate that none of us chooses where, how, or who we 
are born and, as a result, I see the world from a different angle. I am a much 
more open person than I was before.

People also often assume that having a child with special needs puts pressure 
on their siblings and it is something I have worried about in the past. There 
have been times when I have worried that Seb’s younger siblings are missing 
out, or feel he gets more than the lion’s share of attention, but my middle 
child, who is six, already shows how Seb has shaped him for the better. When he 
was just three, his preschool teachers told us that he had very high empathy 
levels for his age, and a caring nature: he would always be the first to 
console an upset child, he is very good at sharing and is very thoughtful. He 
also understands that we are all different. He once asked me why Seb “talked 
funny” and I explained that we are all unique and have different strengths and 
things we have to work hard on. He immediately piped up: “Oh, yes, like Seb is 
good at football.”

Sally Phillips: Do we really want a world without Down’s syndrome?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/do-we-really-want-a-world-without-downs-syndrome-ds-prenatal-test>
9. Inclusion is the answer to everything. I know that my initial fear of 
Down’s syndrome existed because I had never known anyone with it, or had the 
chance to see beyond the label. I see the importance and value of inclusion on 
a daily basis at school and in our community. Nothing fills me with more 
happiness than when Seb enters the playground and is welcomed into a game of 
football. I also know that if you asked a friend of Seb’s to describe him they 
would say he was sporty, or funny, or wore glasses, or supports Chelsea. If you 
asked a parent, they would probably say he was “the Down’s syndrome kid in year 
3”. We have so much to learn and gain from inclusion, and I truly believe it 
will breed a new generation of acceptance.

10. Despite some challenges, I wouldn’t change a thing. Having a child with 
special needs does bring challenges. Seb needs extra support to achieve the 
things that come naturally to others, we often have to fight for funding and 
can sometimes be faced with prejudice. I physically hurt at his potential 
vulnerability and dare not think about what might happen when I am no longer 
here, but that is because of societal ignorance, not Down’s syndrome. Seb has 
enriched my life beyond measure and I feel truly blessed that he is my son.

• Caroline White’s The Label: A Story for Families is published by Ivy Press, 
£6.99, in January 2017 (10% of proceeds from the sale will go to Mencap). To 
order a copy for £5.73, go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/label.html> or call the Guardian Bookshop 
on 0330 333 6846.
 