
About a year ago I approached Carrie Fisher to write a column for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/advice-from-the-dark-side>. 
With other A-listers, it’s all too common to be rebuffed by several layers of 
management, publicists and protective naysayers. But somehow – all too easily – 
I found myself with an invitation to her house in Beverly Hills.

And what a house it is. Huge neon arrows and signs hang from trees in the 
driveway. It wasn’t Christmas, but a fully lit tree was the centrepiece of her 
living room (it was there year-round). A giant moose head with a fez hung above 
the fireplace; snow globes depicting macabre murder scenes decorated the 
shelves and, outside in the garden, next to a life-size Leia stepping out of a 
British telephone box, was the back end of a lion attached to the wall, its 
raised tail revealing giant cat balls.

Rob Delaney: ‘I revered Carrie Fisher til I met her. Then I loved her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shortcuts/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-catastrophe-loved-her-rob-delaney>
Carrie was delayed, having spent the morning looking after her mum, Debbie 
Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, whose house is on 
the same grounds: a big “Debbie” made of light-bulbs pointed the way to her 
property in their shared driveway. Reynolds had suffered two strokes; she and 
her daughter saw each other nearly every day. When Carrie finally appeared, she 
told me that Debbie, on hearing they had a visitor, had assumed I was there to 
speak to her, as Hollywood royalty, and declared: “I can’t see anyone.” Her 
daughter had kept up the fiction.

I had been expecting maybe an hour of her time, but somehow we ended up 
spending the entire day together: I was pressed to drink bottles of wine she 
had picked for their rude or amusing names (she didn’t drink – saying she 
couldn’t trust her addictive personality). We shopped, ate homemade banana 
pudding out of the dish and plotted how we were going to get her a boyfriend 
(her desire for companionship and sex were to become a running theme).

We began chatting in her bedroom, the walls and ceilings decorated by 
projections of fluttering butterflies. Gary – her French bulldog, whose tongue 
steadfastly refuses to stay in his mouth – lay snoring next to a Gary-themed 
gift director JJ Abrams had presented to Carrie at the wrap party forStar Wars: 
The Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>.

The film had just been released, and Carrie had quickly become everyone’s 
favourite part of the promotional tour. She shot down anyone who asked abouther 
weight loss for the role <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kh1t2MJDbrs> and had 
recently asked, via Twitter, for everyone to stop debating whether or not she 
had aged well – as it hurt “all three of my feelings 
<https://twitter.com/carrieffisher/status/681738143075176448>”. 

Like everything Carrie said or did, that tweet revealed a truth – she told me 
she hated the way she looked in that film and suddenly, unexpectedly, she was 
in tears.

Minutes later she was in high spirits, plotting to tweet an old photo she had 
unearthed from the first set ofStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> in which she was cupping C-3PO’s 
balls. “This is going to get me in trouble with the people at Disney,” she 
said, while I held the pic steady and she snapped, “but I don’t care.”

Hilarious realist: Carrie Fisher was the person everyone would want to sit 
next to at a wedding | Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/filmblog/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-appreciation-remembered>
She revealed that the resurrection of the franchise had been a huge financial 
boost – she had agreed to the “teeniest-tiniest percentage of a percentage of a 
percentage” of the backend profits and knew she never had to worry about money 
again.

And she was beyond generous. She thrust presents on her staff and insisted we 
went shopping to find gifts for her mum, daughter and others. (When we 
eventually got around to talking about the column she asked to be paid in fun 
presents rather than money – an idea her agent sadly nixed when it was up and 
running.)

I was gone so long that my husband texted to see if I was OK, in response to 
which she sent a video of herself riffing about how she was going to do bad 
things to me and make me vote for Donald Trump in the upcoming election.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcarrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-remembered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54d6df9630f816594e9a40c761a5cb4304544e8%2F0_385_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20time%20with%20Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20a%20hurricane%20of%20energy%2C%20charisma%20and%20foul%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcarrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-remembered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20time%20with%20Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20a%20hurricane%20of%20energy%2C%20charisma%20and%20foul%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcarrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-remembered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54d6df9630f816594e9a40c761a5cb4304544e8%2F0_385_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Carrie Fisher in her kitchen. Photograph: Merope Mills for the Guardian 
In every store we went into she was a hurricane of energy and charisma and 
foul language – and she was instantly loved. She swore loudly at the shop 
assistants that didn’t have the particular light she sought in stock and 
laughed hysterically at a bed we saw that was priced at over $100,000 – then 
made me pose comic-seductively across it while she took photos. The staff all 
took it in their stride.

The column cast Carrie as an agony aunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/06/carrie-fisher-advice-column-cheating-husband-prostitutes>
 and was a huge hit, but getting it out of her was like pulling teeth. She was 
in such high demand – filming Star Wars, the hit TV comedy series Catastrophe 
and writing a book – I often didn’t hear from her for weeks on end. Then 
suddenly, out of the blue, my phone would buzz multiple times.

 “I’m a giant asshole. It’s official.”

“I’ll try to make it up to u.”

“If it takes all our sad, exciting lives.”

“It’s Carrie F gunning for contact.”

“Will wait breathlessly and nude.”

Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher – in their own words and pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher-in-pictures>
I read every problem she was emailed for the column, and a running theme was 
what an inspiration she was to so many people living with mental illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/carrie-fisher-advice-column-mental-illness-bipolar-disorder>
: the inbox piled up with the young, the old, the depressed and bipolar, all 
thanking her for how open she was about her own disorder.

Recently, Carrie was interviewed by my colleague Simon Hattenstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/20/carrie-fisher-harrison-ford-affair-star-wars-memoir-interview-simon-hattenstone>
 and talked about how she hoped to find a boyfriend, relaying to Simon, as she 
did to me, how she wanted a “British professor who will be able to put up with 
me, so you can put the word out. Good sense of humour, intelligent, not 
hideously unattractive, and sort of confident without being arrogant.”
 Tom Hiddleston, Carrie Fisher and Guardian editors at the 2016 White House 
Correspondents dinner. Photograph: Twitter 
Shortly afterwards, a Guardian reader wrote to offer himself as a potential 
suitor and I forwarded his message to her. She called me back to say she would 
meet him. She was impressed he had put himself forward, because “I’m not the 
kind of person you read an interview with and think: ‘I want to date her.’”

Carrie asked me to visit her in London before she flew back to LA just before 
Christmas; I couldn’t. It was on that flight that she had a heart attack.

We spoke two weeks before her death and she was in high spirits – funny, 
honest, open, without artifice. She talked at length about how much she liked 
her daughter’s new boyfriend and how proud she was of her. Carrie had just 
bought a house in London and wanted to spend more time in the UK but knew that 
she couldn’t leave her mum alone in LA. When she joined the Guardian as a guest 
for Barack Obama’s final White House Correspondents’ dinner the last thing she 
did before leaving the taxi was call Reynolds. “Mommy, I love you,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&media=>
Carrie Fisher - video obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Since Fisher’s death, emails for her have continued to pour in at the Guardian 
address. “Hi Carrie,” one reads. “I know you’re dead. But that shouldn’t stop 
you from continuing to respond to those who are sick and suffering, because 
come on, you were super-human in life – and in death you’ve become even more 
powerful.”
 