
The Whitsundays: What sort of holiday requires instructions?


Our first holiday as husband and wife was a disaster. This is not counting the 
honeymoon obviously, because honeymoons must be resolutely remembered as 
blissful, otherwise the union is doomed. But our first holiday thereafter, 
still newlyweds, still getting used to life in tandem: disaster.

No one actually mentioned the word divorce so early in the piece but when 
you’ve got one sailing boat, five days of unseasonably appalling conditions and 
two captains overinflating their sailing experience and underreporting their 
bossiness, that’s the threat lurking behind every curt instruction.

Can’t you see the red lines? The RED LINES!
Lucy Clark 
What sort of “holiday” requires instructions? Well exactly. A holiday in which 
one person must necessarily take charge in a bossy-boots kind of way is no 
holiday at all. Add to this disgruntlement the necessity to yell to be heard 
over roaring winds while you veer dangerously off-course, and you start 
dreaming of a holiday to get over the holiday.

This is what we imagined: the becalmed beauty of the Whitsunday Passage, that 
spectacular collection of islands protectively nestled inside the Great Barrier 
Reef, safe from prevailing winds; bright blue languid days gliding over 
turquoise waters, taking turns at the tiller in our togs; finding our own 
private cove as the sun goes down; diving into warm pristine waters; the 
tinkling of intimate laughter; the fizz of champagne and the sizzle of prawns 
on the barbie.

This is what we got: driving horizontal rain (freezing); cyclonic winds 
(freezing); nasty, choppy, steel-grey water (freezing). A heaving boat, the 
relentless slap, slap, slap of the hull, no reprieve in quiet coves, and 
yelling from stern to bow. I’ll look at the map, you steer! No, I’ll steer, you 
look at the map! Release the cleat, I said, the CLEAT.


48 hours on the Sunshine Coast: even storms can't spoil an idyllic escape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/06/48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape>
Our combined minutes of sailing experience brought us undone when we hit a 
reef on day two, with a sickening crunch and lurch onto that pale bit on the 
map that you’re supposed to avoid. Can’t you see the red lines? The RED LINES!

I’ll save you the pain of days three and four and take you straight to day 
five: a mayday call, a rescue mission, and a midwater transfer from lurching 
boat to lurching boat.

A friend of mine once said he reckoned the best test for any new relationship 
is the camping trip, but the yachting in cyclonic conditions with next-to-no 
sailing experience trip will do the trick too. If you can make it through that, 
calmer waters await.Lucy Clark
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0588fe84f177877fff3b5a2055532a18fac83b%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0588fe84f177877fff3b5a2055532a18fac83b%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
 ‘This is what we imagined: the becalmed beauty of the Whitsunday Passage.’ 
Photograph: Maureen Dettre/AAP 
Tokyo: ‘Please do not be shocked by my appearance’

Before I got on the plane from Barcelona to Tokyo I emailed the friend I was 
staying with. “Please do not be shocked by my appearance. I look a little 
different. Also, I won’t have any money when I arrive, so if you can help me 
sort it out – appreciate.”

The stitching on my face looked like someone had killed a black spider but 
left the corpse there
Brigid Delaney 
My appearance was shocking. I gasped with horror whenever I accidentally 
glimpsed at myself in the mirror – and that was before I even registered that 
it was me looking back. My face got worse on the plane ride to Tokyo – whether 
it was just the cabin pressure or the time that bruises take to bloom. But my 
friend, meeting me at a Hilton in Tokyo, blanched when he saw me. My eyes were 
black and swollen shut, one side of my face was also swollen and bruised and a 
long line of black, badly stitched thread ran down my right temple to my brow. 
The stitching looked like someone had killed a very black spider on my face but 
left the corpse there.

I had been assaulted and robbed in Barcelona a few days before, which resulted 
in two black eyes, a swollen jaw and fractured skull, now dented and stitched 
together by an exhausted intern who would never win a prize for the neatness of 
his craftwork.

My friend in Tokyo was a lawyer who dealt with the complexities of 
transnational airline leases and wore immaculately tailored suits. We made an 
odd-looking couple as we went from bank to bank with my passport, trying to get 
money out or get money wired or just access it somehow. In his flawless 
Japanese he negotiated on my behalf as I stood there – my face a grotesque 
mask. But each time we were rebuffed. In a chilled Starbucks my friend brought 
me an iced coffee, which I drank through a straw (my jaw still hurt) and said, 
“The people in the bank probably think I beat you up and am trying to drain 
your bank accounts. That’s what it looks like.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F668df88b03d6d8dc2135cc1a5331a016346cb0a6%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F668df88b03d6d8dc2135cc1a5331a016346cb0a6%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 ‘In the day, when I should have been exploring Tokyo (pictured), I lay on the 
couch in the cool, dark flat and watched reruns of Dawson’s Creek.’ Photograph: 
Steven Beijer/Getty Images/EyeEm 
We tried one more bank, and when they said no, tears burst with some 
difficulty from my swollen eyes, and the sight might have been so weird and sad 
that they finally said yes.

The rest of the time in Tokyo I didn’t leave my friend’s flat. I was anxious 
and exhausted, and had started to dream of the assault in shattered and jumbled 
fragments. In the day, when I should have been exploring Tokyo, I lay on the 
couch in the cool, dark flat and watched reruns of Dawson’s Creek.Brigid Delaney

New South Wales: Vomit and a blizzard 


Holidays with children are wonderfully unpredictable. Our three-week 
international jaunt with a four-year-old and two-year-old, which included about 
50 hours of flying time, was a dream, despite the horror stories involving 
toddlers and long-haul flights. It was a week-long trip to the snow that turned 
out to be the family holiday that would bring us to our knees.


We had it all planned. This would be a skiing holiday that would not break the 
bank. We borrowed gear, waited all year for Aldi specials on kids’ snowboots 
and booked a family room in the youth hostel.

The journey from Sydney to the snowfields takes about six hours, according to 
Google, but by the time we had stopped multiple times to intervene in 
children’s fights, change nappies and for plentiful snack breaks, seven hours 
had passed and we were only in Canberra. We booked a last-minute room at great 
expense in a hotel where there was a gathering of tax auditors or something, so 
the whole place was full.

We couldn’t open the window to get rid of the smell because there was a 
blizzard outside
Patrick Keneally 
The next day, we made it to our cosy room at the hostel. Then the projectile 
vomiting started. Our two-year-old had developed a high fever within minutes of 
us putting our bags down and was quite ill. Instead of marvelling at the snow 
swirling across the mountains outside, we were stuck in a room about the size 
of a small car trying to administer Panadol to a writhing toddler.

I stayed up most of the night worrying about how to drive in the snow to a 
hospital if things got worse – at one point he started convulsing. Vomit was on 
all of our clothes, the bedsheets, everything. We couldn’t turn the light on 
because it would wake our daughter so we had to use mobile phones to try to see 
what was happening (we hadn’t packed a torch). We couldn’t open the window to 
get rid of the smell because there was a blizzard outside.

The next morning, the conditions on the mountain were perfect but the little 
bloke was still very ill. Fresh white powdery snow was everywhere but we had to 
make the call to pack up and head home, fearing another night of temperatures 
in the 40s and no access to a doctor. While my wife packed up, I took our 
daughter to the snowfield to build a quick snowman and ride on a toboggan. In 
the end, we spent three days travelling, thousands of dollars probably (I 
didn’t want to add it up) and about 30 minutes – total – at the snow.Patrick 
Keneally

Sicily: Even shouting, we couldn’t hear each other

I’d pre-booked most of the accommodation for our driving trip around Sicily 
because with a five-year old the days of “let’s just see where we end up” were 
well behind us. But there was one day when I wasn’t sure how far across the 
southern coast we’d drive so I figured we’d just find something that night. 
“How bad could it be?” I thought. As it turns out, very bad.

At 4am the music stopped, but then the clean-up staff smashed bottles and sang 
football songs until dawn
Lenore Taylor 
Everything was full when we started looking in the late afternoon. Hours 
later, as the “I’m hungry” whine from the back seat turned into a meltdown, the 
tourism office in Sciacca said they had a “private rental”. We followed a bloke 
on a bike to a neat little terrace house near the port, paid him, promised to 
leave the keys on the living-room table, and wandered across the road to a 
trattoria for dinner, feeling quite pleased.

But as we returned we noticed the terrace next to ours was setting up chairs 
and tables on the pavement outside its front door and ours. Well-dressed young 
Italians were getting out of cars and a very loud sound check seemed to be 
emanating from our living room.

Baroque and roll: a cycling tour of south-east Sicily
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/16/sicily-rushby-baroque-syracuse-noto-modica-cycling>
The terrace next door was a night club. The music began around nine, shaking 
the walls and vibrating through the floor. The pavement outside our front door 
was packed with screaming, dancing revellers. The “beer garden” included our 
back courtyard. Even shouting, we couldn’t hear each other. We drank some beers 
and tried to entertain our son who was hysterical with exhaustion. Finally, at 
4am, the music stopped, but then the clean-up staff smashed bottles and sang 
football songs until dawn.


We left as elderly neighbours arrived home on the back of scooters, having 
obviously fled to sleep somewhere quieter. My husband may have thrown the keys 
into the harbour.Lenore Taylor 

Sydney: A normal weekend day (in a bad way)

Our previous expensive family holiday had ended in disaster, so we decided to 
be smart and holiday at home this time. It would be cheap! It would be fun! We 
would save time travelling to our destination and just ... be.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F462abe889f30cb4cde3ab2bf5a6382d232d92bb8%2F0_220_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F462abe889f30cb4cde3ab2bf5a6382d232d92bb8%2F0_220_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘We made it to the peach farm and successfully picked two bags of fruit! It 
was to be the highlight of the holiday.’ Photograph: Attila Balazs/EPA 
I would like to write that things went well initially, but they didn’t. On the 
eve of our staycation my daughter got a temperature and was up all night saying 
her tummy hurt. Exhausted, we scrapped plans to go fruit picking the next day 
and stayed local. It was like a normal weekend day. We even went to the 
supermarket.

The following day we made it to the peach farm and successfully picked two 
bags of fruit! It was to be the highlight of the holiday. Gastro struck the 
rest of the family down in the following days. Oh, it was a staycation all 
right – in the bathroom.

When we finally emerged, thinner, paler and jaded, we had one day left of 
“holiday”. We went to the supermarket. The car broke down on the way home.
Bonnie Malkin

The Netherlands: Car trouble 

At one point on this holiday we visited the Vaalserberg, a place where the 
borders of Netherlands, Belgium and Germany meet. So you can stand in three 
countries at the same time. That did not make it the worst holiday in itself, 
but I say that as a preface for a detail about this story. Which is that when 
we – my dad driving, my mum alongside, a 16- or 17-year-old fractious me in the 
backseat, my younger sister and brother – headed down a remote country road, I 
can’t remember what language the road sign saying DO NOT ENTER was actually in. 
Or maybe it was just a sign with no words. Anyway, the meaning was fairly 
obvious, in retrospect.

We saw not so much of the Piazza del Duomo, quite a lot of the Talbot dealer
Will Woodward 
I remember the next bit, which was about 100m away: the wheels of the 
Nurofen-coloured Talbot spinning round in the mud, countryside flying 
everywhere like an outtake from Carry on Camping. Us getting out of the car 
while the local farmers – Dutch? Let’s say they were Dutch – watched amused and 
incredulous. My dad in his cords, out of the car, pulling clods from tyres. I 
think then a tractor, and a rope. And an exchange with the Dutch farmers about 
that sign back there, you know the one saying DO NOT ENTER in one (or possibly 
two, or none) of four languages. It wasn’t raining; I guess that was a silver 
lining.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74bfed9640c00695356a8b7d84e0bc8abda955d1%2F562_53_3945_2369%2F3945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74bfed9640c00695356a8b7d84e0bc8abda955d1%2F562_53_3945_2369%2F3945.jpg>
 ‘We saw not so much of Milan’s Piazza del Duomo (pictured) but quite a lot of 
the Talbot dealer in the less-fashionable outskirts.’ Photograph: Giuseppe 
Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
And it also meant that when I became a driver myself I had learned my lesson. 
I’ve only so far since had to be pulled out twice by a tractor, when I was a 
reporter in eastern England, both times within weeks of each other. No one told 
me there was a ditch there. Or there.

Everything was wrong with that holiday. Night terrors. Family dynamics. Me. 
Flat as a pancake – the land and the atmosphere. It was the family holiday you 
vow not to go on again – and you don’t until you get older, when you find that 
your parents are just the sort of people you want to spend time with like that. 
Strangely enough it produced one of the best all-family pictures we ever had 
taken, us all smiling. It contained a broader truth but in that week was a 
hideous lie. My dad had a very dry wit and was not great with cars.

A year later, or before, we got off the motor-rail in Milan and – bang – the 
exhaust fell off. So we saw not so much of the Piazza del Duomo, quite a lot of 
the Talbot dealer in the less fashionable outskirts. And he had a line about 
inventing a new Olympic sport: Battery-carrying on the Pembrokeshire coast. We 
didn’t think it was much of a goer, but that was before they allowed 
synchronised swimming, and golf.Will Woodward


The Whitsundays II: Sea rescue in failing light 

Tears of terror rolling down my children’s cheeks are the most enduring memory 
of my worst holiday ever – a sailing trip in the Whitsundays in April 2014 that 
turned into a sea rescue in fading light.

If a boat is on fire, you get off – they tend to go up (or down) very quickly.
Alison Rourke 
We probably should have twigged that something was wrong when the outboard 
motor on the dinghy failed on day one. An engineer was dispatched to repair it 
and we sailed north towards Hayman Island in a blustering 40-knot easterly.

After lunch the catamaran’s port-side engine failed. Powerful gusts – or 
“bullets” as they are known locally – tested our anchor overnight as we waited 
for another engineer. Surely day three would be better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9933fff7283105a72ee5095434cae9a3b0841ae0%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20worst%20holiday%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20on%20breaks%20that%20nearly%20broke%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmy-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9933fff7283105a72ee5095434cae9a3b0841ae0%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 The calm before the storm: Alison Rourke and her daughter Ella sailing towards 
Hayman Island, before the engine set on fire, they breached the reef and had to 
be rescued. Photograph: Alison Rourke 
In the late afternoon we set off for a sheltered overnight mooring. After 10 
minutes, the starboard engine’s gauge ran hot. My son came up from the cabin 
saying he could smell smoke as black clouds billowed out of the stern hull.

If a boat is on fire, you get off – they tend to go up (or down) very quickly.

I deployed the fire extinguisher as my husband lowered the dinghy into the 
water. The kids, aged eight and nine, sat silently, frozen with fear. I don’t 
think they had ever seen their parents in emergency mode.

I asked them to find their precious bed teddies – items I knew we could not 
live without. They say that’s when they knew we were really in trouble. The 
scraping sound that followed was unmistakeable. We had drifted onto the reef in 
a falling tide with no idea how much damage had been done ... by the fire or 
the coral.

Eventually the harbourmaster at Hayman Island came to our aid as night fell – 
but catamarans were permanently struck off our holiday list that day.Alison 
Rourke

Corsica: ‘It is forbidden to pee in your wetsuit’

Corsica, Zonza in particular, was, according to every person I knew who’d been 
(two people), a brilliant location for canyoning. You couldn’t go to Corsica 
and not canyon.

Our tour was jam-packed with outdoorsy types, the true kind– not the kind who 
only do outdoorsy for one day on one holiday per year. They looked fit, had 
hiking gear and, unlike us, had brought lunch. As the only non-French speakers, 
we felt alone and outcast. We went off to find a sandwich, contemplating for 
the first time that we may have got ourselves into a semi-dangerous situation. 
Or worse. A just plain dangerous situation.

So this was canyoning: jumping off rocks into water you can’t see
Gabrielle Jackson 
When our guide told us to “try on” our abseiling gear and that he would check 
it for safety, I weighed up in my mind the pros and cons of the day as I now 
saw it.

Pros: Zonza was a great place to try canyoning. And the guides were cute!

Cons: we look like absolute fools, or worse – die! And that would be in front 
of the cute guides.


Perhaps had I been a bit more careful while hiking down to the canyon, instead 
of practising in my head all the words I knew in French that I could possibly 
put together to impress upon the guides and fellow travellers that I was not a 
complete fool after all, I would not have tripped on those stones, lost 
balance, fell over and then rolled sideways down the rocky hiking path.


We hadn’t even got to the dangerous part yet. I started to wonder if my £10m 
travel insurance policy would cover a helicopter coming in to get me right 
about now when my friend Helen enquired:

“Why didn’t we find out exactly what canyoning was?”

“I don’t know.”

A guide started giving instructions in French. He seemed to be saying pretty 
important stuff. People were watching him and looking serious. Every now and 
then some nervous laughter broke out. Eventually he looked at Helen and me and 
said: “Mathieu will tell you in English.”
 Gabrielle Jackson on the day, but shortly before, she realised what canyoning 
was. Photograph: The Guardian 
After roughly five to seven minutes of watching him talk, Mattieu did. “So in 
canyoning you jump like this. You take one step forward and push off with the 
other foot, almost like running. Use your arms to get your balance and then do 
this.”

He crossed his arms across his chest. That was it. The other guide’s pep talk 
reduced to three sentences.

Before we left, our guide made one more announcement in English: “It is 
forbidden to pee in your wetsuit.”

We reached our first drop quite quickly, and were there met with a choice: a 
two-metre or four-metre jump. So this was canyoning: jumping off rocks into 
water you can’t see and abseiling down rocks at ever-greater heights.

My first jump turned out to be quite exhilarating and I began to believe the 
hike may have been the scariest part of the day. Then Helen said there was no 
way she was jumping off a nine-metre high waterfall. “I probably should have 
thought that my fear of heights may have affected my ability to do this,” 
pondered Helen, as she swam through the canyon’s fresh stream, face white and 
heart pounding.

Let’s just say, the next five hours were long. I’m glad I’ve done it, but I’ll 
not be canyoning again any time soon. On the plus side, we never had cause to 
call in that helicopter.Gabrielle Jackson

Tell us your experiences in the comments section below and with pictures and 
stories viaGuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/2016/dec/29/tell-us-about-your-worst-holiday>
 