
I have always loved basketball. I grew up in the 90s (the Michael Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/17/michael-jordan-50-birthday-memories-years>
 era) and would set my VCR to recordNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> 
coverage on at stupid o’clock. I played a bit in school, just playground stuff, 
but with my prosthetic leg (I was born with my right leg missing from the hip), 
I couldn’t keep up. I found out about wheelchair basketball only by chance, 
when somebody at my hospital put me in touch with a local club. It’s liberating 
to play a sport controlled by your hands, not your feet.

Wheelchair basketball is the same as the running game in almost every way: the 
rules, the court size, the height of the basket. You can hold the ball in your 
lap, but every two pushes of the wheels you have to bounce, pass or shoot. 
People imagine these big, cumbersome chairs, but the game is extremely 
fast-paced and skilful.

I’m a bit of a jack of all trades on court, owing to my classification, which 
is based on the severity of your disability. An able-bodied player would be a 
five; someone with a spinal breakage around the chest might be a one. I’m a 
3.5, pretty much slap-bang in the middle. Each team’s on-court players can add 
up to 14, to keep the playing field level.

My workout: Toni May Skidmore, 25, roller derby player – ‘Knocks happen’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/08/my-workout-roller-derby-player-toni-may-skidmore>
Upper body fitness is crucial, with good shoulder strength for pushing. It 
helps that I like to keep fit (I qualified as a personal trainer last year; 
most of my clients are able-bodied). As a wheelchair athlete you can compete at 
a high level into your late 40s; I’m going to play for as long as my body lets 
me, just for the love of the game.

The social aspect is great, too. There are people at my club, the London Titans
 <http://www.londontitans.org/>, who might not get out and do social stuff 
day-to-day. At training, they can meet people like themselves – that’s really 
empowering. When you’re on court, getting into your zone, you forget any 
stresses or issues outside. In my chair, taking shots, I’m happy.

My weekend workout

Years playing? Seriously, for 10 years.
How often do you play? Training twice a week and league games twice a month.
Most points scored in one match? 26.
Proudest moment? Winning a prestigious European trophy, the André Vergauwen 
cup.


Five ways to get started

1 In the domestic British leagues, you don’t need a disability to play – an 
able-bodied player would simply be classed as a five-point player. It’s only 
when you get to international level that you need to have a lower -limb 
disability.

2 Regular players have bespoke chairs, but most clubs have spares for 
newcomers. You can even use your everyday wheelchair if you have one.

3 There are clubs in most cities and towns in the UK, plus development leagues 
for little ones and a women’s league (though many teams are mixed). Find your 
local club onthe British Wheelchair Basketball website 
<http://www.gbwba.org.uk/gbwba/>.

4 The most important skill to master is chair control. A lot of people jump in 
at first and start pushing around, then panic because they can’t stop. Before 
trying to bounce or pass the ball, practise turning, spinning and stopping.

5 The general rule for shooting is, if you’re right-handed and the basket is 
in front of you at 12 o’clock, turn your chair to 10 o’clock, keep your elbow 
close to your body and shoot, keeping a line from shoulder to elbow straight up 
to the basket.

Essential kit
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmy-workout-wheelchair-basketball-player-tyler-saunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0661f29dcab96c8646f1f5ba77c002fa9cc63c93%2F33_112_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20workout%3A%20Tyler%20Saunders%2C%2033%2C%20wheelchair%20basketball%20player%3A%20%20%E2%80%98Taking%20shots%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20happy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmy-workout-wheelchair-basketball-player-tyler-saunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20workout%3A%20Tyler%20Saunders%2C%2033%2C%20wheelchair%20basketball%20player%3A%20%20%E2%80%98Taking%20shots%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20happy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmy-workout-wheelchair-basketball-player-tyler-saunders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0661f29dcab96c8646f1f5ba77c002fa9cc63c93%2F33_112_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
 From left:Spalding NBA Grip Control basketball 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Spalding-Mens-Outdoor-Basketball-Orange/dp/B00193UG74/ref=sr_1_4?s=sports&ie=UTF8&qid=1476803488&sr=1-4>
, £38.92, amazon.co.uk;RGK Club Sport wheelchair 
<http://www.gblwheelchairs.com/shop/product/3574/>, from £1,332, 
gblwheelchairs.com; Basketball top, £29.95, adidas.co.uk 
<http://www.adidas.co.uk/> 
• Do you have a passion for exercise? Send your story to 
fitness@theguardian.com <>
 