
The summer of 2015 saw a 10% rise in money spent on transfers by clubs from 
Europe’s top five leagues to take the total to a staggering€2.93bn. With the 
season now reaching its climax, which purchases have proved the best value for 
money?

We asked our experts from England, Germany, France, Italy and Spain to list 
their top four signings of the season, to give us an idea of what is likely to 
bring clubs success in the market these days. We asked the writers to take into 
consideration the fee, the age, the salary and the performances of the players.

Big-money signings are – apart from Ángel Di María – conspicuous by their 
absence and14 of the 20 transfers picked by our writers came at a cost of less 
than £10m. In fact the average transfer fee of the 20 best signings is£9.1m 
with add-ons excluded. The average age of our best signings is24.65 years.

Javier Hernández: my career suffered on Manchester United bench
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/javier-hernandez-manchester-united-bench>
It is also interesting to note that seven of the 16 players from Germany, 
France, Spain and Italy are players who, for one reason or another, did not 
succeed in England. Javier Hernández, Mohamed Salah, Di María, Lassana Diarra, 
Hatem Ben Arfa, Roberto Soldado and Iago Aspas have prospered since leaving 
England, which suggests the Premier League clubs are failing to make the most 
of the expensive players they are signing.

England

N’Golo Kanté

 From Caen to Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> Fee £5.6m Age 24 Position 
Midfield

Boasting only a season playing in Ligue 1 for Caen when snapped up by 
Leicester last August, Kanté has been nothing short of a revelation for his new 
club. The driving force behind the unlikely title push from Claudio Ranieri’s 
side, he is tipped for a place in France’s Euro 2016 squad this summer.

Dele Alli

From MK Dons to Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> Fee £5m Age 19 Position
 Midfield

Before you say it, yes, England’s new brightest young thing was signed last 
January from MK Dons. But as he was immediately loaned back and did not make 
his Spurs debut until August, Alli makes the cut after a stunning breakthrough 
season in the Premier League in which the teenager has scored seven goals and 
earned a place in Roy Hodgson’s England squad.

Dimitri Payet

From Marseille to West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> Fee £10.7m Age 28 Position 
Forward

Such has Payet’s impact been at Upton Park that he has already been rewarded 
with a new contract worth up to £125,000 a week despite signing for the club 
only at the end of June. The forward born on the island of Réunion has racked 
up nine goals and seven assists for Slaven Bilic’s side in their attempt to 
bring Champions League football to east London next season.

Toby Alderweireld

From Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> to 
Tottenham HotspurFee £11.4m Age 27 Position Defender

Southampton looked as though they had managed to secure the Belgium defender 
who spent the second half of last season on loan at St Mary’s, until Atlético
moved the goalposts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/07/toby-alderweireld-friends-spurs-atletico-madrid-southampton>
 in the summer. Ronald Koeman’s loss has definitely been Mauricio Pochettino’s 
gain as Alderweireld has starred at the centre of the Premier League’s meanest 
backline.

Ed Aarons 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e7064c3c5f8678f9641fa207dac375bc3e7e11%2F130_450_3429_2056%2F3429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e7064c3c5f8678f9641fa207dac375bc3e7e11%2F130_450_3429_2056%2F3429.jpg>
 Dimitri Payet scores West Ham’s goal from a 30-year free-kick in their 1-1 FA 
Cup draw against Manchester United at the weekend. Photograph: Arfa 
Griffiths/West Ham United via Getty Images 
Germany

Javier Hernández 

From Manchester United to Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> Fee £9m Age 27 Position 
Forward

Thanks to Louis van Gaal, Bayer paid a bargain-basement price for one of the 
world’s most prolific strikers. The Mexican has averaged nearly a goal per game 
since moving to the BayArena and has made Leverkusen games the most‑watched 
Bundesliga matches in North and Central America.

Douglas Costa

From Shakhtar Donetsk to Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> Fee £22.5m Age 25 Position 
Forward

In a summer when all of Europe’s top clubs were desperately looking for 
wingers, Bayern’s technical director, Michael Reschke, hit the jackpot by 
buying the Brazilian for relatively little. Douglas Costa’s pace is frightening 
and his ball control makes him a nightmare for defenders.

Julian Weigl

From 1860 Munich to Borussia Dortmund Fee £1.88m Age 21 Position Midfield

Weigl went from the second division at one of Germany’s most chaotic clubs 
straight into the starting XI of Thomas Tuchel’s lean, mean, rebooted Dortmund 
machine. His mature performances in central midfield have belied his age.

Joshua Kimmich

From Leipzig to Bayern Munich Fee £6.38m Age 21 Position Midfield

Kimmich wasn’t exactly cheap – he came with enough hype to force Bayern to pay 
a hefty price – but he has certainly been worth every euro. Under Pep 
Guardiola, the under-21 international has blossomed into a midfield leader and 
played as a makeshift centre-back in impressive fashion.

Raphael Honigstein
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a786c8e2fabee2f1ec674cd15ad483f3dd7b96a%2F0_167_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a786c8e2fabee2f1ec674cd15ad483f3dd7b96a%2F0_167_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Bayern Munich’s Douglas Costa. Photograph: A. Hassenstein/Getty Images for FC 
Bayern 
Italy

Paulo Dybala

From Palermo to Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> Fee 
£24.8mAge 22 Position Forward

Juventus paid a steep price for a forward who had reached double figures only 
once in three seasons at Palermo, but he has fully vindicated their faith. 
Dybala leads Juventus in both goals and assists, and Paul Pogba suggested his 
team-mate could go on to win the Ballon d’Or one day.

Sami Khedira

From Real Madrid to Juventus Fee Free Age 28 Position Midfield

Other players signed by Juventus last summer have greater potential – Alex 
Sandro springs to mind – but to land a 28‑year‑old World Cup winner on a free 
transfer is simply excellent business. Despite missing games due to injury 
Khedira has been an assured presence in midfield when available.

Mohamed Salah

From Chelsea to Roma Fee £3.9m loan + right to buy Age 23 Position Winger

Fiorentina were furious when Salah refused to stay last summer despite their 
holding an option to make his loan from Chelsea permanent. Instead he joined 
Roma on a similar deal. The fee is high for an initial one-year loan, but his 
goals and assists have them on course for the top three.

Mattia Destro

From Roma to Bologna Fee £5m Age 24 Position Forward

Destro initially struggled at Bologna, failing to score in his first 10 
appearances. Since Roberto Donadoni’s appointment, however, he has eight goals 
and three assists in 17 games. Such productivity may trigger bonus fees but 
Destro has more than repaid them by lifting his team clear of a relegation 
scrap.

Paolo Bandini
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff28504a9658d16aea49d1178f6cbfb5c91d83271%2F0_0_2948_1769%2F2948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff28504a9658d16aea49d1178f6cbfb5c91d83271%2F0_0_2948_1769%2F2948.jpg>
 Roma’s Mohamed Salah, right, in action against Real Madrid. Photograph: Juan 
Medina/Reuters 
France

Ángel Di María

From Manchester United to Paris Saint-Germain Fee £49m Age 28 Position Forward

His impact has been immense at PSG, so much so that when he is absent the team 
do not perform as well. Goals, assists, pace, skill, passing – Di María has 
done it all in Ligue 1 already. And his incredible first goal against Angers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6teDpTua6Sg> will remain forever among the 
best scored in France.

Lassana Diarra 

From Unattached to Marseille Fee Free Age 30 Position Midfield

After 15 months without playing football because of a conflict with Lokomotiv 
Moscow, his former club, Diarra came home and has pretty much bossed every 
opposition’s midfield since. He has been so good that Didier Deschamps picked 
him again for the national team, five years after his last cap.

Hatem Ben Arfa

From Unattached to Nice Fee Free Age 28 Position Forward

Redemption No2. After six months without a club because he had already played 
for Newcastle United reserves and Hull City last season, Ben Arfa has lit up 
Nice and Ligue 1 this year with feats of dribbling never seen before. He has 
been Messi‑esque and unstoppable at times.

Thomas Lemar

From Caen to Monaco Fee £3.1m Age 20 Position Forward

Lemar can lay claim to having the sweetest left foot in Ligue 1 along with Di 
María, Ben Arfa or Lyon’s Nabil Fekir. Monaco bought him for £3.1m, which is a 
total bargain considering the incredible potential of the France Under‑21 
international. He can play anywhere as an offensive midfielder and it is always 
a delight to watch him.

Julien Laurens
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F628bcdf3b447c244a2a8c33410d8901a23af78b9%2F0_256_4645_2787%2F4645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F628bcdf3b447c244a2a8c33410d8901a23af78b9%2F0_256_4645_2787%2F4645.jpg>
 Thomas Lemar of Monaco. Photograph: Vincent Michel/Icon Sport via Getty Images 
Spain

Yannick Carrasco

From Monaco to Atlético Madrid Fee £11.6m Age 22 Position Forward

Atlético spent more than €100m in the summer, and so far it has not entirely 
worked. Carrasco would probably be described only as a good signing until now, 
but there have been glimpses that suggest it will not be long before he is 
described as an exceptional signing. Exciting, quick and creative, he is a 
player that Atlético need. The question is: in which position?

Roberto Soldado

From Tottenham to Villarreal Fee £7.8m Age 30 Position Forward

Roberto Soldado returned to Spain and scored on his debut. He also scored the 
winner against Real Madrid. But it is not really his goals that have stood out 
this season, it is his assists. Only Luis Suárez, Neymar and Toni Kroos have 
more in La Liga. He was no bargain but Villarreal are 13 unbeaten in the 
league, sitting in fourth, and his partnership with Cédric Bakambu has been as 
good as the club hoped. It has not been exactly as they desired, though. “The 
truth is that their roles have been reversed compared to what we anticipated at 
the start,” the manager, Marcelino says. “Assists? I prefer to score goals than 
give them,” Soldado admits. But it turns out he is not bad at both.

Borja Bastón

From Atlético Madrid to Eibar Fee Loan Age 23 Position Forward

This season’s best signing could have been Sergi Enrich, Sergio Gontán ‘Keko’ 
or Borja Bastón, all of whom joined Eibar from second-division clubs for free. 
Keko has been their greatest attacking and creative threat on the right while 
Enrich has been the perfect striking partner for Bastón. Bastón has scored more 
goals than any other Spaniard. More goals than anyone at Atlético as well, the 
club he belongs to and for whom he made his debut in 2010 only to tear his 
cruciate ligament that day. This is his fifth consecutive season on loan, at 
Murcia, Huesca, Deportivo and Zaragoza, all of them in the second division, 
before joining Eibar. Last year he was top scorer for Zaragoza with 22.

Iago Aspas

From Sevilla to Celta Vigo Fee £3.9m Age 23 Position Forward

It has been a great transfer for him, anyway. “I came home to be happy, to 
have playing time, to be with my people. I feel loved here,” Aspas said. After 
all, he is a local boy and a mad Celta fan. It has been good for them, too, 
although performances dipped from that early‑season explosion in which Celta 
put four past Barcelona. Four goals, four assists, and constant movement have 
been a key part of the team’s success.

Sid Lowe 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae0e332dce82173a1b85a8f7474be2d2f92d2011%2F0_13_4271_2564%2F4271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%E2%80%99Golo%20Kant%C3%A9%20to%20Mattia%20Destro%3A%20what%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20top%20signings%20teach%20us%20about%20how%20to%20spend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ftransfer-window-success-ngolo-kante-mattia-destro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae0e332dce82173a1b85a8f7474be2d2f92d2011%2F0_13_4271_2564%2F4271.jpg>
 Borja Baston of Eibar. Photograph: Manuel Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images  