
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
remain in the hunt for three trophies this season after leaving Italy with a 
hard-fought draw that was not entirely free of controversy.

Nacer Chadli had put Spurs ahead with a dubious penalty before Federico 
Bernardeschi’s deflected second-half effort, to leave both sides fancying their 
chances in the return leg next Thursday.

Fiorentina 1-1 Tottenham: Europa League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/18/fiorentina-v-tottenham-europa-league-live>
Dele Alli was again inspirational, especially in the first half, but he was 
also lucky to avoid a red card for a kick aimed at aFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> defender.

In the buildup to this tie, Mauricio Pochettino insisted he still had designs 
on winning the Europa League as well as competing for the FA Cup and Premier 
League. But, in making seven changes fromSunday’s win at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/manchester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, which left them second in the table, the Spurs head coach was putting faith 
in his squad to deliver when called upon. Ryan Mason captained the side on his 
first start since November, while Michel Vorm deputised for the injured 
captain, Hugo Lloris, in goal. Tottenham had been knocked out here in Florence 
12 months ago with another much-changed side, a game that came three days 
before the Capital One Cup final against Chelsea.

It was a subdued start from both sides as neither goalkeeper was worked inside 
the opening 25 minutes until Christian Eriksen rasped a shot that Ciprian 
Tatarusanu had to push behind for a corner.

Alli was booked for a petulant kick on Nenad Tomovic after he had already 
fouled the defender on the touchline, with several Fiorentina players crowding 
the referee, Felix Zwayer, and Pochettino was not impressed. “We need to look 
at the video and try to teach him,” the Argentinian said. “He is a young player 
and he has a lot to learn about elite football. It is his first season in the 
Premier League at Tottenham. He came from League One, he needs to learn a lot, 
still learn. But I didn’t see [the incident]. Some people say ‘yes’, say ‘no’, 
so I don’t know.”

The hosts should have taken the lead just after the half-hour mark as Josip 
Ilicic’s cross fell to Bernardeschi six yards out, only for the winger to fluff 
his lines with Mauro Zárate stabbing the loose ball wide. They were made to pay 
as Spurs were awarded a penalty from their next attack when Ben Davies went 
down in the box after minimal contact from Tomovic.

Chadli, starting as the main striker with Harry Kane a substitute, stood up 
and confidently stroked the resulting spot-kick past Tatarusanu. Zárate wasted 
another decent chance as Jakub Blaszczykowski’s cross was cleared into the path 
of the former West Ham man, who fired over the bar just before the break.

Christian Eriksen strikes late as Tottenham stun Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/manchester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
Spurs thought they had doubled their advantage early in the second half but 
Son Heung-min was offside as he dived to head in Eriksen’s free-kick. Mousa 
Dembélé was brought on at half-time and he set Chadli scampering away in search 
of a second, only for Tatarusanu to turn his angled effort behind. But it was 
Fiorentina who would strike next as Bernardeschi let fly from long range, 
seeing his effort loop in due to a deflection off Mason.

Pochettino turned to Kane with a little more than 20 minutes remaining as Son 
made way for the man who has scored 19 goals for Spurs this season.

However, the England international could not add to that, with the Fiorentina 
defender Gonzalo Rodríguez then came closest to producing a winner before next 
week’s second leg.
 