
The National Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust> has been 
accused of using dozens of unpaid interns to complete the work of full-time 
administrative roles at its properties and head office.

The charity, which currently has 33 unpaid workers in placements that last for 
six months, has been accused by employment campaigners of using rolling adverts 
for internships with paid travel and lunch expenses to boost its workforce.

The trust is advertising on its website for a visitor experience development 
intern 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/fountains-abbey-and-studley-royal-water-garden/documents/visitor-experience-development-intern-role-profile.pdf>
 (pdf) for its Fountains Abbey and Studley Royal property, a position that has 
a suggested time commitment of three days, or 22.5 hours, a week for six months.


“You’ll be working on a number of projects and also be involved in the 
day-to-day organisation and running of the department. There is also the 
potential to become involved with other teams to support your own career 
interests,” the advertisement reads.

Anyone who qualifies as a worker, with set hours and responsibilities and 
doing work that would otherwise need to be done by a paid member of staff, must 
be paid at least the minimum wage if under 25, or the national living wage if 
25 or over.

However, some charities are using an exemption intended to protect the concept 
of volunteering to avoid paying interns.

Tanya de Grunwald, campaigner for fair internships and founder of careers blog 
Graduate Fog <http://graduatefog.co.uk/>, said the entire charity sector was 
“way behind the times” on internships.

“Clearly it is not reasonable to ask someone to work unpaid for months on end. 
Other members of staff don’t work for free – this logic is only applied for 
junior workers,” she told the Guardian. “What disturbs me the most is when 
charity interns tell me they have explained to their line manager how difficult 
it is to work for free, the boss says, ‘We’re a charity’, and the intern comes 
away feeling they have been unreasonable in asking for a wage for the job they 
are doing.

“Whereas much of the corporate sector now sees the clear link between unpaid 
internships and reduced diversity in their workforce,charities are still 
failing to join the dots 
<http://graduatefog.co.uk/2016/4595/national-trust-internships-charity-unpaid-wide-range-of-people/>
,” De Grunwald added.

In November London zoo was criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/09/london-zoo-graduate-role-unpaid-global-project-zsl>
 for seeking a master’s degree graduate to help run a global conservation 
project for no payment other than £5 a day for lunch and a Travelcard.

A National Trust spokesperson said it had 61,000 volunteers, of which just 33 
were interns.

“All internships support projects, rather than everyday business, and 
placements last no longer than six months. While the Trust cannot guarantee an 
internship will lead to paid employment, a good number of our previous interns 
have found employment with us and many more have gone on to find jobs in 
related sectors.”
 