
Rickets is a disease commonly associated with the malnourished slum-dwellers 
of smog-bound Victorian London. Which is why it came as a surprise for 
scientists to discover that it afflicted a young woman living a pastoral 
existence on a Hebridean island more than 5,000 years ago.


 Previously, the earliest known case of rickets in the UK dated back to the 
Roman period. The disease, which affects the bones, is generally caused by 
vitamin D deficiency caused by lack of exposure to sunlight and nutritious 
elements found in seafood.

 Which makes it all the more remarkable that the new findings, unveiled at the 
British Science Festival in Bradford on Wednesday, concern a skeleton unearthed 
in 1912 by amateur archaeologists from a sandy bank yards from the ocean on the 
Scottish island of Tiree.

The skeleton languished in the Hunterian Museum in Glasgow until fresh 
radiocarbon tests dated it from between 3340 and 3090 BC – firmly in the 
Neolithic period.

According to Prof Ian Armit of the University of Bradford, the discovery 
raises more questions than it answers. For example, why was the woman – aged 
25-30 – suffering a lack of sunlight?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fneolithic-skeleton-oldest-case-rickets-hebrides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F363b378063097c45f7305d45a749aff43f3409c8%2F0_137_2848_1709%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neolithic%20skeleton%20is%20UK%E2%80%99s%20oldest%20case%20of%20rickets%2C%20experts%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fneolithic-skeleton-oldest-case-rickets-hebrides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neolithic%20skeleton%20is%20UK%E2%80%99s%20oldest%20case%20of%20rickets%2C%20experts%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fneolithic-skeleton-oldest-case-rickets-hebrides%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F363b378063097c45f7305d45a749aff43f3409c8%2F0_137_2848_1709%2F2848.jpg>
 Deformities in the woman’s bones correspond to the symptoms of rickets. 
Photograph: Fiona Shapland 
“It might be that she had some other illness that caused her community to 
confine her indoors, or she could have been a slave,” Armit said. “It’s also 
possible she wore a costume that covered her body, and this could have been 
because she held a religious role. But we will probably never know.”

 And why be deficient in minerals from fish, when the woman lived by the sea? 
“They would have been a farming community, growing mainly barley and raising 
cattle and sheep,” said Armit. “We don’t know why fishing stopped during the 
Neolithic period, but the people put their efforts into farming, which was 
obviously very labour-intensive. There may have been religious reasons or 
cultural taboos which meant eating fish had become a last resort for them.”

 Fishing was common in the Mesolithic era but tailed off around 3800BC when 
farming became more widespread, only returning with the Vikings in about AD800, 
said Armit.

 The rickets came to light when the co-author of Armit’s report, Fiona Sharp, 
was conducting tests on the skeleton as part of her PhD studies and noticed 
that the deformities in the bones corresponded to the symptoms of the illness.

 Armit said: “We carried out radiocarbon tests but we didn’t believe the 
results, so we did the tests three times. Then we realised we were looking at a 
case of rickets that was 3,000 years earlier than any case seen before.”

 Full skeletons from the Neolithic era are rare – there are perhaps only 10 or 
so in existence. Also unusual was the method of burial. The body was interred 
in a Neolithic “cemetery” with other bones. Only one other site of that kind 
has been discovered, in Oxfordshire, as most bodies in the era were buried in 
monumental mounds.

 However, further investigation of the other remains is impossible – the 1912 
Tiree expedition was run off the island by the local community angry they were 
desecrating their distant ancestors’ remains, said Armit, and were then 
probably hidden or reburied to keep them away from other snooping amateur 
archaeologists.
 