
Their talents range from comedy to gaming and from singing to playing pranks, 
often captured with nothing more than a handheld camera. But YouTubers are at 
the vanguard of an industry worth tens of millions of pounds.

Forbes’ ranking of the 12 highest-earning YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> stars shows they collectively 
earned £55m in the past 12 months, an increase of 23% on last year.


The substantial rise in income is a testament to the growing influence of 
YouTube celebrities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/03/why-youtube-stars-popular-zoella>
, who have moved beyond the platform to monetise their digital success, by 
authoring bestselling books, securing film deals and, in one case, becoming the 
face of L’Oréal.

Why are YouTube stars so popular?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/03/why-youtube-stars-popular-zoella>
It is the second year that Forbes has ranked the earnings of YouTube 
celebrities, who come from countries including the US, France, Sweden, India 
and Chile.

The list was again topped by PewDiePie, whose name is Felix Arvid Ulf 
Kjellberg. The 27-year-old from Sweden has built up a following of nearly 50 
million subscribers for his videos, which have had 11bn views, in which he 
comedically narrates while playing video games.

It has proved to be an increasingly lucrative pastime since Kjellberg joined 
YouTube in 2010. Forbes estimated that he earned $15m (£11.8m) last year from 
advertising revenue and sales of his parody self-help tome This Book Loves You.

The list this year features four new entries, most of whom have capitalised on 
their enormous online following 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/09/youtubers-hit-mainstream-digital-media-top-choice-new-talent>
 to earn six-figure book deals and sell merchandise.


Roman Atwood, who earned $8m last year from videos of him and his friends 
performing pranks in the street, has a book and feature film in the pipeline, 
as well as an online store that sells branded hats, pens and sunglasses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fyoutubers-increase-earnings-forbes-top-12-ranking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafb934582c4b60c4aca438403595ede6a132614a%2F0_179_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Net%20earnings%3A%20top%20YouTubers'%20income%20rises%2023%25%20in%20past%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fyoutubers-increase-earnings-forbes-top-12-ranking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Net%20earnings%3A%20top%20YouTubers%27%20income%20rises%2023%25%20in%20past%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fyoutubers-increase-earnings-forbes-top-12-ranking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafb934582c4b60c4aca438403595ede6a132614a%2F0_179_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tyler Oakley has used his YouTube presence to discuss LGBT issues, bullying 
and eating disorders. Photograph: Vincent Sandoval/WireImage 
Integrated sponsorship deals, where companies pay for their products to 
feature in popular vlogs, are also a large source of revenue for this 
generation of YouTube celebrities.


The comedy duo Smosh, who are fourth on the Forbes list with earnings of $7m, 
had a series sponsored by razor company Schick.

One of the new entries is the vlogger Tyler Oakley, who has won plaudits for 
using his largely video diary YouTube channel tochallenge LGBT issues and speak 
about being bullied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/08/tyler-oakley-popular-champion-of-the-youtube-confessional>
 and having an eating disorder. Oakley, who earned $5m last year, has had a 
book reachnumber two in the New York Times bestseller list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/29/binge-tyler-oakley-review>
 and interviewed Barack Obama.

Oakley attributed the success of YouTube vloggers to the DIY ethos they 
continue to represent for a young audience. “I think it’s the concept of 
authenticity,” he said.

“It’s an honesty that didn’t exist in media before when I was growing up. For 
example, gay youth might look at me and feel more of a connection because it’s 
a human, as opposed to a fictional TV character who’s gay.

YouTubers hit mainstream as digital media become top choice for new talent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/09/youtubers-hit-mainstream-digital-media-top-choice-new-talent>
“For sure, YouTube is becoming so important in challenging those closed-minded 
attitudes. I think through YouTube, a lot of people have met their first openly 
LGBTQ people.

“And by feeling that level of intimacy with people like me and other 
YouTubers, it has definitely accelerated the sentiment of acceptance.

“I think there’s a level of intimacy with YouTube people, where maybe [with] a 
movie star, you feel [a] connection maybe once a year. With YouTube, you can 
find who you want and if you don’t like someone, you don’t have to watch it.”

The number of YouTube channels making six-figure sums is up by 50% on last 
year.


One of the UK’s biggest YouTube stars is Zoe Sugg, known as Zoella, a vlogger 
living in Brighton whose chattyvideos about beauty have earned her millions of 
followers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/01/zoella-youtube-books-pewdiepie-tyler-oakley-dan-phil-jamie-curry-alfie-deyes>
.

Her book, Girl Online, broke the record for the highest first week sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/dec/03/zoella-girl-online-zoe-sugg-fastest-selling-book-of-the-year>
 of a first-time novelist when it was released.

However, Penguin later admitted that Sugg had not written the book and had 
instead “worked with an expert editorial team to help her bring to life her 
characters and experiences in a heartwarming and compelling story”.
 