
Shared parental leave (SPL) was introduced on 5 April 2015 to give parents 
more choice and flexibility in caring for their children during the first 12 
months after their birth. Parents can split 52 weeks’ leave, receiving some 
payment for 39 of those weeks. That is on top of the two weeks’ statutory 
paternity leave available to fathers.

Research among 200 employers by the firm My Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Care found that more than 
four out of 10 had not seen a single male employee take up the right. At 11%, 
only between 0.5% and 1% of male workers had taken shared parental leave and 
fewer than 10% reported more than 1% takeup. A further quarter of firms were 
not able to give a figure.

Have you taken shared parental leave? If not, why? If you did opt to share 
leave with your partner what was it like? We’re particularly interested in 
hearing the experiences of new fathers who have taken leave. We’ll feature some 
of your stories on the site.


You can share your experiences by clicking on the blue ‘Contribute’ button on 
this article. You can also use theGuardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for ‘GuardianWitness assignments’. Alternatively, you can fill in 
our form below.


 * GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/series/guardianwitness> is the home of 
readers’ content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, 
and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. 
• The subheading on this article was amended on 23 May 2016. An earlier 
version said a tiny proportion of new fathers had opted for shared parental 
leave. That figure of 1%, from a MyFamily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Care survey, relates to all 
men, not just those eligible for shared parental leave.
 