
Graham Westley has told Peterborough’s fans to judge him on how his team play 
following some negative reaction to his appointment.

The 47-year-old’s spell at Preston was overshadowed by reports of player 
unrest and criticism of both his management and playing style before he was 
sacked just over a year in charge and Posh fans have raised concerns on social 
media.

“Your actions are always the most important thing in football. It doesn’t 
matter what you say, what matters is what you do,” Westley said when unveiled 
by the club at a press conference.

“I was really touched [on Sunday] as news started breaking by some of the 
messages I got from Stevenage fans. They know what Graham Westley is all about. 
They’ve worked with me, alongside me, got round my team and around me over the 
course of time and it was fantastic to get so many genuinely deep messages.

“People wishing me well, you’re just up the road but in our hearts-type thing 
and those are people who are judging me, not on what they think I’m about, but 
on what I’ve done for the football club.

“It’s actions, not words that are going to inspire people. Whatever cynicism 
or scepticism there is, they’re going to watch the team and they’re going to 
see the confidence and energy and organisation, the verve and the drive that 
the team is going to play with. And it’s that they’ll ultimately judge me on. 
That’s all.”

Doncaster’s and Oldham’s caretakers make their point with honours even | 
Jeremy Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/sep/20/doncaster-oldham-david-dunn-rob-jones>
Westley, who guided Stevenage to the Football League for the first time in 
their history in 2010 and secured back-to-back promotions for the club the 
following season, will take charge of his first game for Posh at Bradford on 
Saturday.

The club chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, had earlier released a statement 
<http://www.theposh.com/news/article/westley-2701757.aspx> on the club’s 
website defending his decision to appoint Westley. “I’ve spent the last 10 days 
getting to know Graham inside out and not only did we have a phenomenal 
one-on-one interview here in Florida, but we have spoken every day since Graham 
returned to the UK as I took my time making the final decision.

“Before we ever spoke or met, I read all the various things written about 
Graham’s time at Preston, his apparent preference in style of football and his 
apparent obsession with fitness and physicality over style, flair and fast free 
flowing football. To judge somebody on the views of others is something I’m 
never prepared to do without meeting and judging for myself.

“Graham Westley has achieved his success at what are so called unfashionable 
clubs and the one blip on his CV doesn’t mean he should be blackballed and 
blacklisted from working in football and atPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United. Sure he has made 
mistakes as we all have at some point in our lives, sure on reflection he would 
do things differently, but remember, there are always two sides to every story.”
 