
Too rubbish to go up? So bad you went down? Bored of living in a city without 
a football team? Fear not, for all you need in order to overcome your 
footballing frustrations these days is a large wad of cash. Stump up the 
millions and you too can buy a place in the sun. Better still, you can buy a 
place in La Liga.

Next season, Spain's Second Division will have eight new teams, one of whom 
will be Granada 74. Granada 74 are not one of the three teams relegated from 
the First Division, nor are they one of the four teams promoted from the four 
groups of the 72-team Second Division B. They did win promotion this summer, 
but that was fromRegional Preferente to the 18-division regional Third Division 
and that's not why they're going to be in the Second Division next season. No,
Granada 74 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/granada74> will be playing in 
the Second Division next season because theybought a place in the Second 
Division.

Well, strictly speaking they bought another club who just happened to be in 
the Second Division, but thanks to the new rules approved by the Spanish league 
(LFP) in the summer, the result has been exactly the same. Keen to encourage 
investment and to offer a solution to cash-strapped clubs beyond the normal 
cap-in-hand dash to the town council, the LFP authorised newly purchased clubs 
to move base and change name. And Ciudad de Murcia owner Enrique Pina, who set 
up the club in 1999 and grew sick of getting little institutional support and 
even less real support in a city where Real Murcia are the club with a genuine 
tradition, wasn't slow to take advantage.

For months now, Pina has been scouting round for potential buyers for his 
club, knowing that what he was really selling was their place in the Second 
Division (or even, it had briefly seemed, in the First Division, what with 
Ciudad de Murcia a single place off promotion). In his discussions with 
potential buyers, not once did anyone suggest taking on Ciudad de Murcia and 
nor did Pina demand it. He spoke to Real Oviedo, relegated to the Third 
Division, about buying their way back. He spoke to recently reformed yet 
historic Mérida about returning. And he spoke to Granada 74, a club ready to 
jump 300 teams with one wave of a chequebook.

It was Granada that won out, owner Carlos Marsá buying Pina out for a figure 
understood to be somewhere in the region of 20m. Pina will use that cash to 
bid for Cadiz, while Marsá immediately did exactly what everyone knew he would 
do: he changed the name, allowed those players who wanted to go to leave, 
effectively making those who remained the B team, and moved out of the city. 
Within a day, nothing was left of Ciudad de Murcia. Except their place in the 
Second Division.

Granada 74 have thus leapfrogged the city's other two clubs, Third Division 
Granada Atlético and Second Division B side Granada CF, straight into the 
Second Division. But this might not be as simple as they hoped. They will face 
much the same problems that Ciudad de Murcia did: no fan base and no support 
from the local council, who consider Granada CF the city's real club. As a 
result, they also will have no stadium, because the council will not allow them 
to share the municipal ground with the city's other two clubs, leaving Marsá 
looking for somewhere else to play - with Almuñecar and Guadix, 78 and 68 
kilometres away respectively, the front-runners. The country's first 
footballing franchise is a reality, but where will it take its team? Where, 
more to the point, will it take Spanish football?
 