
Paul Nuttall <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/paul-nuttall> has long been 
the Ukip figure feared by Labour MPs with seats in the party’s traditional 
northern heartlands.

Now he is the leader of the party controlled for so long by Nigel Farage, the 
fear is that this former lecturer from Bootle in Merseyside will have greater 
appeal toLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> voters than a 
tweeded, privately educated City boy.

Ukip can replace Labour as 'patriotic voice of working people', says new 
leader Paul Nuttall - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/28/fresh-legal-challenge-wont-delay-brexit-fallon-claims-politics-live>
It is no small ambition but Nuttall’s stated aim is to “replace the Labour 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-elected-as-ukip-leader>
 and make Ukip the patriotic voice of working people”.


His line of attack is already clear: that Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader is an 
out-of-touch metropolitan figure obsessed with Palestine, fair trade and 
climate change. In contrast, Nuttall will talk relentlessly about standing up 
for the English and putting the “great” back into Britain, while claiming to 
have the solutions to “the issues that affect real people in real working-class 
communities”.

In other words, the new Ukip leader will attempt to press all the Trumpian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/19/welcome-to-the-age-of-trump> 
nationalist buttons that tap into fear of immigration and resentment about 
feeling left behind financially while an elite prospers.

While Farage was viewed suspiciously by many Labour supporters in the north as 
a former Tory from the home counties, Nuttall does not have quite the same 
baggage.


That said, the new Ukip leader does have some weak points for Labour to 
exploit. In particular, his past call for the NHS to be dismantled and his 
admiration for Margaret Thatcher are likely to feature prominently on 
opposition election literature. Nuttall has also failed to break through 
electorally whenever he has run for parliament, gaining just 11% of the vote in 
Bootle in 2015.

Farage has long boasted that Ukip is on the brink of breaking through in the 
north of England, but has little to show for his efforts. The party may have 
come second to Labour in 34 seats across the north-east, north-west and 
Yorkshire (as well as in 33 in the south-east against the Conservatives) but 
this translated into no new MPs at the last election.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaul-nuttall-replaces-nigel-farage-as-ukip-leader-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Nuttall%20replaces%20Nigel%20Farage%20as%20Ukip%20leader%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaul-nuttall-replaces-nigel-farage-as-ukip-leader-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Nuttall%20replaces%20Nigel%20Farage%20as%20Ukip%20leader%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaul-nuttall-replaces-nigel-farage-as-ukip-leader-video&media=>
Paul Nuttall replaces Nigel Farage as Ukip leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-replaces-nigel-farage-as-ukip-leader-video>
Nuttall will have to work hard on Ukip’s “ground war” if he wants a different 
outcome next time. But Ukip insiders believe the EU referendum could have 
helped the party by breaking people’s long-established voting patterns, with 
former lifelong Labour supporters willing to try a party that accords more with 
the expression of their pro-Brexit view.

It may also have partially detoxified the Ukip brand by making its central 
aims appear more mainstream, as Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and finally the new 
prime minister, Theresa May, jumped on board with leaving the EU and stricter 
controls on immigration.

The risk posed by Ukip to May should not be underestimated. While Nuttall is 
focusing mainly on scooping up former Labour votes in the north, he may with 
little effort be able to pick up support from Brexit voters who end up feeling 
betrayed byMay’s efforts to take the UK out of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/uk-government-faces-legal-challenge-over-single-market>
.

'This will be a new Ukip': Paul Nuttall aims to take party beyond Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-the-leader-aiming-to-take-ukip-beyond-brexit>
If the prime minister delivers a deal that disappoints the majority of leave 
voters, especially on immigration controls, Ukip will be the natural vehicle 
for discontented Brexiters. The challenge for Nuttall will be to hold Ukip 
together without the unifying force of Farage, after a summer of infighting and 
a wave of post-Brexit defections to theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

That will be no easy task but there is a possible path to success for him: 
appealing to non-metropolitan Labour voters in the north-east, north-west, 
Midlands and Wales, along with any Tory voters disappointed by compromises over 
Brexit.

And by 2020 it is certainly possible that Farage will have had enough of 
fishing and playing thepro-Trump firebrand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 on US talk shows. The other parties should not be complacent about the thought 
of a Nuttall-Farage partnership leading Ukip into the next election, at a time 
when Britain could still be struggling to extricate itself from the EU, 
suffering the economic consequences of uncertainty and failing to bring down 
immigration.
 