
Mark Rylance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-rylance> has been awarded 
a knighthood, capping a year in which the veteran Shakespearean actor won an 
Oscar and two Baftas, as talent from across the performing arts was recognised 
in the New Year honours.

It is the first honour for the actor who played Thomas Cromwell in the BBC’s 
Wolf Hall and won an Oscar for his portrayal of Rudolph Abel in Bridge of Spies.

Speaking earlier this year, Rylance said he did not set much store by the 
various accolades he had collected over his career: “People say things about 
competing as actors and I know that is necessary to make a show out of it, but 
those actors are so good I feel I’m more of a spokesman when I win rather than 
better than the other nominees. I don’t take it too seriously.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa327c0aab2abe7dbe9bd605b3fcf427c14032644%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa327c0aab2abe7dbe9bd605b3fcf427c14032644%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Patricia Routledge. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Patricia Routledge <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/patricia-routledge>, 87, 
best known as Hyacinth Bucket in Keeping Up Appearances, was among those in the 
world of theatre and television honoured with a damehood.

Speaking to the Guardian in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/01/patricia-routledge-interview> 
ahead of a return to the stage at the National Theatre, Routledge said she 
still got fan mail from all over the world for the 1990s sitcom, and attempted 
to answer every letter.

The actor said it had not been a burden to be so closely identified with one 
character. “If everything focuses on that, it’s just too silly. But it would be 
churlish of me not to appreciate what it’s brought me. If a good number of 
people come into a theatre because they know me from the dreaded Mrs B, I 
couldn’t be happier.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10d96e7a7a16b7cc7a5db9e88378769125a2a2e%2F36_75_1890_1133%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10d96e7a7a16b7cc7a5db9e88378769125a2a2e%2F36_75_1890_1133%2F1890.jpg>
 Richard Eyre. Photograph: Hugo Glendinning 
Richard Eyre, 73, the playwright and director and former artistic director of 
the National Theatre, was also awarded the Companion of Honour, while actor
Helen McCrory <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mccrory> was given an 
OBE following her critically acclaimed performances on stage at the National 
Theatre in both Medea and Deep Blue Sea, as well as on screen in the BBC series 
Peaky Blinders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a1aa32c12ffb82512bccc030760bdb7fec95e3%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%20honours%20list%3A%20arise%20Sir%20Mark%20Rylance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-year-honours-list-arise-sir-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a1aa32c12ffb82512bccc030760bdb7fec95e3%2F0_153_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ray Davies. Photograph: Joseph Okpako/Redferns 
Kinks frontman Ray Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ray-davies>, 72, 
said he felt a mixture of joy and embarrassment on being awarded a knighthood 
for services to the arts. Despite the Kinks parting ways in 1996, Davies forged 
a solo career and two years ago collaborated on Sunny Afternoon, the 
Olivier-award wining musical based on his music and lyrics.

“This is for the people who supported my music over the years,” said Davies. 
“I’m kind of reluctant to collect rewards. I usually back out of ceremonies. 
I’m kind of a shy person.”

There was also a knighthood for veteran comedian Ken Dodd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ken-dodd>, who, despite being 89 and 
recently admitting his memory was beginning to fail, still performs lengthy 
musical and comedy shows that often run well past midnight. He said he was 
“highly tickled” to have been made a knight.

Dodd, who entered the Guinness Book of Records in the 1960s for telling 1,500 
jokes in three hours, began his foray into comedy at 14 and built up a 
following for his speedily delivered one-liners. He has also had 19 songs enter 
the Top 40 over his career, with his version of Tears topping the UK charts for 
five weeks in 1965. Dodd said he had no plans to retire anytime soon, adding: 
“I’m very proud, I’m very, very happy and full of plumptiousness.”

Welsh opera singer Bryn Terfel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bryn-terfel> 
said he was “truly humbled” to be among those receiving a knighthood, an honour 
that was also given to Jeffrey Philip Tate, the chief conductor for the Hamburg 
Symphony Orchestra, for services to British music overseas.


Naomie Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/film/naomie-harris>, who played 
loyal crown servant Eve Moneypenny in James Bond films Skyfall and Spectre, 
received an OBE, as has Tim Pigott-Smith, 70, who made his break in The Jewel 
in the Crown in 1984 and was recently nominated for both an Olivier and a Tony 
award for his portrayal of the Prince of Wales in Mike Bartlett’s play King 
Charles III.


One of the few nods for the visual arts was a CBE for Chris Ofili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/chris-ofili>, the Turner-prize 
winning painter who has represented Britain at the Venice Biennale and was one 
of the few British artists of African descent to emerge as part of the Young 
British Artist movement in the 1990s.
 