
When I decided to pay my £3 to the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party to sign up as a registered 
supporter just 12 months ago, I can’t say I expected much for my money. I’d 
been a paid-up member in the past, but after moving to Brighton to study, I 
voted for the Green party. While living there, I never looked back.

Voting in last year’s leadership election was a punt, a show of defiance; I 
wanted Labour to remember I existed. Like so many others, I wanted the party to 
represent a socialist politics, but as a child of the 90s it felt like 
something I wouldn’t see in my lifetime.

That all changed as the long summer of 2015 wore on. The excitement and sense 
of opportunity thatJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>’s leadership offered was 
infectious. On his election the next step seemed clear: (re)join the party as a 
sign that those of us who had helped ensure his election were truly committed 
to helping to build a Labour party that could deliver change.

The reality has been somewhat different. Just a year later, with Corbyn being 
challenged, polls showing Labour struggling and the PLP looking beyond repair, 
I headed to my first constituency Labour party (CLP) event expecting to find 
hundreds of fellow Corbynistas – but a smattering of attendees was all I could 
see. Where had the hordes disappeared to?

My fellow Corbyn fans have been quick to point the finger of blame, but we too 
must take some share of it. I’ll hold my hand up, and admit that I haven’t done 
enough in the year gone by – and I’m sure that’s true of many others.

Yes, I’ve tweeted and shared supportive articles, voted for Sadiq Khan and set 
up a direct debit to pay my fees. But that’s pretty much it. I’ve been absent 
from my local party meetings. I’ve failed to join others canvassing, week on 
week. Speak to longstanding members up and down the country, and it’s a 
frustration you’ll heard time and time again.

The reasons are clear. Joining Labour was for many the first time they had 
considered party membership – CLP meetings and internal democracy seemed 
complex and cliquey. Watching the infighting at conference unfold this year 
will have done nothing to dispel these concerns.

For others, myself included, activism and campaigning was all that we knew. 
The idea of electioneering and party political campaigning felt distant and 
hard to relate to.

But the Labour party establishment must take its fair share of the blame too. 
Ejecting new members for past support of other progressive parties hardly makes 
people feel welcome. Suspending CLP meetings when we finally started attending, 
just as Corbyn’s leadership was challenged, didn’t suggest they wanted us 
around.

The constant stream of slurs in the press – especially labelling new members a 
dangerousrabble of Trots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/trotskyists-young-labour-members-jeremy-corbyn-tom-watson>
, despite the fact that the vast majority couldn’t tell you any more than the 
most basic of details about Leon Trotsky, is hardly the ideal way of bringing 
people in.

However, the easiest way for new members to reassure the old Labour guard, 
which fears a dangerous insurgency is taking place, is to turn up, get talking, 
and prove that we’re all just fighting for a fairer society.

Did Jeremy Corbyn’s conference speech win over the party? Our writers’ verdict 
| The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-speech-labour-party-conference-panel-views>
We’re already learning. Labour conference may have been consumed by party 
infighting, factional posturing, and endless debate of internal rules, butThe 
World Transformed 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjsjPqpzrLPAhVsIMAKHTgOBdUQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Ftheworldtransformed.org%2F&usg=AFQjCNHlGZ8IOTL6Vqybqy7Jo6iAeuO90g&sig2=l1caLefzLhnS0cTYB9hdYA&bvm=bv.134052249,d.d24>
 – Momentum’s inaugural annual conference – was taking place down the road. 
Sessions on phone banking, crowdfunding, community organising and planning were 
peppered throughout the long weekend, a clear sign that this new, invigorated 
membership is interested in more than rhetoric and backslapping.

Our engagement isn’t just about reassuring the Labour faithful. The polls are 
a stark reminder of just how much work there is to do. We must turn the party 
into a movement that can be radical, and can win. As Corbyn said in his speech 
at conference, this wave of new members is in fact a “vast democratic resource” 
– not, as some people see it, a threat.

Those on the right of Labour seem to have no plan for achieving this change, 
having shifted little from the last two failed election attempts. Corbyn and 
his supporters are offering an alternative, but we need to communicate this in 
our communities if it is to have any chance of success. It’s just getting 
started. And, after this conference, I know I need to do more.
 