
Scientists have discovered a new species of gibbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/19/hainan-gibbon-endangered-species-china-extinction>
 living in south-west China’s rainforests.

Although scientists had been studying the primate for some time, new research 
has revealed it is in fact a different species.

It has been named the Skywalker hoolock gibbon by its discoverers, who are 
Star Wars fans. The name is also a nod to the fact that the Chinese characters 
of its scientific name,Hoolock tianxing, mean “Heaven’s movement”.

Dr Sam Turvey, from the Zoological Society of London, who was part of the team 
studying the apes, told BBC News: “In this area, so many species have declined 
or gone extinct because of habitat loss, hunting and general human 
overpopulation.

“So it’s an absolute privilege to see something as special and as rare as a 
gibbon in a canopy in a Chinese rainforest, and especially when it turns out 
that the gibbons are actually a new species previously unrecognised by science.”

Related: Primates in pictures: US photographer's portraits of endangered 
species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/jan/07/primates-in-pictures>

The research team, led by Fan Peng-Fei from Sun Yat-sen University in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, first suspected that the gibbons 
they were studying in Gaoligongshan nature reserve in Yunnan province might be 
different because of subtle differences in the typical facial markings of white 
eyebrows and beards.

Gibbons are renowned for their loud song, which they use to mark territory, 
and this also sounded unusual.

A full genetic and physical comparison with other gibbons then confirmed that 
they had found a new species.


The scientists estimate that about 200 Skywalker gibbons are living in China 
and also potentially in neighbouring Myanmar, but say that the species should 
already be classified as endangered.Habitat loss and fragmentation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/19/plan-to-build-treetop-bridges-to-save-critically-endangered-hainan-gibbons>
 is putting the gibbons at risk of extinction.


In the Gaoligongshan nature reserve where the gibbons were discovered 
scientists had to trek up to 2,500m to find suitable habitat as “everywhere 
below there has been logged”, Dr Turvey said to the BBC.
 