
Jarrod Mullen’s NRL career hangs in the balance after the Newcastle star was 
provisionally suspended by theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> for 
testing positive to an anabolic steroid.


The Knights and NRL announced on Tuesday afternoon that Mullen had returned a 
positive sample to Drostanolone in an out-of-season test in late November.


Related: Semi Radradra to quit NRL at end of season and head for Toulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/semi-radradra-to-quit-nrl-at-end-of-season-and-head-for-toulon>

The test came just a week after the 29-year-old aggravated a recurring right 
hamstring injury.


Under the NRL’s drugs policy, Mullen is facing a maximum four-year ban but can 
decide to have his B-sample analysed by the Australian Sports Anti-Doping 
Authority.


“The club is obviously extremely disappointed,” CEO Matt Gidley said. “The 
club has a strict governance program, the players are regularly educated and 
fully aware of the consequences of going outside our governance guidelines.

“From here, there is a formal process we need to follow under the guidelines. 
We need to respect the process and in the interim the club will continue to 
monitor Jarrod’s welfare.”


A shocked Gidley later told reporters that there isn’t any more education the 
game could provide to its players regarding the consequences of drug use.


“One of the things I’m really proud of in terms of our game is the way we 
educate our players now and the NRL has played a huge role in that,” he said. 
“We can’t control what players do when they leave the club and who they take 
advice from.

“I can’t believe it. It’s hugely disappointing. For a player that I’ve known 
for 20 years. He’s an experienced player. It’s disappointing for everyone 
involved.”


Asada said it had completed the test on 29 November. “Asada undertakes a 
comprehensive anti-doping program to ensure the integrity of the NRL 
competition,” Asada said in a statement.

Mullen is the first NRL player to test positive to steroid use since former 
Sydney Roosters forward Martin Kennedy was hit with a two years and nine month 
ban in 2015.


Former Asada boss Richards Ings said Drostanolone, which is also known as 
Masteron and is primarily used for the treatment of breast cancer patients, was 
a very serious steroid.

“He’ll need to show the source of the steroid and that he exercised extreme 
caution to avoid ingesting it,” Ings tweeted.


Mullen has played 211 games for the Knights since making his debut in 2005 and 
was considered an integral member of their line-up ahead of the upcoming 2017 
season.
 