
Of all the improbable animal noises Chris Watson has recorded over the years – 
limpets grazing, cod purring, a single ant walking, Kenyan hippos chuckling, 
the pitter-patter of Northumbrian caterpillar excrement falling from a tree – 
none is more entrancing than the buzz of the dung fly.

To capture the sound, the Bafta-winning wildlife sound recordist  
<http://www.chriswatson.net/>put a tiny microphone into a cowpat on Newcastle’s 
Town Moor. He likes to put microphones in unusual places – a zebra carcass, for 
example, or an Icelandic glacier – and record the results. The way Watson 
describes it, that cowpat is one of Newcastle’s leading night spots.

“It’s where dung beetles pair up and mate. Dung flies too. The males compete 
for females on the surface of the cowpat.” It’s also where flies make sounds 
hitherto unappreciated by human ears. “It was the fulfilment of a longtime 
ambition, and I was really pleased withthe results 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03btw66>,” says Watson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdefe67996555c41220a91395ec480d317d8ee985%2F124_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcastle's%20most%20buzzing%20night%20spot%3F%20A%20cowpat%20on%20the%20Town%20Moor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcastle%27s%20most%20buzzing%20night%20spot%3F%20A%20cowpat%20on%20the%20Town%20Moor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdefe67996555c41220a91395ec480d317d8ee985%2F124_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
 Watson at work in Kielder Forest, Northumberland 
The microphone was the sort you normally see attached to TV presenters’ lapels 
and Watson promises it’ll be clean before he fixes it to David Attenborough. 
The co-founder of Sheffield’s experimental post-punk bandCabaret Voltaire 
<http://www.sheffieldvision.com/aboutmis_bands_cv.html> is today one of the 
world’s leading sound recordists, specialising in natural history. He has won 
two Baftas for his work, one for Attenborough’s The Life of Birds in 1996, the 
other forFrozen Planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/20/how-we-made-frozen-planet-david-attenborough-nature-bbc>
 in 2012.

What I do is put a microphone where you can’t put your ears
Chris Watson 
Watson has long been recording bugs, inspired by the Japanese tradition of 
appreciating insect sounds as we do birdsong. In 15th-century Japan, crickets 
would be put into tiny cages and, at the right temperature, they would sing. 
Kyoto monks claimed the Japanese bell cricket had the voice of Buddha. Though 
more prosaic, the Geordie dung fly song is also appealing, says Watson. “It 
sounded like an acoustic bass, a deep woody sound.”

Watson recorded on the Town Moor – the vast green space in Newcastle 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/uk/newcastle> city centre – for a year. He used 
underwater hydrophones to record water boatmen and bat detectors to catch 
pipistrelles’ echolocation during their nocturnal hunts. “What I do,” he tells 
me, “is put a microphone where you can’t put your ears.”

Feel the buzz: the album recorded by 40,000 bees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/bee-band-the-hive-kev-bales-martin-bencsik-wolfgang-buttress-nottingham-arts-theatre-be-one>
The hardest thing to capture? “Newcastle United scoring a goal.” St James’s 
Park lies on Town Moor but it took three trips to the ground for Watson to get 
the chance to record 55,000 Geordies celebrating leather hitting net. Now he 
has assembled an audio portrait of a year on Town Moor, which will be presented 
as a 40-minute “dark” cinema experience, co-produced by BBC Newcastle and 
showing inThe Gallery 
<https://www.tynesidecinema.co.uk/whats-on/art/the-gallery> at Tyneside cinema 
for the next month. “You’ll come into the cinema, take your seat, the curtains 
will draw back and the screen will be black and for the next 40 minutes you’ll 
hear 14 signature sounds of Town Moor,” he explains.

As well as the water boatmen and bats, you can hear a circus, some steam 
engines, and drone planes being tested by local engineering students. As they 
listen, viewers will become the image-makers, hopes Watson, who hasn’t included 
the dung fly in the final cut. “Perhaps I should try again and get it in.”

One of the joys of Watson’s work is that it makes you listen anew to everyday 
noises and appreciate their neglected beauty. One recording from Town Moor 
features the start of a park run. The sound of padding athletes’ feet sounds, 
to my ears, velvety, like the sensual brush work of a jazz drummer. “We hear 
everything but we hardly ever listen,” Watson responds. “So many of us have 
iPods in our ears as a way of controlling noise pollution. [We] don’t listen to 
what’s immediately around us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsL-nTv5LL9g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsL-nTv5LL9g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsL-nTv5LL9g&media=>
Right now, sound art such as Watson’s is having a moment. The other day, I was 
going up and down the lift at Birmingham’s Ikon Gallery listening toMartin 
Creed’s installation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cLq7dk-QtGs>: a choir 
whose voices rise through the octaves as you go up, and down as the lift 
descends. Talk about elevator music.

Crickets, bees and vinyl – Chris Watson's Pestival mix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/03/chris-watson-pestival-southbank> 
Watson is increasingly invited to work in galleries. In 2009, he made an audio 
response to John Constable’s Cornfield for an exhibition calledSounds of the 
Gallery 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/about-us/press-and-media/press-releases/sounds-of-the-gallery>
. In 2010, he collaborated onThe Bee Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/bee-band-the-hive-kev-bales-martin-bencsik-wolfgang-buttress-nottingham-arts-theatre-be-one>
, a vocal work performed live with a choir and honey bees in surround-sound at 
the insect-themedPestival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/03/chris-watson-pestival-southbank>
. In 2011, he worked at the Louvre in Paris onthree installations 
<http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/04/01/upward-with-the-arts-the-louvres-cy-twombly-ceiling/>
, one a sound response to Cy Twombly’s vast ceiling painting in the Salle des 
Bronzes, one that included recordings of cranes in flight. In 2014, he used the 
groaning of an Icelandic glacier in a sound piece calledSönghellier 
<http://www.hildurness.com/news/touch_presents_live_in_lincoln.html> (the Cave 
of Song) at Lincoln Cathedral.

Is what he does music, art or sound recording? “I don’t demarcate. I don’t 
find it helpful to do so.”

His obsession started in Sheffield in the 1960s, when his parents gave him a 
battery-operated reel-to-reel tape recorder. He decided to record birds and 
realised he needed to leave the machine near the bird table and retreat so as 
not to disturb the chaffinches, blue tits and robins. That fascination was 
cemented when, as a teenager, he came across the work of French composerPierre 
Schaeffer <http://www.factmag.com/2016/02/23/pierre-schaeffer-guide/>, the 
so-called father of sampling and a form of music calledmusique concrète, which 
appropriated the sounds of nature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ca46ecbe7b9849888e80dfa673a78be3b99abde%2F0_1417_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcastle's%20most%20buzzing%20night%20spot%3F%20A%20cowpat%20on%20the%20Town%20Moor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcastle%27s%20most%20buzzing%20night%20spot%3F%20A%20cowpat%20on%20the%20Town%20Moor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fnewcastle-town-moor-chris-watson-cabaret-voltaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ca46ecbe7b9849888e80dfa673a78be3b99abde%2F0_1417_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Watson’s recording of Town Moor included park runs, insects’ mating songs and 
even St James’ Park celebrating a goal. Photograph: Courtesy BBC Newcastle/ 
Kaleel Zibe and Jacky Longstaff 
After quitting Cabaret Voltaire in 1981, he joined the sound department of 
Tyne Tees TV, working on shows including The Tube. Leaving experimental 
post-punk for sound recording seems rather like Brian Cox giving up rock’n’roll 
for physics. “There is a parallel,” he says. “I found sound recording much more 
thrilling. This, you have to remember, was after punk and the whole ‘revolt 
into style’ of post-punk falling apart.” He still releases albums of music and 
found sound on the long-running independent labelTouch <http://www.touch33.net/>
.

Watson’s recordings have been used therapeutically. He once took part in an 
art project calledWild Song At Dawn  
<http://www.fact.co.uk/projects/wild-song-at-dawn.aspx>at Liverpool’s Alder Hey 
children’s hospital, using sounds patients and staff had recorded to calm other 
patients in the wards. Does sound recording in nature help him spiritually, 
too? Yes, he says. One of his greatest pleasures is the chance to be alone and 
absorbed in listening to what other humans miss.

His recent Radio 4 series Soundstage <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05pclsm>
 featured recordings of the dawn chorus in Suffolk, wildebeest migrating across 
Kenya, a glacier melting in the Antarctic. In one episode,The Oak Woodland 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07cvhrz?ns_mchannel=social&>, he stood 
beneath a tree getting showered with frass – the aforementioned caterpillar 
excrement – near his home in Northumbria. What I heard was something like a 
soft rain.

“It may have sounded that way,” laughs Watson, “but, trust me, it felt 
different.”


 * The Town Moor – A Portrait in Sound 
<http://www.tynesidecinema.co.uk/whats-on/art/events-exhibitions/chris-watson>, 
is at the The Gallery at Tyneside Cinema, Newcastle, until 24 July.
 