
Newport County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newport-county> have 
appointed John Sheridan as their new manager following the departure of Terry 
Butcher.

Sheridan, 51, who was unveiled the day after Butcher left the club, will take 
charge of Saturday’s home game against Exeter City.

The former Oldham, Chesterfield and Plymouth manager has yet to confirm his 
backroom staff and will be assisted by Byron Anthony and Michael Flynn for his 
first match.

Butcher left the club on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/01/terry-butcher-leaves-newport-county>
 after one win in 10 games left them bottom of League Two following 
confirmation that the supporters trust had completed a deal to take control.

The former England international defender was appointed in April 2015 to 
succeed Jimmy Dack, but failed to produce consistent form, with Tuesday’s 3-0 
home defeat by Crawley Town prompting the club to act.

The trust had needed to raise £195,000 to buy the club and surpassed its 
target by £41,000 in the space of a month.

Sheridan told the club website 
<http://www.newport-county.co.uk/news/article/john-sheridan-announced-as-county-manager-2722417.aspx>
: “Following the supporters trust taking control of the club in the past 24 
hours, I’m confident that if the players and fans work together we can help the 
squad climb the table, away from the relegation zone.

“From my time at with Plymouth, Chesterfield and Oldham, I know what is 
required to succeed in this division.”

A brief club statement read: “The trust board are delighted that John has 
agreed to join us. He comes with an excellent track record and we would ask 
fans continue to support the club by coming along to John’s first game against 
Exeter on Saturday, and of course the first game as a supporter-owned 
community-based club.”

Sheridan, who won the League Two title with Chesterfield in 2011, spent just 
over two seasons at Plymouth but left the club at the end of last season after 
guiding them to theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-offs, citing his 
desire to return to the north.
 