
Simon Stevens <https://www.theguardian.com/society/simon-stevens>, the NHS 
chief executive, has been defended by MPs for sounding the alarm over health 
funding, amid reports of tensions with Downing Street over his handling of the 
A&E winter crisis.

Stevens will appear before the House of Commons public accounts committee on 
Wednesday, where he will be expected to explain whether the NHS is funded 
sufficiently at a time when doctors are warning of anunprecedented danger to 
patient safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/an-absolute-warzone-nhs-doctors-describe-their-week-in-ae>
.

He will also be pressed on his relationship with No 10 after the Times 
reported that Downing Street aides had expressed irritation in meetings with 
his “unenthusiastic” attitude towards making savings.

No 10 plays down reports of rift with NHS chief Simon Stevens - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/11/pmqs-may-corbyn-nhs-simon-stevens-10-plays-down-reports-of-rift-with-nhs-chief-simon-stevens-politics-live>
May has insisted the NHS needs to reform its relationship with social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/social-care-crisis-theresa-may-under-pressure-to-act-fast>
 and make efficiencies, rather than get any more cashthan the £10bn a year extra
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/labour-theresa-may-10bn-nhs-claim-uk-statistics-authority>
 she claims it will receive by 2020.

However, Stevens has argued that the figure is more like £8bn a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/theresa-mays-claim-on-health-funding-not-true-say-mps>
 and this may not be enough.

Senior government sources dismissed reports of tensions as nonsense. However, 
Stevens was backed by Sarah Wollaston, the chair of the health select 
committee, who thanked him for “exercising his duty of candour” as set out in 
legislation.

Wollaston is one of a group of 70 politicians, including Norman Lamb, the 
Liberal Democrat health spokesman, and the Conservative former health minister 
Dr Dan Poulter, urging the prime minister to set up a cross-party convention to 
consider the long-term future ofNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
funding.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Wollaston did not rule out the idea 
that such a convention should examine higher taxes to fund the health service, 
and suggested May shouldrethink plans for seven-day GP availability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/plans-for-seven-day-gps-not-thought-out-says-spending-watchdog>
, given the current pressures.

The former shadow business secretary Chuka Umunna said reports of tensions 
showed “desperate stuff from ministers desperate to avoid responsibility for 
their mess” in the NHS, while Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, said it was 
“blame the expert time again from the Conservatives”.

“Simon Stevens has heroically kept the NHS afloat, despite its scandalous lack 
of funding,” he said. “The government is getting slaughtered by MPs of all 
parties for the NHS crisis it is presiding over, so to distract attention, it 
blames the expert.”

May is also likely to be pressed on her relationship with and confidence in 
Stevens at prime minister’s questions, while Labour may raise the issue later 
on Wednesday afternoon at its opposition day debate on the NHS.

Hospital doctors are warning May that the NHS “will fail” this winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-fail-winter-without-cash-injection-hospital-doctors-tell-theresa-may>
 and patient care will suffer unless she provides an emergency cash injection.

The leaders of 33,000 doctors from 30 medical specialties urged the prime 
minister to recognise that hospitals are “paralysed by spiralling demand”.

In a letter to May, the Royal College of Physicians and a host of senior 
doctors said the NHS was trying to tackle so many problems with such limited 
resources that it was in danger of not being able to do its job of caring for 
patients.

Speaking to the BBC, Prof Jane Dacre, the president of the RCP, said: “Our 
members tell me it is the worst it has ever been in terms of patients coming in 
during a 24-hour period and numbers of patients coming in when there are no 
beds to put them in.

“And there are patients within the hospital who can no longer get home because 
of the difficulties there are in placing people in social care.”

A government spokesperson said: “We recognise the pressures of an ageing 
population, which is why we recently announced almost £900m of additional 
funding for adult social care over the next two years. But as the prime 
minister has made clear, this is not solely about money.

“That is why we are working to find a long-term, sustainable solution, which 
helps local authorities learn from each other to raise standards across the 
whole system.”

Jonathan Ashworth, Labour’s shadow health secretary, said it was “really, 
really unfair blaming Simon Stevens, who’s a civil servant who runs the NHS”.


“The buck stops with Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> and Jeremy Hunt. On Monday 
Jeremy Hunt appeared to be blaming the public for turning up at A&E. Today they 
appear to be blaming this poor guy Simon Stevens. No doubt tomorrow they will 
be blaming the weather. They’ve got to take responsibility.”

Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, said on Monday that conditions in A&E were 
improving but there could be further challenges on the way with cold weather 
forecast for the end of the week.
 