
NHS organisations are paying millions of pounds to private firms that stop 
patients being referred to hospital by theirGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps>, an investigation has found.

Controversial referral management centres are used by some clinical 
commissioning groups (CCGs) to scrutinise patient referrals to hospitals by 
family doctors.

Supporters say they can reduce inappropriate referrals, saving the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> money, but critics argue that adding 
an extra layer of scrutiny risks delaying diagnosis. There is also doubt over 
the effectiveness of such schemes.

GP practices 'offered rewards' for not referring patients to hospitals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/01/gp-practices-offered-rewards-for-not-referring-patients-to-hospitals>
In an investigation, the British Medical Journal (BMJ) sent freedom of 
information requests to all 211 CCGs in England. Of the 184 that responded, 72 
(39%) said they commissioned some form of referral management scheme.

Almost a third (32%) of the schemes are provided by private companies, while a 
further 29% are provided in-house and 11% by local NHS trusts. Some 69% of the 
CCGs with schemes gave details of operating costs. These CCGs combined have 
spent at least £57m on schemes since April 2013.

Most CCGs were unable to provide evidence showing the scheme saved money. Only 
14% could show that the scheme had saved more cash than it had cost to operate, 
while 12% showed that their schemes had not saved money overall.

Meanwhile, 74% of CCGs (53 groups) failed to supply figures to show whether 
any money had been saved, the BMJ reported.

Some CCGs did not collect data on savings, some said their referral scheme was 
designed not to save money but to improve the quality of referrals, and others 
declined to disclose details of savings on the grounds of commercial 
confidentiality.

Overall, there were 93 referral management schemes in operation across 72 
CCGs, with some CCGs having more than one.

Dr Richard Vautrey, deputy chairman of the British Medical Association 
<https://www.bma.org.uk/>’s GPs committee, told the BMJ: “[CCGs] are leaping at 
these schemes without any clear evidence of benefit. They are just hopeful that 
it might reduce their costs.

“It is a very short-term approach to healthcare management. We need to see 
much more evaluation … and not just keep making the same mistakes year after 
year. As public bodies, there should be an expectation on every CCG to account 
for what it is doing.”

Vautrey said some schemes were helpful because they gave GPs rapid access to 
advice from local specialists.

Graham Jackson, co-chair of NHS Clinical Commissioners, the membership 
organisation representing CCGs, said referral management was only one way of 
managing demand for services.

“In many cases they provide a useful and effective role which is more than a 
redirection service,” he said. “CCGs will balance the cost of commissioning 
with the benefit they provide to GPs and patients in terms of peer review, 
education, caseload management and choice.”

In October, Roberta Blackman-Woods, Labour MP for City of Durham, criticised a 
local scheme to screen referrals for conditions including cardiology, 
gynaecology and gastroenterology.

The North Durham CCG has awarded a contract to the private firm About Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> to manage referrals.
 