
Cash-strapped hospitals in England face a £322m tax rise from April which 
threatens to increase the strain on the under-pressureNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

Changes to the business rates system mean that the 1,249 NHS hospitals liable 
for the property tax will see their bill increase by 21% over the next five 
years, according to research conducted for the Guardian by property consultant 
CVS.

The total bill faced by hospitals will rise from £313m this year to £377m a 
year on average for the next five years. This annual increase of £64m would be 
enough to pay for nearly 2,500 more junior doctors.

George Osborne's changes to business rates: Q&A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/george-osbornes-changes-to-business-rates-qa>
The hospitals facing the most severe increases include the Queen Elizabeth 
hospital in Birmingham, which will see its business rates bill more than double 
from £2.8m a year to £6.9m, while the Royal London in east London will see 
bills rise from £6.3m to £9m.

The revelation of the increase comes after the Royal College of Physicians 
(RCP) and a host of senior doctors warned Theresa May in a letter that 
hospitals are“paralysed by spiralling demand” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-fail-winter-without-cash-injection-hospital-doctors-tell-theresa-may>
 and the NHS “will fail” without an emergency cash injection.

The increase in business rates is a result of a revaluation of property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/george-osbornes-changes-to-business-rates-qa>
 in Britain. This is supposed to take place every five years but the previous 
revaluation wascontroversially delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/29/revaluation-business-rates-delayed-tory>
 by the government for two years, making the change in bills from April more 
pronounced.


Charging business rates to NHS hospitals is controversial. Some private 
healthcare providers, such as NuffieldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, enjoy an 80% discount because 
they are registered as charities.

More than 100 NHS trusts, roughly half of the acute trusts in the country, 
wrote to local authorities last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/cash-strapped-hospitals-ask-for-a-15bn-rebate>
 claiming they should be eligible for the discount and a £1.5bn rebate. The 
trusts are being represented by Bilfinger GVA, a property consultancy. Although 
their request was rejected, they are now understood to be considering legal 
action in what could become a major test case.

Stephen Graves, chief executive of the Peterborough and Stamford hospitals NHS 
foundation trust, warned that his hospitals will have to cut more costs to pay 
for a 43% increase in rates.

He said: “The trust has seen an increase on business rates of £1.2m, which is 
an increase of 43% in a year. This has created a rise from £2.7m to £3.9m, 
which means that the trust will now need to put additional cost efficiencies in 
place, on top of the savings that we had already planned for, to ensure that we 
reach our financial control total for next year 2017/2018.”

A spokesperson for the Barts Health NHS trust, which includes the Royal 
London, added: “Like every trust in London, we have been aware of the coming 
changes in business rates and we have plans in place to meet our financial 
obligations.”

Bilfinger GVA warned that hospitals faced an “exponential” increase in their 
tax bill. A spokesperson said: “Increases in rateable values [of the hospitals] 
and the liabilities [tax bill] are largely due to a hike in building costs and 
tender prices for new hospitals, part removal of age and obsolescence 
allowances for hospital buildings built in the 60s and 70s, a removal of 
multi-floor allowances, the inclusion of multi-storey car parks, and long stay 
exemptions for patients sectioned under the Mental Health Act and for those 
patients whose length of stay exceeds 60 days.”

However, local authorities, which receive around half of the revenues raised 
from business rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/osborne-to-allow-local-councils-to-keep-26bn-raised-from-business-rates>
, defended taxing hospitals and pledged to fight attempts for them to be 
re-registered as charities.

A spokesperson for the Local Government Association said: “The LGA continues 
to support member councils who received applications for mandatory relief from 
business rates on behalf of a number of NHS trusts.

 “We remain of the view that NHS trusts and foundation trusts are not 
charities and therefore not eligible for mandatory non domestic rate relief. 
Following legal advice, affected councils have responded to further letters 
from GVA setting out that their arguments for relief remain unfounded.”

A spokesman for the Department for Communities and Local Government said: 
“This revaluation improves the fairness of rate bills by making sure they more 
closely reflect the property market. Rateable values are set independently by 
the Valuation Office Agency, which uses a widely accepted method to assess NHS 
hospitals. We’ve also given local authorities the powers to grant additional 
business rate relief as they see they fit.

 “Overall nearly three quarters of properties in England will see no change or 
even a fall – including 600,000 who from this April will have their bills cut 
altogether.”
 