
Niall Ferguson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/niall-ferguson>, the 
historian and rightwing commentator, is ready to answer questions about many 
things, among them his critics (“They’re engaging in a rather unscrupulous and 
dishonest pursuit”); Barack Obama (“This presidency has not been a great 
success”); and anyone offended by his ideas (“There is a kind of PC 2.0 
generation, who found a way of empowering themselves by seeking to police 
campuses in ways that sometimes vaguely remind me of the Cultural Revolution in 
China”). But for all his outspokenness, when I ask him about the contours of 
his life, Ferguson, who usually speaks in complete paragraphs, becomes 
tight-lipped – or perhaps merely tired, faced with going over old ground.

“You were born in Glasgow,” I say. “Yes.” “And you grew up there?” “Yes. So 
far as I have grown up.” “What did your parents do?” “My father was a doctor. 
My mother was a teacher.” He lays out his own teaching career, after receiving 
a PhD in German history from Oxford, like this: “Taught in Cambridge three 
years. Taught at Oxford 10 years. Got bored, came here. That’s it.”

There’s a little more to it than that. Ferguson’s first book, Paper and Iron 
(1995), was celebrated for its reassessment of the influence of German 
hyperinflation in the 1920s, and his two‑volume history of the Rothschild 
family was universally praised for its meticulous research. He has gone on 
to write numerous bestsellers and become an academic celebrity, currently 
teaching at Harvard, and has adapted a number of his books into TV series 
that he presents himself.

He is the author, most recently, of a 1,000-page authorised biography of Henry 
Kissinger. The first of two volumes, it covers the years 1923 to 1968 and bears 
the subtitle “The Idealist”. In a fiery indictment,The Trial of Henry Kissinger,
Christopher Hitchens famously accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/feb/24/pinochet.bookextracts> the 
statesman of “war crimes and crimes against humanity in Indochina, Chile, 
Argentina, Cyprus, East Timor and several other places” – and in some 
intellectual circles, to call Kissinger an idealist is nothing short of heresy.

Ferguson had unprecedented access to Kissinger’s private papers and argues that
Richard Nixon <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/richard-nixon>’s secretary 
of state has been misunderstood for years as a machiavellian realist obsessed 
with power at any cost, and that his true reputation is buried under “visceral 
hostility” ranging from mere “vitriol” to “outright lunacy”. Ferguson has made 
a career out of combativeness. In more than a dozen books and countless 
columns, he has attempted to dismantle certain accepted notions of history, as 
well as the very concept of disagreeing with Niall Ferguson, and this new 
volume is in the same vein.

His account of the first time he met the political scientist and diplomat is 
both serious and ridiculous, and is worth quoting at length: “It was in London, 
in a bookshop, that Boswell met Johnson. My first meeting with Kissinger was 
also in London, at a party given byConrad Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/conradblack>. I was an Oxford don who 
dabbled in journalism, and I was naturally flattered when the elder statesman 
expressed his admiration for a book I had written about the first world war. I 
was also impressed by the speed with which I was dropped when the model Elle 
Macpherson entered the room.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443024892995%2F892482aa-bc9a-481e-9ba2-99a7ab70169e-1508x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Niall%20Ferguson%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Public%20life%20these%20days%20is%20a%20cascade%20of%20abuse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Niall%20Ferguson%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Public%20life%20these%20days%20is%20a%20cascade%20of%20abuse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443024892995%2F892482aa-bc9a-481e-9ba2-99a7ab70169e-1508x2040.jpeg>
 Henry Kissinger in Washington in 1975. Photograph: Dirck Halstead/Getty Images 
Since Ferguson’s book ends in 1968, there is no mention of the biggest 
controversies surrounding Kissinger – including the bombing of Cambodia (a 
neutral country in America’s conflict in Vietnam), which led to more than 
100,000 Cambodian deaths. Ferguson doesn’t want to talk about this (“I haven’t 
really begun processing the material I have on that,” he says), but part one of 
his biography offers plenty of opportunities for the author to reconsider his 
subject. One received view he tries to dispense with is that Kissinger as a 
young man was a “dour conformist”, and among his evidence is a cocker spaniel 
called Smoky. Kissinger, as a student at Harvard, would write letters to his 
parents in the voice of the dog – “a man who not only writes letters on his 
dog’s behalf but also brings the dog to college” hardly matches the description 
of a conformist, the argument goes. (“Smoky died of heat exhaustion,” it turns 
out, “having been inadvertently locked in a sealed car.”)

Ferguson makes little mention of Kissinger’s family life as an adult, skipping 
over any sordid details about his first marriage, which ended in divorce, 
partly because, as he tells me, he has “been through a divorce myself”. 
Ferguson is now married to the Somalian writerAyaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali>. During our conversation, 
he mentions her only briefly, to say that he feels the negative reception of 
her bookHeretic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/27/heretic-islam-reformation-ayaan-hirsi-ali-highlights-scale-of-the-task>
, about Islamic reformation – “Islam is not a religion of peace,” Ali, a former 
Muslim, wrote – was “really quite disgusting”.

The most crucial of Ferguson’s historical revisions concerns the claim, first 
made by Seymour Hersh in his 1983 bookThe Price of Power, that Kissinger leaked 
classified information to the Nixon campaign about the Johnson administration’s 
1968 Paris peace talks with North Vietnam. This, other historians have argued, 
allowed Nixon and his advisers to persuade South Vietnam into pulling out of 
the talks on the promise they would get a better deal from a Republican 
president. But it led to a useless prolonging of the war for another five years.

The story has been rehashed over and over in the books on Kissinger, with 
varying degrees of outrage. Ferguson does not deny that Kissinger meddled, but 
he reinterprets its importance: Kissinger’s knowledge of the talks was vague, 
he argues, and South Vietnam would have backed away from the talks even if 
Nixon hadn’t intervened. Besides, Ferguson writes, “Would a lasting peace deal 
have been concluded if Nixon had just sat and watched? The answer must be no.” 
Well, who knows? Other writers – including Hersh andHitchens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/22/christopher-hitchens-decca-aitkenhead>
 – have said the opposite.

“I think you’ve got to really bend the evidence to arrive at the story that 
Hersh and Hitchens told,” Ferguson tells me. “In other words, you’ve got to 
want a story. You’ve got to be a journalist, not a historian. It’s a big 
problem for journalism that a lot of history is just not that exciting.” (When 
I write to him, Hersh declines to comment because he hasn’t looked at 
Ferguson’s book, but adds that it “must be one hell of a read”.)

Kissinger is sure to inspire disagreement, which will make it typical of 
Ferguson’s output, from weighty tomes to rapidly written articles.One notable 
squabble was in 2011, with the writer Pankaj Mishra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/14/niall-ferguson-pankaj-mishra>, 
which unravelled like a sober version ofNorman Mailer and Gore Vidal on the 
Dick Cavett show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C8m9vDRe8fw>. Mishra wrote a 
negative review in the LRB 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v33/n21/pankaj-mishra/watch-this-man> of Ferguson’s 
Civilisation: The West and the Rest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/25/civilization-west-rest-niall-ferguson-review>
, a book that argues that the 500-year era of western ascendency is coming to a 
close and attempts to explain its rise in the first place with reference to six 
“functional complexes”: property rights, competition, science, medicine, the 
consumer society and work ethic. He refers to these in the book as “killer 
apps”. (“Which sounds rather facile,”Ferguson himself told Charlie Rose in 2011 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0-07Sc11TMo>, “but it’s not a bad metaphor.”) 
Mishra concluded that the book was a “gallimaufry” that celebrated imperialism 
while glossing over the slave trade, and drew a comparison between Ferguson and 
Theodore Lothrop Stoddard, the author of the 1920 bestsellerThe Rising Tide of 
Color Against White World Supremacy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rising_Tide_of_Color_Against_White_World-Supremacy>
.

I think you’ve got to really bend the evidence to arrive at the story that 
Hersh and Hitchens told

Ferguson replied via a letter to the LRB, calling Mishra’s review “libellous 
and dishonest” <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v33/n22/letters>. He demanded an apology. 
Mishra responded with another letter, saying: “Ferguson is no racist, in part 
because he lacks the steady convictions of racist ideologues like Stoddard.” 
Ferguson shot back, claiming that Mishra had not “bothered to read my work”. 
Mishra offered a closing note: “It says something about the political culture 
of our age that Ferguson has got away with his disgraced worldview for as long 
as he has.” All of this was covered breathlessly by the literary press on both 
sides of the Atlantic. I ask Ferguson about it. “Well,” he says, sighing, “I 
should obviously apologise.” A pause. “Because I’m very sorry to the general 
public for having drawn anybody’s attention to him.” Mishra tells me that “a 
two-volume hagiography of Henry Kissinger strikes me as an appropriate career 
move for this figure”.

Ferguson was widely criticised in 2009 when he compared Obama to Felix the Cat 
in a column for the Financial Times (“not only black” but also “very, very 
lucky”, to which Nobel prizewinning economistPaul Krugman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-austerity-delusion>
 responded in the New York Times: “I don’t think that Professor Ferguson is a 
racist. I think he’s a poseur.”) In 2013, he was called homophobic for 
critiquingJohn Maynard Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/17/john-maynard-keynes-vince-cable>
’s economic philosophy as being selfish because Keynes was childless as a 
result of being a homosexual. Ferguson apologised for this in an open letter 
in the Harvard Crimson, though he concluded the letter defensively by saying, 
“For the self-appointed inquisitors of [the] internet, it is always easier to 
accuse than seriously to inquire.”

The most consistent charge of Ferguson’s detractors, however, is that he gets 
basic facts jumbled in his work.“Niall Ferguson displays his ignorance of 
economics,” 
<http://www.cepr.net/blogs/beat-the-press/niall-ferguson-displays-his-ignorance-of-economics>
 ran a headline from earlier this year on the blog of the Center for Economic 
and Policy Research. “For Niall Ferguson, the commission of error is more 
than a hazard,”Jonathan Chait wrote recently in New York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/06/niall-ferguson-fights-back-against-fact-checkers.html#>
. “It’s a cherished way of life.” The criticism over Ferguson’s inaccuracies 
peaked over a2012 cover story for Newsweek 
<http://www.newsweek.com/niall-ferguson-why-barack-obama-needs-go-64419> about 
why Obama didn’t deserve a second term as president, which inspired criticism 
from people across the political spectrum – including Ferguson’s old school 
friend and fellow conservativeAndrew Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/25/andrew-sullivan-distortion-terrorism-woolwich>
 – claiming that it was riddled with blunders. I mention this article to 
Ferguson. He maintains that there was only one error, which related to “the 
finances of Obamacare”.

“Everything else was just people disagreeing,” he says. “They were trying to 
present things that were factually correct as errors to try to discredit the 
piece. But as I said, there was only one mistake.” I cite one of the claims 
people said he got wrong – that in 2011 “nearly half of the population [was] 
not represented on a taxable return”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025133415%2F286579c4-af34-465d-b67d-72d00eee0c4a-1695x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Niall%20Ferguson%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Public%20life%20these%20days%20is%20a%20cascade%20of%20abuse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Niall%20Ferguson%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98Public%20life%20these%20days%20is%20a%20cascade%20of%20abuse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fniall-ferguson-interview-abuse-henry-kissinger-historian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025133415%2F286579c4-af34-465d-b67d-72d00eee0c4a-1695x2040.jpeg>
 Ferguson with his wife, Ayaan Hirsi Ali, at the Time 100 gala in New York, 
2009. Photograph: Jemal Countess/WireImage.com 
“The reality is that 46% of American households did not file federal income 
taxes in 2011, but they paid state and local taxes,” I say. “So it was an error 
by omission, I guess.”

“Yeah,” Ferguson says. “If that’s all you can really attack someone for, you 
must be really quite desperate … Frankly, compared with writing a biography of 
Kissinger, or any book that I’ve written, a cover story for Newsweek is not a 
tremendously important proportion of my work.”

Ferguson’s self-defence almost invariably takes the form of saying his 
accusers have not read his work or not read it carefully enough, or he 
dismisses an attack as partisan grandstanding. He has been on the receiving end 
of so much ire, not unlike Kissinger, that he has coined a phrase as a blanket 
defence, Correct Politicalness, which he defines as an attempt to “undermine an 
irrefutable argument by claiming loudly and repetitively to have found an error 
in it”.

“It’s what people on the left do when they’re out of ammo,” he tells me, “they 
retreat into these ultimately inconsequential quibbles.” When I ask him if 
people on the right aren’t perhaps guilty of the same thing, he says, “I can’t 
speak for the right. I’m at Harvard. I’ve met four conservatives in this entire 
town.”

Though he discusses the topic with noticeable weariness, Ferguson is clearly 
not ignorant of the fact that people dislike him and his work. He admits as 
much in the preface toKissinger, writing that he initially didn’t want to take 
on the project in the first place because he would be “inevitably … savaged by 
Christopher Hitchens and others.” He’s joking, to a degree, but I ask him 
whether he has become oversensitive to the opinions of his contemporaries.

“I was on quite friendly terms with Hitchens,” Ferguson says. “I was very sad 
when he died, and not least because it would have been great fun to have read 
his review of this book.” He goes silent for a moment, then continues: “People 
get attached to certain narratives. And the narrative that Henry Kissinger is 
the most evil American that ever lived is a sort of important narrative for 
people, particularly people who were here in 1968 and came up in the 1970s, 
opposing everything that Nixon did. So if you challenge those narratives, 
it’s not surprising that people react sometimes quite strongly. It comes with 
the territory. I certainly don’t enjoy it. I don’t think anybody likes being 
abused, even if it’s only in tweets. Public life in any form these days is 
essentially inseparable from a cascade of abuse. And you have to just get on 
with what you do and not pay so much attention to it.”

He groans and stares at the ground. “I have a certain amount of dread,” he 
says softly, “for the kind of stuff that people will say about me and the book. 
Because I could kind of write it for them. It’s depressingly predictable. 
People just want to give an opinion of the author, and why waste time reading 
the book when you’ve already decided he’s a dreadful person?”

• To order Kissinger: 1923-1968 – The Idealist for £28 (RRP £35) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/326863/> or call 0330 
333 6846.
 