
The ugliest word in boxing is “quit”. Muhammad Ali wouldn’t do it when he 
fought all the way to the finishwith a broken jaw against Ken Norton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/19/ken-norton-jaw-breaking-fighter>
.

Danny Williams wouldn’t do it when he knocked out Mark Potter with a 
dislocated right arm. Audley Harrison, often derided, came from behind nursing 
an injured shoulderto knock out Michael Sprott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/apr/10/audley-harrison-european-champion-boxing>
 in the final round. Don’t even start with the bare-knuckle boys.

Ken Norton: a jaw-breakingly good fighter and myth buster | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/19/ken-norton-jaw-breaking-fighter>
Ali’s account of his 12-round championship fight with Norton in 1973 is worth 
recounting: “I think back to the second round, when Ken Norton got in through 
my guard and crashed a left up, breaking my jaw. I felt a snap and a sudden 
gush of blood in my throat. There were 13 rounds left. I went through round 
after round. Why didn’t I stop when I could have got my face torn off? Maybe 
because I didn’t believe Norton could beat me, even with a broken jaw. Maybe 
because I’ve never backed off from a fight.”

The surgeon who wired Ali’s jaw said: “I personally don’t understand how he 
could have gone 11 rounds with that much pain. It was a very bad break. The 
bone which was broken had three or four jagged edges. The edges kept poking 
into his cheek and into his mouth. He had so much pain during the fight that 
he’s totally exhausted right now.”

On Saturday night in Las Vegas, Nicholas Walters, a ferocious puncher from 
Jamaica, quit against Vasyl Lomachenko, one of the game’s genuine wizards, in 
the seventh round of their fight for the WBO super-featherweight title. He did 
not have a broken jaw. Nor was his arm broken or his shoulder dislocated. He 
had not even been down. He had a punch that might have won him the fight at any 
point in the remaining five rounds but Lomachenko was simply boxing his ears 
off.

Beforehand Walters said he would destroy Lomachenko. He was a warrior. He was 
irresistible. This is what he said later: “I think basically it was inactivity. 
It has been a while since I’ve been in the ring. Going back into the ring after 
so much layoff, it wasn’t a warmup fight. He was the champ. He was on target. 
You could see he was on target more than I was. He was throwing some pretty 
good shots in the last round and my corner decided to stop the fight.

“Unfortunately, the inactivity, it took a toll on my body. I tried. I tried 
each and every round to catch him but my punches kept on hitting his guard or 
he’s off range. If I had maybe one or two warmup fights, then take him on at 
the end of this year … I wasn’t finding my reach. Everything was off. It was an 
off night for me tonight.”

Orlando Cruz stopped by Terry Flanagan in WBO lightweight title fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/orlando-cruz-terry-flanagan-wbo-lightweight-title-fight>
As Barry Jones (who once held the belt Walters and Lomachenko were contesting) 
said on BoxNation as Walters gazed into the middle distance before the fight 
had started: “He doesn’t look all there.”

Nor did he. He had been out of the ring since last December – when he drew 
with one Jason Sosa – and may have had problems getting work. When Walters got 
it, the work proved not the sort he was looking for.

It was a tough gig, mind. Lomachenko is a one off. He boxes instinctively 
rather than by the diktats of repetition. His combinations have no pattern, 
because he mixes them up, riffing like a jazz musician. And Walters struggled 
to respond to the rhythm.

Walters finally came out of his shell in the sixth round – a last, frustrated 
gasp of effort to save his pride – but Lomachenko is as organised in defence as 
he is intuitive in attack. He swerved, dipped, blocked, eased in, eased out, 
and all the while his buzzsaw fists still tormented his opponent.

The end was as weird as it was unexpected. Walters was soaking up a blizzard 
of quality shots but did not look like going over. When he returned to his 
corner, he had a discussion with his seconds and then with the referee, and it 
was done. Over. Thanks for coming.

The booing punters at the Cosmopolitan took the not unacceptable view that 
fighters fight. That’s their job. They don’t take the money and then decide the 
job is too difficult. If that were the case, your garbage would never get 
collected. This was a classic “no más”, an irreversible draining of the will.

As Barry Jones remarked: “The bigger the risk you take, the more exposed you 
are against Lomachenko. But [Walters] could have done a bit more. Whatever he 
could have done, what you don’t do is quit. That is the sign of a bully. Every 
boxer who is watching this will be astounded.”

Jones knows the dangers better than most. The British Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control took his licence 
off him in 1997, even though he was a world champion, when a brain scan 
revealed an abnormality. He won it back and went on to challenge for the title 
again three years later. After Acelino Freitas, a puncher every bit as 
destructive as Walters, knocked him down six times and stopped him in the 
eighth round, Jones retired. It was the right call at the right time.

Nick Blackwell ‘in stable condition’ after reported sparring session
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nick-blackwell-hospital-ill-sparring-session>
On Saturday night, Walters did not get the decision or the timing right. As 
his conqueror said: “In the beginning he said he was a gladiator, he was going 
to do this, he was going to do that. In the end, he didn’t show up. He just 
quit.”

Most fighters have frustrations outside the ring, as Walters clearly did, but 
they don’t want to quit. Sometimes, maybe, they should.

Even as the nobly tough Eduard Gutknecht lay in a London hospital last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/eduard-gutknecht-undergoes-surgery-after-george-groves-fight>
 recovering from an operation after his fight against George Groves, Nick 
Blackwell, who survived a similar scare against Chris Eubank Jr last March and 
had to retire from the sport,was in hospital for the second time in eight months
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nick-blackwell-hospital-ill-sparring-session>
. Blackwell, who is now a trainer, could not resist the urge to do what he 
trained all his life to do. Michael Watson,disabled after losing to Chris Eubank
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/sep/22/boxing.comment1> in 1991, said 
years later he would gladly fight again if he could.

The fine judgments boxers make during a fight are not confined to when to 
punch, slip or duck. They must also know when to acknowledge they have given as 
much to the cause as might be considered reasonable and safe. It is often 
beyond their understanding of their circumstances to get that call right, 
because of their hard-wired refusal to give up, even when under heavy shelling.

No such argument can be made for Walters. His reputation has been seriously 
damaged. The next time he gets in a ring, his opponent will look across and 
think the worst of him: “He’s a quitter.”
 