
The final fortnight of parliament for 2016 begins on Monday and the Turnbull 
government is hoping to use it to clear its legislative backlog before 
Christmas.


But the independent senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> has already flagged 
a problem with the government’s plan to debate the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission legislation on Tuesday.

Xenophon told Sky News on Sunday that the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> would not have a chance 
of passing the legislation until next week at least because negotiations had 
not concluded.

War of words: I would have been sacked if I said that, says Barnaby Joyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/19/war-of-words-i-would-have-been-sacked-if-i-said-that-says-barnaby-joyce>
The ABCC bill triggered the 2 July double-dissolution election. 

Labor plans to keep the focus this week on “Aussie jobs”. The shadow workplace 
relations minister, Brendan O’Connor, said Labor would also be demanding 
amendments to the government’s registered organisations bill.

He said if the proposed amendments were accepted – including letting the 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission be the regulator, exempting 
volunteers, providing better protection for whistleblowers, and having the same 
donation disclosure thresholds for candidates in unions and MPs – the bill 
would likely pass the Senate.


“You can hardly say it’s OK to have transparency for union elections when it 
comes to donations but not have the same forms of disclosure for candidates for 
people who want to run the country,” O’Connor told the ABC.

Xenophon also warned he would be wary of the Coalition’s behaviour in the 
Senate this fortnight, after last week’santagonism about the Murray Darling 
Basin Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/government-agenda-in-doubt-as-barnaby-joyce-rejects-south-australia-water-deal>
.

He accused the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, of “free ranging” 
last week after Joyce told a meeting of state water ministers that the promised 
450 gigalitres in extra environmental flows in the Murray Darling could not be 
provided under current legislation.

The South Australian water minister, Ian Hunter, reportedly told Joyce 
<http://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/news/politics/ian-hunter-barnaby-joyce-on-receiving-end-of-sa-ministers-tirade/news-story/c49a1d7c2189965ee7c29b21b798daeb>
 to “fuck off” and left the meeting prematurely.


Liberal senator Anne Ruston, who was at the meeting, formally complained about 
Hunter’s behaviour to the SA premier, Jay Weatherill, on Sunday.

On Monday a delegation of farmers and growers will travel to Canberra to 
explain to MPs and senators the impact of the ongoing uncertainty about the 
backpacker tax.

Sack Barnaby Joyce for ditching plan to return water to Murray river, says SA 
minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/sack-barnaby-joyce-for-ditching-plan-to-return-water-to-murray-river-says-sa-minister>
They will urge the parliament to break a stalemate over the tax, which they 
argue will already leave rotting fruit on trees.

“The message to the politicians is simple – throwing your hands up and saying 
‘we’ve done all we can do’ is not good enough,” sais the chief executive of the 
National Farmers’ Federation, Tony Mahar.


The high court is preparing to hear a challenge against the eligibility of One 
Nation senator Rod Culleton and former Family First senator Bob Day to contest 
the 2 July election on Monday.

Malcolm Turnbull returns from the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) 
leaders’ summit in Peru on Tuesday.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 