
When journalist and broadcaster Nick Robinson’s vocal cord was damaged in an 
operation to remove a tumour on his lung, he thought he’d never speak again.

For Robinson, political editor of the BBC at the time, whose livelihood and 
identity were defined by his voice, the fact that he could barely whisper came 
as an incredible shock.

“I wasn’t expecting it,” he says. “That contrast between the amazingly good 
news that the tumour had been removed and there was every chance that the 
cancer was behind me, was absolutely outweighed by the fact I had no voice and 
wasn’t sure whether I’d ever get it back.”

He adds: “I thought I would never broadcast again. I thought in many ways my 
voice was my personality. It was who I was. So, without my voice, I wouldn’t be 
the person I had been … That was an incredibly frightening thing that really 
goes to the core of who you are as a person.”

Faced with the fear he might lose his career, Robinson enlisted speech and 
language therapist Julia Selby and they embarked on a journey together that is 
still ongoing. It is mostly down to her that Robinson has his voice back and 
can be heard most mornings on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Robinson says: “I 
can never thank her enough – she knows that. In a sense, one takes for granted 
that top medical people know what to do to make you better. The thing that 
makes them extra special is if they also know how to give you that 
psychological support.”

Selby and Robinson worked together in therapy every day for months and he had 
a minor operation to try to restore the positioning of the vocal cords. Then, 
when Robinson first went back to work, Selby was on hand to direct him from 
behind the camera. He recalls: “She acted like a conductor so she used to stand 
behind the camera and when I was talking she’d conduct – point to the sky if 
she wanted me to pitch a bit higher, push her palms to the floor when she 
wanted me to go more slowly.” Selby still sees him, but now only once every few 
months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnick-robinson-never-thought-get-voice-back-speech-therapist-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2826f7cf0191c2a26643e56bbd2f3d3947a15167%2F0_111_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Robinson%3A%20'I%20never%20thought%20I'd%20get%20my%20voice%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnick-robinson-never-thought-get-voice-back-speech-therapist-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Robinson%3A%20%27I%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20get%20my%20voice%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnick-robinson-never-thought-get-voice-back-speech-therapist-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2826f7cf0191c2a26643e56bbd2f3d3947a15167%2F0_111_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
 Julia Selby and Nick Robinson discuss his recovery at an event hosted by the 
Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. Photograph: Geoff Wilson 
It wasn’t only Selby’s professional prowess and technical knowhow that 
returned Robinson to full voice, however. At first he assumed there was no 
chance he would get his voice back. While Selby didn’t guarantee he would speak 
again, she underlined that there was no reason why he shouldn’t make a 
recovery. Robinson recalls: “Did I always believe her? No. Quite often, I 
didn’t believe her. Quite often I thought: ‘You’re just saying this’. She went 
out of her way to say we could deal with this together.”

Robinson admits that it was that emotional support that was vital in his 
recovery: “You want someone you can cry with, you want someone who can listen 
to your fears, who believes in you, who convinces you if you work hard enough 
you’ll get better. A huge part of a therapist’s role is not just the technical 
and the mechanical and the medical, it’s the emotional support.”


Even now, if Selby thinks his voice sounds a little croaky she sends a text 
with suggestions for how to improve it. Robinson compares their partnership to 
that of the dancers on Strictly Come Dancing. He says: “You’re in it together. 
If I did a crap broadcast, she felt bad. If I did a good broadcast, she thought 
it was a triumph.”

James Whale: 'Cancer hasn't changed me, I'm still miserable and difficult'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/19/james-whale-cancer-hasnt-changed-me>
Robinson was lucky he was able to access extra private care that is not 
routinely available on the NHS. Nevertheless, the health service is full of the 
same dedicated professionals who are tasked every day with transforming lives. 
He says: “I hope the thing that makes it a job that is incredibly worthwhile is 
that you change people’s lives … You send people out into the world again able 
to cope in a way that they once thought they couldn’t. If that reward goes out 
of working in any part of the health system, then we’re doing something 
terribly wrong.”


He adds: “This is a country with huge admiration for healthcare professionals 
and massive support for the NHS and what it stands for. I know [healthcare 
professionals] feel undervalued, underappreciated and overworked and whenever I 
get the chance to talk to anybody that might influence it, I tell them that.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

 * This article was amended on 29 December 2016 to correct the spelling of 
vocal cord. It had previously been written as chord.  