
Nick Blackwell is no longer sedated after being operated on to reduce swelling 
on his brain, according to the Press Association.

The 26-year-old suffered the injury last Tuesday in an ill-advised sparring 
session that took place despite him no longer having a licence to box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nick-blackwell-hospital-ill-sparring-session>
. He had retired aftercollapsing at the end of his defeat by Chris Eubank Jnr 
in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jnr-hospital>
, when he was found to have suffered a bleed on the skull and put into an 
induced coma.

While Blackwell remains in hospital and will continue to be monitored by 
doctors, the BritishBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of 
Control’s (BBBC) investigation into the circumstances surrounding his injury is 
also ongoing. Their general secretary Robert Smith has spoken of their need to 
discover who oversaw the sparring session and who else was involved.

Nicholas Walters stuns boxing by committing the sport’s ultimate sin | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/nicholas-walters-boxings-ultimate-sin-quits-vasyl-lomachenko>
The incident happened without the knowledge of Blackwell’s former trainer Gary 
Lockett, who had encouraged the fighter to get his trainer’s licence if he 
wanted to remain in the sport.

Lockett said in a statement: “I can’t believe the boxer he sparred with, and 
[the] coach or coaches involved, would ever allow Nick to spar when he’s had a 
brain injury. In due course, I hope they are dealt with by the British Boxing 
Board of Control in the correct manner.

“We thought that was all going very well and while we knew Nick missed boxing, 
we obviously didn’t realise the extent to which he missed it. I am deeply 
saddened by what has happened. Nick is not just an ex-boxer of mine, but also 
someone I consider to be a friend.”

Promoter Frank Warren called for anyone involved in the session to have their 
licence revoked. Speaking on BBC Radio Wales, he said: “How on earth can people 
have allowed this to happen? Anyone involved should have their licences taken 
away because they certainly didn’t have Nick Blackwell’s or boxing’s best 
interests at heart.

“Some of these guys want to box because they’re fighters. They just think, ’Oh 
it doesn’t matter I can get over that’. A lot of money was raised to help 
because he wasn’t going to box anymore and he obviously received his purse from 
his last fight, so this is not about money, this is about someone wanting to 
fight. This is madness, total madness.”
 