
Nicola Adams, one of boxing’s true pioneers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/nicola-adams-rio-2016-respect-boxing>
, brought her Olympic boxing odyssey to a fitting, gilded conclusion with a 
fine points win over her long-time rival, Sarah Ourahmoune, in the flyweight 
final here on Saturday.

She would not commit to any plans for the future in the afterglow of her 
winning her second gold medal but, at 33, the four-year stretch ahead to Tokyo 
seems a long and difficult journey and, as she said, “this is a tough process”.

Adams had only to win three bouts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/nicola-adams-rusty-start-defence-olympic-title>
 here, after a bye at the start of the tournament, and her opponent – who is 
retiring at 34 – was having her fourth contest but both were fresh and unmarked.

Adams, now the European and world champion and double Olympic gold medallist, 
bridled at the suggestion that this might have been an easier assignment than 
in London, where she won her first gold – and the first by a woman in the short 
history of the sport.

Team GB’s Nicola Adams commands respect from all and sundry at Rio 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/nicola-adams-rio-2016-respect-boxing>
“Definitely not,” she said. “I had to qualify like everybody else. It’s tough, 
because everyone wants to go to theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. Every time you beat someone, 
you’re crushing their dreams. Today I thought I was winning the rounds quite 
comfortably and scoring with the cleaner shots.”

She added, with no hint of arrogance: “I’m now the most accomplished British 
amateur boxer of all time. It’s a nice title to have. To be honest, it feels 
pretty much the same this time [as in London]. I’ve had a massive amount of 
support from Yorkshire and the rest of the nation. I feel like I have all their 
support in the ring with me, every punch I was throwing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-defends-olympic-title-gold-flyweight-boxing-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%20defends%20Olympic%20title%20with%20gold%20in%20flyweight%20boxing%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-defends-olympic-title-gold-flyweight-boxing-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%20defends%20Olympic%20title%20with%20gold%20in%20flyweight%20boxing%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-defends-olympic-title-gold-flyweight-boxing-video&media=>
Nicola Adams defends Olympic title with gold in flyweight boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/20/nicola-adams-defends-olympic-title-gold-flyweight-boxing-video>
Although the decision was unanimous across the scorecards of the three judges, 
they mysteriously awarded the third of the four rounds to Ourahmoune when it 
was by some way her least convincing. “I just like to keep things interesting, 
I guess,” the ever-smiling winner said. “I didn’t follow the points all the way 
through, so I’m not sure how they gave that to her, to be honest.”

It is academic, of course, and the alleged pro-French bias that some have 
detected in this tournament – in the men’s and women’s draw – did not kick in 
here. Then she rattled off a thank-you list that included her mother, brother, 
coach and fans.

Adams looked extraordinarily relaxed walking to the ring but revealed later: 
“I’m always very nervous for every competition I have and I use that nervous 
energy when I get into the ring. It gives you an adrenaline rush and it lets 
you know that you’re taking it seriously and you’re not just going to walk 
through it.”

She could hardly have made a brighter start, picking her spot with wicked 
precision and judging the distance to perfection – until she walked smack into 
a solid right near the end of the session, followed by a right hook. Yet she 
did enough to shade the points.

She knocked the French boxer off balance at the start of the second but did 
not spoil her work by rushing in. When she caught her with a stinging head shot 
on the ropes, however, Adams did not waste the opportunity and whaled in 
two-fisted. Ourahmoune again did her best work in the closing moments of the 
round. All three judges saw it for Adams and the Parisian southpaw was in a 
deal of bother.

Rio 2016 Olympics: goodbye to Bolt with triple treble, hello to GB hockey gold 
– live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/20/rio-2016-olympics-day-15-mo-farah-relays-tom-daley-nicola-adams-football-live>
The exchanges grew more lively in the third. Adams, working behind a piercing 
jab, looked good in centre ring, where she had room to do her boxing, but was 
caught a couple of times on the retreat. Ourahmoune slipped to the floor with 
30 seconds left but was throwing enough to catch the attention of the officials 
and clawed a round back. It seemed an odd call, however.

It was still a competitive fight, with both boxers aware that their entire 
careers were reduced to the final two minutes of an engaging if scrapping 
final. It was not pretty and they were both cautioned for some untidy work 
inside. Ourahmoune seemed the major culprit but she did not lack for spirit. In 
a lively conclusion she landed a couple of long right hands and took a pair of 
uppercuts to the body in return.

There was huge mutual respect and both embraced at the end, champions in their 
sport and worthy finalists.

While Ourahmoune had already declared this was her farewell, Adams was 
equivocal.

“I’m going to take a holiday, come back and then decide what’s next.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-rio-2016-olympics-boxing-gold-great-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F248b09c460616b29c270da718fe44e12e4a878d0%2F0_48_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%20beats%20Sarah%20Ourahmoune%20to%20retain%20Olympic%20flyweight%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-rio-2016-olympics-boxing-gold-great-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%20beats%20Sarah%20Ourahmoune%20to%20retain%20Olympic%20flyweight%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fnicola-adams-rio-2016-olympics-boxing-gold-great-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F248b09c460616b29c270da718fe44e12e4a878d0%2F0_48_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
 Nicola Adams lands a crushing blow to Sarah Ourahmoune’s head on her way to 
another Olympic gold medal for Great Britain. Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Reuters
Whatever she does – acting, coaching or boxing on – she will do it with the 
biggest smile in the room. However, the occasion got to her in the end and she 
let the tears flow freely as she stood on the podium a little while later.

Is she the most accomplished amateur Britain has had? Some might push the case 
for Harry Mallin – unbeaten in more than 300 bouts and back-to-back gold medals 
in Antwerp and Paris – or Dick McTaggart, the stylish Scot who won gold and 
bronze, as well as 610 of his 634 contests. But nobody can have been as warm 
and popular as the gregarious little flyweight from Leeds.
 