
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has frustrated 
the leaders of Scotland and Wales by refusing to reveal any details of her plan 
for Brexit or assure them that tariff-free trade with the EU will continue.

Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, the 
first minister of Scotland, left a joint ministerial council for the leaders of 
the home nations, saying she thought May did not have a coherent plan for how 
to take the UK out of the EU.

'No discernible strategy': readers on Theresa May's first 100 days
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/no-discernible-strategy-readers-on-theresa-mays-first-100-days>
“I don’t know any more now about the UK government’s approach to the EU 
negotiations than I did before I went in to the meeting,” she said. “At the 
moment, it doesn’t seem to me like there is a UK negotiating strategy, which is 
one of the sources of great frustration.”

Sturgeon is pressing for May to give Scotland continued access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/nicola-sturgeon-second-scottish-referendum-likely-in-event-of-hard-brexit>
 to the EU single market even if the rest of the UK opts to leave, but said she 
had been given no clues as to whether this was possible.

“Now we’re hearing the words that say she will consider options like that, but 
so far, those words are not matched by substance and action,” Sturgeon said.

She added: “But what I’m not prepared to do as first minister is simply stand 
back and watchScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> be driven off 
a hard-Brexit cliff edge.”

Separately, Carwyn Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/carwyn-jones>, 
the Labour first minister of Wales, told the Guardian “nothing concrete came 
out of the meeting and I am none the wiser as to what her proposals are”.

“The problem seems to be that they don’t know what to do next,” he said, 
adding that May had declined a direct opportunity to reassure him that 
businesses would continue to trade without tariffs with the rest of the EU.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20Scotland's%20future%20in%20UK%20depends%20on%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20Scotland%27s%20future%20in%20UK%20depends%20on%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon: Scotland’s future in UK depends on single market access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/14/nicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video>
“Time is not in our favour and we need to have some kind of idea about what 
the basis of the negotiation will be.”

Jones said he feared there was now a serious danger of the UK leaving the EU 
without having negotiated a trade deal and having to fall back on World Trade 
Organisation tariffs.

The prime minister met Sturgeon, Jones and Northern Ireland’s leader and 
deputy leader, Arlene Foster and Martin McGuinness, in Downing Street on Monday 
with an offer of adirect input over Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-constitutional-crisis-brexit-deal-institute-for-government>
, but received a sceptical response from Sturgeon and Jones.

Foster, from the Democratic Unionist party, was more positive, telling 
reporters that it had been “a very useful engagement”.

It was the first gathering of the joint ministerial committee which brings 
together the leaders of the UK’s devolved administrations since theBrexit vote 
on 23 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/how-did-uk-end-up-voting-leave-european-union>
.


May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has been warned to 
expect a “full-blown constitutional crisis” unless agreement on the terms of 
Brexit can be reached between the government and the UK’s devolved 
administrations. Sturgeon in particular has said she is prepared to push for 
another independence referendum if Scotland, which voted to remain, is denied 
full access to the single market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fnicola-sturgeon-says-brexit-meeting-was-deeply-frustrating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36e611d7249c8c9bde5f7757d511c4222fe6d3a2%2F126_817_3638_2183%2F3638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20says%20Brexit%20meeting%20was%20'deeply%20frustrating'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fnicola-sturgeon-says-brexit-meeting-was-deeply-frustrating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20says%20Brexit%20meeting%20was%20%27deeply%20frustrating%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fnicola-sturgeon-says-brexit-meeting-was-deeply-frustrating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36e611d7249c8c9bde5f7757d511c4222fe6d3a2%2F126_817_3638_2183%2F3638.jpg>
 Martin McGuinness and Arlene Foster leave Downing Street after the joint 
ministerial committee meeting. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
After the meeting, May would only say she wanted to “strike a bespoke Brexit 
deal that works for the whole of the UK”. But earlier, No 10 rejected the idea 
of Scotland staying part of the single market while the rest of the UK had a 
different relationship with Brussels, saying the prime minister wanted a 
unified approach.

After the meeting, May reported back to parliament on her first EU summit, 
where she promised MPs a series of debates on the “high-level principles” of 
her negotiating strategy.

However, she did not reveal what these are or when they will be made public so 
MPs can discuss them. The debates do not go so far as to allow parliament to 
have a vote on No 10’s Brexit strategy, which Labour, the Lib Dems and some 
Tory MPs are demanding before article 50 is triggered to take the UK out of the 
EU.

During the debate, May appeared to suggest she favours an approach of offering 
bilateral free-trade deals to EU member states when pushed by one eurosceptic 
MP.

Sir Edward Leigh, Tory MP for Gainsborough, asked: “Is not our objective this: 
that we want to conclude, having adopted every last EU law to our laws on 
Brexit day, a free trade agreement that is overwhelmingly in the interests of 
the rest ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>? And 
incidentally, this would do so much for the poorest nations in the world as we 
lead the battle for a free trade and prosperous world.”

This anglo-centric government is putting the union at risk over Brexit | 
Archie Bland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/brexit-scotland-northern-ireland-wales-constitutional-crisis>
May stood briefly to reply: “I agree.” 

However, she then appeared to backtrack on the clear answer when Tory MP Steve 
Baker said: “I understood from your answer ... that there is no proposition to 
put tariffs between us and our European partners. Will you confirm that you’re 
willing to offer them a free trade deal bilaterally?”

May replied: “At risk of repeating yet again what I have said previously, what 
we want to get is the right deal. I want to get the best possible deal for the 
maximum possible opportunities for British businesses to be able to trade 
within the single market, to operate within the single market and trade with it 
in both goods and services.

“That is our clear aim. We want to be able to have that trading, good trading 
relationship, with the European Union. But there are other things we will doing 
at the same time, such as ensuring we can control the movement of people from 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> into the UK.”

May also dismissed the idea that the collapse of an EU trade deal with Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/eu-trade-deal-with-canada-collapses-as-belgium-refuses-to-sign>
 would have any impact on the UK’s ability to negotiate one with Brussels.

“To those who suggest that these difficulties have a bearing on our own future 
negotiations, I would remind them that we are not seeking to replicate the 
existing model that any other country has in relation to its trade with the 
European Union. We will be developing our own British model.”
 