
‘She looks bigger on the telly.” It’s a curious thing to say about a flyweight 
boxer with a fighting weight of 51kg (8st 1lb), but the training gym regular 
who has sidled over to my side of the ring for a better view of the double 
Olympic gold champion is right.Nicola Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicola-adams> is even tinier than you think 
she’s going to be. Her stature – just shy of 1.62m (5ft 4in) in bouncy trainers 
– seems too small to contain it all: the Muhammad Ali shuffle, the Miss World 
smile, the megawatt punch.

Adams is dressed in the crisp, boxfresh aesthetic specific to athletes who 
have made it to business-class lounge level: slim grey marl tracksuit bottoms 
tucked into pristine white high-top trainers, sizeable diamond studs in her 
lobes, a fancy pair of gold headphones worn around the neck of her bright white 
T-shirt. For the portrait, she adds the finishing touches, first pulling on a 
navy Team GB hoodie and then, after digging around in the side pocket of a 
Louis Vuitton rucksack, her latest gold medal, which she pulls out of a thick 
black sock. “Stops it getting scratched,” she says, flashing me that Tinker 
Bell smile and looping it around her neck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb704ba6998c50af6d0ee2cc8c22e5630a0ae9e3b%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb704ba6998c50af6d0ee2cc8c22e5630a0ae9e3b%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Adams v Sarah Ourahmoune in the women’s flyweight final at Rio. Photograph: 
Owen Humphreys/PA 
Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> is big on mythology, and the 
boxing club on a King’s Cross backstreet that we are borrowing as a portrait 
studio has gritty glamour in spades. Ali quotes on the walls, fleets of 
punchbags around a ketchup-red ring, walls crammed with photos of boxing 
legends, chart music on the radio, a bucket in one corner where the roof leaks. 
Adams is a heroine here and, word having got out about the shoot, the place is 
packed. Someone has brought a small dog, someone else a small niece. Someone 
else has shaved specially.

At 33, Adams already has an MBE and a place in history: the first female boxer 
ever to represent England, the first woman to win an Olympic boxing gold,the 
first woman to win a second Olympic gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/nicola-adams-rio-2016-olympics-boxing-gold-great-britain>
. And the British public don’t just admire her, they love her. “Everyone, 
everyone is just lovely,” she says. “The other day, an old lady invited me in 
for a cup of tea.”

As the first openly LGBT boxer to win an Olympic medal, Adams – one of very 
few bisexual black women in British public life – has quietly carved out a new 
kind of identity. She does not refuse to talk about her sexuality, but she 
makes minimal issue of it in a way that makes it very clear she does not expect 
it to dominate conversation. She arrives at today’s shoot withMarlen Esparza 
<https://twitter.com/Marlen112Boxing>, the first American female boxer to 
qualify for the Olympics, winner of a bronze medal in 2012. It is not at any 
point made explicit in what capacity Esparza is here, but it’s hard not to 
notice her, with her Texan drawl, bright splashy leggings, supersized eyelash 
extensions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bcb12fd0ed2c54f657f2636561e75f99e47ac9f%2F0_56_6115_3670%2F6115.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bcb12fd0ed2c54f657f2636561e75f99e47ac9f%2F0_56_6115_3670%2F6115.jpg>
 Adams and Esparza at premiere of Bridget Jones’s Baby in London. Photograph: 
Dave J Hogan/Getty Images 
Adams has talked about having a girlfriend who wasn’t able to be with her in 
Rio, but hasn’t named her. Towards the end of our interview, I ask her why her 
partner couldn’t join her, and she tells me: “She’s an athlete as well, so she 
had her own commitments, and I understand that.” Which sport, I ask, and she 
just says, “boxing”. Then she fixes me with that level stare, daring me to look 
over her shoulder to Esparza, sitting a few feet away doing emails on her 
laptop. The penny drops. Later, I look up their social media: there are regular 
photos of the two together, including selfies on both accounts from the red 
carpet of the Bridget Jones’s Baby premiere, complete with lipstick and 
hearts-for-eyes emoji.

The electric energy of Adams in the ring is belied by her laidback, 
non-confrontational persona outside. She and Esparza arrived late to our shoot, 
because their taxi driver had a scrape with a lorry that necessitated a fraught 
and lengthy exchange of insurance details; then he got lost looking for the 
gym, but refused to accept navigational help until Esparza insisted. Had she 
not intervened, the American says, Adams would have let the taxi drive around 
in circles endlessly rather than make a scene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2d5b82e72eb3577d02ed3f1bacf8b2eef94406%2F117_0_2717_1631%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2d5b82e72eb3577d02ed3f1bacf8b2eef94406%2F117_0_2717_1631%2F2717.jpg>
 Adams celebrates after winning gold at the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. 
Photograph: Russell Cheyne/Reuters 
Esparza arrives a bit rattled by this start to the day. But Adams poses 
serenely for her portrait, submits gracefully to a protracted selfie session 
with the gym regulars, and does not stop smiling during the hour that we are 
talking. Her smile is something of a trademark. Does she do it to unsettle the 
competition? “Well, I guess when I’m smiling, waving to the crowd, looking 
really happy, an opponent is going to look at me and think – wow, is she even 
nervous? But really, I’m just enjoying myself.” Much of her persona – the 
smile, the Frosties she refuses to give up for breakfast – has this upbeat, 
almost childlike tone.

Right now, she is on her post-Olympic holiday. For two months, she can rest, 
see friends, relax her diet, cut training right down to four hour-long sessions 
a week. What is the part about this that she relishes the most – lie-ins? 
Eating cake? Going out at night? “All of that! Definitely the lie-ins. And the 
cake. And going out clubbing. But mostly it’s just nice to see friends and 
family, and catch up with what is going on in their lives, before I’m back in 
training lockdown.”

Taking gold at a home Olympics in 2012, with women’s boxing included for the 
first time, was hard to beat. But her Rio medal was just as sweet, Adams says, 
because after overcoming a serious shoulder injury, “this four years taught me 
a lot about my mental strength”. She didn’t get to see much of Rio on this 
trip, because she was competing in the last week and was “living and breathing 
boxing training”, but she got to go to Christ the Redeemer when she visited Rio 
with David Cameron after the 2012 Olympics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F809eaebc722c61510169c9206843a5095a04e628%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F809eaebc722c61510169c9206843a5095a04e628%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 With her gold medal in Rio. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
She always thought Team GB would do well in Rio, she says, “because we have 
the funding and facilities now. We have nutritionists, sports psychologists, 
strength-training specialists, physiotherapists. What I should be eating, what 
I should do about any injuries – that’s all taken care of by experts, and all I 
have to think about is boxing.”

I never think, I'll be happy just to win a medal. I’m only happy with gold

Adams was in San Diego this summer when she heard Muhammad Ali had died. “I 
was really upset that I’d never got to meet him, to say to him: you are the 
reason I wanted to win an Olympic gold medal.” Her first memory of boxing is 
watching a video of the Rumble in the Jungle with her dad. “I remember how he 
performed in the ring, but how he was in interviews as well. His charisma, his 
charm, his cheekiness, his poetry. I just loved all that. He was an 
entertainer, and I’ve taken a lot of that into my boxing. I like to see the 
crowd enjoying themselves. If they’re happy, I’m happy.” A few years later, 
aged 12, she went to the boxing gym for the first time when her mum Dee, by 
then a single parent, needed somewhere she could leave Nicola while she went to 
aerobics. “There were kids doing pads, some shadow-boxing, some in the ring. It 
was really cool, I loved it.” Was it not a bit intimidating, for a 12-year-old 
girl? She looks a bit nonplussed. “Um, no. Not at all. It was exciting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe652b5475b425f41be0718f59543a69276a2118a%2F297_0_1578_948%2F1578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe652b5475b425f41be0718f59543a69276a2118a%2F297_0_1578_948%2F1578.jpg>
 The flyweight final at London 2012. Photograph: Murad Sezer/Reuters 
Her first competition was a year later – “I won” – but the first opponent she 
remembers vividly was Sofya Ochigava, who she boxed in the 2007 European 
Championships. “In the last 30 seconds I was one point up, and I was just about 
to be European champion. I got excited, I lost my focus, and I switched off for 
half a second. She scored two points, and I ended up with a silver.” That 
silver was the first medal won by an English woman at a major international 
championship, but Adams doesn’t remember it as an achievement. “I was 
devastated. I never go to a tournament thinking, I’ll be happy just to win a 
medal. I’m only happy with gold.”

Adams came through the ranks with no female role models. She dealt with this 
by adopting the philosophy of her coach, who on her first day in the gym told 
her: “In this gym, there’s no male or female. You’re just a boxer.” In other 
gyms, though, sexism was the norm in the early part of Adams’s career. “Just 
stuff like, you’d go to a gym and the guys would do eight three-minute stints 
on the bags, and then the women would just do five. Like, because we’re women 
we can’t do the full eight! Ha.” The Olympics have had a huge impact on 
attitudes to female boxing, she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29d1027a3e2c145cced25b2b541d9c07d4d342a0%2F0_51_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29d1027a3e2c145cced25b2b541d9c07d4d342a0%2F0_51_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Ringside at the Times ABC. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Guardian 
As has Adams herself. Boxing has always had a strong aesthetic iconography, 
but strictly a male one. There hasn’t been a beautiful, glamorous female boxer 
before now.Adams has been profiled in Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/article/nicola-adams-british-vogue-interview-quotes>, 
and starred ina Marks & Spencer fashion campaign 
<http://www.nicola-adams.com/10-press/20-m-s-launches-campaign-celebrating-britain-s-leading-ladies>
. (That was fun, apparently, because Helen Mirren turned out to be a huge 
boxing fan.) Recently, Adams upgraded the braided hairstyle she wore in 2012 
for a more stylised look, with a high quiff offset by intricately patterned 
shaved sides. It requires a visit to the hairdresser once a week. (“I like it 
to look sharp.”)

Nicola Adams: ‘After I won gold, I went to McDonald’s for the hell of it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/nicola-adams-gold-mcdonalds-for-the-hell-of-it-olympic-boxing>
The success of women’s boxing has popularised the sport as fitness – the 
Instagram feed of any ambitious young model will feature the obligatory 
gloved-up gym selfie – but Adams is more interested in seeing women’s pro 
boxing televised. “That would change the game. I’d love to help make that 
happen,” she says.

She waves away the notion that she might worry about the impact of boxing on 
her brain. But then, her worst injury – one that kept her in bed for three 
months, and out of the ring for a year, and very nearly prevented her taking 
part in trials for London 2012 – came from falling down the stairs. Getting 
back to fitness was “almost like learning to walk again”, she says. “I went 
from doing 300 sit-ups a day to not being able to lift my shoulders off the 
floor.”

Crucially, though, she never lost her self-belief. “Boxing is 50/50, mental 
and physical. You can be the strongest, fastest, most technical boxer out 
there, but if you’re not there mentally, you won’t win. You see boxers who look 
unbelievable in the gym, and then they get into the ring and they fall to 
pieces. The mental aspect is about how to stay in control, to get your opponent 
to make mistakes and then to capitalise on them. It’s a bit like chess, 
really.” She has played chess since she was 10 years old.

After 2012, she says, the decision to pursue further Olympic success over a 
professional career was simple. “I knew straight away I wanted the double gold. 
I wanted to make history.” Now – four years older, with fewer years ahead – she 
faces the same decision again, and she’s not giving anything away. “There’s a 
lot to think about,” is her deliberately oblique answer. “I’ll make a decision 
by the end of the year about what the next chapter will be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0011f0a064539f64c2013d2a70629e52470de5d%2F47_0_1407_844%2F1407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Adams%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wish%20I%E2%80%99d%20told%20Muhammad%20Ali%20he%20was%20the%20reason%20I%20wanted%20to%20win%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0011f0a064539f64c2013d2a70629e52470de5d%2F47_0_1407_844%2F1407.jpg>
 Appearing in Waterloo Road. Photograph: BBC 
Acting will play a bit part 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/nicola-adams-reveals-turn-acting-8544311>, at 
least. A sideline as an extra in Coronation Street and Emmerdale turned intoa 
bigger part in Waterloo Road <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01k2hgh> after 
2012, when she could no longer blend into the background. Acting is on the back 
burner while she is boxing, but she has at least one role lined up for next 
year. Whatever the future holds, it will involve an audience. “I love a big 
moment. I love a big crowd. It’s an amazing feeling. Bigger the better, really.”
 