
Tawera Nikau, the New Zealand international, is in line for a surprise return 
to the Warrington team for tomorrow's Super League match againstBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls>.

The 33-year-old loose-forward flew home following the sudden death of his wife 
on April 6 and was thought to have played his last game for the club. However, 
Nikau was back in England yesterday, accompanied by his 13-year-old daughter 
and seven-year-old son, and announced his intention to resume his career.

"I'm delighted," said Darryl van de Velde, Warrington's coach. "It's a big 
boost to the club and to the team to have 'T' back. He has decided he wants to 
play the season out and is determined to get back to normal as soon as 
possible. He will be training and we'll decide then whether he plays at 
Bradford. If he doesn't, he will definitely be in the side to play Huddersfield 
on Sunday."

Nikau, formerly with Castleford, Cronulla Sharks and Melbourne Storm, joined 
Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> on a two-year 
contract in October 1999 and had missed only one match up to the beginning of 
April.

The players' union is taking legal advice in the light of allegations from 
Wakefield's directors that the body misrepresented former Trinity players. The 
club's board had claimed that the 11 players sacked at the height of their 
financial crisis last September stood to receive less compensation because of 
the actions of the Players Association, part of the GMB trade union.

Wakefield were ordered by an industrial tribunal last week to pay out more 
than Â£150,000; it ruled they were in breach of contract and had unfairly 
dismissed four of the 11.

The directors claimed that they had lodged within the club's Creditors' 
Voluntary Arrangement a larger amount to pay the players in the event of them 
being successful in recouping money pledged to the Super League club by the 
former chief executive John Pearman.

The Players Association responded through its chairman Andy Goodway: "The club 
seems to allude that the association has not done the best for its members. We 
are taking legal advice as to whether or not the association and its advisers 
have been libelled.

"Throughout the hearing on April 23 and 24 and at the pre-hearing on January 8 
the club stated they had no liability to pay any monies awarded by the 
tribunal. In their press release the club seem to indicate that the monies will 
be available to pay the players in full but we know that is not the case."
 