
Mattia Destro’s first goal for Milan was not enough as they had goalkeeper 
Diego López sent off and finished the match with nine men after running out of 
substitutionsin a 1-1 draw at home to Empoli on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3753352>.

Milan left the field to the familiar sound of jeers from a sparse San Siro 
crowd of 27,000 after being outplayed by their promoted opponents, who should 
have taken all three points. They have taken only five points in sevenSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> games since the Christmas 
break, a run which has included home defeats by Sassuolo and Atalanta, and have 
been knocked out of the Coppa Italia by Lazio.

Empoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> made the early running 
and Mario Rui nearly scored a stunning opener when he spotted López off his 
line and just missed the target with a dipping effort from near the halfway 
line. However, Milan went ahead with their first shot on target when Destro 
turned in Giacomo Bonaventura’s low cross from close range, his first goal 
since his move from Roma.

Empoli deservedly equalised in the 69th minute when Massimo Maccarone escaped 
the attentions of two defenders and scored with a powerful downward header from 
Elseid Hysaj’s cross.

The former Real Madrid keeper López was dismissed with six minutes left as he 
handled outside the area, having got himself into the mess with a terrible 
clearance. Destro was substituted to make way for the substitute goalkeeper 
Christian Abbiati.

Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>, who had already lost 
their defender Alex to injury in the seventh minute, were in the wars again 
when Gabriel Paletta pulled up clutching his hamstring and went off, leaving 
them to finish with nine men after using their three substitutions.
 