
There are times when a job hunt calls for unconventional measures. If you’re 
not getting interviews, it could be because your CV isn’t reaching the hiring 
manager.

Recruiters prefer to hire people they know: a recent study shows 
<http://www.jobvite.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/RecruiterNation2016.pdf> 
(pdf) that employee referrals and internal hires make up 72% of new jobs. So 
sometimes the best approach is to circumvent the general inbox and speak 
directly to the decision maker.

Get in touch with the hiring manager

As most roles are filled internally, start your job hunt by referring to your 
network instead ofvisiting a job board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv-how-to-get-more-interviews>. Do you 
know anyone who works in the industry or the company you’re targeting? Can they 
put youin touch with a hiring manager 
<https://uptowork.com/blog/how-to-email-a-resume>? Some companies even offer 
referral bonuses, which makes it a win-win situation.

It takes guts to contact a stranger on social media, but it can make all the 
difference

But what if you have no contacts in the company you want to work for? How can 
you make yourself known?

To identify the hiring manager, start with the company’s website. Smaller 
companies often have employee profiles. If you’re lucky, you’ll get both a name 
and an email address. Regardless of what you find, you’ll want to locate the 
individual on LinkedIn.

Still need the hiring manager’s email address? You can try calling the 
organisation and asking for their contact details, or use apps likeHunter 
<https://hunter.io/> or VoilaNorbert <https://www.voilanorbert.com/>. The 
former app will generate an email address when you click on a LinkedIn profile, 
and the latter will help you find up to 50 corporate emails for free.

What to say when you get in touch

The next step is to contact the hiring manager. The tone of your email is 
important, as you don’t want them to feel pestered. Start your message by 
providing a valid reason for contacting them. Perhaps refer to an article 
they’ve written, or something admirable about the company.

Next, consider why you would be useful for them. Perhaps you’ve got a solution 
to a problem or can offer collaboration. If not, you can simply express further 
admiration and that you’d like to work for them. Keep your message professional 
and concise (under 300 words).

Not all hiring managers want to receive unsolicited CVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv>, but it’s still worth connecting with 
them online. Does the manager have a professional Twitter profile or publish 
content? Engage by following them, re-tweeting posts, and leaving comments. If 
the manager doesn’t publish any work-related content, you can engage with the 
brand’s online content.

You may end up still having to follow their standard recruitment process, but 
you’ll already be familiar with them so they’ll remember you.

Shhh, quiet: an introvert's guide to networking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/dec/10/how-to-network-introvert> 
Write a personalised email with your CV

Let’s say you make a good impression and are asked to send over your CV. 
Emailing your CV is about personalisation. Instead of writing “CV”, try opening 
with a solution, such as “I can boost your company’s growth”. If that makes you 
uncomfortable, you can also pitch yourself, “Award-winning marketing manager”. 
Use the hiring manager’s name in the introduction.

The message should demonstrate the value that you could bring to the company 
and knowledge of the company’s culture, brand and competition. Use a natural, 
yet formal tone that fits with the company culture.

It’s a good idea to track your email while you’re waiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/job-application-waiting-use-time> for a 
response. You can use free versions of sales tools likeMixmax 
<https://mixmax.com/> or Yesware <http://www.yesware.com/> for this purpose. 
Knowing that a hiring manager has opened your message will allow you to follow 
up or start looking for a new lead.

Finding a job is often about who you know. That’s why making a personal 
connection with a hiring manager works. Networking used to entail swapping 
business cards, but most of it now takes place online. It takes guts to contact 
a stranger on social media, but it can make all the difference.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 