
Even when vacancies are booming, there are three types of jobseeker who will 
always have a harder time getting work. Are you one? Don’t fear – there is 
plenty you can do with your CV to ensure you get an interview.

The job hopper

Hiring the wrong person is an expensive mistake 
<http://www.oxfordeconomics.com/my-oxford/projects/264283>, so understandably 
recruiters are wary of applicants who seem to have a habit of changing jobs.

The five most common CV problems – and how to fix them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/01/five-cv-problems-fix-employment-gap-lack-experience>
At the same time, frequent job hopping has become more and more common. A 
recent survey showed that 91% of millennials expect to stay in a jobless than 
three years 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jeannemeister/2012/08/14/job-hopping-is-the-new-normal-for-millennials-three-ways-to-prevent-a-human-resource-nightmare/#58fa89745508>
 – with71% of this group 
<https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/About-Deloitte/gx-millenial-survey-2016-exec-summary.pdf>
 planning to change their current job before 2020. So how can a job hopper stop 
employers seeing them as a risk?

You need to focus on what you gained from the experiences. The benefit of job 
hopping is that workers are more accomplished at doing different work and are 
regularly adding to their skill sets. So it makes sense to write a CV focused 
on your skill set and achievements. Use facts and figures to show that you 
generated value for past employers. For example: “acquired major clients 
generating an increase of X amount in annual revenue”. If you can do that, the 
recruiter can imagine you creating the same tangible value for them, cancelling 
out your risk factor.

The long-term unemployed

The unemployment rate hit record lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/uk-unemployment-record-low-private-sector-hiring-stall-self-employment>
 in the UK this summer at 5%, a figure not seen since the turn of the 
millennia. Of that 5%,around 30% 
<https://data.oecd.org/unemp/unemployment-rate.htm#indicator-chart> are 
long-term unemployed – jobseekers who have been unemployed for more than a year.

Once you’ve been out of a job for some time, it becomes even more difficult to 
find work. If you’ve not quite hit the six-month mark, find something to occupy 
your time and fill you CV, be it freelance work or volunteering.

If you’ve been unemployed for longer than six months, there are ways to make 
yourself more employable. Alongside volunteering, try a less conventional 
approach to jobhunting: contact hiring managers directly by phone or email. 
It’s also important tooptimise your LinkedIn profile 
<https://uptowork.com/blog/optimize-your-linkedin-profile> and get in touch 
with people in your professional network.

How to avoid the top six most common job interview mistakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/2015/may/28/how-to-avoid-the-top-five-most-common-job-interview-mistakes>
Nearly half of all hires <http://www.jobvite.com/resources/jobvite-index/> are 
made from job referrals, even though they make up only 7% of all applications. 
If you can find someone on the inside to push your CV, or if you can make a 
personal connection with a hiring manager, there is a much greater chance that 
they will overlook the gaps on your record.

The overqualified job seeker

While it is tempting to assume that being overqualified is a good thing, 
that’s not always the case. Recruiters may make some confused assumptions, such 
as the candidate wants more money or is likely to leave for better offer.

Hiring managers need to know that you understand the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/how-to-apply-job-overqualified> on offer, 
and that requires an explanation. Perhaps you’re choosing less responsibility 
for a better work-life balance, or you want to go back to what you were doing 
before a promotion. Whatever the reason, it’s best explained. Your cover letter 
is the perfect place for this sort of information. A CV summary can also help 
you say where you are, where you’re going, and how that will benefit your new 
employer.

Whatever is holding you back, you can always upgrade your CV to make you top 
of the pile. And, above all, tailor your CV to match the job, instead of 
sending generic CVs to many different employers.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 