
No new drugs for depression <https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression> 
are likely in the next decade, even though those such as Prozac work for little 
more than half of those treated and there have been concerns over their 
side-effects, say scientists.

Leading psychiatrists, some of whom have been involved in drug development, 
say criticism of theantidepressants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/08/why-have-antidepressant-prescriptions-doubled-in-the-last-decade>
 of the Prozac class, called the SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors), is partly responsible for the pharmaceutical industry’s reluctance 
to invest in new drugs – even though demand is steadily rising.

But the main reason, said Guy Goodwin, professor of psychiatry at Oxford 
University, is that the theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and 
healthcare providers in other countries do not want to pay the bill for new 
drugs that will have to go through expensive trials. The antidepressants that 
GPs currently prescribe work for only about 58% of people, but they are cheap 
because they are out of patent.

Why 'big pharma' stopped searching for the next Prozac
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/prozac-next-psychiatric-wonder-drug-research-medicine-mental-illness>
“We are not going to get any more new drugs for depression in the next decade 
simply because the pharmaceutical industry is not investing in research,” said 
Goodwin. “It can’t make money on these drugs. It costs approximately $1bn to do 
all the trials before you launch a new drug.

“There is also a failure of the science. It has to get more understanding of 
how these things work before they can improve them.”

Andrea Cipriani, an associate professor of psychiatry at Oxford who works on 
reviews of the evidence of the effects of the drugs, said at a briefing in 
London that 58% of patients in clinical trials responded to them, while 40% 
responded to aplacebo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/15/jo-marchant-mind-body-health-medicine-science>
. A review of the effects in children found that only one of the SSRIs worked: 
fluoxetine, better known as Prozac.

But, say the experts, the drugs help people cope with the acute stage of 
depression, when they feel unable to carry out their daily activities. They 
help them overcome their negative thoughts and give them a more positive 
outlook. Recovery, however, takes much longer and involves counselling and 
other therapy.

Prescription rates have steadily climbed in spite of the limited efficacy and 
reports of side-effects including suicidal thoughts inyoung people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/acne-and-exam-stress-among-factors-leading-young-people-to-suicide-study-finds>
. “The number of prescriptions for antidepressants has risen quite dramatically 
since the 1990s,” said Glyn Lewis, professor of psychiatric epidemiology at 
University College London.

The SSRIs were safer than previous antidepressants, so they began to be 
prescribed in increasing numbers by GPs and the rate was now rising by 6-7% a 
year, he said. There were 61m prescriptions a year in England last year, 
compared with 31m a decade earlier in 2005. The bill was £285m in 2015.

Why have antidepressant prescriptions doubled in the last decade?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/08/why-have-antidepressant-prescriptions-doubled-in-the-last-decade>
It was not about increasing numbers of people getting depressed, he said. 
“There is a slight increase in men and women of reports of depression, but 
that’s not the explanation,” he said. “The increase seems to be about people 
staying on them for longer.” But it was still not entirely clear whether there 
was over-prescription or under-prescription, he said.

“Only about 20% of people reporting a lot of symptoms are taking 
antidepressants. Why not the other 80%? They might have tried them in the past 
and they didn’t work or they had lots of symptoms.” Lewis is now engaged in 
research to find out what is happening and potentially give guidance to GPs on 
when to prescribe.

Maintenance therapy – staying on the drugs for nine months or even longer – 
does prevent relapses and is helpful, say the experts. But many people then 
found it hard to come off the drugs, Lewis said.

Counselling and in particular cognitive behaviour therapy have been shown to 
make people well and are recommended by the National Institute forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Care Excellence, while 
antidepressants are only recommended for moderate to severe cases of 
depression. There can be long waits for treatment, however, which leads GPs to 
prescribe antidepressants and patients to take them to alleviate the symptoms 
while they are waiting.
 