
Downing Street has promised that Theresa May will stick to the Tory manifesto 
pledge of the triple lock, whichguarantees rises in the state pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/20/pensions-state-scrap-triple-lock-protect-paul-johnson-ifs>
, after a former pensions minister said it would become unaffordable after 2020.

Ros Altmann, who left the government in July, called for the mechanism to be 
abolished and suggested that the prime minister could be more open to this idea 
than her predecessor,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>.

A No 10 spokeswoman quickly dismissed the possibility of there being any risk 
to the triple lock before the next general election. “The manifesto contains a 
commitment to protect the triple lock. That commitment still stands,” she said.

Lady Altmann had warned that the cost of keeping the safeguard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/state-pension-triple-clock-doubts>
 would be “enormous” after the election in 2020.


The Conservative peer and pensions expert said she tried last year to persuade 
Cameron to drop the triple lock,under which pensions go up 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/double-inflation-boost-for-state-pension-with-additional-help-to-the-poorest>
 by the inflation rate, the growth in average earnings or 2.5%, whichever is 
the highest.

“The triple lock is a political construct, a totemic policy that is easy for 
politicians to trumpet, but from a pure policy perspective, keeping it for ever 
doesn’t make sense,” Altmanntold the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/state-pension-triple-clock-doubts>
.

“I was proposing a double lock, whereby either you increase state pensions in 
line with prices or with earnings. Absolutely we must protect pensioner 
incomes, but the 2.5% bit doesn’t make sense. If, for example, we went into a 
period of deflation where everything, both earnings and prices, was falling, 
then putting up pensions by 2.5% is a bit out of all proportion.

“Politically, nobody had the courage to stand up and say we have done what we 
needed to do.”

Altmann also suggested that the triple lock could be abandoned now May was in 
charge, with the prime minister having shown herself to be willing to
re-evaluate previously stated policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/30/theresa-may-delayed-hinkley-point-chinese-beijing-vince-cable>
.

“With David Cameron, it was more difficult. It was his flagship policy. But 
from 2020, and even, you know, now, he is not there,” she said.

May’s joint chief of staff Nick Timothy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
 said inan article for ConservativeHome 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2015/11/nick-timothy-dividing-lines-and-binary-choices-how-the-tax-credit-changes-went-wrong.html>
 last November that the obvious alternative to welfare credit cuts, looking at 
the triple lock, was “off the table” for the then chancellor George Osborne.

“He could redistribute the welfare cuts to take the pressure off low paid, 
working people. But the obvious alternative is already off the table: pensioner 
benefits are protected and so is the ‘triple lock’, which means that the state 
pension goes up by the highest out of the growth of wages, inflation or 2.5%,” 
Timothy wrote.

Debbie Abrahams, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said it would be a 
“grand betrayal, a shocking broken promise hitting pensioners in the pocket” if 
the triple lock were broken.

“The lesson here is that for all their words about doing the right thing, the 
Tories don’t stand up for ordinary people,” she said.
 