
Kim Stoddart’s report (Living in a broadband ‘not-spot’? Try using the church 
spire to get a signal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/12/slow-broadband-church-signal-fast-internet>
, 12 November) highlights a variety of local attempts to solve this problem but 
bemoans the fact that Ceredigion in west Wales is seventh from the bottom out 
of 650 UK constituencies for connectivity. Oh really? Not in our part of 
Ceredigion. We have a mast supplying 4G signals from all four major mobile 
network operators and we buy, and distribute 40Mbps broadband from a small 
technology company.

We are currently looking at extending our service by using “whitespace”, spare 
bandwith capacity on TV wavebands. This is a community achievement. Six years 
ago four of us in our seventies and eighties formed a not-for-profit company, 
raised £243,000 from grant sources (including European money) and the cost of 
our unpaid time. We had contractors build the mast on a small piece of land 
leased to us by a local farmer. It was not always easy: fighting bureaucracy at 
local, Welsh and Westminster government levels took a lot of time and energy 
but with help from our friends in the community, including our local MP, we did 
it. He tells us we have better communications here than he has in Westminster. 
It can be done but needs a community to commit its resources of members’ time 
and energy. And forget the church spires: Welsh chapels don’t have spires.
Bill Messer
Authorising officer, Ger y Gors Projects

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 