
Once you’ve actually got your film made and production has wrapped, you’d be 
forgiven for expecting that audiences will be given the chance to see it.

But even if your film is blessed with an all-star cast, it could still be 
placed on a dusty faraway shelf and then kept there for years. This month sees 
the release of Accidental Love, aka Nailed, a comedy that David O Russell made 
in 2008, before he became an Academy BFF with The Fighter, Silver Linings 
Playbook and American Hustle. A starry cast, including Jessica Biel and Jake 
Gyllenhaal, couldn’t prevent production delays and legal issues that led to 
Russell taking his name off the film.

Alive again: David O Russell's abandoned film Nailed re-emerges as Accidental 
Love
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/06/alive-again-david-o-russells-abandoned-film-nailed-re-emerges-as-accidental-love>
Critical reaction to the film has been underwhelming (a 6% rating on Rotten 
Tomatoes explains why Russell was so keen to pull anAlan Smithee 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Smithee>), but seven years after production, 
it has managed to get a release.

That’s something the following films might never experience … 

Empires of the Deep
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db3dnwxUSK9k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db3dnwxUSK9k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db3dnwxUSK9k&media=>
After unofficial live-action Ferngully remake Avatar came, conquered and 
induced headaches globally, studios were keen to replicate the 3D formula. One 
of the most blatant attempts was this underwater epic, which used a hefty $130m 
budget to tell the story of a love story between a man and a mermaid, played by 
Olga Kurylenko. Yet despite initial hype, the film floundered with an 
understandably caustic reaction to the above trailer and five years after being 
made, no release has been set. You know your film’s in trouble when Catwoman 
director Pitof changes his mind about getting involved.

Get a Job
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F1%2F1433167927179%2F86b4d202-aa85-47bf-96bd-5e3e3e6d16a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F1%2F1433167927179%2F86b4d202-aa85-47bf-96bd-5e3e3e6d16a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anna Kendrick stars with Miles Teller and Bryan Cranston in Get a Job – but 
will it ever get a release? 
When Dylan Kidd scored an indie hit with Roger Dodger in 2002, it seemed as if 
a career in Hollywood was a given. But the followup, a Laura Linney romantic 
drama called P.S., failed to make an impression and he’s avoided movies ever 
since. It took a decade to return to the director’s chair but his star-studded 
comedy Get a Job, about college graduates struggling to enter the workforce has 
been indefinitely shelved. Shot three years ago, there’s no clear reason why 
it’s still to be released, especially considering a cast that includes Miles 
Teller, Bryan Cranston, Alison Brie, Christopher Mintz-Plasse, Marcia Gay 
Harden and Anna Kendrick, whorecently said 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/anna-kendrick-says-dylan-kidds-all-star-comedy-get-a-job-may-never-see-the-light-of-day-20140908>
 she doubts it will ever see the light of day.

Hippie Hippie Shake
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433255547297%2F429f0660-73c7-4614-b2a9-eaf2a2e9513f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433255547297%2F429f0660-73c7-4614-b2a9-eaf2a2e9513f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sienna Miller and Cillian Murphy on the Hippie Hippie Shake film set in 2007. 
Photograph: Carl Sims/REX_Shutterstock 
The trouble started for this 60s-set, fact-based drama before it even began 
production with a nine-year stretch in development hell. It was finally made in 
2007, with a cast including Sienna Miller,Cillian Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cillian-murphy>, Chris O’Dowd and Derek 
Jacobi, yet still hasn’t surfaced. Director Beeban Kidron, of Bridget Jones 2 
fame, quit the film during post-production, and in 2011, Working Title 
announced the film wouldn’t get a theatrical release. Strangely, test-screening 
reports weren’t that bad, and given Sienna Miller’s career resurgence, this one 
could be salvageable.

Black Water Transit
 Karl Urban in Black Water Transit. 
Tony Kaye is not a lucky man – or maybe Tony Kaye is a very difficult man. He 
famously fell out with Edward Norton during the production of his debut film 
American History X, which led to the star making his own cut of the film that 
won him an Oscar nomination. In 2007, he decided to make Black Water Transit, a 
post-Hurricane Katrina crime drama based on the novel by Carston Stroud, but 
the production company went bankrupt during filming. He screened it at Cannes 
in 2009 but legal issues have prevented a release. Kaye claims he is still 
working on a new cut of the film, which stars Stephen Dorff, Karl Urban, 
Laurence Fishburne and Brittany Snow.

7500
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D71vXzDCKqDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D71vXzDCKqDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D71vXzDCKqDw&media=>
Takashi Shimizu, director of both Japanese and Hollywood versions of The 
Grudge, took his brand of repetitive, scare-tactic horror and put it on a 
plane, filled with D-list actors. Amy Smart, Jamie Chung, Ryan Kwanten and 
Leslie Bibb all starred in this supernatural sky-based horror film, which was 
so close to release that an official trailer and website were launched. But a 
summer 2012 date was canned, as were two more in 2013 and another in 2014. It’s 
gone direct to video in various territories but there’s still no confirmed 
release in the UK or the US. Withthe Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/7500-film-review-744023> saying it 
“plays out like a very serious Snakes on a Plane”, maybe that’s for the best.

I Spit on Your Rave
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F8066787&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F8066787> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F8066787&media=>
Some moderate buzz started back in 2009 for this comedy horror, which used an 
attempt to break the record for “most amount of zombies captured on camera” at 
the Big Chill festival as the impetus for a film. It starredNoel Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/noel-fielding> as King of the Zombies, who 
sets up a music festival to keep the undead entertained. A 2010 release was 
cancelled, and in 2012 it was announced that E4 would redevelop the film as a 
six-part TV series. Three years later and there’s been no news. You can watch a 
rather dreadful promo for the film above though, if you like.

Boogie Town
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ99sVFQ2liM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ99sVFQ2liM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ99sVFQ2liM&media=>
Taking the plot of Footloose and giving it a sci-fi spin, this bizarrely 
plotted film takes place in a dystopian future where battle-dancing is illegal 
because the chief of police’s son was killed in a dance battle(!). R&B singer 
Marques Houston and Scandal star Brenda Song feature, along with some 
well-known hip-hop dancers, and it was strangely pitched as You Got Served 
meets Twilight. But its 2009 release date came and went, and six years later, 
still no word. As you can see from the trailer above, it has not aged well …

In God’s Hands
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433231038601%2F53bded3a-42ae-49a1-8101-da68d60905d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20coming%20soon%3A%20the%20films%20still%20stuck%20in%20purgatory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnot-coming-soon-david-o-russell-accidental-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433231038601%2F53bded3a-42ae-49a1-8101-da68d60905d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Maggie Gyllenhaal and Peter Sarsgaard, who starred in the 2003 drama In God’s 
Hands. Photograph: JPI Studios / Barcroft Media 
A slightly different example here in that, strictly speaking, this one will 
never ever get released. In 2003, director Lodge Kerrigan (who later went on to 
make Keane) took a post-SecretaryMaggie Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/maggie-gyllenhaal> and paired her with 
up-and-coming actor Peter Sarsgaard for a Steven Soderbergh-produced drama 
about a couple who must find a way of coping with the death of their child. But 
after wrapping, there was apparently extensive negative damage, and the entire 
film had to be scrapped. Rumours circulated that the film didn’t get released 
because it wasn’t very good, but it did lead to the couple dating and then 
starting a family together, which is something.

The Poughkeepsie Tapes
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXdjFcoe2950&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXdjFcoe2950>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXdjFcoe2950&media=>
This grisly found-footage horror film about a serial killer who films his 
crimes was tantalisingly close to release in 2007 and even had its trailer 
shown at cinemas in the US before a planned wide roll-out by MGM. But five 
weeks before release, during a difficult financial time for the studio, it was 
pulled from the schedule. Further release dates came and went and then last 
year, the film showed up on US satellite network DirecTV to watch on demand. 
But strangely, it was yanked off that platform and there’s been no word since. 
Despite all of this, the film still served as a calling card for director John 
Erick Dowdle who has since gone on to direct other released genre titles, such 
as REC remake Quarantine and Devil.

Cagefighter
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F21900308&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F21900308> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F21900308&media=>
Before Derek Cianfrance broke out with the devastating breakup drama Blue 
Valentine, he made a documentary about cage fighters. Despite finishing in 
2007, it ran into immediate difficulties. The problem lay with release forms, 
or rather a lack thereof, which meant that the fighters who Cianfrance had 
interviewed couldn’t legally be shown on film. It’s been shelved and, unless 
someone goes on an ambitious Erin Brockovich-esque hunt for signatures, it’s 
unlikely to ever see the light of day.

 * This article was amended on Tuesday 2 June 2015. We mistakenly put Brittany 
Murphy rather than Brittany Snow in the cast list for Black Water Transit. This 
has been corrected.  