
The world title match in New York stands level, 2.5-2.5, after the first five 
games (of 12) all ended in draws. For Sergey Karjakin, the Russian challenger 
and long-odds outsider, opportunity comes knocking as soon as this weekend, 
when games six and seven are played on Friday and Sunday (7pm start, live 
online). The normal colour alternation changes after game six so that Karjakin 
will have two games in succession with the white pieces.

This chance for Karjakin comes immediately after Norway’s Magnus Carlsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen>, the reigning champion and 
heavy favourite, failed to clinch very favourable endings in games three and 
four and then, in his own words, “screwed up” in game five when he defended 
poorly and was in danger of defeat. Carlsen is a resilient character but his 
mental anguish has been palpable in the post-game press conferences.

The 26-year-old Muscovite Karjakin has been resourceful, stubborn and 
successful in defence, saving lost endings against Carlsen in games three and 
four. In contrast the fruits of his opening preparation have been feeble. 
Before the match both Carlsen and Karjakin set up training camps in the 
Caribbean where one important target was to prepare opening bombs which could 
be unleashed at critical moments in the $1.1m championship series.

Like Anatoly Karpov in his heyday in the 1970s and 1980s, Karjakin had the 
support of other Russian grandmasters led by the ex-champion Vlad Kramnik. The 
old champion Mikhail Botvinnik beat Vasily Smyslov by a sudden switch from the 
French 1 e4 e6 to the Caro-Kann 1 e4 c6, while Karpov unleashed an early knight 
sacrifice against an unsuspecting Viktor Korchnoi, so the chess world looked 
forward to seeing what Karjakin had in store.

Instead he began with a d3 Ruy Lopez and then an h3 anti-Marshall, two 
innocuous systems which posed few problems to Carlsen, who in game four was 
almost winning with Black out of the opening. If Karjakin does have a bomb up 
his sleeve, he needs to trigger it this weekend.

Carlsen, for his part, has produced something novel, a mind games innovation. 
As White in game three, he went down a hackneyed route against Karjakin’s 
Berlin Wall. Then, instead of retreating an attacked rook from e5 to e1 as 
occurred in hundreds of previous games, he stopped at e2. The surprised 
Karjakin thought for half an hour, made a developing move and then Carlsen 
instantly retreated the rook to e1. The idea served its purpose, to unsettle 
Karjakin and make him consume clock time.

The downside for Carlsen has been his surprising fallibility in clinching 
endgame advantages. In game three he missed four clear wins, though none was 
simple. In game four he failed to foresee Karjakin’s plan to set up a fortress 
which the Norwegian army could not penetrate.

There are probably at least 100,000 online spectators with many websites 
carrying the moves and a major talking point is the organiser Agon’s pay per 
view channel to watch the live stream with closeups of Carlsen and Karjakin. 
The cost for the entire match is only $15 but this still seems a sticking point.
Chess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> audiences have got used to free 
viewing and Agon has had some negative publicity.

The chief commentator is the all-time No1 woman, Judit Polgar, who is 
articulate, clear, and a brilliant analyst. Agon’s best hope of a large influx 
of premium spectators will be if the match goes to the wire and especially to 
6-6 tiebreaks, for then everyone will want to watch closeups.

Other than the official site some of the best commentaries are on Chess24 
where the seven-time Russian champion Peter Svidler explains events, aided by 
another GM.

India’s Vishy Anand won the elite quadrangular in St Louis, where Bulgaria’s 
Veselin Topalov won the most brilliant game. His bishop sacrifice 13 Qg3? was 
unsound, but the US champion went wrong at moves 18 (Bc6!), 19 (Qc5!) and 23 
(Bf7!). As played, Topalov’s queen and rooks broke through and forced mate.

Veselin Topalov v Fabiano Caruana

1 c4 Nf6 2 Nc3 e6 3 Nf3 d5 4 d4 dxc4 5 e4 Bb4 6 Bxc4 Nxe4 7 O-O Nxc3 8 bxc3 Bd6
9 Re1 O-O 10 Qd3! Nd7 11 Ne5 Bxe5 12 dxe5 Nb6 13 Qg3? Nxc4 14 Bh6 g6 15 Rad1 Bd7
16 h4 Nb6 17 h5 Qe7 18 Rd4 Be8? 19 Bg5 f6? 20 exf6 Qc5 21 Rxe6 Qf5 22 Re5 Qb1+ 
23 Kh2 gxh5? 24 Bh6+ Bg6 25 Bxf8 Rxf8 26 Qg5! Qxa2 27 Re7 Qxf2 28 Rg7+ Kh8 29 
Rxg6!1-0

3469 White’s f1 rook is pinned, so the queen has to win on her own: 1 Rxg7+! 
Kxg7 2 Qf7+ Kh6 3 Qf4+! Kh5 4 Qg4+ Kh6 5 Qh4+! Kg7 (Kg6? 6 Qf6+ Kh5 7 g4 mate) 
6 Qf6+ Kg8 7 Qf7+ Kh8 8 Qxe8+ Kg7 9 Qf8+ Kg6 10 Qf6+ Kh5 11 g4 mate.
 