
Henri Lansbury scored a hat-trick as Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> ran out 5-2 winners 
against 10-man Barnsley at Oakwell. The hosts led twice in the first half but 
both times held their advantage for less than 10 minutes as Forest secured 
back-to-back away wins in the Championship.

“The target was to keep a clean sheet, but sometimes the team want to play 
with their character. It’s better to win 5-2 than draw 0-0,” said the Forest 
manager, Philippe Montanier. “After the victory at Ipswich we needed another 
victory because we’re not well ranked and before this game we were one point 
from the relegation zone. To score five goals is perfect for the fans.”

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> have now gone seven 
home league games without a win but it looked like that run was coming to an 
end as first Sam Winnall and then Marley Watkins put them in front either side 
of Lansbury’s long-range equaliser.

Apostolos Vellios levelled the scores again before Lansbury put the visitors 
ahead with a fine header during a frantic opening 45 minutes. Ben Osborn 
grabbed a fourth for the away side after half-time shortly before Watkins saw 
red for a stamp.

Lansbury completed his hat-trick from the penalty spot late on after 
substitute Matty Cash was brought down in the area.

Mustapha Carayol: ‘I learned everything at Damilola Taylor Centre, not just 
football’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/mustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest>
Barnsley went ahead with their first attack of note after five minutes. James 
Bree, making his 50th appearance for the club, burst down the right-hand side 
and delivered an excellent cross which Winnall headed home. Forest also scored 
with their first serious foray into opposition territory after 12 minutes. Adam 
Jackson was penalised for going in high on Osborn and from the subsequent 
30-yard free-kick Lansbury played a one-two with Pajtim Kasami before firing a 
low effort past Adam Davies, who should have done better.

The hosts were back in front just two minutes later as Conor Hourihane’s 
clever chipped pass found Watkins, who having beaten the offside trap chested 
the ball the ball down and steered it it into the bottom corner of the net. 
Once again, though, Barnsley’s lead was short-lived, Vellios equalising with a 
miscued finish which looped over the hapless Davies, after receiving from Danny 
Fox on the left. Winnall saw an effort from a corner routine tipped over and
Adam Hammill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/barnsley-oxford-united-johnstone-paint-trophy-final-match-report>
 had one shot stopped by Vladimir Stojkovic and another whistle over the bar as 
the hosts began to dominate.

But it was the away side who took the lead for the first time on the stroke of 
half-time, with Lansbury heading Osborn’s cross from the left into the bottom 
corner from 12 yards. Winnall missed a good opportunity to level the scores 
seven minutes after half-time when he headed Watkins’ cross agonisingly wide 
and Josh Scowen wasted some neat approach play from the hosts as he fired over 
the crossbar from the edge of the box.

Osborn then got the goal his display deserved after 63 minutes when his 
well-placed header from a Michael Mancienne cross found the bottom corner.

Four minutes after falling two goals behind, Barnsley found themselves reduced 
to 10 men when Watkins was shown a straight red by referee Oliver Langford card 
for stamping on Thomas Lam. Substitute Cash was then bundled over by Scowen 
with eight minutes remaining and Lansbury made no mistake from 12 yards.

Tammy Abraham, Pontus Jansson and the Championship’s most eye-catching players 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/tammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players> 