
There was a twinkle in Philippe Montanier’s eye. “What do you want to know? 
You know everything,” he said when there was a brief pause before the waiting 
journalists asked him a question, followingNottingham Forest’s 4-3 win over 
Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/nottingham-forest-burton-albion-championship-match-report>
 on Saturday.

Anyone can afford to be jovial after a home win but there already seems a 
confidence and assurance to the new Forest manager one competitive game into 
his tenure. In his press conference, when he was not lightly ribbing the 
interpreter he occasionally uses but does not really need, the Frenchman 
admitted this was a victory “with difficulties” and there was plenty to work 
on, a mild weakness of the kind new managers might not usually reveal.

Football League review: Wolves fight back as Ched Evans scores on return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/football-league-review-wolves-fight-back-ched-evans-scores>
His confidence was also shown in the team he selected, an XI which could 
fairly be described as absurdly young. The 10 outfield players had an average 
age of 21.8 years, featured five academy products, three teenagers and only two 
players over 23. Two of those , Matty Cash and Alex Iacovitti, were making 
their senior debuts. The old man of the group, Matt Mills, turned 30 in July. 
The next oldest was Henri Lansbury, who is 25.

It was a fairly remarkable selection and not without risks but one that might 
buy the manager a little extra goodwill with which to start his tenure. His 
suggestion last week that youngsters would have a big role to play in the 
season might have sounded like a man placating the locals but, as it turned 
out, he was not kidding.

These are the latest products of what has been a rich stream of talent and 
money for Forest. Iacovitti and Cash were the 44th and 45th graduates of the 
club’s academy to start for their first team since its establishment in 1997. 
Some have briefly appeared and quickly disappeared but others have formed key 
parts of the team for years and some have gone on to bigger and brighter 
things. David Prutton and Gareth Williams, the first two graduates from the 
academy, graduated to the Premier League while others have included Jermaine 
Jenas, Michael Dawson, Andy Reid, Jamaal Lascelles, Patrick Bamford, Karl 
Darlow and, of course, Wes Morgan.

The best footballer of the current group is Ben Osborn, an impish midfielder 
turned winger to whom the ball seems to stick and has been a first-team regular 
for a couple of seasons, but the most exciting may be Oliver Burke. At 6ft 2in 
and with a chest almost as broad, Burke has the pace of a 100m runner, which 
must make the sight of him belting down the right wing a particularly 
trauma-inducing sight for any left-back. The 19-year-old was called up to the 
senior Scotland squad last month and, while he is raw, his touch and 
decision-making already seem to have improved since last season. Two of 
Forest’s goals on Saturday were indirectly created by Burke causing havoc on 
the flank and, for a team that struggled in attack last season, his 
contributions will be vital.

Selling youth products is an economically prudent, if rather unromantic way of 
doing things, and the funds brought in by a few of those players – most 
recently Lascelles and Darlow to Newcastle – have proved valuable. But to the 
fans they have a much more important role, providing a sense of pride and 
connection to those on the pitch. Forest, often a mess and even an 
embarrassment in recent years, anything to which they can cling for a bit of 
pride and enthusiasm is to be welcomed.

Norwich City hit their stride as Jacob Murphy sets up rout at Blackburn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/blackburn-rovers-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
Such a significant group starting in one game will probably not be repeated 
too many times through the season. A couple of those inclusions were because of 
fitness problems with more senior players, but Osborn, Burke and possibly Jorge 
Grant, another midfielder, will be part of the first team for the foreseeable 
future, as may be Tyler Walker (son of Des), who was absent on Saturday. It 
would have been very easy for Montanier, new to the club and country, to shy 
away from youngsters but it speaks volumes for the quality of those players, 
and the work done by the academy manager, Gary Brazil, that he felt confident 
enough to include all of them against Burton.

This summer Reid, arguably the most beloved of Forest’s modern youth products 
and in his second spell with the club, finally gave in and retired, nearly two 
years since he last played a first-team game after a persistent groin injury 
refused to heal. There was a certain symbolism in such a promising collection 
of youngsters representing the team a few weeks later.

Talking points 

• Speaking of young players, there was a rare sight during QPR’s 3-0 win over 
Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/qpr-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 on Sunday. Olamide Shodipo was a constant threat in the first half, direct and 
impressive down the left with a couple of fine deliveries into the box, but his 
involvement was significant if only because he was a youth product, something 
virtually unheard of at Loftus Road. The odd one or two have briefly appeared 
in the interim but the last first-team regular to come through the ranks was 
Richard Langley, who made his debut in 1999. “The last player – and that was 16 
years ago. That cannot be right,” said QPR’s director of football, Les 
Ferdinand, last year and there certainly seems more of a focus – perhaps partly 
out of financial necessity – on youth now. If Shodipo can deliver on some of 
his promise, that barren run might come to an end.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9963e2753f8f1a609ea8fa84ac74e866b7cdee86%2F0_0_3712_2864%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nottingham%20Forest%20make%20bright%20start%20as%20Philippe%20Montanier%20gives%20youth%20a%20chance%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nottingham%20Forest%20make%20bright%20start%20as%20Philippe%20Montanier%20gives%20youth%20a%20chance%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9963e2753f8f1a609ea8fa84ac74e866b7cdee86%2F0_0_3712_2864%2F3712.jpg>
 QPR’s Olamide Shodipo, right, in action against Leeds. Photograph: Alan 
Walter/Reuters 
• Nothing says welcome to the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/fulham-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
 like losing to a Matt Smith header from a set piece. Rafa Benítez will be used 
to people telling him that life in the second tier will be tough for Newcastle 
but perhaps a bigger short-term challenge will be knitting his new team 
together. There were five summer signings in his team for the defeat by Fulham 
on Friday night, which did not include Jesús Gámez and Mohamed Diamé, with more 
to come. Once this team clicks, then all logic says they should win promotion 
by a healthy margin. Until then they might have to endure a few more nights 
like Friday.

• The Jack Grealish curse continues, admittedly largely because he has played 
in an awful team.Aston Villa’s defeat by Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/sheffield-wednesday-aston-villa-championship-match-report>
 stretched to 19 the run of league games he has appeared in which have ended in 
defeat. Perhaps he needs to be exorcised.

• Life does not get much brighter for Charlton. After a few years of calamity 
under Roland Duchâtelet, their inevitable relegation toLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> came last season, as 
did the stripping of assets like Stephen Henderson and the excellent Jordan 
Cousins. They lost their first game of the new campaign, 2-0 at Bury, then 
after the game some players appeared to become involved in what we’ll call a 
“frank exchange of views” with fans. It was probably not the greatest PR move 
but, then again, what does one expect from today’s Charlton.

• Another basket case club made a more positive start. Karl Oyston is not 
going to win the freedom of Blackpool any time soon but things do seem to be 
changing a little at Bloomfield Road. This summer they actually signed a few 
players in good time and have a manager, Gary Bowyer, willing to talk to the 
press. This more conciliatory tone was followed by a win in theirLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> opener, as they beat 
Exeter City 2-0 and thus recorded their sixth victory of 2016. Baby steps …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59de91ae0e2283b1e8a7f87211455e985f367808%2F0_0_3267_2078%2F3267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nottingham%20Forest%20make%20bright%20start%20as%20Philippe%20Montanier%20gives%20youth%20a%20chance%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nottingham%20Forest%20make%20bright%20start%20as%20Philippe%20Montanier%20gives%20youth%20a%20chance%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fmontanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59de91ae0e2283b1e8a7f87211455e985f367808%2F0_0_3267_2078%2F3267.jpg>
 Blackpool congratulate Kyle Vassell after scoring against Exeter. Photograph: 
CameraSport – Kevin Barnes 
• This is the first in a new series of weekly Monday Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> blogs
 