
It is probably a reflection of Nottingham Forest’s difficulties in the modern 
era that when they renew acquaintances withArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> on Tuesday it will be the first 
time in the 21st century they have encountered the club who wear the same 
colours because it was Forest, 130 years ago, who donated a red strip to help 
set them up.

The last occasion the two sides met was in January 1999 when Ron Atkinson had 
just been appointed as Forest’s manager and infamously began his short, 
undistinguished spell more like Rowan Atkinson by climbing into the wrong 
dugout. Forest, with the fingers of relegation closing round their necks, lost 
1-0 and it was their next home game when they played in a nine-goal thriller 
against Manchester United that is still talked about on the banks of the Trent. 
Unfortunately for Forest, they scored only one of the goals.

Arsène Wenger surprised Nicklas Bendtner signed for Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/arsene-wenger-nicklas-bendtner-nottingham-forest-arsenal-efl-cup>
Today, the club are 13th in English football’s second tier, exactly the 
position whereBrian Clough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brian-clough> 
inherited them in 1975. It is the 12th anniversary of Clough’s death and in the 
12th minute of their EFL Cup tie against Arsenal a tribute is planned for the 
man who led Forest – “the most unprogressive club in the country” as one of 
their own committee members described them – to promotion, a league title, two 
European Cups, four League Cups and a place in football where they could beat 
Barcelona in the European Super Cup yet be clapped out of Camp Nou by the 
Catalan supporters.

For the modern-day Forest, it is a very different set of ambitions. There is, 
however, one area of the club that has quietly been excelling and it helps that 
the latest manager, Philippe Montanier, is a firm believer in giving young 
players a chance. Montanier helped bring through Antoine Griezmann at Real 
Sociedad. He also gave Ousmane Dembélé his debut at Rennes and he has joined a 
club that is building a reputation for the quality and quantity of its academy 
players.

Perhaps the best way to gauge it is to walk through the entrance of the Nigel 
Doughty Academy, named after Forest’s late chairman, and look at the 11 framed 
photographs that have been positioned neatly on the left-hand wall.

The first 10 are the academy graduates who have risen through the system to 
play for Forest’s first team in the past two and a bit years. Ben Osborn, first 
on the list, joined the club at the age of nine and is now a first-team 
regular. Oliver Burke, another who started at Forest at primary-school age, has 
just been sold to RB Leipzig for £13m, a fee that many people feel will one day 
be regarded as a steal. Tyler Walker, son of Des, is among the other 
photographs – alongside Matty Cash, Jorge Grant, Gerry McDonagh, Dimitar 
Evtimov, Alex Iacovitti, James Thorne and Deimantas Petravicius – and the 
montage is certainly a striking way of demonstrating why Forest are building a 
reputation within the sport for their academy’s success. The 11th frame is for 
all the other boys who might be passing through. There is no picture in this 
one. It says simply: “Will you be next?”

There cannot be many other clubs in England’s top two divisions, if any, with 
a better production line from youth level to first team – the pathway as it is 
known – over the same period and the conveyor belt of young talent is testament 
to the work of Gary Brazil, the head of academy, and his staff, among them the 
former Forest striker Jack Lester.

Brazil, another ex-striker whose playing career incorporated spells at Fulham, 
Newcastle United, Preston North End and Sheffield United, takes his ethos from 
the sign behind his desk – “the only place success comes before work is in the 
dictionary” – and another of the academy’s finds could soon be on the wall. 
Anel Ahmedhodzic, a 17-year-old Swedish centre-half, was put on the bench by 
Montanier for last week’s game at Rotherham. Three others – Joe Worrall, Jordan 
Gabriel and Ryan Yates – went with the first team on their pre-season tour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Farsene-wenger-surprised-nicklas-bendtner-move-nottingham-forest--arsenal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20surprised%20at%20Nicklas%20Bendtner's%20move%20to%20Nottingham%20Forest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Farsene-wenger-surprised-nicklas-bendtner-move-nottingham-forest--arsenal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20surprised%20at%20Nicklas%20Bendtner%27s%20move%20to%20Nottingham%20Forest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Farsene-wenger-surprised-nicklas-bendtner-move-nottingham-forest--arsenal-video&media=>
Arsène Wenger surprised at Nicklas Bendtner’s move to Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/20/arsene-wenger-surprised-nicklas-bendtner-move-nottingham-forest--arsenal-video>
. 
Virgil Gomis, from the Under-18s, is also one to keep an eye on and others are 
coming through. Dan Micciche, manager of England’s Under-16s, regards Forest’s 
team of that age level as one of the finest around. Kevin Betsy, manager of 
England’s Under-15s, is another admirer.

“We’re got some really driven people here and it’s starting to give us a real 
return,” Brazil says. “The ideal situation would be that in two or three years 
we have four or five kids playing regularly in the first team. The fans love 
seeing their own players coming through and we believe there are others who the 
fans might not know about yet. It’s the culmination of a lot of hard work.”

The joke has been on Nicklas Bendtner for far too long | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/nicklas-bendtner-ego-nottingham-forest>
It also makes a difference that Montanier goes by the same ethos that once led 
Clough to make an 18‑year‑old Gary Mills the youngest ever player in a European 
Cup final. Montanier’s first game in charge featured five academy graduates, 
including two debutants, in his starting lineup.

Burke, a winger with the build of an Olympic sprinter, was given carte blanche 
to menace opposition defences and just about every club in the Premier League 
was eyeing the teenager in the last transfer window before he signed for 
Leipzig. Burke – “Twisty” to use his nickname – started 10 games in the 
Championship and quickly made an impression on his Bundesliga debut, setting up 
the decisive goal in a 1-0 win over Borussia Dortmund.

“Oliver’s a young man with a great future,” Brazil says. “We’ve lost a 
wonderful young man and precocious talent but three years ago it wasn’t a given 
that he would reach this stage. Oliver still has a lot of work to do to fulfil 
his potential but we’ve created a programme for the boys, we stay consistent to 
it and the fact we’ve had some real joy lately has made the staff even hungrier.

“When Oliver made his [Leipzig] debut, all the staff who have worked with him 
here were watching it. Everyone was so proud.”
 