
A phenomenally successful day of action by 1.5 million council, health 
service, and university manual workers has given Britain a taste of things to 
come as the public service unions pursue their demands for an immediate “going 
rate” pay rise and a pay comparability study.

Yesterday’s nationwide stoppages which saw tens of thousands of demonstrators 
converge on London, will be followed by continuous action in some areas and by 
coordinated programmes of local selective strikes, lightning strikes, and other 
disruptions.


Union leaders seem to be in danger of losing control in the face of demands 
for an all-out strike.


In Scotland, about half the manual workers in local government and the health 
service have warned that they will stop work completely if no progress is made 
at the next talks with employers.


The action by 75,000 members of the General and Municipal Workers’ Union, who 
have rejected selective action could take effect later this week.


Local authority employers said that any improvement on their 5 per cent offer 
to their 1.1 million manual workers would not come from them but from the 
Government, with the Government agreeing to pay its share.


They also warned that if they were forced to settle at a higher figure they 
would want to renegotiate the Rate Support Grant, which was fixed last November 
on the presumption of 5 per cent pay rises. Renegotiation would aim to ensure 
that the Government met its share of the direct and indirect costs of the 
settlement.


Employers expect to obtain from the Government today a “form of words” about 
the setting-up of a pay comparability study. Before agreeing to take part in 
the study, employers want to be sure that it will take account of all 2.5 
million council employees.

In two hours of talks with the Environment Secretary, Mr Peter Shore, and 
Employment Secretary, Mr Albert Booth, the employers made “some progress on 
this issue, said Mr Tag Taylor, Conservative leader of the Association of 
Metropolitan Authorities.


But Mr Taylor warned: “If the Government insists upon a study only for the 
manual workers, we are in for a real confrontation with the Government.”


The authorities agree with the Prime Minister’s estimate that a 10 per cent 
pay rise would mean an 18 per cent increase in the domestic rate. “We told the 
Ministers that if this kind of figure is eventually arrived at, we should wish 
to renegotiate the Rate Support Grant,” Mr Taylor said. This would mean the 
taxpayer, instead of the ratepayer, having to foot the bill.


Some union leaders claimed that up to 110,000 manual workers had marched 
through London to lobby the House of Commons.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgeneral-strike-public-sector-trade-unions-1979%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a37483596bb1935f84306e566c73542b486b661%2F0_0_3433_2059%2F3433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Now%20the%20call%20is%20for%20all-out%20strike%3A%20archive%2C%2023%20Jan%201979&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgeneral-strike-public-sector-trade-unions-1979%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Now%20the%20call%20is%20for%20all-out%20strike%3A%20archive%2C%2023%20Jan%201979&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgeneral-strike-public-sector-trade-unions-1979%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a37483596bb1935f84306e566c73542b486b661%2F0_0_3433_2059%2F3433.jpg>
 Shepherd Street, Central London, during the ‘Winter of Discontent’, 1 February 
1979. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Chants of “all-out strike” overwhelmed speakers at a mass meeting in Central 
Hall, Westminster. Hundreds of strikers milled around outside the chamber, 
while those who managed to get inside continually interrupted speeches by 
leaders of the four unions involved, and the meeting ended in uproar.


Several hundred - with uniformed ambulancemen much in evidence - thronged the 
Central Lobby of the Houses of Parliament to see their MPs.


A spokeswoman for the National Union of Public Employees - which has the 
largest number of strikers involved - said the response from members yesterday 
was “phenomenal.” She said: “We are absolutely astounded. It has been 
successful beyond what we ever expected. Reports front around the country show 
70 to 80 per cent of our members are out - and the rest have exemptions, or are 
applying restricted services in hospitals. Some have gone further than we 
intended.”


Further action depended on the decisions of the union’s 1,800 branches, she 
added. Present indictions were that London refuse collectors would stay out, 
while in other places collections would be stopped by strikes involving small 
numbers of incinerator workers.


Roads would not be gritted in bad weather because crews would refuse standby 
duties.


In Scotland, highly selective strikes would aim to close hospitals, possibly 
on a rota basis. NUPE was dismayed by the GMWU’s plans for all-out action in 
Scotland.


In Shropshire, a woman picket at East Hamlet Hospital was reported to have 
suffered bruises after being knocked down by a car.


Social services in many areas were relatively unaffected, although in some 
parts of London they were badly hit. In Camden, for example, meals-on-wheels, 
delivered to more than 1,000 people every day, came to a halt, as did the 
home-help service.


Elderly people were not able to get to day centres because their regular 
transport was not available, and only skeleton staffs were on duty in old 
people’s homes.


Last night chief negotiators from the four unions met Mr Shore, Mr Booth, the 
Education Secretary, Mrs Shirley Williams, and the Health Secretary, Mr David 
Ennals to press their claims.


Mr Charles Donnet, of the GMWU, said: “We were lobbying Ministers in the same 
way as we had instructed our members to lobby their MPs. We were seeking a 
higher target.”

 