
Manly produced an early second-half blitz to down the Warriors 32-12 in 
Auckland and keep theirNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> play-off 
hopes alive. The match was a battle of attrition and the Warriors’ defeat was 
compounded by star halfback Shaun Johnson being taken to hospital for scans.

Johnson was injured in the 25th minute scoring a typically mercurial try in 
which he stepped past three defenders, but his left ankle got trapped as he 
reached out to dot down.

The Warriors also lost second rower Bodene Thompson in the second spell. Manly 
were even more badly hit, with both centre Steve Matai and bench forward Luke 
Burgess going off in the opening half. And when backrowers Ligi Sao and Tom 
Symonds were also injured, the visitors were left to play most of the last 
quarter without a bench.

Manly arrived at Mt Smart Stadium precariously placed in 13th position and 
after a mid-week report that the club wanted to release 14 players at the end 
of the season. But they made most of the running and, in prop Jake Trbojevic, 
they had a player who gave them plenty of go-forward.

The loss was the second in a row for the Warriors, who are now in danger of 
dropping out of the top eight. With the scores tied at 6-6 at halftime, Manly 
then broke the game open with three tries in eight minutes.

Winger Jorge Taufua got the first by powering over. The Warriors then failed 
to clean up a Daly Cherry-Evans kick and fullback Brett Stewart was on hand to 
dot down. Taufua completed his brace with an athletic put-down.

Stewart got his own double with a kick-and-chase to make it 13 tries in 12 
matches against the Warriors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c398401d5bab8f788b3a37969d1373cef0f0b76%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NRL%3A%20Manly%20too%20strong%20for%20Warriors%20while%20Storm%20trounce%20Dragons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NRL%3A%20Manly%20too%20strong%20for%20Warriors%20while%20Storm%20trounce%20Dragons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c398401d5bab8f788b3a37969d1373cef0f0b76%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Storm defence was steadfast in their 22-4 win against the Dragons. 
Photograph: Kerry Marshall/Getty Images 
Hometown hero Tohu Harris had a hand in two tries as Melbourne Storm’s Napier 
experiment paid off in style, downing St George Illawarra 22-4 at McLean Park.


A crowd of 14,532 witnessed the first NRL match in the Hawke’s Bay city and 
were treated to a masterclass by the Storm at their efficient best to condemn 
the Dragons to their seventh straight loss.

After an error-strewn opening on a greasy surface, the desperate Dragons 
looked to have taken the lead in the 27th minute when a wide cut-out pass from 
Benji Marshall sent Jason Nightingale over in the corner only for it to be 
called back for a forward pass.


The Storm made them pay a minute later when Nelson Asofa-Solomona bullocked 
his way over from short range to chalk up his first NRL try.


When Marshall tried to repeat his earlier pass three minutes before the break, 
Hawke’s Bay-born Harris was alert to the danger.


Playing in front of his family sitting in the aptly-named Harris Stand, he 
intercepted the pass to send a flying Marika Koroibete, who had been denied 
earlier in the half, away on an 80m dash to the line.


The 12-0 halftime deficit was perhaps a little harsh on the Dragons who had 
matched their pre-game talk of an improved defensive effort in the Storm’s 
opening set.


Matt Duffie defused a testing bomb for his first touch in a Storm jersey in 
847 days before almost being driven back in-goal. The Red V kept up the 
intensity to force Cronk to kick from inside his own 20m.


They were again to the fore soon after the interval with five tacklers 
combining to thwart a hard-charging Kevin Proctor from extending the Storm lead.


But they struggled to get anything going in attack and seconds after a chant 
of “Melbourne, Melbourne” rang out Proctor latched onto a short ball from Cronk 
to extend the ‘home’ side’s lead 15 minutes after the resumption.


Harris, who designed the one-off jersey worn by the Storm, then had his second 
assist of the night to retrieve a knockdown from a Cronk bomb and send Mahe 
Fonua over in the corner to put them up 22-0 and the result beyond doubt.


They still had enough time to have tries to Blake Green and a second to Fonua 
ruled out for forward passes as the fire went out of the Dragons before they 
claimed a late consolation to centre Peter Mata’utia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22796a8157050ce1c19d9cf35cfdb0da56acd489%2F0_121_3036_1823%2F3036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NRL%3A%20Manly%20too%20strong%20for%20Warriors%20while%20Storm%20trounce%20Dragons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NRL%3A%20Manly%20too%20strong%20for%20Warriors%20while%20Storm%20trounce%20Dragons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fnrl-manly-too-strong-for-warriors-storm-trounce-dragons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22796a8157050ce1c19d9cf35cfdb0da56acd489%2F0_121_3036_1823%2F3036.jpg>
 South Sydney walloped Newcastle in a demolition at ANZ stadium. Photograph: 
Mark Kolbe/Getty Images 
South Sydney side flexed their premiership muscle by destroying a hapless 
Newcastle 52-6 at ANZ Stadium on Saturday night.


On the same day the Knights lost key playmaker Jarrod Mullen for the season, 
the Rabbitohs recorded their biggest ever victory over Newcastle, surpassing 
last year’s 40-point rout in Cairns.


The win consolidates the Rabbitohs’ spot in the top four, while Newcastle’s 
loss, their 12th in 14 games, all but ends their faint finals hopes.


Skipper Greg Inglis and Alex Johnston both bagged hat-tricks, centre Dylan 
Walker recorded a double and hooker Issac Luke ran rampant behind a dominant 
Souths pack.


If it wasn’t for Adam Reynolds’ off-night with the boot - he nailed just six 
goals from 10 attempts - the Rabbitohs would have surpassed their biggest ever 
win at ANZ stadium.


An upset initially looked to be on the cards when Knights prop Kade Snowden 
crashed over untouched in just the 2nd minute.


But it took only three minutes for their dream start to turn into a nightmare, 
as Rabbitohs centre Dylan Walker finished off a 60-metre blindside play that 
also saw opposite three-quarter James McManus’s night end with concussion.


The early setback seemed to flick the switch for the defending premiers, with 
Johnston burning Chanel Mata’utia in the 10th, John Sutton offloading for 
Inglis in the 15th and then Bryson Goodwin going over on play one of a scrum 
win in the 23rd.


Co-owner Russell Crowe was watching on from the stands and the only opponent 
the Rabbitohs seemed to be playing was the clock.


The carnage continued when Inglis stretched out to nab his second try in the 
27th. Walker notched his brace in the 33rd, before Inglis celebrated his 
hat-trick in the 40th by bringing out his goanna celebration.


By the end of a first half, the Rabbitohs led 36-6.


The points somewhat dried in the second half, with Thomas Burgess crashing 
through in the 49th, Johnston soaring over Mata’utia in the 59th and then 
Walker effecting his own hat-trick in the 73rd.
 