
Although they’ll take it as one if they think it’ll help, it’s no slight on 
the Melbourne Storm that Sunday’s grand final buildup appears to be all about 
their opponents, theCronulla Sharks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cronulla-sharks>.

It’d be enough if that were simply because the Sharks have never won a 
premiership since joining the top flight in 1967 – a wait so long that should 
Cronulla win on Sunday long-time supporters may feel disorientation amongst the 
elation, as so much of what came to define their team will no longer be true.

But 50 years of successfully avoiding success is one thing; another is recent 
history. Just two years ago Cronulla were a basket case and, worse, an 
embarrassment. Many league fans might have been prepared to look the other way 
had theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> taken the Sharks for a long 
drive – to Perth or purgatory, whatever came first. That year the sponsor-less 
Sharks finished last and the position flattered them. However, their measly 
five wins and a points differential of -279 were merely sniffles when measured 
against a body wracked on a cellular level.

The Sharks were a club in crisis, one reeling from the tail-whip of the 2013 
Asada scandal. The club faced a $1m fine, staff were sacked, coach Shane 
Flanagan was suspended for a year, interim coach Peter Sharp, beaten and bowed, 
later resigned, captain Paul Gallen, among others, accepted backdated bans, and 
star forward Andrew Fifita publicly flirted with rugby union and Canterbury 
(before changing his mind).

To top it all off, five-eighth Todd Carney wrote himself a new entry in the 
Bumper Book of Boofheads by urinating into his own mouth while on camera. Not 
even this major role in contributing to the national vocabulary (it’s called 
“bubbling”, kids) was enough to save his skin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c9c912b70d69bf7ef0c412429abb3bed6dbde0%2F0_163_3914_2350%2F3914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NRL%20grand%20final%20preview%3A%20Cronulla's%20spirit%20meets%20the%20Melbourne%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NRL%20grand%20final%20preview%3A%20Cronulla%27s%20spirit%20meets%20the%20Melbourne%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c9c912b70d69bf7ef0c412429abb3bed6dbde0%2F0_163_3914_2350%2F3914.jpg>
 Thumbs up: Cronulla star Michael Ennis laps up the grand final week buzz with 
Sharks fans. Photograph: Matt King/Getty Images 
Two years on and the Sharks are in the grand final. The Sharks are in the 
grand final. It barely computes. But, 2014 aside, the Sharks have been building 
for this since 2012 when, with Flanagan overseeing an overhauled squad, they 
finished seventh. After finishing fifth in 2013, the Sharks threatened again in 
2015, performing promisingly on the back of their experienced forwards and 
integrating the youthful skills of Valentine Holmes and Jack Bird. It was 
looking good until the Cowboys thumped them 39-0 in the semi-finals. Yet again 
the Sharks’ “Up, Up Cronulla” team song appeared to have written for ironic 
purposes.

But the Sharks have progressed this year with a well-balanced squad; equal 
parts flair and grit, youth and experience (the Sharks’ grand final squad, in 
terms of their combined first grade games, will comprise the most experienced 
team in NRL grand final history – which should help keep nerves under control). 
The arrival of new halves Chad Townsend and, in particular, James Maloney, 
coincided with, or triggered, an Indian summer for the likes of Michael Ennis, 
Luke Lewis, Wade Graham, Gallen and Ben Barba, the latter of whom is back to 
something resembling his best.

With hit-up king Fifita popping offloads like a piñata leaks lollies, points 
have flowed (24.3 per game in 2016 compared to 19.5 last year), and the back 
three of Barba, Holmes and Sosaia Feki have scored 50 tries between them. At 
the same time the Sharks’ defence has tightened up (16.8 conceded compared to 
19.8). Mid-year they put together a 15-match winning streak so impressive that 
one was forced to ignore the weight of history and declare them a real chance. 
That is, until they then won just one in six leading into the finals, allowing 
both Melbourne and Canberra to overtake them.

Cronulla's potential drought-breakers: the NRL grand final fairytale that 
isn't | Sam Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/cronullas-potential-drought-breakers-the-nrl-grand-final-fairytale-that-isnt>
Would we really have been surprised if they’d then bowed out in straight sets? 
No, but in a sign that this Cronulla side has the ability to do what no other 
Cronulla side has done – sides that have included Tommy Bishop, Greg Pierce, 
Steve Rogers, Gavin Miller, Andrew Ettingshausen, and David Peachey – the 
Sharks showed togetherness and resolve to pick themselves up and see off the 
Raiders and, most clinically and impressively, the Cowboys. In doing so they 
have reached their first decider since the Super League grand final of 1997 
and, before that, the1978 NSWRL grand final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ElAM7fzjR4>. 

In theory this makes the Sharks this year’s fairytale story, bearing in mind 
that media bylaws demand there be one for promotional purposes. But to be 
honest, given Cronulla’s various scandals and the on/off-field behavioural 
history of the likes of Gallen, Fifita, and Ennis – men as hard to love as sand 
in your gusset – the Sharks’ fairytale is more like something from the oeuvre 
of the Brothers Grimm than Disney. Cronulla are not really a team towards whom 
neutral fans would be inclined to feel any particular warmth, but a win on 
Sunday might well induce widespread sentimentalism and an acceptance that after 
all this time, all this pain, the Sharks have earned such joy.

If the Sharks aren’t universally loved then neither are the Melbourne Storm 
who, in NSW at least, will forever be tarred with the Original Sin of being 
based in Victoria and of being born out of Super League in the wayDamien (of 
The Omen) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7CEbd7ffNw> was born of a jackal. 
Oh, and there’s the don’t-mention-the-war matter of the salary cap rorting that 
saw the Storm stripped of both their 2007 and 2009 premiership titles. Still, 
you’d have to be wilfully stubborn to overlook the Storm’s continued ability to 
stay at or near the top year in, year out.

In fact, ahead of what will be the club’s 500th game on Sunday, and their 
sixth grand final in 11 seasons, they have the greatest winning percentage of 
any first grade team in rugby league history (63.5%). Yes, there’s an asterisk 
against Melbourne’s name for many of those years, but even after shedding 
players to belatedly abide by the salary cap in 2010, the Storm haven’t faded 
away as many thought they might have. Or should have.

Helmed by Craig Bellamy – a man who can wring blood from a stone; a man whose 
game-day passion keeps Windex in business – they are as well-drilled as the 
North Korean military during Kim Jong-un’s birthday parade. New players come in 
and fall into stride. This year, even a season-ending injury to someone as 
brilliant and influential as Billy Slater wasn’t enough to derail them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e58d9d1ef67f04f671bb6c27d83e34606098c1%2F0_125_3550_2130%2F3550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NRL%20grand%20final%20preview%3A%20Cronulla's%20spirit%20meets%20the%20Melbourne%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NRL%20grand%20final%20preview%3A%20Cronulla%27s%20spirit%20meets%20the%20Melbourne%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnrl-grand-final-preview-cronulla-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e58d9d1ef67f04f671bb6c27d83e34606098c1%2F0_125_3550_2130%2F3550.jpg>
 Storm coach Craig Bellamy is looking to pilot another Melbourne triumph in 
Sunday’s NRL grand final. Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/AAP 
The steadying influence of their talismans Cameron Smith and Cooper Cronk 
cannot be overestimated. Nor can their footballing brains. How reassuring and 
nerve-settling for some of the Storm’s younger players to look across the 
dressing room and see them lacing up their boots. With this pair playing the 
role of coaches on the field (and, in Smith’s case, the referee too), the Storm 
have been a model of consistency, as their minor premiership attests.

Win or lose on Sunday, Storm's Craig Bellamy is the greatest NRL coach ever | 
Nick Tedeschi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/win-or-lose-on-sunday-storms-craig-bellamy-is-the-greatest-nrl-coach-ever>
In fullback Cameron Munster, in Fijian wingers Suliasi Vunivalu and Marika 
Koroibete, they have line-breaks and finishing prowess. With leading forwards 
Jesse Bromwich and Tohu Harris they have muscle and offloads. But it’s their 
remarkable organisation in defence which has taken them so far this year, with 
the Storm conceding an average of just 12.5 points a game. It allows them, as 
with last week’s preliminary finals against Canberra, to score just 14 points 
and win. The ability of that defence to hold firm on Sunday will go a long way 
to determining the result of the grand final.

Cronulla, less reliant on structure, appear to have the edge in attack. Could 
they also have an edge in desire, one underlined by their club’s empty trophy 
cabinet? Captain Paul Gallen, for one, wondered if he’d retire without ever 
playing in a season decider, let alone winning one, and he knows well enough 
that it would be foolish to expect another chance to come his way. So he and 
his team will lay it all on the line on Sunday. It won’t bringHarold Holt back  
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport/nrl/teams/sharks/harold-holts-grandson-will-cheer-for-cronulla-in-sundays-nrl-grand-final/news-story/58e542e3298dd2ebb1fd84c199588ec2?nk=b5d529dd12c29dc8e31da04b263ecf8b-1475046420>
but it just might be enough to end half a century of heartbreak.
 