
The NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> have trumpeted the 
participation of NRL stars Jason Taumalolo and Valentine Holmes in Los Angeles 
trials next week. Taumalolo and Holmes flew together from London immediately 
after squaring off against each other in the Four Nations final between 
Australia and New Zealand on Monday.

The NFL Management Council informed clubs of the trial to be held on November 
26. “Jason Taumalolo and Valentine Holmes, two of the best players in 
Australia’s National Rugby League, have scheduled a work-out for NFL clubs this 
Saturday,”a league statement said 
<http://www.theroar.com.au/2016/11/21/breaking-jason-taumalolo-valentine-holmes-to/>
.

“These players are considered NFL free agents and are eligible to sign with 
clubs after the club has received written permission from the player’s National 
Rugby League club.”

Australia hark back to golden era with crushing Four Nations final win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/australia-golden-era-four-nations-final-anfield-new-zealand>
The Cowboys said Taumalolo would test with their blessing. “The North 
Queensland Cowboys are aware that player Jason Taumalolo is returning from the 
Four Nations tournament via the USA where he will undergo testing in front of 
NFL scouts,” the club said. “Jason has done this with the full backing of the 
club, and in consultation with the player’s management.”

Taumalolo’s interest comes less than two months after he put rumours of a 
cross-code move to bed by declaring he wanted to become anNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> great following his Dally M medal win. 
“My plan is to retire playing rugby league and that hasn’t changed over the 
last little while,” he said.

Both Taumalolo and Cronulla’s Holmes are believed to be deep into negotiations 
to remain with their NRL clubs beyond the end of the 2017 season. However the 
latest development could throw a spanner in the works, and comes less than a 
year after South Sydney forward Thomas Burgess tested with New York Giants.

The Rabbitohs prop also went with his club’s blessing, and returned to play in 
the 2016 season. The 2016-17 NFL season is into its 11th week with Super Bowl 
LI on February 5.



 