
Some years ago, in the guise of Rugby League Week’s “Man On The Hill”, I 
headed down to Remondis Stadium, the home ground ofCronulla Sharks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cronulla-sharks>. There on the hill I 
laughed along with the Sharks fans as their centre-three-quarter Ben Pomeroy 
dropped the ball, time and again. We laughed like fiends.

Such was the lot of your average Sharks fan – you just laughed. What else 
could you do? It was like you owned the players and their errors. They were the 
fans’ errors. And it was all a big gag, a bit like the Barmy Army celebrating 
their terrible team by singing songs of their badness. It was the height of 
good humour.

But they’re laughing long and loud for a different reason now, Sharks fans, 
because their improbable rugby league team has made off with the Provan-Summons 
trophy. In a hard-boned and willing grand final at Sydney’s ANZ Stadium in 
front of a near capacity 83,625 people, a heaving, pulsating, roiling sky-blue 
sea, with occasional algal blooms of two-tone purple, saw a great game of rugby 
league.

NRL grand final: Cronulla Sharks vs Melbourne Storm – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/oct/02/nrl-grand-final-cronulla-sharks-vs-melbourne-storm-in-pictures>
There was intent early. Brutish intent. As Knights enforcer Paul Harragon said 
before the 1997 decider, “You can’t get sent off in a grand final”. And it’s 
probably true. You’d have to be really bad. Early on, the players set out to 
test it. Mick Ennis threw a high shot in the first twenty seconds. Marika 
Koroibete swung a forearm at Chad Townsend’s Rick Astley-looking head and was 
put on report. He’s off to rugby, though, Koroibete and thus had license to 
kill. Maybe not kill. But he was put on report and won’t serve a sentence on 
the Wallabies’ spring tour.

Giant Cronulla prop Andrew Fifita was a factor early, and throughout. Luke 
Lewis would win the Clive Churchill Medal, and had a great game, his head 
finishing like a very bad boxer’s, his cheeks like Cro-Magnon man’s. But Fifita 
was huge, a real factor. “The Fifita Factor”: ordinary airport novel, but the 
man was up there with the best on ground.

Storm lock Dale Finucane’s defence was staunch, this chunky jack-hammer of a 
man. Dean Lance redux. Lewis almost scored a try from a James Maloney burst, 
slid towards the try-line but couldn’t reach out and score because the 
double-movement law’s an ass. It’s not the worst law in rugby league. But it’s 
one of them.

Bouncing Ben Barba scored the first try from a scrum move that referees sent 
to the bunker because referees couldn’t believe someone had ripped it off.Can 
you do that? Is that allowed?The move went like this: halfback fed under the 
lock’s feet, the lock took off with it, turned it back inside to the 
second-rower – Barba – who scooted over the line. And up went “TRY” and up went 
the Shark people, happy as Leisure Suit Larry.

And from there the Sharks’ bombed in. All the momentum. It was the same 
momentum they’ve had all year. They just kept on coming, playing footy, and 
rucking their way down field – equal parts hot potato Raiders and staunch-wall 
Storm. A heady combination.

Jack Bird hurt his arm, it hung limp like a deadweight. “Bird has one wing,” 
said commentator Ray Warren. Someone had to say it. And Our Rabbi did, God 
bless him for it.

On field the Sharks ran fast and with intensity, all hard bodies, footwork and 
endeavour. Storm couldn’t hold them, couldn’t slow things down. Normally they 
do. That’s their thing – brutalise their opponents, kill the ruck with the 
moves of judo. Cop a penalty. Do it again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fnrl-premiers-cronulla-laughing-long-and-hard-for-all-the-right-reasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7923a55c83e250796882c44946ee1fbc620e88%2F0_0_4714_3289%2F4714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NRL%20premiers%20Cronulla%20laughing%20long%20and%20hard%20for%20all%20the%20right%20reasons%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fnrl-premiers-cronulla-laughing-long-and-hard-for-all-the-right-reasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NRL%20premiers%20Cronulla%20laughing%20long%20and%20hard%20for%20all%20the%20right%20reasons%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fnrl-premiers-cronulla-laughing-long-and-hard-for-all-the-right-reasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7923a55c83e250796882c44946ee1fbc620e88%2F0_0_4714_3289%2F4714.jpg>
 Cronulla Sharks players celebrate their 2016 NRL premiership win. Photograph: 
Craig Golding/AAP 
Not this game. And referees Matt Cecchin and Ben Cummins, it seems, have 
adjudicated a clean one. The Sharks, freed up, broke free of the human net and 
won the ruck. Won the first half. Only 8-nil. But they owned it.

Yet the Storm were good. Their completions were “perfect”. They played 
“Stormball”. But the Sharks played footy. And monstered the Storm.

On field Ennis continued to menace. It’s what he does. He rubbed it in, he 
annoyed, he pushed people. He’s probably the game’s most disliked opponent. And 
fair enough, he’s not out there to be nice. “He’s in their heads,” reckoned 
Phil Gould of the latest Ennis-inspired push-n-shove. And say what you will 
about Ennis, love him or hate, agree or disagree, one thing is clear: he’s a 
grub.

In the second half it was more of the same; Sharks just hammering away, 
bludgeoning the Storm line. Yet Storm, again, held firm. They love that stuff. 
Love copping it and throwing it back. And back they came. It’s what they do. 
They stay cool and play their Stormball. “Cool” will be on Cam Smith’s 
tombstone. His resting heart-rate is just above dead.

The Sharks were bashed. Head bin here. Bad knee there. “He’s still on one 
wing, the Bird man,” said Warren again, warming to the theme. And from nothing 
Jesse Bromwhich, the indomitable giant of New Zealand, rumbled over for a try. 
It had been all Sharks. But they only led by two. It was in their heads. How 
could it not be? They knew Storm would not go away, would not panic. But hell! 
They’d smashed them for 55 minutes. Still couldn’t shake ‘em.Who are these 
people? 

Koroibete ran on one wing. Will Chambers ran on the other. Channel Nine threw 
up a statistic: Storm had completed 28 of 30 sets; Sharks 22 of 24. There was 
22 minutes to go. It was a close to “perfect” game. And still anyone’s.

Cronulla Sharks beat Melbourne to break 50-year NRL premiership drought | Sam 
Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/cronulla-sharks-beat-melbourne-to-break-50-year-nrl-premiership-drought>
Chambers stepped Ennis and scored a try that took his team into the lead. 
Gallen’s head went into his hands.Oh the humanity! How could this be? Had we 
not thrown our everything at them? They are like a piece of iron. They are not 
human.And it was true. No human could weather such a Shark attack and survive. 
But Storm had beaten it, eaten it, owned it. And now led by four points.

Fifteen to go and you couldn’t pick a standout player. Willing replacement 
punk Christian Welch threw an ill-advised swinging arm at Townsend’s very bad 
haircut. Fifita rock-and-rolled over through a phalanx of judo-trained 
bodyguards to somehow plant the ball under the posts. Try-time. A marvel of 
human movement.

Sharks by two. Sweet Jesus and DK Lillee it was tense. Cronk stabbed for the 
line and Bird fielded at second-slip. Maloney kicked out on the full trying to 
kill off a set. And the Storm came again and again. Chambers kicked and chased 
and nearly won it for his team. The Sharks kicked long, and out.

One minute left. The Storm threw everything. Time up on the clock. And still 
they came, these horrible automatons. What a team. What a club. They can never 
be killed. But the Sharks made a desperate late tackle on Koroibete. Time off. 
Ennis hugged some ball-boys. And the Shire went up as one.

Now Cronulla are premiers of the National Rugby League. First time in their 
49-year existence. How about it? It’s magnificent. And in Cronulla, they’re 
laughing.
 