
At the highest and darkest point of the South Downs escarpment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/27/great-country-walks-south-downs-hampshire>
, an Anglo-Saxon hall stands beefy and lumbering under a black sky dusted with 
stars. Built with hand-hewn oak timbers and hazel spars, it is the latest 
addition tothe educational farm  <http://www.butserancientfarm.co.uk>on Butser 
Hill where I work as a creative developer, feeding goats and designing guide 
books.

The farm is an outdoor archaeological laboratory, and recreates ancient 
buildings from the neolithic period onwards. Inside the hall a log fire 
releases sparks like doves at a wedding, burning through the daylight hours to 
amuse wandering visitors searching for a taste of history.

This hall was built using archaeological footprints from a Saxon settlement in 
Chalton, a tiny village sleeping one mile away. It is warm and woody; in the 
centre lies a large feasting table laden with deer skins and tankards. Fourteen 
centuries ago such a table would have swayed with honey mead and platters of 
hot wild boar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c20b84ba2ccea320852a3e46d3d599cc6f37f1%2F0_0_1869_1255%2F1869.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oaken%20hall%20where%20the%20barn%20owl%20flies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oaken%20hall%20where%20the%20barn%20owl%20flies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c20b84ba2ccea320852a3e46d3d599cc6f37f1%2F0_0_1869_1255%2F1869.jpg>
 The feasting table. Photograph: Tiffany Francis 
No man lives here now – yet it is inhabited. On winter nights a barn owl 
visits, to consume her own feast of mangled voles and frogs. The thatch 
provides shelter from iced winds, and in the morning we find a carpet of 
shining black pellets brimming with skulls and rubbery tails.

Barn owls were historically able to catch rats inside barns and outhouses, but 
the decline of such buildings has seen owl populations plummet 
<http://www.barnowltrust.org.uk/barn-owl-facts/current-uk-barn-owl-population/past-barn-owl-population>
, with many birds dying of starvation. An increase in manmade nest boxes since 
the 1990s has helped numbers recover, but, according to the Barn Owl Trust, in 
May 2013 there were fewer barn owls in Britain than at any time since records 
began.

Fortunately, our owl, thawed in her shawl of ivory feathers, has found shelter 
within the thick beams of this hall, as she would have done in its Saxon 
original before rat poison, habitat loss and motorcars began to threaten her 
species. She arrives and departs silently within this modern agricultural 
landscape of rapeseed and ammonium phosphate, and dissolves into the darkness 
before dawn can begin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2437e84cb5fa240ed42fac161a30489b5600ddb7%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oaken%20hall%20where%20the%20barn%20owl%20flies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oaken%20hall%20where%20the%20barn%20owl%20flies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Foaken-hall-barn-owl-flies-south-downs-hampshire-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2437e84cb5fa240ed42fac161a30489b5600ddb7%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
 The owl’s roof entrance. Photograph: Tiffany Francis 




 