
Andre Ward, the undefeated star boxer finally returning to the ring on 
Saturday night, is a Bay Area kid and it shows.

It shows in the tight-knit elite athletic community he’s cultivated in his 
hometown: recently retired Seahawks running back Marshawn Lynch is a close 
friend, and the Warriors’Stephen Curry carried Ward’s championship belt 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/25220954/watch-steph-curry-carries-championship-belt-in-andre-wards-entourage>
 out for his fight with Paul Smith last year.

It shows in what he talks about: “Can you believe how expensive organic 
groceries are these days?” the long-time super middleweight champion asks.

And, he says, it shows in the chip on his shoulder as he faces off the Cuban 
fighter Sullivan Barrera on Saturday at the Oracle Arena inOakland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oakland>, kicking off Ward’s path toward a 
new title: the light heavyweight championship.

“We call it the Oakland treatment. Things here don’t get their due. But it 
just builds grit,” he tells the Guardian over pasta and steak in his hotel room 
the night before the fight. “Now there’s the Stephs, the Trayvons, the Clays. 
And it’s crazy cause we knew this was in Oakland – we always knew – but it just 
took the rest of the world some time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Foaklands-andre-ward-americas-finest-boxer-is-at-home-out-of-the-spotlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b35cde2e693fb8f76b4a65b5f1fe0b4d8db851%2F109_698_2733_3418%2F2733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oakland's%20Andre%20Ward%2C%20America's%20finest%20boxer%2C%20is%20at%20home%20out%20of%20the%20spotlight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Foaklands-andre-ward-americas-finest-boxer-is-at-home-out-of-the-spotlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oakland%27s%20Andre%20Ward%2C%20America%27s%20finest%20boxer%2C%20is%20at%20home%20out%20of%20the%20spotlight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Foaklands-andre-ward-americas-finest-boxer-is-at-home-out-of-the-spotlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b35cde2e693fb8f76b4a65b5f1fe0b4d8db851%2F109_698_2733_3418%2F2733.jpg>
 Stephen Curry carried Ward’s title belt out to the ring ahead of his most 
recent fight last year. Photograph: Jeff Chiu/AP 
Ward, the last American man to win a gold medal at the Olympics back in 2004, 
has since had aHall of Fame pro career <http://boxrec.com/boxer/281958> at 
super middleweight, holding the 168lb title from 2009 until vacating it last 
year to strike out at new ground. Most pundits rated him no worse than No2 on 
the pound-for-pound rankings behind Floyd Mayweather for a few years, but he’s 
fought only four times since 2012 due to a long-running promotional spat and 
more recently a training injury, so he’s slipped from the public consciousness 
to some extent.

The biggest fight out there for the 32-year-old is a showdown with the 175lb 
champ Sergey Kovalev, a knockout machine who is considered by many the most 
feared fighter in the sport. They’ve agreed to meet in the fall in principle – 
in what would be one of 2016’s highest profile and most anticipated fights – 
provided they get through their respective tune-up bouts in the spring. That’s 
what this fight with Barrera is for Ward. And he is an overwhelming favorite.


Unlike Mayweather’s self-styled pantomime villain, Ward is a real-life “good 
guy” – a church-going family man who takes his position as a role model 
seriously and never says anything objectionable (his nickname is “SOG” or “Son 
of God”) – which doesn’t “sell” and in part explains why he’s not become a 
crossover star.

“In my sport they literally tell you you have to act ignorant, act like a 
buffoon if you want to make it. You can’t just have a weigh-in, you have to 
throw a chair at someone,” he said. “They literally tell us that. If I’m the 
bad guy because I’m not the guy they want me to be, then so be it.”


Over the last year he resolved his promotional woes in court and has since 
signed with Jay Z’s Roc Nation Sports – along with Miguel Cotto the nascent 
sports agency’s highest-profile signing in boxing.


If I’m the bad guy because I’m not the guy they want me to be, then so be it.
Andre Ward 
“During all that, part of me wanted to stay away, wanted nothing to do with 
the sport again,” he said. “But you can’t hide. You have to face this kind of 
stuff. So I did.”

But the time off let him have a little fun. Ward and wife got a 45ft RV and 
took their four kids, labradoodle and King Charles spaniel on road trips.

“We drive it up the Pacific north-west, stay in some of those beautiful RV 
parks along the way,” Ward said. “We cook, we bring the bikes and the dogs.”

Now, gearing himself back up to fight, he says he’s not angry about the 
hiatus. “It’s just another chapter in my book. I don’t look at it like it’s 
this horrible thing. It’s all part of the totality of a career.”


The night before the fight, Ward is wearing sweats and sitting on the sofa in 
his hotel room. He’s muscular and charismatic, with an easy, broad smile. It’s 
easy to see how he’d take to TV. He’s been commenting for HBO lately, and this 
fight with Barrera will be the main event on the network’s flagship World 
ChampionshipBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> series. He also 
had a role in Creed, the critically acclaimed boxing movie, for which he was 
recruited directly by the director, fellow Oakland native Ryan Coogler.

“I loved it, and I want to do more,” Ward said. “Ryan went out of his way to 
get into the culture. He’d send me scripts and I’d send back edits. He’s like, 
‘look it’s PG-13, Andre can only have a certain amount of cuss words.’”

When he was nine years old, Ward went to work out with his father. At the gym, 
Ward met his coach Virgil Hunter. When as a teenager Ward’s father died, Hunter 
became both coach and godfather and still trains him today. Ward’s fought a 
disproportionately high number of his fights in Oakland, rare for a fighter of 
his stature in a sport where the biggest fights happen in Las Vegas. “I’ve had 
people tell me this is a small market here,” Ward says. “That I’ve gotta move 
to New York or LA or Vegas, but it’s just not in me.”

“You get that healthy chip on your shoulder out here. It’s good because 
there’s always going to be people questioning you in this game,” Ward says. 
“There’s always going to be some guy behind behind a laptop saying, ‘What about 
this?’ So for me it’s never about proving anything to critics but proving that 
my supporters were right.”


Ward gets back to eating. “He’s always telling me to eat less meat,” he says, 
gesturing to a friend sitting across the room.

His friend is Bryant Jennings, a 227lb vegan campaigning to be heavyweight 
champion.

“Well, I’m not perfect, I ate an egg,” Jennings says. “When was it, maybe two 
years ago?”

Ward says he was a vegetarian until he started training for the fight.

“It’s a lifestyle thing. I want to be around a long time for my kids, meet my 
grandbabies,” Ward says. “There’s a bunch of crap in our food. A bunch of crap.”


Jennings agrees before the two launch into a debate about organic produce. 

“It’s crazy we have to pay more just to get food in its original state,” Ward 
says as he walks me out.

He’s never been the type to court mainstream stardom, preferring instead to 
allow his performance speak for itself. But if all goes according to plan in 
2016, Ward won’t be able to avoid it much longer.
 