
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> on Sunday used 
Twitter, a medium notoriously favoured by the man who will succeed him in the 
White House, to tout his achievements in office.

Trump spokesman on Russia: president-elect already getting 'wins' abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-vladimir-putin-russia-hacking-sean-spicer>
“As we look ahead to the future,” Obama wrote in his first tweet 
<https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815600521688055808>, “I wanted to take a 
moment to look back on the remarkable progress that you made possible these 
past [eight] years.”

From 20 January and for the next four years, barring unforeseen circumstances, 
Obama’s place in the Oval Office will be taken by the businessmanDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

On Sunday Trump’s incoming White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, told 
ABC’s This Week the president-elect would continue to useTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> to announce policy and make 
comment on current events.

The medium, he said, was a way to avoid mainstream media outlets and get his 
message directly to the American public.

Despite widespread concern over the flagrant provocation and outright 
disregard for protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 displayed by many of Trump’s tweets, Spicer said: “You know what? The fact of 
the matter is that when he tweets, he gets results.”

In an interview with CBS 60 Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
 after his election victory over Hillary Clinton, Trump said that he would now 
be “very restrained, if I use it at all” regarding social media. He has not 
achieved that aim.

On 28 December, to take one among many examples, he used Twitter to say 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/814110460761018368>: “Doing my best 
to disregard the many inflammatory President O statements and roadblocks. 
Thought it was going to be a smooth transition – NOT!”

On Sunday, the subject of that tweet sent out sober comments about a number of 
results he has achieved.

“Facing the worst financial crisis in 80 years,” he wrote 
<https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815600798558208001>, “you delivered the 
longest streak of job growth in our history.

“After decades of rising healthcare costs, today nearly every American now has 
access to the financial security of affordable healthcare.”


The latter tweet <https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815601279716225024> spoke 
to a key concern among Democrats, as Trump and Republicans in Congress consider 
ways to repeal the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

Obama is reportedly arranging a meeting with congressional Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/31/obamacare-barack-obama-democrats-republicans-trump>
 to consider ways to preserve his signature legislative achievement.

The president’s next tweet hinted at progressive fears over Trump’s nomination 
of a number ofclimate change deniers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
 to key positions in his cabinet.

Obama continued <https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815601640124387328>: “We 
traded foreign oil for clean energy, we doubled fuel efficiency standards [and] 
we acted on a global scale to save the one planet we’ve got.”

He added <https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815601969154899969>: “We brought 
home more of our troops [and] strengthened US leadership– leading with 
diplomacy [and] partnering with nations to meet global problems.”

Facebook temporarily bans author after he calls Trump fans 'nasty fascistic 
lot'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/30/facebook-temporary-ban-kevin-sessums-trump-supporters>
Obama also said <https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815603416089194496>: “From 
realizing marriage equality to removing barriers to opportunity, we’ve made 
history in our work to reaffirm that all are created equal.”

In conclusion, the president tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/815603723707658241>: “It’s been the privilege 
of my life to serve as your president. I look forward to standing with you as a 
citizen. Happy New Year everybody.”

Obama’s @POTUS <https://twitter.com/POTUS> Twitter account has 12.9 million 
followers, compared with 18.3 million for@RealDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
.

As of 5pm ET on New Year’s Day, the president-elect had not tweeted anything 
since a series of celebratory tweets and retweets sent shortly before the turn 
of the year.

Not long before that, he tweeted a supposedly conciliatory message 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/815185071317676033>: “Happy New 
Year to all, including to my many enemies and those who have fought me and lost 
so badly they just don’t know what to do. Love!”
 