
What is a readers' editor? 
 Stephen Pritchard 
The readers' editor is the Observer's internal ombudsman. The job of the 
readers' editor is "to collect, consider, investigate, respond to, and where 
appropriate come to a conclusion about readers' comments, concerns, and 
complaints in a prompt and timely manner, from a position of independence 
within the paper".

Stephen Pritchard <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephenpritchard> is 
the Observer's first readers' editor, a post he has held since 2001. He was 
fomerly production editor and managing editor. He has recently completed his 
second term as president of theOrganization of News Ombudsmen 
<http://www.newsombudsmen.org/>. 

How to contact the readers' editor

To make a correction, or raise an issue about the Observer with the Readers' 
editor, email:observer.readers@theguardian.com 
<mailto:observer.readers@theguardian.com>; write to Readers' Editor, The 
Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU; or telephone +44 (0)20 3353 
4656.

Corrections

For the record <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/series/for-the-record> 
is the Observer's weekly corrections and clarifications column.

Column

The readers' editor on... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/the-readers-editor-on> is a 
regular column by Observer readers' editor Stephen Pritchard about your 
suggestions, concerns, complaints and other issues.

Useful links

Accuracy and standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/page/accuracy-and-standards>
Guardian editorial code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>
Guardian style guide <https://www.theguardian.com/styleguide>
Guardian readers' editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/sep/23/readers-editor>
 