
Nantes got through four different coaches the last time they were in Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> and by the end of this 
week the newly-promoted side could be on their second of the season after 
losing 2-0 to Bordeaux at the weekend.

Current boss Michel Der Zakarian, a former title winner with Nantes in 1983, 
was under pressure as soon as he guided the team back into the top flight after 
one year in Ligue 2. His Nantes side had foregonela jeu à la nantaise, the 
quick-passing style 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xl8ly_jeu-a-la-nantaise_sport> made famous by 
the academy that produced the likes of Marcel Desailly and Didier Deschamps, 
and instead scrapped their way to promotion. New owner Waldemar Kita who, upon 
taking over in the summer of 2007, dropped the 'Atlantique' from Nantes's name, 
changed the club badge, tried to bring in Jean-Pierre Papin as coach, and then 
rewarded Der Zakarian with a one-year contract. This summer he tried and failed 
to appoint Henri Michel, who coachedIvory Coast at the World Cup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XqmwPJO1w40>, as technical director. 

Nantes are joint-bottom of the table with one point from three games, and the 
ambitious Kita is looking at the situation "and how best we can re-motivate the 
players". Alain Perrin, fresh from coaching Lyon to the double last season, is 
reported to be top of his wish-list. "He is a good coach but there are others," 
Kita said ominously.

Kita is as guilty as the Nantes fans of expecting too much this season. The 
squad has too many second-division players to finish in Ligue 1's top half, 
while the glory days are long gone - Nantes were the last team to win the 
title, in 2000, before Lyon's dominance began, and the last French side to 
reach the Champions League semi-finals,losing 4-3 on aggregate to eventual 
winners Juventus 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3mdm7_nantesjuventus96_extreme>. "The scent 
of crisis at Nantes," was France Football's front-page headline.

In truth, the problems began with the sacking of Raynald Denoueix after a 
tricky few months in 2001, the season following that title success. Just as 
Newcastle have never recovered from the dismissal of Bobby Robson, so Nantes 
have lacked stability and success ever since. Denoueix, meanwhile, took
unfancied Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/nov/04/europeanfootball.sport> to 
within one game of the 2003 La Liga title but, despite receiving offers from 
both Lyon and L'OM, has not coached since 2004.

On Sunday night, Nantes conceded a goal in the first five minutes for the 
second week running, as David Bellion latched on to Michael Gravgaard's 
backpass only to be upended by goalkeeper Tony Heurtebis.Cavegol scored the 
penalty <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pDC5PX-Zwbc> . "We have to start asking 
questions like why the strikers get no service and why we start matches so 
poorly," said Nantes midfielder Ricardo Faty. "It's too early to panic," 
responded Der Zakarian, whose words look set to fall on deaf ears.Fernando's 
late volley <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-pcbPd_mOn8> sealed the win for 
Bordeaux, who have bounced back from last week's loss to Paris Saint-Germain 
and are third in a familiar-looking top three behind Marseille and Lyon, both 
of whom won this weekend.

Marseille president Pape Diouf wanted his team's match at Le Havre postponed 
after two fans were killed in a car crash on their way to the game. The fans 
refused to sing during the match and afterBolo Zenden's free-kick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BI5UmNynaxE> won the game, coach Eric Gerets 
would not talk football.

"There are times when you just don't care about the result, and this is one of 
them," he said. "Today, this club lost two players." And yet his players showed 
considerable mental strength to come away with the points: their defence looks 
stronger nowRonald Zubar 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xouce_la-danse-de-zubar_fun>, red-carded on 
Saturday, is partnering Hilton in the middle, and with Mathieu Valbuena yet to 
return from injury and Elliot Grandin impressing in his cameos as substitute, 
Marseille are early leaders, ahead of Lyon with the same goal difference (+5) 
but more goals scored.

Grenoble came back down to earth from their two early wins after a 2-0 loss at 
Lyon, but they emerged with some credit, as Daniel Moreira troubled a 
worryingly out-of-form Cris. Lyon coach Claude Puel had the luxury of 
experimenting with his team: Karim Benzema started wide-left with Frédéric 
Piquionne in the middle, while Mathieu Bodmer played at centre-back with 
Jean-Alain Boumsong stuck on the bench; but he is yet to decide on a preferred 
formation. "Having seen the players work in training, I can now see why Lyon 
have been French champions for seven years," said their first goalscorer Jean 
II Makoun.

Next week, Lyon have a derby against Saint-Etienne, whose 1-0 defeat at Le Mans
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHKaVfINRNo> left coach Laurent Roussey 
struggling for answers. "I just don't recognise my team," he said. "I can't 
understand the lack of commitment from older players and even the younger guys 
who played with hunger last year look different to me as well." This is in 
stark contrast to Le Mans, who once again sold their best players this summer 
(seven of last year's starting XI) but have found decent new ones to replace 
them. Their match-winner was one-time Portsmouth playerThorstein Helstad 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajGAs4LCrj0>, who scored his second goal in as 
many games.

Looking up at Le Mans from bottom spot in the table is their former coach Rudy 
Garcia, who is struggling for points at Lille. Theylost 2-1 at Rennes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VxoYTukkQp8> and the departures of Makoun and 
more significantly, Puel, are looking harder to fill than those of Bodmer, 
Kader Keita and Peter Odemwingie in previous years. This might be a tough 
season for them.

Elsewhere, Stéphane Sessegnon showed what an important player he could become 
in scoring PSG'sexcellent equaliser <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tPuByYMZd_4>
 in the 1-1 draw with Sochaux, while Valenciennes, without defender David 
Sommeil, who suffered a heart attack in training last week, continued their 
brilliant home record with a3-1 win over Lorient 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fkDlEhoks5U>. Sommeil, 34, collapsed after 
training on Wednesday and was given mouth-to-mouth resuscitation by two 
team-mates, David Ducourtioux and Rafael Schmitz. He is now out of intensive 
care but is not expected to play again. That, and the Marseille fans' tragedy, 
puts the problems of Nantes and their quick-fix owner into some perspective.

Results: Le Havre 0-1 Marseille, Monaco 1-1 Caen, Valenciennes 3-1 Lorient, Le 
Mans 1-0 Saint-Etienne, Sochaux 1-1 PSG, Nancy 0-0 Toulouse, Lyon 2-0 Grenoble, 
Auxerre 0-1 Nice, Rennes 2-1 Lille, Bordeaux 2-0 Nantes.
 