
Claressa Shields attributed her decision to turn professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/25/claressa-shields-boxing-olympics-professional-debut>
 to a desire to build a legacy.

So far, so good. 

Andre Ward scores controversial points victory over Sergey Kovalev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andre-ward-sergey-kovalev-boxing-points-decision-title-fight>
The two-times Olympic gold medalist cruised to one-sided points win over 
Franchon Crews in a highly entertaining four-round super middleweight bout on 
the undercard ofSaturday’s light heavyweight title fight between Sergey Kovalev 
and Andre Ward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andre-ward-sergey-kovalev-boxing-points-decision-title-fight>
 at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas. All three judges scored it a 40-36 
shutout, as did the Guardian.

Crews, an eight-times national champion and alternate on the last two US 
Olympic teams, was no walkover and managed to back Shields against the ropes 
and land a series of punches early. The two-way action continued into the 
second with Shields, fighting without headgear for the first time, continuing 
to get the better of the exchanges while clearly pursuing a knockout.

It nearly came at the end of the third when Shields finally connected flush 
with an overhand right, wobbling Crews moments before the bell rang. She 
connected with an even bigger left hand early in the fourth, following it up 
with a left-right combination to the head that Crews, a 29-year-old from 
Baltimore also making her pro debut, somehow absorbed upright.

Shields descended from the ring apron into the crowd after the decision was 
announced, embraced her family and friends, then snapped selfies with fans 
while making her way to the locker room.

“It feels so good to have just made my pro debut,” said Shields, who landed 76 
of 214 punches (35.5%), compared to 27 of 182 (14.8%) for her opponent. “This 
is what I’ve been training for. I’m faster and I hit harder. And I’m the better 
fighter. But Crews brought 100% and I respect her for that.”

It was a typically dominant performance by the 21-year-old from Flint, 
Michigan – a familiar outcome for a fighter who capped a sterling 77-1 amateur 
career with ascintillating performance at the Rio Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/claressa-shields-boxing-gold-medal-rio-2016-olympics>
, becoming the first American boxer to win consecutive Olympic gold medals and 
winning the Val Barker Trophy as the top overall female fighter in the 
tournament.

Now comes the hard part.

Shields wants to elevate women’s boxing the way Ronda Rousey propelled women’s 
MMA from sideshow to headline attraction. It won’t be easy.

Rousey has benefitted from the full backing of the UFC, which puts the same 
marketing and promotional heft behind its female fighters as their male 
counterparts. The return on investment has been evident over the past two 
years: Rousey emerged as the sport’s biggest crossover star and UFC 200, touted 
breathlessly as the biggest card in the organization’s history,featured a 
women’s bantamweight title fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/09/ufc-200-live-tate-nunez-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva>
 as the main event.

The fighter nicknamed T-Rex has yet to sign with a promoter and made 
Saturday’s debut on a one-fight deal with Roc Nation Sports, which backs Ward. 
Whichever company decides to sign Shields will be tasked with investing in her 
growth with no guaranteed return in a sport with seemingly no collective 
interest in the advancement of the women’s game. Consider that Shields fought 
before an audience of maybe a thousand fans at the T-Mobile Arena when a spot 
on the televised pay-per-view undercard, where millions more could have watched 
her, would have made perfect sense.

Shields, who overcame a transient childhood, poverty and sexual abuse on her 
climb to Olympic glory, has the sort of remarkable backstory that normally 
makes fight promoters salivate. But aside from odd flashpoints through the 
years – Christy Martin landed the cover of Sports Illustrated, Laila Ali traded 
on the family name to supplement her talent – women’s boxing is all but 
ignored. Not even Shields’ prodigious talent will be able to reverse that trend 
alone.

After Saturday’s successful debut, Shields said that she hopes to fight again 
in January or February. Her performance only underscored the star quality she 
exuded during her four-year run at the summit of women’s amateur boxing, but 
nothing less than a total promotional commitment will see Shields’ dream 
blossom.
 