
Born in 1963 and raised in Sheffield, Jarvis Cocker founded Pulp (then called 
Arabacus Pulp) at the age of 15. Between 1983 and 2001 they released seven 
studio albums includingHis ’n’ Hers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=38by00DGid0> and Different Class 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yuTMWgOduFM>. In 1996 Cocker made headlines by 
invading the stage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJqIEU6RfUo> during Michael 
Jackson’s performance of Earth Song during the Brit awards. Since Pulp’s split 
in 2002, he has released two solo albums,The Jarvis Cocker Record 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5I-FlVjryw4> and Further Complications. In 
2010, Cocker began presentingJarvis Cocker’s Sunday Service 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00ptsjd> on BBC Radio 6 Music, and in 2011 
was appointed editor-at-large by publisher Faber. His7-inch soundtrack EP 
<http://store.roughtraderecords.com/latest-products/jarvis-cocker-music-from-likely-stories.html>
 to the forthcoming TV seriesLikely Stories 
<http://www.iainandjane.com/work/film-tv/neil-gaimans-likely-stories/> was 
released on 20 May on Rough Trade.

1 | DVD 

Batman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uo94Z6Vm-gg> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae7d470b8d30515c7b1298da10cb73b1aeabea1%2F33_0_2844_1707%2F2844.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae7d470b8d30515c7b1298da10cb73b1aeabea1%2F33_0_2844_1707%2F2844.jpg>
 The original… and best? Adam West (right) and Burt Ward as Batman and Robin. 
Photograph: Allstar/20th Century-Fox/Sportsphoto Ltd 
The eventual release of the 1960s Batman series on DVD last year was something 
I had been awaiting for a long time. I was obsessed with the show as a kid. Now 
I have been inflicting it on my own son – isn’t that one of the perks of 
parenthood? You can rewatch stuff under the pretence of creating a “bespoke 
cultural environment”. Not all the episodes are great but it mostly stands up. 
If you want to see a spot-on representation of the Donald Trump “phenomenon”, 
watch the episode Hizzonner the Penguin: the Penguin runs for mayor of Gotham 
City with a campaign aimed squarely at the lowest common denominator. Batman 
attempts to stop him, reasoning: “If our national leaders were elected on the 
basis of tricky slogans, brass bands and pretty girls, our country would be in 
a terrible mess, wouldn’t it?” Hmmmm. Tim Burton incorporated this storyline 
into his 1992 filmBatman Returns <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlbtLfWvFbo> 
which is also well worth re-viewing. If only for the exploding penguins. Batman 
rules.

2 | Film 

Victoria <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kp8wcV3GjW0> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219dbea68d06bd7a04be2937f858f893749e3971%2F40_0_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219dbea68d06bd7a04be2937f858f893749e3971%2F40_0_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
 One-take wonder: Frederick Lau and Laia Costa in Victoria. Photograph: 
Allstar/Radical Media 
I had this down as a one-trick pony – along the lines of that film from years 
ago that featured “real” sex (Romance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W0lBN4KTkDw>), but luckily my girlfriend 
persuaded me to overcome my in-built prejudice against things that I have no 
actual knowledge of whatsoever and I really enjoyed it. In case you don’t know, 
the “gimmick” is that the film is shot entirely in one take – but this film is 
far from being a dry, technical exercise. The fact that the story unfolds in 
real time really makes it feel like you’re on one of those nights out when 
everything gets a bit messy and out of control (not that I do things like that 
any more, you understand). And when the plot line eventually kicks in, things 
gets very intense. Great acting from Laia Costa and Frederick Lau. And a good 
score byNils Frahm 
<http://www.nilsfrahm.com/works/music-for-the-motion-picture-victoria/> – plus 
anawesome rave track <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3nZyRlIgFLY> by DJ Koze 
at the very beginning. Have it.

3 | Music 

Unloved <https://www.facebook.com/WeAreUnloved/>/Max Richter 
<http://www.maxrichtermusic.com/en/index.php>/Cat’s Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cats-eyes>/Daft Punk & Junior Kimbrough 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4RbBeU6-iY> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44215c957aee61d5c547bca837d3360ac760fc61%2F380_752_3620_2171%2F3620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44215c957aee61d5c547bca837d3360ac760fc61%2F380_752_3620_2171%2F3620.jpg>
 Imaginative instrumentation: Cat’s Eyes. 
While we’re on the subject of “having it”, here’s some music I’ve been 
enjoying lately. TheUnloved <https://www.facebook.com/WeAreUnloved/> album is 
David Holmes’s latest project and it’s got a great, murky yet song-based feel 
to it.

Sleep <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7W6W-kTZuUc> by Max Richter was the 
Sunday Service album of 2015. He performed a truncated version of it at the 
Barbican this month which was great to drift off to. The LED stage lights in 
the main hall were a bit annoyingly bright though – or maybe that was on 
purpose…

Cat’s Eyes <http://catseyes.tv/> have been producing great music with very 
imaginative instrumentation and arrangements for a while now. TheDuke of 
Burgundy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P-xIMBnclyA> soundtrack was fab – so 
is this new album. And the video forDrag <https://youtu.be/c4gMFvZ-TAI> makes 
me laugh in a slightly uncomfortable way.

The Junior Kimbrough track is a re-edit of one of his songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4RbBeU6-iY> done by Daft Punk 
<https://www.daftpunk.com>. It came out on Record Store Day 
<http://www.recordstoreday.com/PromotionalItem/8428>, is 15 minutes long and is 
the sexiest piece of music that I’ve heard all year. Oh yes.

4 | Art 

Hilma af Klint 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/hilma-af-klint-painting-unseen>
/The Museum of Everything <http://www.musevery.com/exhibitions.html> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b782004bee225d01b984790d8aa9da4cce85d5%2F0_33_3000_1934%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b782004bee225d01b984790d8aa9da4cce85d5%2F0_33_3000_1934%2F3000.jpg>
 Supernatural talent? Works by Hilma af Klint at the Serpentine Gallery, 
London. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
The Hilma af Klint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/21/hilma-af-klint-occult-spiritualism-abstract-serpentine-gallery>
 show just finished at the Serpentine Gallery. They were big abstract paintings 
from the beginning of the 20th century. She claimed that they had come to her 
through the seances she attended regularly. James Brett (head honcho of the
Museum of Everything <http://www.musevery.com/exhibitions.html>) organised a 
symposium at theCollege of Psychic Studies 
<https://www.collegeofpsychicstudies.co.uk/> in South Kensington to discuss the 
idea of artistic inspiration coming via “supernatural” means.

The Museum of Everything <http://www.musevery.com/exhibitions.html> is 
dedicated to exhibiting the work of Outsider Artists, many of whom also claim 
that the impulse to create comes from some mysterious external location. I 
don’t know if I totally agree with that – but Ido know that the harder you 
consciously will yourself to create something, the less creative you are 
actually likely to be. You have to “get out of your own way” somehow. Some 
might call it “zoning out”, others “going into a trance” – but great ideas 
seldom come when you are concentrating. So some people consider them to be a 
“gift of heaven” or messages from the Other Side – but I guess you could just 
as easily attribute them to you gaining access to the right-hand side of your 
brain: the bit that houses your unconscious. Anyway, that’s my excuse for 
sleeping so much. Zzzzzz.

5 | Radio 

The BBC/Radio 3 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2de031375fb94c641c277c99f1f2d93114bee04%2F0_40_4435_2661%2F4435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2de031375fb94c641c277c99f1f2d93114bee04%2F0_40_4435_2661%2F4435.jpg>
 Rob Cowan of Radio 3’s Essential Classics. Photograph: Jude Edginton/BBC 
While we’re skirting the subject of religion: I made a speech at a radio 
conference in Salford back in 2012 where I stated that I thought that the BBC 
was the nearest thing the UK has got to a national faith. I would stand by that 
statement. Think about it: an all-encompassing entity that is there to 
entertain and educate you at all stages of your life, that has your best 
interests at heart and isn’t trying to sell you anything. There’s something 
kind of divine about that, isn’t there? I used to twiddle the dial and hear 
bits of Radio 3 and think, Oh, I’m not ready for that yet, but now, years 
later, it’s still there and I love it. Especially Rob Cowan’sEssential Classics 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b014r87y> on weekday mornings from 9am. I’m a 
believer.

6 | Football 

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club <http://www.swfc.co.uk/> 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17645a1180a27ca7803628bdeb3339fbb88ac6af%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fjarvis-cocker-on-my-radar-batman-max-richter-daft-punk-sheffield-wednesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17645a1180a27ca7803628bdeb3339fbb88ac6af%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Up the Owls: young Sheffield Wednesday fans at Hillsborough. Photograph: 
Martin Rickett/PA 
If you had told me six months ago that I would be including something 
football-related in my list of cultural highlights I would have laughed in your 
face – but things have changed. I went to pay my last respects to my father 
recently and one of the few things he responded to in his enfeebled state was 
when I mentionedSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>. And when I showed 
him a picture of my son sporting the full Wednesday kit he looked proud enough 
to burst (I guess that, in his confusion, he may have believed my son was 
actually playing for them). Something as simple as a football team provided a 
link across three generations of a family. And realising that made me 
re-evaluate my attitude to the game.

I guess football has always been a barometer of the times: the takeover of 
Manchester United was a perfect manifestation of the unacceptable face of 
modern capitalism, for instance – but this has been a good year, hasn’t it? 
Leicester proved that itdoesn’t all just come down to money in the end and, 
closer to home, the final findings of the Hillsborough inquiry have proved that 
you can’t hide the truth for ever. Object lessons from a game involving 22 men 
kicking a bag of leather around a field – who’d have thought it? Up the Owls.
 