
London-born musician Ben Watt has worked as a DJ, record producer and radio 
presenter, but is best known as one half of alt-pop duo Everything But the 
Girl. His first solo album,North Marine Drive, reached No 1 in the UK indie 
chart in 1983. Teaming up with partner Tracey Thorn, Watt went on to record 
nine studio albums as Everything But the Girl, with one platinum and six gold 
discs in the UK. As a DJ, Watt helped to establish several London club nights 
and, in 2003, launched his own record label, Buzzin' Fly, followed by a sister 
label, Strange Feeling, in 2007. Watt regularly hosts Radio 6 Music's6Mix 
programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0072pz7> and has also written two 
books: the autobiographicalPatient (detailing Watt's battle with Churg-Strauss 
syndrome) andRomany and Tom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/23/romany-and-tom-ben-watt-review>, 
a memoir about his bohemian parents. In April he released his second solo album,
Hendra <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/13/ben-watt-hendra-review>, 
a collaboration with Suede's Bernard Butler and featuring Pink Floyd's David 
Gilmour. His new single, Forget, is released tomorrow.

Music: Hiss Golden Messenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/13/new-band-hiss-golden-messenger>

Hiss Golden Messenger have just signed to Merge Records but I was alerted to 
them by an old friend of mine who runs a record shop in Indianapolis when they 
made their first album. It's based around the songwriting of a guy called MC 
Taylor, who used to be in a band in San Francisco. Their recordBad Debt  
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/18834-hiss-golden-messenger-bad-debt/>was 
recorded in his kitchen on to a cassette while his kid was asleep in the next 
room, and has recently been rereleased. It's like folk-rock, but quite 
contemplative. It has a questioning, spiritual doubt to it that I really like. 
His voice is lovely: soft, but with some gravity to it. I've spoken to him a 
little bit on Twitter lately and we have vowed to get together at some point 
later this year and do a gig, which will be fun.

Film: Exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/24/exhibition-review-joanna-hogg>



Joanna Hogg's Exhibition had very mixed reviews but I thought it was 
absolutely brilliant. It's a portrait of a relationship between two artists 
living in a house together and I hadn't seen anything like it before. It's both 
existential and also quite sensual; it's domestic, but quite mysterious. I also 
liked the sound design. A lot of the microphone placements are done in the 
middle-distance, so you have a sense of the overheard, rather than the 
traditional method of miking people up very close. There's this mad tension 
between the two characters, and it's also unsentimental and unironic. It is an 
examination of a middle-class couple, but there isn't the usual slightly snidey 
slant on it. I thought it was very original and Viv Albertine is really good 
too.

Sport: Barnet FC
 Photograph: Ben Hoskins/Getty Images 
I grew up supporting Chelsea but when my son got into football about four 
years ago, we decided we wanted to watch a local team. We live in north London 
so, on a whim, I opened the paper one day and [saw that] Barnet were at home 
and we went to see them. We've become really attached to the club. They've had 
so many ups and downs in the past four seasons and they're now non-league. Last 
year they had Dutch legend Edgar Davids as their player-coach and it was just 
extraordinary watching him play atBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet>. But it all went wrong when he 
walked out mid-season, and they're now back in the hands of a much more 
straightforward, slightly brutalist manager – Martin Allen. There's a very good 
community atmosphere in football at that level. You suddenly get an absolutely 
golden moment, mixed in with a lot of rubbish, and it feels very real.

Book: Train Dreams by Denis Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/16/train-dreams-denis-johnson-review>

Train Dreams is a novella that tells the story of a railway worker during the 
depression in America. It's beautifully written – a miniature masterpiece. It's 
got aspects of William Maxwell, whose writing I really like, and a bit of 
Cormac McCathy. It has a brilliant superstitious angle to it. In those days, 
when people were so up against the brutality of life, there was that reaching 
for pseudo-religious stuff, like magic tricks and palm reading. This is woven 
into the texture of the book and I really like that side of it. I read in fits 
and starts, but I live with a big reader. Tracey is an absolute bookworm, so 
it's hard to compete with her appetite for books. We've lived together for so 
long, but we always seem to disagree on books; I think we have different tastes.

Place: The Powerhouse Arena, New York

I've just come back from New York and I did a book reading at the Powerhouse 
Arena in Brooklyn. It's a huge, high-ceilinged room and it's used as a multiple 
space. It's split-level and, as you go in downstairs, it seems to be just like 
a bookshop and gift shop. Then you look towards the back of the shop and all 
the office and admin seems to be up at a much higher level, and you realise 
that the two spaces are separated by this kind of portable amphitheatre. All 
the bookcases are on wheels and, in the evenings, they get pushed out of the 
way and it becomes an amazing performance space. I really liked it as an idea, 
it's very fluid. Every place has character, but I just thought that this was 
very different.

Gallery: Graves art gallery
 Photograph: Alamy 
On the surface, the Graves gallery seems very mundane. It's a municipal 
gallery that is part of Sheffield City Hall. I was touring up there last year 
with Bernard Butler and I had a couple of hours spare. I found myself outside 
the gallery and I thought, Well, what's to be lost?, so I went in. It was 
absolutely brilliant. There was a great wood engravings exhibition on and they 
also had stuff by Vanessa Bell, Gwen John, Frank Auerbach… It reminded me of 
when I was at Hull University, where we had the Ferens art gallery. Again, it 
was a northern town with an unpretentious municipal gallery, which can be a 
really inspiring space – they don't all need to be hipster, White Cubes. I was 
really knocked out by the Graves art gallery, I came away feeling like it was 
an hour and a half well spent.
 