
It all started with a dispute over a bit of land. A rich and powerful 
foreigner claimed some fields were his, a local was adamant they were not. 
There had already been other rich and powerful foreigners building holiday 
homes – whopping great crenellated ones – and when our local hero raised his 
flag, it all kicked off. The most recent Welsh rebellion was under way. It was 
1400.

Our present-day Owain Glyndŵr tour starts in the countryside near Oswestry, 
where there is a lovely green hill and an oak tree with a small coat of arms 
nailed to it. “Some say he’s buried under there,” says Rob Laird, our guide on 
the trail of the Welsh hero, a trail launched this year to mark 600 years since 
he died. It will take us right across the country, from this border area to 
Cardigan Bay in the west.

“This was his homestead, a place where they said the door was never locked: 
bards, storytellers, troubadours – they all came. Glyndŵr was the Prince of 
Powys and this was his court, really.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efef682b25296078d3db91cda2341b552d521aa%2F0_0_5100_3400%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efef682b25296078d3db91cda2341b552d521aa%2F0_0_5100_3400%2F5100.jpg>
 Owain Glyndŵr immortalised in the town of Corwen, the cradle of his rebellion. 
Photograph: The Photolibrary Wales/Alamy 
The nearest village is Sycharth and this tranquil spot is where the Glyndŵr 
story begins, the place where he was living contentedly until the land-robbing 
started. His rebellion then cut a swath across the country, taking in some of 
Wales’s most spectacular locations – places that Rob has cleverly woven into a 
tour. It was the biggest rebellion Wales ever had. “He deserves to be 
remembered,” says Rob.

We loop north, stopping at Ruthin to take a peek at the castle of Glyndŵr’s 
enemy, Lord de Grey, the English nob who triggered the rebellion by seizing 
lands that were not his. De Grey’s home is now atmospheric, peacock-adorned 
ruins attached to a hotel. Ruthin in those days was a cantonment, an English 
garrison in hostile territory. Rob is loosening up, starting to get into his 
stride. Why did Glyndŵr fail? Why did he not become the Welsh William Wallace? 
Will there ever be a Welsh Braveheart film and independence referendum? We are 
going to attempt some theories on our journey across the principality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6bf435c14059dba4ac0f2afec21e06e20f3aa8%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6bf435c14059dba4ac0f2afec21e06e20f3aa8%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
 Ruthin castle, home of Lord de Grey. Photograph: Alamy 
We jump in the car and head south to Corwen, a gorgeous, neglected little town 
that deserves to be visited, if only for the graveyard and church, which look 
like they were built for Gothic television dramas, or maybe a scene in the 
Welsh Braveheart to come. “I see Rita Ora as the love interest,” says Rob, “Tom 
Jones as the wise bard, Iolo Goch.” But who to play Glyndŵr?

At Corwen, on 16 September 1400, the Prince of Powys raised his standard and 
disgruntled Welsh fighters flocked to him. Many, like Glyndŵr himself, had been 
mercenaries in the English army. On a wall at the back of the atmospheric 
churchyard there is the imprint of a medieval sword, reputedly Glyndŵr’s. 
Inside there is an ancient stone effigy of a knight, looking like he has just 
laid down for a snooze between rousing rebel speeches. I can almost see Tom 
Jones, striding through swirling mist, past the 10th-century cross and pagan 
standing stone, growling to camera, “I carry Wales around inside me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f2da1d29533ab6ce855ae65b31752da4b577e9%2F0_14_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f2da1d29533ab6ce855ae65b31752da4b577e9%2F0_14_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 A bedroom in Plas Mawr. Photograph: Alamy 
The wildly eccentric 20th-century novelist, John Cowper Powys, lived in Corwen 
for many years and was inspired to write his novelOwen Glendower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/mar/02/classics1> (1942), a book “deep 
with the half-tones and shadows of the legendary past of Wales”, as one critic 
put it. Perhaps there’s a screenplay in it. The town also has a statue of 
Glyndŵr in the High Street, a recent replacement of an older work that was 
“like a short-arse from the Lord of the Rings,” one local informed me. Now he’s 
a full-blooded warrior knight on his charger, his face contorted into a rictus 
of victory celebration which has a strong resemblance to – I think I’ve found 
our Glyndŵr – Gareth Bale after scoring a goal.

Corwen has a sleepy 1950s quality, which I like. However, we are moving on 
again, spending a night in Betws-y-Coed. I walk up to Swallow Falls, which are 
drenchingly impressive, though the entry, via a fortified coin-operated 
turnstile unworthy of a 1960s football club, is a disgrace. Why is one of 
Britain’s great natural wonders reduced to this shabby cash cow? The entry is 
operated by the local council, apparently, but the land belongs to absentee 
landlords whose ancestors were donated the land by Henry VIII. What would 
Glyndŵr think?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447417471388%2F40799751-8c45-4983-a9b2-1baafc15adff-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20trail%20of%20Owain%20Glynd%C5%B5r%2C%20the%20Welsh%20Braveheart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fon-the-owain-glyndwr-trail-wales-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447417471388%2F40799751-8c45-4983-a9b2-1baafc15adff-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Harlech is a castle of ‘dizzying Escheresque complexity and symmetries’. 
Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
In March 1401, Glyndŵr’s supporters, faced with tougher barricades at Conwy 
Castle, managed to grab Conwy fort from the English, and really put the wind up 
Henry IV. Next day, we head down there, walking the spectacular walls, then 
dropping down into the enclosed town to visit Plas Mawr, the exquisitely 
restored Tudor home of the courtier Robert Wynn. This is a real highlight, 
worth a trip in itself. The quirky L’s Café nearby makes a friendly lunch spot, 
then after squeezing into a house reputed to be the smallest in Wales, we head 
for Harlech, the last fortress in Edward I’s formidable ring of iron. With its 
new visitor centre and arching footbridge, this is now castle-chic, but the 
real pleasure is still the original dizzying Escheresque complexity and 
symmetries. We finish with tea and welshcakes in the high street.

Despite capturing Harlech, Glyndŵr’s rebellion petered out. He had failed to 
team up with Henry “Hotspur” Percy at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403 and so 
missed his great opportunity. (Orson Welles’ forgotten classic Chimes at 
Midnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/chimes-at-midnight-review-orson-welles-falstaff-messy-masterpiece>
 brilliantly captures the appalling ferocity of that conflict.) Henry of 
Monmouth, the future Henry V, burned down Glyndŵr’s homestead at Sycharth, 
doused the fires of Welsh nationalism and went on to win at Agincourt in 1415, 
the same year Glyndŵr died. Without the rebellion, Glyndŵr might have been 
there too, along with the 500 Welsh archers who won the day. Henry had defeated 
the French, but he never caught Glyndŵr, who spurned all offers of amnesty and 
disappeared, his grave unlocated to this day.


Shakespeare, however, captured the man perfectly: “That great magician, damned 
Glendower” at whose birth “the heavens were all on fire, the earth did 
tremble”. Six centuries later, his trail still lights up the Welsh landscape. 
But one vital question remains: will Gareth Bale transfer to Hollywood?

• The trip was provided by Visit Wales <http://www.visitwales.com/> and Welsh 
Dragon Tours <http://www.welshdragontours.com/5001/20801.html> (01286 831818, 
); a four-day Glyndŵr tour costs £599pp (minimum two in party) including 
driver/guide, B&B in a guesthouse or hotel, and entrance fees

• This article was amended on 17 November 2015. An earlier version misspelled 
Sycharth as Sycarth.

 