
Sometimes wildlife champions come as high as heads of state. Since taking 
office in 2011 the current president ofKyrgyzstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyrgyzstan>, Almazbek Atambayev, has turned 
the former Soviet Republic into a centre point for snow leopard conservation 
and research. Perhaps the best symbol of Atambayev’s commitment to snow 
leopards are recent camera trap photos showing the elusive, high-altitude 
predator roaming Shamshy Wildlife Reserve. Just two years ago, Shamshy was a 
concession for high-paying trophy hunters looking to bag an ibex. Today, it’s 
protecting those prey animals that snow leopards depend on.


“We are certain about the presence of at least one, perhaps two snow 
leopards,” Koustubh Sharma, the Senior Regional Ecologist at the Snow Leopard 
Trust, said. “The second snow leopard we are not sure about given a slightly 
blurry image.”

A couple snow leopards may not sound like much. But with a global population 
only in thousands and in decline, every individual counts. Indeed, the images 
from Shamshy are also the first confirmation of snow leopards in the 
454-kilometre long Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range that runs north-south through 
almost the entirety of Kyrgyzstan.

 Adorable ibex kids recently born in Shamshy are caught on camera trap. 
Without healthy populations of prey animals, like these, snow leopards can’t 
survive. Overhunting has depleted many prey animals across snow leopard range. 
Photograph: SLF Kyrgyzstan / Snow Leopard Trust / SAEPF 
Shamshy Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Range 
spreads across nearly 200 square kilometres in the Kyrgyz Ala-Too, but even 
this is barely enough to protect a single roaming snow leopard. Recent research 
has shown that male snow leopards range over 200 square kilometres and females 
130 square kilometres.

“Shamshy itself is too small to be a full home range for a snow leopard, but 
it can certainly be a part of one, or even several,” said Sharma.

The new protected area is co-managed by the Kyrgyz government, local 
communities and various conservation NGOS, including the Snow Leopard Trust. 
The stakeholders share responsibilities, including training and paying wildlife 
rangers, research efforts, education programmes for locals and eco-tourism.

“Shamshy has a bit of everything – the terrain gradually changes from lush 
meadows and thick forests along a crystal clear stream to grassland, and 
finally to steep, rocky peaks covered in glaciers,” Kuban Jumabai uulu, the 
Director of the Snow Leopard Foundation Kyrgyzstan, said in 2015. Shamshy is 
also home to wild pigs, badgers, marmots, red fox, lynx and wolves.


As a part of the agreement, local people are allowed to graze livestock in 
Shamshy but in a regulated and monitored fashion.

Sharma noted that this innovative model could easily be replicated elsewhere. 
After the early successes at Shamshy, the Kyrgyz government has reached out to 
the Snow Leopard Trust with interest in expanding the idea to other hunting 
concessions.

“We need to think [outside the box],” Sharma said. “We must look at more 
partnerships between Government and [NGOs], where two or more partners bring 
together their different sets of expertise to make a stronger team.”

He added that even hunting companies might want to consider such models to 
help recover wildlife populations by closing concessions – and working with 
partners – for a limited time.

Snow leopards are currently categorised as Endangered by the IUCN Red List and 
are threatened by a widespread decline in their prey, killings by locals who 
often view them as pests, and, probably most grievously, poaching. A recent 
report by TRAFFIC found thathundreds of snow leopards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/21/hundreds-of-snow-leopards-being-killed-every-year-report-warns>
 are killed to feed the illegal wildlife trade every year. It’s an open 
question how long the big cats could survive under such an onslaught.


The only way to adequately protect snow leopards in these remote mountains is 
to directly involve local communities.
Peter Zahler 
At the same time, debate continues over how many snow leopards there actually 
are on planet Earth. The mainstream estimate by the IUCN is just 4,080 to 6,590 
animals. However, recent research based on surveys by 31 snow leopard 
researchers suggest that number may be a major underestimate. Recently compiled 
by Peter Zahler with the WildlifeConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society and colleagues, 
the new estimate is 4,700 to 8,700 individuals across just 44 percent of snow 
leopard range. This means the total global population could be much larger than 
previously estimated.

“Previous estimates of snow leopard populations were really just guesstimates 
based on early assumptions about overall range and a general sense of density,” 
said Zahler. “As research continues to provide better information…we are slowly 
getting a better sense of numbers.”

Most importantly, camera traps are giving researchers a better sense of where 
snow leopards actually are – and giving the world the incredible images seen on 
Planet Earth II. All this was an impossible even 20 years ago for a species 
notorious for its ability to avoid the human gaze. In 1973, nature writer, 
Peter Matthiessen, spent two months searching for snow leopards with famed 
conservationist, George Schaller. He never saw one (though Schaller did), but 
he entitled his award-winning book about the journey,The Snow Leopard, all the 
same.

The new estimate remains controversial 
<http://www.takepart.com/article/2016/07/12/new-snow-leopard-population-estimate-has-scientists-on-edge>
, but Zahler insists that a higher number of animals doesn’t mean the snow 
leopard is any less threatened or that its population is not declining – only 
that there may have always been more cats than humans suspected. He pointed to 
the TRAFFIC report as proof enough for ongoing vigilance.

“Really the only way to adequately protect snow leopards in these remote 
mountains is to directly involve local communities in those protection efforts.”

Still, Zahler describes himself as “very hopeful” for the long-term survival 
of the snow leopard.

“Unlike the tiger, which has lost something like 97 percent of its range in 
the last century, the snow leopard’s high-mountain environment is still 
relatively intact and connected across this vast range,” he said. “Unlike the 
African lion, which has seen a 40% population decline in the past 20 years, the 
snow leopard, if declining, does not seem to be doing so at anywhere near the 
same rate.”

Zahler also noted that real-world practice has proven that snow leopard prey 
populations can bounce back quickly if given the chance and that initiatives to 
save the snow leopard, such as Shamshy, are growing rapidly.

Related: Has hope become the most endangered species in conservation? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/oct/05/conservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit>

Still, climate change remains a wild card here, according to Zahler. Global 
warming is expected to hit the high Himalayan region hard, especially in terms 
of glacier melt. But how that impacts snow leopards and their prey is difficult 
to say.

“There are so many variables…that predictions are hard.” 


Other concerns remain, including the fact that 40% of protected areas 
<https://www.panthera.org/scientists-discover-half-asia-s-protected-areas-too-small-snow-leopard-survival>
 in snow leopard territory are too small to house a mating pair of leopards – 
including Shamshy, though such reserves remain important for the species if 
they connect to other suitable and protected habitat.


Still, unlike many of the world’s species, snow leopards have entire NGOS 
devoted to their long-term survival and champions in high places. In 2013, 
President Atambayev convened the world’s first ever Snow LeopardConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Forum, which brought 
together all 12 countries with snow leopards in their boundaries to discuss 
conservation and research efforts. A follow up conference is scheduled for this 
year.

“President Atambayev deserves accolades for not only mainstreaming snow 
leopard conservation in Kyrgyzstan, but also across the range,” Koustubh Sharma 
said.

If more heads of state acted like Atambayev, the outlook for the world’s 
wildlife might be that much brighter.

 A look at Shamshy Wildlife Reserve by the Snow Leopard Trust.  A wildlife 
ranger scans fro wildlife in the mountains of Shamshy Wildlife Sanctuary. 
Photograph: Photograph: SLF Kyrgyzstan / Snow Leopard Trust / SAEPF  Snow 
leopard caught in a field of wild flowers on camera trap. Photograph: SLF 
Kyrgyzstan / Snow Leopard Trust / SAEPF  