
Learning disability services could be most at risk from continued failure to 
deliver increased funding for social care, a report by independent experts is 
warning.

Up to 30,000 jobs – one in 10 – in learning disability services could be axed 
over the next four years as rises in the government’s “national living wage” 
(NLW) hit providers particularly hard, according to the analysis.

To enable providers to break even, the report suggests, annual funding 
increases of at least 5% will be needed through to 2020, when ministers have 
said the NLW will be worth more than £9 an hour for workers aged 25 or over. It 
is currently £7.20, rising to £7.50 next April.

The report 
<http://www.hft.org.uk/News--events/Hft-news/New-research-shows-thousands-of-jobs-could-be-put-at-risk-unless-additional-funding-is-found-for-the-social-care-sector/>
, commissioned by learning disability charity HFT, will add to pressure on 
ministers to announce extra funding for social care in the annual local 
government finance settlement, expected before Christmas.

Social care leaders were shocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/30/government-inaction-on-social-care-funding-needs-a-radical-response>
 by the absence of any help for the sector in the chancellor’s autumn 
statement. They hope thatsubsequent protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/tory-mps-press-philip-hammond-over-nhs-and-social-care>
 by Conservative-led councils and Tory backbenchers will force a quick change 
of heart.

Transforming learning disability care means valuing all citizens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/05/learning-disability-care-valuing-citizens>
Robert Longley-Cook, HFT’s chief executive, said: “The situation is simply 
unsustainable and could ultimately lead to some of the most vulnerable adults 
in society ending up without the vital support that they need.”

About 150,000 adults in England receive learning disability services. Unlike 
the older people’s sector, there is little or no private payment enabling 
providers to cross-subsidise people funded by the state.

The analysis for HFT, prepared by economics and business consultancy CEBR, 
suggests that wage rates are particularly low in learning disability services – 
a median average of £7.60 an hour, falling to £6.98 for all direct care workers 
including those under 25 – and that the 10,500 employers in the sector face an 
increase of 10.2% in their pay bill by 2020.

Alasdair Cavalla, senior economist at CEBR, said: “While the NLW should be 
beneficial to the economy overall, clearly it cannot be implemented within 
largely state-funded sectors without a corresponding increase in the funding 
going to these sectors.”

The report notes that residential learning disability services made a 
“relatively low” estimated average surplus of 6% in 2015 and now face higher 
costs not just because of the NLW, but also because of rising rents for 
properties and the knock-on effect of the NLW on sleep-in pay rates for care 
workers on shifts.

We could all be Daniel Blake: social workers stand with disabled adults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/02/we-could-all-be-daniel-blake-social-workers-stand-with-disabled-adults>
Typical surpluses for non-residential services are not estimated, owing to 
lack of data, but are thought likely to be even lower.

Of 36 social care providers surveyed for the report, 29 of them offering 
learning disability provision, more than half expected to be in deficit within 
three years and a third said they had already cut staff.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 