
A psychologist has stressed the importance of scary children’s literature, 
after new research revealed that a third of parents would avoid reading their 
children a story containing a frightening character.

A survey of 1,003 UK parents by online bookseller The Book People 
<https://www.thebookpeople.co.uk/blog/index.php/2016/08/09/the-baddest-book-characters/>
 found that 33% would steer clear of books for their children containing 
frightening characters. Asked about the fictional creations they found scariest 
as children, a fifth of parents cited the Wicked Witch of the West from L Frank 
Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, with the Child Catcher fromIan Fleming’s 
Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang <http://www.ianfleming.com/chitty-chitty-bang-bang-2/> 
in second place. Third was the Big Bad Wolf, in his grandmother-swallowing 
Little Red Riding Hood incarnation, fourth the Grand High Witch fromRoald 
Dahl’s The Witches 
<http://www.roalddahl.com/roald-dahl/stories/1980s/the-witches>, and fifth 
Cruella de Vil, from Dodie Smith’sThe Hundred and One Dalmatians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/06/review-hundred-and-one-dalmatians-dodie-smith>
.

“Fear is a natural response,” said psychologist Emma Kenny. “And when you are 
reading a scary story to a child, or they’re reading to themselves, the child 
has got a level of control – they can put it down, or ask you to stop. And the 
story can raise a discussion, in which they can explore and explain the way 
they feel about a situation.”

Being frightened by a book, said Kenny, “helps forge resilience”. “The world 
can be a scary place – children will get into situations where they’re told off 
by teachers, or fall out with friends. Knowing how to confront fear is a good 
thing.”

The Book People’s survey also found that while a third of parents avoided 
books with scary characters, 78% said that baddies helped children 
“differentiate between good and evil”, 53% that they helped children “learn to 
cope with difficult situations”, and 48% that they help conquer fears.

Kermit the Frog and other terrors: the appeal of scary children's books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/10/kermit-the-frog-scary-childrens-books-shaun-tan-gaiman-coraline>
“Children are often being wrapped up in cotton wool,” said Kenny. “Risk and 
fear are something we need in childhood. We know that people who take risks, in 
the long term, do better than those who don’t … And how can you feel safe and 
secure until you know what it’s like to be afraid? Anything that gives you a 
wide range of emotions in a safe and controlled environment is great.”
 