
A key figure picked to prepare the US federal environment agency for life 
under aDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
administration has met in Washington DC with some of the world’s most notorious 
and longest-serving climate science deniers, including One Nation senator 
Malcolm Roberts.

Myron Ebell <https://www.desmogblog.com/myron-ebell>, of the Competitive 
Enterprise Institute 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/competitive-enterprise-institute> (CEI), was picked 
by the now president-elect to lead the Environmental Protection Agency 
“transition team” back in September.

Trump has pledged to strip many powers from the EPA to boost fossil fuel 
production.

On climate change policy, neither time nor Trump are on Turnbull's side | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/19/on-climate-change-policy-neither-time-nor-trump-are-on-turnbulls-side>
Ebell has spent two decades trying to undermine the science linking dangerous 
climate change to fossil fuel burning.

E&E News reported <http://www.eenews.net/eenewspm/stories/1060047060> that 
Ebell was at one meeting hosted by the CEI and held in the hearing room of the 
Senate Environment and Public Works (EPW) Committee.

The EPW committee is chaired by Senator James Inhofe 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/james-inhofe> who, like Trump, has described 
human-caused climate change as a hoax.

The meeting was not open to the public or the press, E&E News reported, with 
Ebell refusing to give any details.

Climate denial who’s who

But details of the gatherings have been made public by some of the climate 
science denialists who attended. The attendee list reads like a who’s who of 
the climate science denial world.

Australian senator Malcolm Roberts <https://www.desmogblog.com/malcolm-roberts>
, of the far-right One Nation party, who is in the US, revealed he had given a 
speech at a CEI meeting with Ebell.

Roberts wrote the meeting was a gathering of the Cooler Heads Coalition and 
then listed some of the participants 
<https://www.facebook.com/malcolmrobertsonenation/posts/984456478364899>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fplanet-oz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fone-nation-senator-joins-new-world-order-of-climate-change-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ecd5e6b7abeee4f056e9e8cb3be48bde04e3357%2F0_0_785_763%2F785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20Nation%20senator%20joins%20new%20world%20order%20of%20climate%20change%20denial%20%7C%20Graham%20Readfearn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fplanet-oz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fone-nation-senator-joins-new-world-order-of-climate-change-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20Nation%20senator%20joins%20new%20world%20order%20of%20climate%20change%20denial%20%7C%20Graham%20Readfearn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fplanet-oz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fone-nation-senator-joins-new-world-order-of-climate-change-denial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ecd5e6b7abeee4f056e9e8cb3be48bde04e3357%2F0_0_785_763%2F785.jpg>
 Screengrab of a post on Malcolm Robert’s Facebook page. Photograph: Facebook 
They included Marc Morano <https://www.desmogblog.com/marc-morano>, Randy 
Randol,Steve Milloy <https://www.desmogblog.com/steve-milloy>, Chris Horner 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/chris-horner>, Craig Rucker 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/craig-rucker>, Patrick Michaels 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/patrick-michaels>, Ken Haapala 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/ken-haapala> and James Taylor 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/james-taylor>.

The views of most of the attendees are in direct contradiction to the 
overwhelming majority of scientific research published over decades, as well as 
the positions of the world’s major scientific academies.

Also listed by Roberts as attending was Breitbart writer James Delingpole 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/james-delingpole>, who published a picture of 
himself, Roberts and Ebell on his Twitter account.

Delingpole says climate change is “junk science” and has said that “hanging is 
too good” for climate scientists.

Denialists reunited

Three of the attendees — Ebell, Randy Randol and Steve Milloy —were part of 
the Global Climate Science Communications Team in the late 1990s.

The GCSC was a coalition of thinktanks and fossil fuel companies that hoped to 
shift people’s understanding of the science linking fossil fuel burning to 
human-caused climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/what-happened-to-lobbyists-who-tried-reshape-us-view-climate-change>
.

At the time, Randol was a lobbyist for ExxonMobil and Milloy was the executive 
director of The Advancement of Sound Science Coalition — a tobacco 
industry-funded front group.

One of the meeting’s attendees, lawyer Chris Horner, was named this week to 
Trump’sEPA “landing team” 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/12/07/donald-trump-s-epa-landing-team-staffed-climate-science-deniers-and-lawyer-known-harassing-climate-scientists-legal>
 alongside Ebell.

Horner, who has been funded by coal companies 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2015/08/27/scientists-not-surprised-climate-denialist-lawyer-christopher-horner-has-financial-ties-alpha-coal-company>
, is known for launching multiple FOIA requests targeting the email inboxes of 
climate scientists and government officials. Many see his work as harassment.

Also in attendance, according to Roberts, was Fred Singer 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/s-fred-singer> – a former advisor to TASSC who set 
up his first group to attack climate science in 1990.

Trump this week named current ExxonMobil chief executive Rex Tillerson as his 
nomination for the Secretary of State.

On Twitter Tony Heller reported that Tim Ball 
<https://twitter.com/SteveSGoddard/status/808823083054366720>, a retired 
geography professor and climate science denier from British Columbia, told the 
EPW meeting: “I’ve waited 40 years for this moment.”

In November 2016, Ball and Heller were in Australia for speaking engagements 
at the invitation of Roberts 
<http://joannenova.com.au/2016/11/events-in-canberra-melbourne-sydney-see-dr-tim-ball-tony-heller-and-sen-malcolm-roberts/>
 who claims there is no evidence linking climate change to human activity.

Ball then travelled to the US for a two-day conference organised by G. Edward 
Griffin 
<http://mediamatters.org/research/2011/03/26/who-is-g-edward-griffin-becks-expert-on-the-fed/177986>
 with the title: Global warming: An Inconvenient Lie 
<http://www.webcitation.org/6mk2zaYpd>.

Griffin, who runs Freedom Force International, which organised the conference, 
is a conspiracy theorist who claims there is no such thing as the HIV virus, 
that climate change is a hoax and that a US military plane shot down one of the 
passenger flights that crashed during the September 11 attacks in the United 
States.

The full line-up of attendees at the Cooler Heads Coalition listed by Roberts 
was Tony Heller, Tim Ball, Fred Singer, Ken Haapala, Craig Rucker, Randy 
Randall, Steve Milloy, Marc Morano, James Delingpole, Chris Horner, Myron 
Ebell, Tom de Weise, James Taylor, Pat Michaels, Austin Smithson, Brandon 
Middleton, Marlo Lewis and “Mandy from Senator James Inhofe’s staff”.

This article was originally published on the Desmog blog 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/>
 