
The people have spoken and the UK stands divided. The English and the Welsh 
voted to leave the EU. Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain. Big 
questions arise: willScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/can-scotland-be-part-of-brexit-britain-and-the-eu-at-the-same-time>
 want to leave the UK and/or be able to stay in the EU? What happens to the
border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/06/ireland-confident-eu-will-keep-northern-irish-border-open-post-brexit>
 and, for that matter, theentire Irish settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/northern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism>
? How can people be stripped of rights? What about trade? What aboutmigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
?

Related: Brexit: government makes closing arguments at article 50 supreme 
court hearing – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>

At the time of the referendum on independence for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/20/scottish-independence-lord-ashcroft-poll>
 from the UK in 2014, Scottish people faced a conundrum. If Scotland had left 
the UK, then Scotland would automatically have been ejected from the EU.

The Scottish nationalists said that their intention would be for Scotland to 
apply to become a member of the EU, but the indications from Brussels were that 
Scotland would have to join the queue for membership. Any Scottish application 
would have to be agreed by all EU states, including Spain, which is reluctant 
to see breakaway regions being treated kindly, given thethreat of secession by 
Catalonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/27/catalonia-independence-spain-democratic-mandate>
.

With article 50 looming large and the government keen to avoid lengthy 
parliamentary debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/brexit-debate-iwould-give-game-away-to-brussels-priti-patel>
 on the terms of departure, perhaps it’s worth considering another form of 
Brexit. Why don’t England and Wales leave the United Kingdom? They would be 
automatically ejected from the EU and Scotland and Northern Ireland would then 
be the constituent parts of the United Kingdom, which would remain in the EU.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Nicola Sturgeon: Scotland’s remain vote must be heard – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jun/28/nicola-sturgeon-scotlands-remain-vote-must-be-heard-video>
Under this arrangement, the UK (by then, the UK of Scotland and Northern 
Ireland) would not trigger article 50 and would not leave the EU. This would 
mean that there would be no issue between the Republic of Ireland and Northern 
Ireland in terms of trade and the movement of people across the border. The 
voters there would get what they voted for. Scotland andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> could adopt the euro, if they 
wished. The EU land border with England would be the border with Scotland.

Scotland would be free of rule by Westminster, without having to leave the UK. 
Edinburgh’s financial services sector would not have to worry about the loss of 
“passporting rights” and England,Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, Wales and Northern Ireland would all 
keep the Queen as head of state, who would continue to live between London, 
Windsor and Balmoral.

The home nations would then create a new constitutional arrangement, to 
cooperate closely and to acknowledge the historic kinship between nations. It 
could be called the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. As 
such, the UK would be preserved, but rewired for a post-Brexit world. Financial 
transfers would need to be agreed between the parts of the UK to preserve 
stability.

Related: The UK needs a new Act of Union to prevent it breaking once and for 
all | Kezia Dugdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/uk-needs-new-act-union-stop-break-brexit-scotland>

The exit from the EU of England and Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> would allow the Westminster government 
to negotiate without delay (and in advance) a favourable settlement with Europe 
without the need for all sides to be constrained by the limitations of article 
50. This could include transitional arrangements covering trade, migration and 
financial contributions. Even the EU would win: there would still be 28 member 
states, as no member state would have left.

Certain matters would be reserved to the “new” UK on a cooperative basis, 
including security and the UN seat. English and Welsh citizens should be 
offered the opportunity to become dual nationals of the UK of Scotland and 
Northern Ireland, thus preserving their rights to live and work within the EU. 
The equivalent right could be extended to citizens of Scotland and Northern 
Ireland, to preserve their right to live in England and Wales. There is a 
precedent for this in the UK’s arrangements with the Republic of Ireland.

If these measures were taken, then the 48% who voted to stay in the EU would 
at least feel that their rights as EU citizens were not being stolen.
 