 What do the following have in common: Bernard Manning's World Famous Embassy 
Club in Manchester; Aneurin Bevan; the Countdown TV theme; red kites; grey 
wolves; Rossini's opera La Donna del Lago; the cut above the eye David Beckham 
sustained after being hit by a flying boot; a 1976 biography of Christopher 
Columbus; giant limestone karsts encountered on a ferry trip in Thailand; the 
storm drains of Los Angeles?
Answer: all have been accorded iconic status in this newspaper over the past 
year. And this is but a small sample from a remarkable total: 493 instances of 
iconic, and 670 of icon or icons.

A reader of the Guardian of Friday July 20, for example, could have read about 
a Turkish musician, the "icon of Arabesque"; Archie Shepp, "iconic figure of 
the early years of free jazz"; Peter Watkins, "the icon of punk film-makers"; 
Jordan, "a punk style icon who was a fixture at early Sex Pistols gigs" (not 
the I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here! Jordan, although we had, 
inevitably, already described her as iconic a month earlier); a 1975 
documentary about Jackie Onassis's eccentric relatives that has achieved - you 
guessed it - "fashion icon status"; and finally, a "London icon": the taxi. 
That's six before breakfast. Half a dozen too many for all but the most 
icon-fixated readers.

But there was no respite. The next day brought eight more: the Routemaster, 
the Lloyd's building, "several iconic buildings" in Greenwich, Sainsbury's, 
Blackpool, Marge Simpson, Voldemort and Shelley. It's not always possible to 
predict where iconitis will strike. Who could have pictured that, according to 
the Work Foundation, four jobs in 21st-century Britain - hairdressers, 
celebrities, managers and management consultants - have become "iconic"?

On seeing that we were running a feature about album covers, I would have bet 
my last battered copy of the Guardian stylebook that some of them had, or were 
destined to, become ... well, you know what. (For the record, Hard-Fi's album 
Stars of CCTV was pronounced "one of 2005's most iconic" covers, raising the 
question of just how many others released that year merited such a description. 
Two of the "most iconic" album sleeves in history were Pink Floyd's The Dark 
Side of the Moon and Led Zeppelin's Houses of the Holy. By contrast, we 
dismissed the "iconography" of Oasis's Be Here Now as derivative.)

Set such an example by those of us paid good money to write and edit this 
stuff, it is hardly surprising that iconitis has spread to those previously 
guilty of no worse linguistic abuses that "less than five items", as evidenced 
in Asda's recent proud boast that its Â£2 chicken is - yes - "iconic".

One assumes that people who use this word so readily know what they wish to 
convey, but for those (like me) who no longer share their confidence, Collins 
gives five definitions of icon: an image of Christ, the Virgin Mary or a saint 
venerated by the Eastern Orthodox Church; an image, picture or representation; 
a symbol representing or analogous to the thing it represents; a sex symbol 
(Jordan, perhaps, but Marge Simpson?) or symbol of a belief or cultural 
movement; and finally a symbol on a computer.

My role as editor of the style guide is to maintain consistency, coherency, 
clarity, and the use of good English in the Guardian. It is not to tell writers 
how to write. However, none of all the other misused, confused, overused and 
downright abused words (arguably, effectively, ironically) comes close to poor 
old icon and iconic - words stripped of all meaning by tedious repetition.

Guardian readers, as ever, are quick to point out such lapses. A reader in 
Canada emailed to say: "I suggest you reserve anything to do with icons to the 
Virgin Mary, Elvis Presley and a very limited number of people whose faces are 
recognised and revered, maybe also little figures on computer screens. 
Otherwise it becomes devalued and is just a trendy way of saying famous or 
memorable." Bob Frankford of Toronto: you are an icon of good sense.
 