
I regularly have cause to recall a scene from a novel called Madder Music, by 
Peter de Vries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/oct/04/family.tim.dowling>, in 
which the main character, a writer who specialises in polo, hears a match 
announcer telling newcomers to the ground that, contrary to popular belief, the 
ball is struck with the side of the mallet, rather than the end. The writer, 
having never realised this before, feels obliged to abandon his life’s work on 
the spot.

It’s a chillingly familiar feeling, although my side-of-the-mallet moments 
tend to be about writing itself, or at least about language. I was well into my 
second decade of journalism before I found out that “enormity” is a synonym for 
monstrosity or wickedness – not hugeness. In practice, you can almost always 
pretend you meant monstrosity, since huge things are often also monstrous. But 
that didn’t stop my ears going hot when it was first pointed out to me.
Matthew Anderson (@MattAndersonBBC) 
Things native English speakers know, but don't know we know: 
pic.twitter.com/Ex0Ui9oBSL <https://t.co/Ex0Ui9oBSL>
 <https://twitter.com/MattAndersonBBC/status/772002757222002688> September 3, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MattAndersonBBC/status/772002757222002688> 
Last week it happened again, when a paragraph from a book called The Elements 
of Eloquence <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/elements-of-eloquence.html> went 
viral on social media 
<https://twitter.com/MattAndersonBBC/status/772002757222002688>. The paragraph 
concerned the order of adjectives – if you’re using more than one adjective 
before a noun, they are subject to a certain hierarchy. You know it’s proper to 
say “silly old fool” and wrong to say “old silly fool”, but you might never 
have thought about why – or if you did you probably imagined it was just some 
time-honoured convention you picked up by rote. But it isn’t. There’s a rule.

The rule is that multiple adjectives are always ranked accordingly: opinion, 
size, age, shape, colour, origin, material, purpose. Unlike many laws of 
grammar or syntax, this one is virtually inviolable, even in informal speech. 
You simply can’t say My Greek Fat Big Wedding, or leather walking brown boots. 
And yet until last week, I had no idea such a rule existed.

In this case my ignorance does not constitute a professional emergency, since 
I doubt I’ve ever put adjectives in the wrong order. If you’re a native 
speaker, the hierarchy is ingrained in you. Only people trying to learn English 
actually need to know the rule. But I’ve duly ordered a copy of the book, just 
in case there’s anything else in there I didn’t know.

Bosh bash bish 

In a piece for the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20160908-the-language-rules-we-know-but-dont-know-we-know>
, The Elements of Eloquence author Mark Forsyth examines a rare exception to 
the adjectival hierarchy: the Big Bad Wolf. Bad is opinion, and should 
therefore come first. However, as Forsyth points out, this phrase is too busy 
obeying another rule I’d never heard of: the rule ofablaut reduplication 
<http://www.macmillandictionaryblog.com/a-hotchpotch-of-reduplication>.

Other examples of the rule in action include chit-chat, singsong, flipflop and 
hip-hop. When you shift vowel sounds for effect this way, the vowels always 
follow a specific order: I, then A, then O. You’d think it was more 
complicated, that it depended on mood or context, but no, it’s that simple – 
bosh bash bish.

A needless four-letter word

Yolo! How do they choose new words for the Oxford English Dictionary?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/sep/12/yolo-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary>
The Dictionary of American Regional English is trying to encourage podcasters 
to employ endangered American words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/05/campaign-to-preserve-endangered-american-words-dictionary-of-american-regional-english>
 and expressions in the hope of preserving them. A list including “fleech” (to 
wheedle or flatter) and “to spin street yarn” (to gossip) has been drawn up. 
The problem with endangered words is that no one knows what they mean any more. 
You can’t chuck them into a conversation without stopping it.

This news comes as the Oxford English Dictionary welcomes the word yolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/12/oxford-english-dictonary-oed-moobs-gender-fluid-yolo-roald-dahl-language>
, among others, into its quarterly update. This strikes me as a little bit 
hasty – I don’t really fancy yolo’s chances in the long term. We put up with 
the expression “you only live once” for a long time without anybody deciding it 
required a dedicated acronym. It was never a terribly profound sentiment, and 
making it shorter doesn’t help much, unless you need to tattoo it on your 
knuckles. I think you’d regret the decision in any case – the days when yolo 
stops a conversation because nobody knows what you’re talking about are coming 
sooner than you think.
 