
Second-half goals from Divock Origi and Roberto Firmino gave Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> a 2-0 victory over Milan in 
their International Champions Cup clash in California.

Liverpool’s Loris Karius breaks hand and is ruled out for two months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/29/football-liverpool-loris-karius-breaks-hand-injured-chelsea>
Jürgen Klopp’s team bounced back from Wednesday’s defeat to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/28/cesc-fabregas-apologies-for-horror-tackle-on-liverpool-ragnar-klavan>
 with a deserved success over their Italian opponents at Santa Clara’s Levi’s 
Stadium.

Liverpool – with James Milner playing at left-back – were on top in the first 
half, new signing Sadio Mané seeing plenty of the ball and almost setting up 
Philippe Coutinho and Daniel Sturridge with crosses. Striker Sturridge also had 
a shot blocked before the break, while his England team-mate Adam Lallana shot 
over.

Firmino and Origi were among the half-time substitutes, and Origi broke the 
deadlock in the 59th minute, showing good footwork before cutting inside and 
shooting into the far corner.

The Belgian had another goal ruled out in the 71st minute for offside, before 
Firmino doubled Liverpool’s lead two minutes later, sliding in at the far post 
to tap in a deflected cross from substitute Sheyi Ojo.

“Everyone knows about the potential of Divock Origi, ” Klopp said after the 
game. “I understand why you ask about Divock after a game like this but tonight 
wasn’t a night to talk about single players. We should talk about the way we 
played and the dominance we had – the passing situations we had in the first 
half were brilliant.

Jürgen Klopp sent Mamadou Sakho home for a ‘lack of respect’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/28/jurgen-klopp-respect-mamadou-sakho-liverpool-us-tour>
“We passed and passed and passed until we were through. We created chances but 
didn’t score. We had four or five big chances. We lost a bit of patience and 
chose the wrong ways with too many long balls. But then we scored some 
wonderful goals and had more chances.

“Gini Wijnaldum did really well in his first game, Ragnar Klavan and Sadio 
Mané did really well. There were good signs. I said before I was really happy 
about the opponent because Italian teams are always well organised and make 
problems for you. It’s not easy to play them.”

Liverpool take on Barcelona at Wembley on Saturday, before opening their 
Premier League campaign at Arsenal on 14 August.
 