
La La Land is a major contender

Since it world-premiered as the opening night film of the Venice film 
festival, Damien Chazelle’s big hearted love letter to Los Angeles has 
continued to buzz as a major awards contender. Reviews were largely glowing out 
of the gate (in Venice, The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw declared it a “
sun-drenched musical masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
”). Even Tom Hanks, an Academy member, is a fan: while attending the Telluride 
film festival, he acted as La La Land’s unofficial mascot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>
, when he was supposed to be touting his performance in Clint Eastwood’s Sully.

Why Hollywood musical La La Land will follow Argo and The Artist to the Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/why-hollywood-musical-la-la-land-will-follow-argo-and-the-artist-to-the-oscars>
La La Land cemented its status as the major breakout this festival season with 
Sunday’s win ofToronto’s People’s Choice award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/la-la-land-tipped-for-oscars-glory-after-win-at-toronto-film-festival>
 which, while decided by cinemagoers, has become a reliable indicator of Oscar 
glory. Previous winners have included American Beauty, Silver Linings Playbook, 
The King’s Speech, Slumdog Millionaire, 12 Years a Slave, Precious and last 
year’sRoom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/room-review-brie-larson-shines-in-a-dark-dungeon>
, which went on to score a surprise four nominations at the Oscars and abest 
actress win for Brie Larson. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/brie-larson-wins-best-actress-oscar-for-room>


The Academy has been known to love films about its own industry, and in that 
regard, La La Land fits the bill. Emma Stone plays a struggling actor, whose 
relationship with her jazz pianist boyfriend (Ryan Gosling) becomes strained 
when his career begins to overtake hers. Chazelle’s swooning execution makes it 
the most audacious ode to Hollywood since The Artist, which swept to success in 
2012. It’s still early to gauge ifLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> will follow in that silent film’s 
footsteps. So far, the chances appear to be in its favour.

The best actress race is stacked

Out of La La Land’s lovesick pair, Stone has emerged as the MVP. She anchors 
the film as the feisty Mia, showcasing all of her best assets as an actor: 
she’s wry when the script calls for it, devastating in a final number, and 
altogether charming. It’s a winning performance – and the best of her already 
impressive career.

Stone beat Natalie Portman (who’s also drawing her best-ever reviews for her 
terrific portrayal of Jacqueline Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
 in Pablo Larraín’s Jackie) for best actress honours at Venice. But as 
potential Oscar narratives go, the two are being pegged as this year’s major 
rivals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foscars-2017-five-things-weve-learned-about-this-years-race-from-toronto-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1052814bc4db40b78709389df49e9a175a128244%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%20five%20things%20we've%20learned%20about%20this%20year's%20race%20from%20Toronto&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foscars-2017-five-things-weve-learned-about-this-years-race-from-toronto-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%20five%20things%20we%27ve%20learned%20about%20this%20year%27s%20race%20from%20Toronto&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foscars-2017-five-things-weve-learned-about-this-years-race-from-toronto-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1052814bc4db40b78709389df49e9a175a128244%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Natalie Portman as Jackie Kennedy in Jackie. Photograph: AP 
Portman hasn’t acted much since winning her Oscar for Black Swan in 2011. She 
proves that victory was no fluke with a galvanising turn as Kennedy immediately 
before and following John F Kennedy’s assassination, that’s sure to impress 
voters for its technical proficiency (Portman thoroughly nails Kennedy’s 
breathy and docile-sounding voice, without letting the affectations get the 
better of her), while also appealing to their emotions.

The two aren’t the only to impress this season. Rebecca Hall did a victory lap 
in Toronto months after debuting her dark character Christine in Sundance. Hall 
is fearless as Christine Chubbuck, the news anchor who achieved notoriety in 
the 70s for killing herself on live TV. The filmwill probably prove too grim to 
factor strongly into the discussion, but Hall deserves a major shot. The same 
goes forRooney Mara in Una 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/una-review-rooney-mara-and-ben-mendelsohn-child-abuse-drama-is-stagey-disappointment>
. The two-hander about a confrontation between a woman and the man who sexually 
abused her as a child didn’t set Toronto aflame. Her performance, however, is 
too charged to ignore.

Christine, film about presenter's on-air suicide, is 'cashing in' says brother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/rebecca-hall-accused-of-cashing-in-by-brother-christine-chubbuck>
Amy Adams meanwhile had a fabulous week, earning major plaudits for her varied 
work in Denis Villeneuve’s brainy sci-fi Arrival and Tom Ford’s sleek thriller 
Nocturnal Animals. She’s sure to have a busy few months ahead.


The Birth of a Nation is still on shaky ground

Nate Parker’s The Birth of a Nation entered Toronto so clouded in controversy 
it probably never stood a chance of reclaiming the glory of its Sundance debut, 
where it sold to Fox Searchlight for a record sum and ignited Oscar buzz as the 
film that would combat recent #OscarsSoWhite controversy at next year’s 
ceremony.

For a moment, however, the Nat Turner biopic seemed poised to come close. 
Similar to Sundance, The Birth of a Nation was greeted by a lengthy standing 
ovation in Toronto, even amid the rape allegations that have threatened to 
derail the film’s chances of entering the awards race.

Everything appeared to be going so smoothly – that was until Parker took part 
in a press conference following its rapturous screening, where he uncomfortably 
chose to evade any questions regarding the 17-year-old case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/nate-parker-deflects-allegation-question-promoting-birth-of-a-nation-in-toronto>
. Ultimately for Parker, there’s no escaping his past.

Moonlight is soaring

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
With The Birth of a Nation floundering, Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
stands to become the needed lighting rod to put an end to #OscarsSoWhite. It’s 
a tougher overall sell: it tells a micro story, focusing on a black gay man at 
three stages over his life. But ecstatic reviews prove it’s a hit with 
discerning audiences. There’s no denying its power.

Harvey Weinstein is back in the mix

The producer, once considered the king of awards season, has in recent years 
been flailing a bit. Last year, he failed to earn Todd Haynes’s Carol a best 
picture nomination. In fact, no films from his company made the cut in a major 
blow for Weinstein, who hasn’t seen a film from his company net the industry’s 
biggest honour since The Artist.

By all accounts, Garth Davis’s directorial debut Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
 will bring Weinstein back into the fold. The Academy gravitates towards 
inspirational and fact-based stories, and Lion has a great one: Dev Patel plays 
a young man adopted as a child who uses Google Maps to track down the family he 
left in India. The film generated a prolonged ovation at its premiere, as well 
as enthusiastic reviews from critics usually immune to such tales. It proved 
its hold by coming in as the runner-up for the People’s Choice award. If 
Weinstein plays his cards right, he’ll be back on terra firma in no time.
 