
Even with months to go before next year’s Academy Awards, and loads of vying 
films still to be unveiled, one thing about the race is certain: the pool of 
female actors is stacked. While Tom Hanks andCasey Affleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/casey-affleck> were arguably the only male 
actors to receive major awards momentum from the recent slate of fall film 
festivals (for their performances in Sully and Manchester by the Sea, 
respectively), a glut of their female colleagues have emerged as surefire 
contenders.

Fences review: Denzel Washington and Viola Davis set to convert Tonys to Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/22/fences-review-denzel-washington-viola-davis-august-wilson>
La La Land’s Emma Stone and Jackie’s Natalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> lead the charge for their 
career-best work in the two ecstatically received films. The pair are closely 
followed by Amy Adams, who earned major plaudits for Denis Villeneuve’s brainy 
sci-fi Arrival, and Annette Bening for her work in 20th Century Women.

On the supporting end of the spectrum, Viola Davis has become the hot favorite 
after reviews hit for Fences, a drama that sees her reprise her Tony 
award-winning role opposite Denzel Washington. She faces stiff competition from 
perennial Academy favorite Michelle Williams, who’s out to break hearts as 
Affleck’s grieving ex-wife in Manchester by the Sea.

All the aforementioned women are sure to have busy few months ahead, as is 
Meryl Streep, whose latest bid for gold, Florence Foster Jenkins, opened this 
summer.


With such a bounty of exceptional female performances, many are bound to fall 
by the wayside. We’re here to course correct that. After all, what’s a proper 
awards season without a few curveballs?

Rebecca Hall, Christine

Rebecca Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rebecca-hall> has been working 
steadily for 20 years, impressing audiences in The Town, Vicky Cristina 
Barcelona and The Prestige. Still, it took until now for her to land a role as 
complex and demanding as the one she undertakes in Christine, Antonio Campos’s 
dark character study about Christine Chubbuck, the news anchor who achieved 
notoriety in the 70s for killing herself on live TV. Hall is astonishing in the 
role, fearlessly digging into Chubbuck’s deep-set insecurities to yield a 
deeply empathetic portrait of a woman on the verge.

Sônia Braga, Aquarius
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ae3847f8d11b0bbf0ed9a5deb9b4a5a0e9b4614%2F33_0_1013_608%2F1013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ae3847f8d11b0bbf0ed9a5deb9b4a5a0e9b4614%2F33_0_1013_608%2F1013.jpg>
 Sônia Braga is commanding in Aquarius. Photograph: PR Company Handout 
Fernanda Montenegro was the last Brazilian actor to be nominated for a best 
actress Oscar for 1998’s Central Station. Sônia Braga deserves to be the 
second. She’s commanding in Kleber Mendonça Filho’s riveting character study as 
Clara, a widowed and retired music critic being driven out of her home. Braga, 
best known to English-speaking audiences for her Golden Globe-nominated turn in 
Kiss of the Spider Woman, has worked steadily since, but it took over three 
decades for Mendonça to give her a role fiery enough to showcase her formidable 
power.

Sally Hawkins, Maudie


Maudie review – Sally Hawkins adds a flourish to portrait of reclusive artist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/maudie-review-sally-hawkins-ethan-hawke>
Sally Hawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sally-hawkins> delivers a 
performance to rival her Golden Globe-winning breakthrough in Mike Leigh’s 
Happy-Go-Lucky in Maudie, a biopic of the Canadian folk artist Maudie Dowley 
Lewis. Aisling Walsh’s small period drama premiered at the Telluride film 
festival to a modicum of buzz and failed to generate much more in Toronto, but 
Hawkins is too good to ignore. She expertly conveys the effects Lewis’s 
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis took on her body, without letting the affliction 
take over her portrait. It’s thoroughly grounded and heartfelt work.

Kate McKinnon, Ghostbusters

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c4799728b9847fac62bf06f10874c3519cd183a%2F0_42_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c4799728b9847fac62bf06f10874c3519cd183a%2F0_42_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Kate McKinnon lets her freak flag fly in Ghostbusters. Photograph: 
Allstar/Sony Pictures 
Whatever your take on Paul Feig’s much-contested reboot of Ghostbusters, 
there’s no denying it got one thing right: it let Kate McKinnon fly her freak 
flag as the group’s wacky engineer. Of the formidable ensemble, the Saturday 
Night Live favorite proves the most compulsively watchable, marshaling a bevy 
of endearing quirks into a star-making, supremely confident turn. Her 
scene-stealing allure mirrors the effect Melissa McCarthy had in Feig’s 2011 
comedy Bridesmaids, which resulted in an Oscar nomination for the comedian. 
McKinnon deserves to follow in her footsteps.

Allison Janney, Tallulah

It’s easy to take Allison Janney for granted – she’s superlative in everything 
she appears in … and Janney works a lot. The prolific actor has long been 
recognized on the small screen, dating back to her four-Emmy tally for The West 
Wing – but strangely, the film world has yet to catch up in rewarding her with 
any type of major recognition. Janney is stellar in Tallulah, an overlooked 
indie offering that premiered at Sundance, only to land on Netflix with a bit 
of a thud. No matter. As an academic mother forced to befriend a stranger who 
claims to be her estranged son’s pregnant girlfriend (played by Ellen Page), 
Janney once again proves to be among today’s most beguiling talents.

Oscars 2017: best foreign language race stacked with auteurs and provocations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/27/oscar-best-foreign-language-film-preview>
Paulina Garcia, Little Men


Ira Sachs’s Little Men is anchored by a number of remarkable performances, but 
none feel as authentic as Paulina Garcia’s portrayal of Leonor, a single 
mother, fighting to keep her quaint clothing store afloat and her boy fed. In 
her first English-language project, Garcia (so strong in the 2013 arthouse hit 
Gloria) isn’t afraid to explore her character’s unsympathetic tendencies, 
resulting in a work that’s deeply humane and hard to shake.

Jennifer Garner, Miracles From Heaven

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1aee0cc31c3ba5e3240febfcecfd18589c16ef9%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1aee0cc31c3ba5e3240febfcecfd18589c16ef9%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jennifer Garner gives Miracles From Heaven her all. Photograph: Chuck 
Zlotnick/AP 
Miracles From Heaven, a faith-based family drama about a family grappling with 
the seemingly impossible, is not a good film. It’s crass Christian propaganda 
that preaches to the choir – and no one else.Jennifer Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-garner>, who leads the drama as a 
churchgoing southern belle whose daughter is diagnosed with a potentially fatal 
disorder, however, is excellent. Throwing herself into the project as if it’s 
an awards pony, and not the Lifetime film it in fact is, Garner gives the role 
her all, imbuing her mama lion with a fierce resiliency that slowly crumbles as 
her daughter’s health worsens. She’s tremendously effective; the picture 
surrounding her is nothing but manipulative.

Anna Gunn, Equity


Anna Gunn on leading all-female film Equity and being 'demonized' online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/anna-gunn-equity-film-breaking-bad>
In Equity, Anna Gunn embodies a ruthless senior investment banker who bears no 
resemblance to Skyler White, the long-suffering matriarch she played to 
perfection on five seasons of Breaking Bad. She manages the difficult feat of 
owning her character’s Wall Street lingo while bringing real urgency to the 
part of a woman facing an uphill battle in her profession solely because of her 
sex. She’s a powerhouse.

Kate Beckinsale, Love and Friendship
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21a14d5f55c5853c33851450f96f90007b4bbc23%2F0_13_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21a14d5f55c5853c33851450f96f90007b4bbc23%2F0_13_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Kate Beckinsale is a hoot in Love and Friendship. Photograph: PR 
Kate Beckinsale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kate-beckinsale> rids 
herself of her Underworld pleather catsuits to don a corset for Love and 
Friendship, and emerges with the most wry and surprising performance of her 
career. She’s a hoot to watch as Lady Susan Vernon, a widow with the cunning 
ability to get what she wants using her wit, smarts and looks. Beckinsale takes 
such evident joy in playing someone so duplicitous – her energy is infectious.

Molly Shannon, Other People

Saturday Night Live veteran Molly Shannon is a proven comedic dynamo – so to 
watch her nail the nuances of a mother suffering from terminal cancer in Other 
People comes as a sort of revelation. In Chris Kelly’s semi-autobiographical 
dark comedy about a struggling gay writer who moves back in with his family to 
help his sick mother, Shannon is quietly devastating, while retaining her 
signature humor. It’s a tricky balancing act that only someone of Shannon’s 
caliber could pull off.

Blake Lively, The Shallows
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c1bd197e4d70265feda0ce1a2cdcc0fc1e9fc3a%2F0_5_4944_2968%2F4944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202017%3A%2011%20female%20performances%20too%20good%20to%20be%20overlooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Foscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c1bd197e4d70265feda0ce1a2cdcc0fc1e9fc3a%2F0_5_4944_2968%2F4944.jpg>
 Blake Lively in The Shallows. Photograph: Courtesy/Rex/Shutterstock 
Blake Lively channels her inner Ripley in The Shallows to deliver the most 
arresting performance of her career. The actor has always been an appealing 
presence, even managing to emerge from Green Lantern relatively unscathed, but 
in The Shallows she shows a formidable mettle few probably knew she had. 
Playing a young surfer forced to battle a great white shark, Lively is a mix of 
brawn and brain. Most impressively, she keeps The Shallows from devolving into 
B-movie fluff by making her character’s peril feel all too real.
 