
The past week has been very challenging, and we fear worse is on its way.


No doubt people were trying their best not to be a burden on public services 
over bank holidays but last Tuesday and particularly Wednesday the floodgates 
opened. Experienced consultants told me they had never seen anything like it. 
We stopped all elective surgery indefinitely – save for day surgery – and 
reallocated consultants who by early evening all looked grey with exhaustion, 
but exhilarated by a kind of Dunkirk spirit that had spread throughout all 
staff including porters, cleaners, nurses and junior doctors. We had 
re-established some modicum of control by 6pm.

We are many beds more than official full capacity, not all of which are 
covered by winter pressure funding. Four of the extra ones are normally 
reserved in maternity for morning sickness patients but have gone to medical 
patients we thought would go home but they deteriorated overnight and stayed 
over the weekend.

The physical drain on consultants, junior doctors and nurses is evident in 
drawn faces

NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England in its wisdom insists on 
two and three-hour teleconferences where all trusts download their tales of woe 
and get asked unhelpful and uninformative questions and are then subjected to 
some rude and unhelpful instructions of the “keep a lid on it” type. We’re also 
told we’re lying and not doing enough in not quite so many words.

Senior managers have to be on site seven days a week for these conferences. 
This is undermining morale big time. We have so far pushed back saying we will 
only do this if we consider it essential and appropriate.

It feels very, very close to a tipping point and we are not alone. 

I’ve cancelled the next board seminar and am sending members round the wards 
to say thank you and well done to all colleagues with instructions to managers 
and ward sisters to turn us away if they can’t cope.

Monday morning was calmer but the physical drain on consultants, junior 
doctors and nurses is evident in drawn faces. Worse, flu is spreading rapidly 
across wards. If the vaccine isn’t quite the right one, it will get much worse. 
The next three weeks will be critical. It will get worse before it gets better.

This isn’t a freak day – this is winter in the NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2017/jan/09/this-isnt-a-freak-day-this-is-winter-in-the-nhs>
I think describing the current situation as “a humanitarian crisis” is a bit 
over the top. The bigger question is that the demands of targets on individual 
trusts are probably – choosing my words carefully – leading to gaming. Equally 
we are all meant to have abandoned all elective surgery but there are strong 
suspicions that certain trusts are not following this; still doing certain 
surgery because they make so much money.

What we are seeing is a breakdown in the trust and cooperation between 
different parts of the NHS. So we have seen mental health almost withdrawing 
from the sustainability and transformation plan process. We have major acute 
hospitals trying to protect their pre-eminent position by being too 
important/big to work with others. We have clinical commissioning groups in 
denial about their total absence of any long-term future. We have NHS England 
shouting down the phone at hard-pressed managers. We have NHS Improvement 
texting chief executives on Saturday afternoons checking that they are on top 
of the situation and expecting them to be at work.

Not one of these actions is going to help a hard-pressed consultant with 
targets – or more critically the patient. Worse than that, the pressure from 
above is largely political because government ministers and MPs cannot accept 
the reality of the general slide to a service that doesn’t meet what the public 
expect.


If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 