
Ousmane Dembélé may be the most coveted 18‑year‑old in world football but, if 
Barcelona, Bayern Munich or Manchester City are serious about prising him away 
fromRennes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> this summer, then 
there is one person they must convince: his mother Fatimata.

“She is who will decide Ousmane’s future,” admits Dembélé’s agent Badou 
Sambagué. “When he wanted to leave last summer, his mother told him she wanted 
him to stay at Rennes and sign his first professional contract. In the end he 
had no choice.”

Last Friday Dembélé scored his 10th league goal of a remarkable debut season 
as Rennes thrashed Marseille 5-2 at the Stade Vélodrome to keep their unlikely 
push for Champions League qualification alive. That made him the youngest 
player in the history of Ligue 1 to reach that mark – quicker than both Thierry 
Henry and Anthony Martial – although it was the assist for his side’sfinal goal 
that really marked the teenager out as something special 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3yom11_ousmane-dembele-fantastic-assist-for-sio-vs-marseille-2-5-hd_sport>
.

Raymond Domenech: ‘People started to think I wore a wizard’s hat on my head’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/22/raymond-domenech-france-ireland-zinedine-zidane>
Chasing a speculative long ball with the game still in the balance, he glided 
past Marseille’s Nicolas N’Koulou before the experienced Cameroon defender was 
left on his backside as Dembélé cut inside. A perfectly weighted pass then 
landed at the feet of his strike partner, Giovanni Sio, to put the seal on a 
remarkable victory for Rolland Courbis’s side. The watching scouts, from a list 
of clubs long enough to form their own breakaway European Super League, could 
not have failed to be impressed.

Arsenal, Chelsea, City and Tottenham are among his suitors in the Premier 
League but reports in France on Monday claimed that Bayern have already secured 
a deal under which Dembélé would be loaned back to Rennes next season. 
Sambagué, a former Mali international who was a semi-professional player in 
France’s lower leagues and grew up in the same block of flats as Dembélé in the 
Normandy town of Évreux, says no agreement has been reached. However, with 
rumours that the bidding will start at around £25m, he knows keeping his young 
prodigy’s feet on the ground will not be an easy task.

“It’s very important for him to only think about playing football. My job is 
to protect him from all the speculation,” he says. “I’ve known Ousmane since he 
was born – I lived on the first floor of ourimmeuble and his family was on the 
second. I went to school with his brother and sister so we know each other very 
well. I was the model for a lot of the young footballers in the area because I 
had played international football for Mali. My example was to play football and 
then study so I became a lawyer after retiring. That’s when Ousmane said, 
‘Badou I want you to give me a target for the future’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3563cb30c382ad3b50895f950965c4e2ac7e46ab%2F0_30_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ousmane%20Demb%C3%A9l%C3%A9%3A%20football%E2%80%99s%20hottest%20property%2C%20if%20you%20can%20convince%20his%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ousmane%20Demb%C3%A9l%C3%A9%3A%20football%E2%80%99s%20hottest%20property%2C%20if%20you%20can%20convince%20his%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3563cb30c382ad3b50895f950965c4e2ac7e46ab%2F0_30_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Dembélé has attracted plenty of attention since being called up by France 
under-21s this month. He is expected to make his debut against Scotland on 
Thursday. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
Sambagué adds: “There are plenty of good and bad examples for him to follow. I 
always explain to him that he has an opportunity to become a good example and 
make a good choice. It’s very important for a young player to have a good 
mentality to strive to maintain their best performances game after game.”

Despite being restricted to only a handful of appearances for Rennes’ second 
string last season, the offers still came flooding in. The Austrian side Red 
Bull Salzburg were ready to pay more than €2m to secure Dembélé’s services 
while Patrick Vieira, in his previous role as Manchester City’s football 
development executive, was a regular spectator at the club’s La Piverdière 
training ground.

But having promised Fatimata, whose family moved to France from Mauritania, 
that her son would sign a professional contract with the club he first joined 
as a 13-year-old, the decision to stay was already made.

“Ousmane had the choice between three or four clubs,” remembers Sambagué. “He 
said, ‘Badou, I’m not a professional player yet because I’m only training with 
the first team. I want to improve and how can I do that if I don’t play?’ But 
he had a good opportunity to gain some experience at a smaller club that know 
him well. If he had gone somewhere then, we may have had to wait for him to 
play games. At Rennes he has established himself in the team and now everyone 
can see what he can do. He has a dream to become a good player, step by step. 
It’s not to go to a big club and just be forgotten about.”

The patient approach has certainly paid dividends for Rennes – traditionally 
known as one of the most prolific producers of players in Ligue 1 – as 
Dembélé’s transfer value has rocketed since making his first-team debut in 
November. A brilliant hat-trick inthe Breton derby against Nantes 
<http://sport.bt.com/news/french-wonderkids-hat-trick-shows-why-arsenal-spurs-and-liverpool-are-keen-on-20m-deal-91364044583815>
 on 6 March was reportedly watched by Barcelona’s sporting director, Robert 
Fernández, leading to predictions in the Catalonian press that he would be the 
next Neymar. A few days later the former Manchester United defender Mikaël 
Silvestre, in his official capacity aschargé de missions (presidential 
adviser)at Rennes, did nothing to dampen expectations when comparing him to “a 
young Cristiano Ronaldo” and predicted Dembélé would one day appear on the 
Ballon d’Or shortlist.

“I’m not surprised by his progress – he has been ready for this stage for a 
long time,” says Sambagué. “I’ve been speaking to a lot of scouts and for the 
past three or four years they have known we have a very good player on our 
hands. But the most important thing is the mentality of the player. You can 
have all the quality in the world but, if you don’t want to improve, you will 
not get very far. The objective for Ousmane is to keep improving all the time.”

Dembélé was called up to France’s Under-21 side last week and is expected to 
make his debut against Scotland on Thursday. He was the centre of attention at 
Monday’s pre-match press conference, denying the Bayern rumours and insisting 
he will not allow them “to go to his head”.

Yet Rennes, having felt short-changed from the sale of their last big discovery
Yann M’Vila – now on loan at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/yann-mvila-sunderland-tyne-wear-derby-newcastle>
 from the Russians Rubin Kazan – for just €12m in 2013, appear ready to cash in 
this time – as long as Fatimata approves, that is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93524cb80f5ad2735bf5bccbbc4f5684ac03e7e0%2F0_78_1381_829%2F1381.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ousmane%20Demb%C3%A9l%C3%A9%3A%20football%E2%80%99s%20hottest%20property%2C%20if%20you%20can%20convince%20his%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ousmane%20Demb%C3%A9l%C3%A9%3A%20football%E2%80%99s%20hottest%20property%2C%20if%20you%20can%20convince%20his%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fousmane-dembele-football-hottest-property-rennes-bayern-munich-ligue-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93524cb80f5ad2735bf5bccbbc4f5684ac03e7e0%2F0_78_1381_829%2F1381.jpg>
 Dembélé celebrates scoring one of his three goals against Nantes in the Breton 
derby on 6 March. Photograph: Damien Meyer/AFP/Getty Images  