
Every era gets a shoe. The 60s had the Birkenstock, the 70s had the platform 
boot, the 80s had the stiletto, and the 90s the Doc Marten. Now we have the 
over-the-knee boot. Although Cavalli and Chanel have featured them in their 
collections since the early noughties, over-the-knee boots have only recently 
been popularised by the likes of Beyoncé, Rihanna andKendall Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner>. Not to mention Theresa 
May, who has twice donned a pair.

The current style is to wear them with an oversize top and coat (nicknamed 
“lampshading” for the big-small silhouette it creates), usually without 
trousers (though May has not taken this particular option). Last month, MTV 
Style announced: “Thigh-high boots are the new pants.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa991fc2384b5b6cf3d835fd0d77c7ad6fe425761%2F0_0_3000_4575%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over-the-knee%20boots%20set%20to%20become%20footwear%20of%20the%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over-the-knee%20boots%20set%20to%20become%20footwear%20of%20the%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa991fc2384b5b6cf3d835fd0d77c7ad6fe425761%2F0_0_3000_4575%2F3000.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian rocks some OTKs from husband Kanye West’s fashion label. 
Photograph: Alo Ceballos/GC Images 
The queen of the #OTK (as they’re known on Instagram) trend is Kim Kardashian, 
who previewed a perspex pair from husband Kanye West’s new collection. On the 
catwalk they have appeared in various iterations: Gucci’s feature python 
diamond prints; McQueen’s in white leather; and Prada’s velvet lace-ups.Louis 
Vuitton <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton>, Kenzo, Givenchy, 
Cavalli and Tom Ford have their own versions.

Meanwhile, Manolo Blahnik <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/manolo-blahnik> 
debuted two thigh-high collaborations, saying: “Shoes help transform a woman.” 
The question remains: what does it transform her into?

Monica Rose, the celebrity stylist (Kardashian, Chrissy Teigen, Gigi Hadid) 
who has put the boots front and centre in her work, toldNylon 
<http://www.nylon.com/articles/monica-rose-interview#page-1> earlier this year: 
“I grew up as a teenager in the 90s, so my aesthetic always has some element of 
the 90s with a modern twist.” And the most obvious pop culture references here 
are, give or take a year, Julia Roberts in Pretty Woman (1990) and Cher in her 
video for If I Could Turn Back Time (1989). That they both appeared as part of 
a costume of sexual provocation illustrates perhaps how our attitude to 
revealing clothing has morphed.


In the era of the naked selfie, the thigh-high boot is just another acceptable 
flesh-baring garment. This change from sexual clothing item to object of 
emancipation can be traced back to The Devil Wears Prada (2006), where the 
slovenly character of Andy (Anne Hathaway) gets a high-fashion makeover and 
finally gets a backbone. Pivotal to this is the ensemble in which she wears 
black leatherChanel <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> boots. The 
intern transforms into a boss.

Cassie Smart, footwear and bags buying manager at Matchesfashion.com 
<http://matchesfashion.com/>, says sales have been buoyant due to the 
versatility of the boot. “The over-the-knee boot has become an important 
category within our boot range due to the different heel heights and the appeal 
for many occasions, from day to night,” she says, name-checking bestsellers 
such as Balenciaga and Valentino, cut in velvet and suede respectively. They 
can be worn in different weather conditions with dresses or skirts, over skinny 
jeans, sweater dresses and more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26f57754c7ae18f9174190db2a5935c94d5c757%2F0_0_2545_2253%2F2545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over-the-knee%20boots%20set%20to%20become%20footwear%20of%20the%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over-the-knee%20boots%20set%20to%20become%20footwear%20of%20the%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fover-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26f57754c7ae18f9174190db2a5935c94d5c757%2F0_0_2545_2253%2F2545.jpg>
 Theresa May pulls off some over-the-knee boots at a public occasion. 
Photograph: Max Mumby/Indigo/Getty Images 
Smart says sales have been growing since 2015’s autumn/winter season when 
versions bySaint Laurent <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/saint-laurent> 
and Nicholas Kirkwood were popular. “They work well with midi dresses, elongate 
the leg, and are equally stylish in more of a daytime look with luxe knitwear 
layered with a longer-length coat.” Or, indeed, worn with no coat at all.
 