
Campaigning for “less popular” causes is a delicate balancing act that can 
easily backfire on charities,Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> 
boss Mark Goldring has warned, while admitting he has twice got it wrong with 
damaging consequences.

In a candid presentation to an audience of charity professionals on 14 
December, Goldring said Oxfam had made high-stakes misjudgments in its notorious
“perfect storm” clash with the coalition government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/jun/14/is-latest-oxfam-advertisement-too-political>
 and inthe row over the involvement of its then celebrity ambassador, Scarlett 
Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/scarlett-johansson-oxfam-quits-sodastream>
 with a company operating in an Israeli settlement on the West Bank.

The Johansson furore had cost Oxfam America “literally thousands” of donors, 
Goldring revealed.

Both events took place in 2014. In the first, to promote a book it had 
co-produced about foodbanks, Oxfamtweeted an image of stormy seas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/12/oxfam-ads-poverty-politics-charity-campaign>
 with the caption: “The Perfect Storm. Starring: zero hour contracts, high 
prices, benefit cuts, unemployment, childcare costs.” In response to acomplaint 
by a Conservative MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/jun/14/is-latest-oxfam-advertisement-too-political>
, the Charity Commission ruled that Oxfam should have done more to avoid any 
misperception of political bias.

In the Johansson case, after a protracted stand-off, the actor ended her 
eight-year association with Oxfam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/scarlett-johansson-oxfam-quits-sodastream>
over its criticism of her for endorsing fizzy drinks company SodaStream, which 
at the time had a factory in an Israeli settlement.

Scarlett Johansson steps down from Oxfam ambassador role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/scarlett-johansson-oxfam-quits-sodastream>
Goldring, who has been Oxfam chief executive since 2013 and was previously 
chief executive of the learning disability charity Mencap and of the 
international volunteer charity VSO, told a seminar on campaigning for less 
popular causes that in mishandling the Johansson affair, Oxfam turned what 
should have been a point of principle into “something of a PR disaster”.

Oxfam’s error, said Goldring, was letting the controversy drag on so that 
Johansson could eventually seize the initiative. “The judgment was when to be 
proactive, when to be forceful, and when to be balanced and reflective,” he 
said. “We got that wrong.”

Goldring also acknowledged that the UK “perfect storm” tweet had provoked a 
massive backlash, and wrecked much of the slow, methodical lobbying work that 
Oxfam had been doing in partnership with other organisations to persuade the 
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) of the problems caused by benefit curbs. 
“We lost any sense of engagement with the DWP, we lost the traction we had and 
we probably over-politicised the debate from the point of view of our 
partners,” he said.

In contrast to these two own goals, Goldring highlighted two instances of 
campaigning that had been positive for Oxfam.Working mainly behind the scenes 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/blog/2016/02/why-tesco-and-other-supermarkets-should-integrate-business-and-ethics>
, as a “responsible interlocutor”, it had helped persuade most leading UK
supermarket chains first to label clearly, then withdraw, any produce from 
Israeli settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/10/guidance-labelling-food-israeli-settlements>
. Only one chain had needed firmer pressure, which had been exerted by other 
campaigners.

The second example, demonstrated in the current Disasters Emergency Committee 
appeal for Yemen <http://www.dec.org.uk/?gclid=CPKvhYH09NACFdTNGwodE_IPdQ>, had 
been Oxfam’s two-pronged campaigning against the effects of war in that 
country, at times stressing the humanitarian plight, but at other times 
lobbying against the UK’s sale of arms to Saudi Arabia, which was involved in 
the conflict.

“Sometimes the public is hugely important; sometimes you need to get to a 
small group of opinion-formers,” Goldring said. “Where you get it wrong is 
where you have not used enough evidence or allowed things to become too 
politicised.”

Charlotte Ravenscroft, a charity consultant and former civil servant, told the 
seminar, organised by Cass Business School’s centre for charity effectiveness, 
that charities embarking upon campaigns needed to choose between an “insider” 
or “outsider” strategy or, as in the case ofOxfam and Yemen 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2016/12/dec-launches-yemen-crisis-appeal>
, which strategy to use at any given time. “I have seen charities do this quite 
badly over the last few years,” she said. Having secured precious insider 
meetings with ministers, some charity leaders had failed to use the opportunity 
to present a reasoned, detailed case, but had instead delivered “a face-to-face 
lecture”.

Achieving change was a slow process, Ravenscroft warned, but it was enough to 
be able to “look yourself in the mirror and say you have acted with integrity, 
and the campaign generally has furthered the cause, even if you didn’t 
necessarily win that particular battle”.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.




 