
An award-winning Paralympic athlete and disabilities campaigner says she was 
“completely robbed of her dignity” after a train company failed to provide an 
accessible toilet on a three-hour journey.

Anne Wafula Strike, 42, a British wheelchair racer who has no use of her legs, 
is a board member of UK Athletics, has an MBE for services to disability sport 
and serves as a patron of several charities supporting the rights of people 
with disabilities.

Rail fares: train operators accused of milking the system as rises kick in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/rail-fares-train-operators-accused-of-milking-the-system-as-rises-kick-in>
The Kenyan-born athlete said she was left profoundly humiliated after being 
left to urinate on herself on a CrossCountry train, covering her face with her 
hoodie after the incident in case anyone recognised her.

Politicians must act on disability access | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/politicians-must-act-on-disability-access>
“I was completely robbed of my dignity by the train company,” she said. “I 
would like to ask the train company when will they give me my dignity back? As 
a disabled person I have worked so hard over the years to build up my 
confidence and self-belief.

“Having access to a toilet, especially in a developed nation like the UK, is 
one of the most basic rights. I tried to conceal the smell of urine by spraying 
perfume over myself. When I finally got home after my nightmare journey, I 
scrubbed myself clean in the shower then flung myself on my bed and sobbed for 
hours.”

She added: “After thinking about it for a while I decided to go public despite 
the personal humiliation of doing so in the hope that it will bring about 
change for other people with disabilities who want to contribute to society but 
are prevented from doing so. Too many people with disabilities suffer in 
silence when this kind of thing happens because they feel too embarrassed to 
talk about it.

“The whole incident made me feel as if I can’t play an active role in society 
and should just hide behind closed doors. Being forced to sit in my own urine 
destroyed my self-esteem and my confidence.

“People with disabilities don’t want perfection, we just want the basics and 
to have our independence. But lack of access and inclusive facilities make us 
feel as if we are an afterthought.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9333eb51a1920390d11602da32b975358495a3c%2F0_97_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympian%20forced%20to%20wet%20herself%20on%20train%20without%20accessible%20toilet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympian%20forced%20to%20wet%20herself%20on%20train%20without%20accessible%20toilet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9333eb51a1920390d11602da32b975358495a3c%2F0_97_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
 Anne Wafula Strike (right) is a patron of several charities supporting the 
rights of people with disabilities. Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
The incident happened when Wafula Strike was returning from a UK Athletics 
board meeting in Coventry on 8 December. She took a taxi from Coventry to 
Nuneaton station and from there boarded the 17.22pm CrossCountry train to 
Stansted airport, where she could catch a connecting train to her home town of 
Harlow. On the journey, which is usually scheduled to last two hours and 48 
minutes, she needed to use the toilet but found that the accessible one was out 
of order.

“If the able-bodied toilet had been closer I could have tried to crawl to it 
but it was too far away and my wheelchair could not fit in the aisles to get to 
it,” she said.

A member of the train crew suggested she could get off the train when it 
stopped at a station, use the disabled toilet there and wait for the next 
train. This would have delayed her journey home but in the event there were no 
staff at the station to help her so she was unable to get off the train.

She tweeted the train company’s customer service team to complain and in a 
series of exchanges Wafula Strike became increasingly distressed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff913fca58ead14f64fc865fdb8c57d8890590d20%2F0_0_4480_2689%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympian%20forced%20to%20wet%20herself%20on%20train%20without%20accessible%20toilet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympian%20forced%20to%20wet%20herself%20on%20train%20without%20accessible%20toilet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fparalympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff913fca58ead14f64fc865fdb8c57d8890590d20%2F0_0_4480_2689%2F4480.jpg>
 Anne Wafula Strike (second left) in the Women’s 100m T54 final during the Visa 
London Disability Athletics Challenge LOCOG test event for the London 2012 
Paralympic Games at the Olympic Stadium in London. Photograph: Julian 
Finney/Getty Images 
Wafula Strike said she felt she had to speak out to expose some of the 
injustice faced by people living with disabilities.

“I’ll probably be remembered as that woman who wet herself on the train. I 
could have kept quiet but I hope that by speaking out other wheelchair users 
who use public transport won’t be subjected to the same experience I had.

“I may have an impairment but the barriers society puts in my path are the 
real handicap. The UK Athletics meeting I had just attended was so positive – 
all about success and medals and athletics superstars and then this happened. 
UK Athletics has always gone out of its way to ensure that the board meetings 
are held in accessible venues but other organisations need to do the same so 
people like me can play our part in society.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20time%20to%20stop%20calling%20disabled%20people%20'inspirational'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20time%20to%20stop%20calling%20disabled%20people%20%27inspirational%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video&media=>
It’s time to stop calling disabled people ‘inspirational’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/sep/07/its-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video>
Sue Bott, deputy chief executive of Disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Rights UK, expressed concern 
about the incident.

“The courts are starting to take cases like this very seriously,” she said. 
“Not only the lack of access but also the injury to feeling that occurs. If 
Anne decides to take legal action we would be right behind her. No one should 
have to go through an experience like that. Access and inclusion need to be 
taken seriously. These things should not just be tick box exercises.”

A CrossCountry spokesman said: “We are extremely sorry for the circumstances 
of Mrs Strike’s recent journey with us, and our managing director has passed on 
our apologies to her along with an explanation of why it appears all our 
systems failed her on that day. We hope she will take up our offer and contact 
us in the new year so we can offer her a more pleasant experience of travelling 
with us.”
 