
A paralysed pregnant woman wearing a bionic suit has completed the Great North 
Run five days after she started it.

Claire Lomas, from Leicestershire, was paralysed from the chest down in a 
riding accident in 2007, which left her with a fractured neck, dislocated back, 
fractured ribs, a punctured lung and pneumonia.

The 36-year-old, who is 16 weeks pregnant, began the half-marathon, which runs 
fromNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> to South Shields, on 
Wednesday and crossed the finish line at about 10am on Sunday.

Lomas told the Guardian that she had suffered from morning sickness during 
much of her training and had had to seek medical attention for sores caused by 
the straps of her suit. “I haven’t had much sleep. I spent the first two nights 
worrying that I wouldn’t be able to make it,” she said.

The former event rider was offered a place in the Great North Run after being 
refused an official place in the London Vitality 10k. Wearing a ReWalk robotic 
exoskeleton, which she raised around £50,000 to buy, Claire walked around three 
miles each day assisted by her husband Dan, visiting schools en route to talk 
to children about her battle to overcome her injuries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparalysed-pregnant-claire-lomas-finishes-great-north-run-in-five-days%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1200e5ca78457f62f0b506e2ce512ca4cf010324%2F0_0_2952_3648%2F2952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralysed%2C%20pregnant%20Claire%20Lomas%20finishes%20Great%20North%20Run%20in%20five%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparalysed-pregnant-claire-lomas-finishes-great-north-run-in-five-days%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralysed%2C%20pregnant%20Claire%20Lomas%20finishes%20Great%20North%20Run%20in%20five%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparalysed-pregnant-claire-lomas-finishes-great-north-run-in-five-days%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1200e5ca78457f62f0b506e2ce512ca4cf010324%2F0_0_2952_3648%2F2952.jpg>
 Claire Lomas on the Tyne bridge during the Great North Run. Photograph: Owen 
Humphreys/PA 
The ReWalk exoskeleton was developed by ReWalk Robotics in Israel to enable 
paraplegic people to stand upright, walk and climb stairs. Powered by a 
backpack battery, it relies on motion sensors to help the wearer lift their 
legs.

“I’ve always liked personal challenges,” she said. “I wanted to raise money 
because I saw a lot of people worse off than me in hospital with neck injures, 
who weren’t getting as much support.” To date, Lomashas raised around £560,000 
for the Nicholls Spinal Injury Foundation. 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/ClairesupportsNF>

Lomas, who gave birth to her first child, Maisie, in March 2011, says that 
staying as active as possible is good for people who have suffered spinal 
injuries. “It’s good for your health, anyway, whether you are [an active 
person] or not and then there are the mental [health] benefits to it, too,” she 
said.

In April 2012, she completed the London Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marathon> in 17 days using the robotic suit. 
The organisers usually require participants to finish the marathon within 24 
hours, but they allowed Lomas to walk two miles a day for 17 days.

“[The Great North Run] has been the toughest by a long way,” said Lomas. “The 
London marathon took me 17 days and I did this in five, and it’s hilly.” 
Although she hasn’t calculated the total amount she has raised from the run, 
she estimates that it will be around £20,000.

Olympic distance-running champion Mo Farah, who finished the run in first 
place for the third year running, congratulated Lomas, describing her as an 
inspiration.

“It’s pretty amazing,” he said. “What she went through and then to finish the 
Great North Run. I want to congratulate her, this is what the Great North Run 
needs. To have the courage to be able to compete is amazing.”
 