
This year’s British Paralympians are a fresh-faced bunch. Between them, they 
average an age of 22.5 years – meaning many have to balance essays and revision 
with their intensive training regimes. And while most students heading back to 
university last month enjoyed a hedonistic freshers’ week, the squad were busy 
competing at the Games – a world apart from the lecture theatre. So, what does 
it take to be a student Paralympian?

Harriet Lee, 25, won a silver medal in the women’s SB9 100m breaststroke. She 
is in the final year of her part-time degree in leadership and management at 
the University of Northumbria, which she balances with her training.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aeb197fb46ebb398cf222f540bde26d4bd41eb2%2F0_0_640_517%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20'It's%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20%27It%27s%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aeb197fb46ebb398cf222f540bde26d4bd41eb2%2F0_0_640_517%2F640.jpg>
 Harriet Lee celebrates silver at Rio. Photograph: Harriet Lee 
“There’s no real rest or down period with swimming, so it’s hard to try to 
balance a uni degree when your sights are set on something like Rio. I would 
have nine two-hour pool sessions a week, three or four gym sessions a week, and 
then two core sessions. When I then had to move away from Newcastle to 
Manchester [to train at the Manchester Aquatics Centre], I had to change my 
degree to distance learning. When I wasn’t distance learning, I’d be in uni 
lectures two afternoons a week.

“Other students have been so good in trying to help me stay on it. For the 
18-, 19-, 20-year-olds who are all partying, life is completely different. But 
they were really supportive and helped me through illness and some of the 
toughest times of my training.

It is tough to study and be an athlete – but I’d never tell anyone not to do 
it.
Ashley Facey-Thompson 
“I wouldn’t say [leadership and management] was my first choice of degree, but 
when I come out of the sport it’ll open a few doors. I haven’t got myself set 
on what I want to be, but there’s a few pies I’ve got my fingers in. One day, 
I’d like to open up my own swimming school.”

Ashley Facey-Thompson, 21, is a sports coaching and analysis student at London 
South Bank University, and competed in class 9 men’s singles table tennis and 
9-10 team at theParalympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>. He 
was a late call-up, just 10 days before the start of the Games after initially 
missing out on qualification by just one point – but was drafted in when the 
Russian team were banned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8758de689677ebd0b05bce6e864fc1c46031b17%2F0_160_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20'It's%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20%27It%27s%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8758de689677ebd0b05bce6e864fc1c46031b17%2F0_160_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Ashley Facey-Thompson: got the call just ten days before the Games began. 
Photograph: Morten Olsen 
“Getting on the team was the biggest achievement of my life. The qualification 
year was so hard. It was horrendous. The training centre for the English 
Institute of Sport is in Sheffield, and I live in London. So I had to keep 
going back and forth. I was barely in uni, and when I was it was only to do 
work and not even to socialise, so I didn’t really know anyone. I used to go to 
Sheffield Hallam and I moved back home – but it’s a sacrifice I had to make to 
qualify for Rio.
 ‘You have to be one step ahead of the game to be a Paralympian.’ Photograph: 
Ashley Facey-Thompson 
“I’d like to focus on my third year and make sure I get a good grade while 
still carrying on with my table tennis. So I think this year is going to be one 
of my hardest yet. I still want to maintain my level and not drop, so there’s 
no time to rest.

“I’ve never had a freshers’ week in my life. Every time I’ve had a big 
competition, like the Europeans, World Championships or the Paralympics. I’m 
always preparing.


“You have to be one step ahead of the game to be a Paralympian. You have to 
make time and effort to speak to the tutors and to your coaches and make sure 
they have a good bond. A calendar is the most important. You’ve just got to be 
determined the whole way through. Sometimes I don’t feel motivated at all, but 
it’s definitely worth it. As a student, you get the benefit of the academic 
work and sport at the same time. It is tough to study and be an athlete – but 
I’d never tell anyone not to do it. If you get the chance, do it.”

Hannah Russell, 20, won two golds and a bronze medal at the Paralympics, 
smashing her own world record in the women’s S12 100m backstroke. The swimmer 
is an undergraduate studying sports science at the University of Salford, and 
will begin the second year of her degree in January.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632f002767b10111b504243de3effb7a91d63587%2F79_0_5263_3159%2F5263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20'It's%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20%27It%27s%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632f002767b10111b504243de3effb7a91d63587%2F79_0_5263_3159%2F5263.jpg>
 Hannah Russell in training. Photograph: Nick Harrison 
“I’m really looking forward to going back. It will be a change for me, as I’ve 
just been purely focused on the training this year. It’ll be nice to have 
something else, to see my friends again. I’ve found that a little bit of a 
struggle. My uni friends will be going into their final year next year, and 
I’ll be starting from scratch again, getting used to new people on my course. I 
consider myself a social person, so it’ll be nice to mix with new people. I’m 
looking forward to studying again.


“Salford has been supportive and they’d always send me my work while I was 
away. If I was at a competition I’d always have the Powerpoint notes on my 
laptop. Going into this year especially, I had so much support from my tutor 
and all my coursemates. They were just proud to see what I’ve achieved.”

Sophie Carrigill, 22, graduated in the summer with a degree in sports 
psychology from the University of Worcester – team GB’s wheelchair basketball 
training base – before heading to Rio to lead the GB women’s team to a 
semi-final as co-captain. She is returning to Worcester to become a graduate 
ambassador for the university.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fc7566c33ff74d82793bc82736e3a5100ae220%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20'It's%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympians%20head%20back%20to%20uni%3A%20%27It%27s%20not%20a%20normal%20student%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fparalympians-head-back-to-uni-its-not-a-normal-student-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fc7566c33ff74d82793bc82736e3a5100ae220%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
 Sophie Carrigill co-captained the GB women’s wheelchair basketball team. 
Photograph: Sophie Carrigill 
“There are so many sacrifices that you make to be a Paralympian. I always say 
that they’re the choices that I made for my life. I didn’t go out like all my 
other friends did at uni. I remember they used to get back at six o’clock in 
the morning from a night out and I’d be up having my breakfast ready to go to 
training. I lived a completely different life to what a normal student would – 
but I’m happy I did it.

“I still made great friends who will be my friends for life. They understand 
my choice. I don’t regret it at all.

“I think it’s important to embrace everything you’re doing. My degree tied in 
quite well with my basketball. But some people’s might not, so for some it’s 
good to get away from your sport for a little bit, have different friends and a 
different social life. It’s quite refreshing not to just be engrossed. As long 
as you’ve got the right support behind you, having that alternative focus is 
always good for an athlete.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 