
At a memorable London fashion show in 1998, Alexander McQueen sent 
double-amputee athleteAimee Mullins 
<http://iconmagazine.se/portfolio/aimee-mullins/> down the catwalk wearing a 
pair of hand-carved wooden prosthetic legs. It was seen as a groundbreaking 
moment for an industry not renowned for being inclusive.

Why aren't more big brands designing clothes for people with disabilities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/13/mainstream-brands-not-designing-clothes-people-disabilities-fashion-school-students>
That was nearly 20 years ago. Today, however, high-profile disabled models are 
still few and far between, and fashion brands – from high-end to high street – 
do little to communicate with disabled shoppers. Now one well-known label is 
hoping to change that. Teatum Jones, which opened this year’s London Fashion 
Week with acollection inspired by the LBGT community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/10/fresh-generation-of-british-designers-takes-to-the-catwalk-with-stories-from-the-streets>
, is setting its sights on people with disabilities and designing a new range 
specifically for them.

Over the next two months, Catherine Teatum and her co-designer Rob Jones will 
embed themselves with members of the British Paralympic team. “We want to 
develop able-bodied and disabled ranges that will cross over,” Jones says.

They plan to film and talk to the athletes about the impact of their 
disabilities and how fabric makes their limbs feel. The aim is to showcase the 
collection in London next year, using models with disabilities.

“Our creative drive comes from wanting to tell people’s stories – the stuff 
that fashion doesn’t normally pay attention to,” says Teatum. “Why isn’t 
disability being catered for in fashion?”

That’s a question Sophie Morgan, the disabled TV presenter who co-hosted 
Channel 4’s Paralympics coverage in Rio, would like an answer to. She welcomes 
the Teatum Jones project but questions whether it will have any major impact.

“Putting people in fashion shows with disabilities feels good on one level, 
but it still isn’t everyday life,” says Morgan, who has modelled for Stella 
McCartney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fparalympians-fight-for-disabled-fashion-uk-high-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7703e8741430a902516f317f155852fa466b4b%2F300_0_1455_3072%2F1455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paralympians%20join%20top%20label%20in%20a%20bid%20to%20break%20fashion%20barrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fparalympians-fight-for-disabled-fashion-uk-high-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paralympians%20join%20top%20label%20in%20a%20bid%20to%20break%20fashion%20barrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fparalympians-fight-for-disabled-fashion-uk-high-streets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7703e8741430a902516f317f155852fa466b4b%2F300_0_1455_3072%2F1455.jpg>
 Aimee Mullins on the catwalk for Alexander McQueen at London Fashion Week in 
1998. Photograph: Daily Mail/REX/Shutterstock 
Morgan was paralysed from the chest down in a car crash when she was 18. Now 
31, she has spent much of her adult life campaigning for the high street to try 
much harder to integrate people with disabilities. Five years ago, frustrated 
by feeling unwelcome in most mainstream clothes shops, she designed the 
“mannequal” – a wheelchair for mannequins – and set about trying to sell it to 
the UK’s biggest retailers.

“I had such a difficult time,” she recalls. “Trying to make people understand 
that there’s a reason to communicate with people like myself. I was treated 
really badly.”

Morgan said she did manage to get the mannequal accepted by Debenhams and the 
Adidas flagship store in Oxford Street, but some of the other big chains would 
not even consider using it unless they were planning a campaign specifically 
about disability. “It couldn’t just be put in and integrated because it should 
be,” she says.

Her Paralympics co-host, former basketball player Ade Adepitan, is similarly 
baffled by the fashion industry’s lack of interest in disabled people. “I’ve 
always thought it’s a shame the fashion industry doesn’t really see us as 
customers – it’s weird because the disabled pound is so strong,” he said. 
According to the Business Development Forum, 16 million people in Britain have 
a disability, with a combined purchasing power of around £20bn a year.

Cat Smith, an academic at the London College of Fashion, argues that the 
purple pound, as it’s known, is not only ignored by fashion brands but by most 
retailers and organisations. She puts it down to a wider “societal discomfort” 
with disabled people.

“I’m fairly cynical about how non-disabled people view us, but I’ve been 
disabled my whole life so I think that cynicism has merit,” she says.

One person uniquely placed to comment on fashion and disability is the 
photographer and documentary maker Giles Duley, 45, wholost both legs and an 
arm in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/feb/10/giles-duley-photography-amputee-afghanistan>
 five years ago. Duley, now working on a photography project calledLegacy of War
 <http://legacyofwar.com/>, which looks at the long-term humanitarian effects 
of conflict, used to take pictures regularly for glossy magazines such asVogue, 
Esquire and GQ. He believes the fashion industry has never been representative 
of society, but is more an “illusory vision” of what society sees as “perfect”.

“The fashion industry will always go for the common denominator,” Duley says. 
“They’ve never catered for people who are tall, obese or with disabilities. 
They just see it in terms of market value.”

He believes, however, that fashion is undergoing some radical changes that 
will see people with disabilities become more visible. “People expect it, they 
want fashion to represent society more fairly,” he says.

Teatum and Jones say they are determined it will, while acknowledging that to 
make disabled fashion more mainstream it will have to be available at 
accessible prices. Teatum says the label is about to sign a distribution deal 
with a major high-street retailer. “Definitely, we will want to get them on 
board with our disabled range,” she says.

Morgan, summing up the feelings of many in the disabled community, hopes they 
will be successful. “We get plus size, we get petite size. Why don’t we have 
seating size? I’d love that,” she says.
 