
Paid paternity leave in Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> is to 
be increased to 16 weeks to give men parity with women, under new measures 
agreed by parliament.

Fathers are currently entitled to 13 consecutive days off work, starting two 
days prior to the birth, adoption or fostering of a child. This increases to 20 
days if the family is large – with three or more children – or if the child is 
born with a disability.


Spain moves towards rightwing government after socialist quits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/spanish-socialist-leader-quits-pedro-sanchez-psoe>
Under existing arrangements, 10 weeks of maternity leave can be transferred to 
the father, an option taken up by less than 2% of men. Under the new law, 
maternity and paternity leave will not be transferable.

The proposal was put forward by the anti-austerity Podemos party on the 
grounds that both the Spanish constitution and European law prohibit 
discrimination on grounds of gender. It was passed with 173 in favour and only 
two against. However, the conservative People’s and Citizens parties both 
abstained.

The agreement is yet to be budgeted as Spain is still formally without a 
government but opponents to the law in thePeople’s party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/spanish-elections-mariano-rajoy-to-build-coalition-peoples-party>
, which is expected to form a minority government by the end of this month, 
said the measure would significantly increase costs.


The Spanish parliament agreed equal maternity and paternity leave in principle 
as far back as 2009 but governments have consistently failed to implement it, 
blaming the financial crisis. However, figures suggest that Spain’s very low 
birthrate means the cost of paternity and maternity benefits is falling.


Elena Faba de la Encarnación, a spokeswoman for the Citizens party, said her 
party had abstained because it wants paid leave to be extended to 26 weeks.

Spanish women are entitled to a year’s unpaid leave once paid maternity has 
expired. Both parents in same-sex couples have been entitled to parental leave 
since 2007.
 