
Kieran Foran celebrated his first game for Parramatta, with the Eels scoring a 
stirring 20-16NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> upset win over an 
error-riddled North Queensland.


The Cowboys on Saturday night were a shadow of the side who lifted last year’s 
trophy, producing one of their worst performances in 12 months with an 
uncharacteristically jittery outing with the ball and ill-discipline in defence.


John Hopoate and NRL enter bizarre social media tit for tat over coaching ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/john-hopoate-and-nrl-enter-bizarre-social-media-tit-for-tat-over-coaching-ban>
They completed just 63% of their sets, turned the ball over 10 times and gave 
away nine penalties.

A vocal crowd of 12,194 witnessed Foran’s first outing in club colours and, 
while he took more than an hour to take his first run with the ball, he 
finished strongly and played a hand in two of their three tries.


However, the victory was soured by a possible broken forearm to hooker Nathan 
Peats, who immediately left the field after a heavy collision with Jason 
Taumalolo in the second half.


Up 14-6 at the break courtesy of a Kenny Edwards’ try – set up by Foran – on 
the stroke of half-time, the Cowboys’ Justin O’Neill reduced the deficit to 
four off a Johnathan Thurston pass early in the second half.


But that was one of the rare times the Cowboys entered the Eels’ zone, with 
numerous attacking raids brought undone by a decisive and energetic Parramatta 
defence.


At one stage in the second half, Parramatta prop Junior Paulo rocked Thurston 
with a hit that shook Pirtek Stadium and lifted his team-mates to another gear.


A crashing try to Brad Takairangi in the 62nd minute – also assisted by Foran 
– kicked their lead out to 10 before Taumalolo crashed over in the final minute 
to set up a grandstand finish. But the Eels’ defence held on, scoring what 
could be a season-defining win.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe843c7f49bd86b003f0622f2096e99d769fc71b5%2F0_0_2216_1477%2F2216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parramatta%20Eels%20upset%20reigning%20NRL%20premiers%20North%20Queensland%20Cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parramatta%20Eels%20upset%20reigning%20NRL%20premiers%20North%20Queensland%20Cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe843c7f49bd86b003f0622f2096e99d769fc71b5%2F0_0_2216_1477%2F2216.jpg>
 Aaron Gray scored a first-half hat-trick in the Rabbitohs’ romp against the 
Knights at ANZ Stadium. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
South Sydney continued their early-season onslaught, smashing Newcastle 48-6 
at ANZ Stadium. The Knights were diabolical while the Bunnies continued to hum 
after racking up their second straight big score to be the surprise early pace 
setters after two rounds.

Even without halfback Adam Reynolds and back-rower John Sutton missing, the 
Rabbitohs crossed for nine tries including a hat-trick to Aaron Gray. 
Five-eighth Cody Walker, playing just his second NRL game and only in the side 
because of Reynolds’ (broken jaw) absence, pulled the strings for his team, 
producing pinpoint cut-out passes to set up two of Gray’s three first-half 
tries.

The 26-year-old Walker is in a two-way battle with Luke Keary to wear the No6 
jersey when Reynolds returns in five weeks and neither could be faulted after 
another emphatic victory to start 2016. It follows their thrashing of the 
Roosters 42-10 last week.

The Knights meanwhile were atrocious, completing just 20 of 30 sets, missing 
29 tackles and making 12 handling errors. They weren’t without their chances, 
getting over the line four times but were either held up or dropped it with a 
try begging.

Souths’ inspirational lock Sam Burgess was back to his rampaging best, 
producing a spectacular flick pass to Paul Carter to set up Keary after minutes 
earlier spiralling a sublime cut-out ball for Gray’s second. On top of that he 
ran for 153 metres from 21 carries and made 25 tackles.

The game was effectively over at half-time as the Rabbitohs opened up a 24-0 
lead at the break before an Alex Johnston double in the first nine minutes 
after the resumption sealed it.


The Knights are now under immense pressure after winning just four of their 
last 22 matches and questions will be asked why prop Kade Snowden and winger 
Sione Mata’utia were omitted as the young side struggled to match it with the 
Rabbitohs in every aspect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9733aaf39147c9e7f1bce13b5b57098fa3f95788%2F0_0_3000_2097%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parramatta%20Eels%20upset%20reigning%20NRL%20premiers%20North%20Queensland%20Cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parramatta%20Eels%20upset%20reigning%20NRL%20premiers%20North%20Queensland%20Cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnrl-round-two-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9733aaf39147c9e7f1bce13b5b57098fa3f95788%2F0_0_3000_2097%2F3000.jpg>
 Two tries for Josh Papalii got the Raiders back into the game against the 
Roosters after the half-time break at GIO Stadium. Photograph: Stefan 
Postles/Getty Images 
An injury-hit Canberra kept the Sydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> winless in 2016 with a 
stunning 21-20 come-from-behind win. Halfback Sam Williams kicked the winning 
field goal with less than three minutes on the clock to snatch the victory at 
GIO Stadium, their second in two games of the new NRL season.

The odds were against the Raiders, who trailed 16-6 at half-time and down to 
just 15 men. They lost veteran Shaun Fensom in the opening minute to concussion 
and their third playmaker in two games, Lachlan Croker, to a shoulder injury at 
the break.

They also were without Joey Leilua who was sinbinned for punching Dylan Napa, 
Leilua responding to being struck in the face with a swinging arm and left 
bleeding from the mouth.

The Roosters had dominated much of the game with a glut of possession, scoring 
three tries in the first half via Latrell Mitchell, Blake Ferguson and Aidan 
Guerra. But a double to enforcer Josh Papalii early in the second half got the 
Raiders back into the game.

After the Roosters hit back on the hour mark through Jayden Nikorima, skipper 
Jarrod Croker scored and converted to level it up 20-20 with eight minutes to 
go – minus Leilua.

Trent Robinson’s men had a chance to go in front, but a 40-20 to hooker Josh 
Hodgson – forced to play in the halves following young Croker’s injury – with 
less than four minutes remaining put the hosts on the front foot. Williams, 
called in to replace the injured Aidan Sezer (eye socket), kicked the winner 
moments later.

The Raiders, who beat Penrith at home last week, will be sweating on Lachlan 
Croker’s fitness, however, given the debutant had come in to replace Blake 
Austin (knee) at five-eighth.

It was the Roosters’ second successive defeat, having been smashed 42-10 by 
South Sydney in round one. They haven’t won in the nation’s capital since 2010.
 