
The biggest loser from Paul Casey’s decision to preclude himself from Ryder Cup
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/paul-casey-european-tour-golf-ryder-cup-us-pga-tour>
 inclusion is not the biennial event. Nor is it the European team. It will, 
unfortunately, be Casey himself when he eventually reflects on a career which 
promised so much, subsequently fading into oblivion before being hauled back to 
a position at least remotely resembling the Englishman’s terrific talent level.

That Casey has passed up the opportunity to mark his second coming with a role 
in such aspectacle as the Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/11/miguel-angel-jimenez-interview-golf-ryder-cup>
 will inevitably cause personal regret; be that five months, five years or five 
decades down the line. It isn’t just the next Ryder Cup he has opted out of, 
either – barring something remarkable, the 38-year-old won’t have a route back 
in. Being blunt, nor should he.

Rory McIlroy wins DP World Tour Championship and Race to Dubai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/rory-mcilroy-world-tour-championship-race-to-dubai>
For now Casey’s insistence that he is placing his family first by continuing 
to play solely on the PGA Tour is entirely his prerogative. He is a sole 
trader, he can do as he likes. Others may ask what difference the playing of 
only five events – which can now be scheduled well in advance, owing to the 
concessions granted by theEuropean Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> – actually make when 
otherwise cavorting around the United States.

Darren Clarke, Europe’s captain, is certainly deserving of bemusement after 
being left with the clear impression by Casey himself that he would do 
everything possible to play, and take on a senior role, at Hazeltine. In a 
basic professional sense, it is unfathomable that Casey wouldn’t want a place 
at the top table when individually he will continue to lag behind the likes of 
Jordan Spieth, Rory McIlroy and Jason Day.

Speaking at the weekend, Justin Rose said Casey may still feel bruised by 
being overlooked for a captain’s pick byColin Montgomerie in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/28/montgomerie-named-european-captain>
. Casey was inside the world’s top 10 at the time. But not only would the 
bearing of a five-year grudge be unhelpful to anyone, the record books show
Europe won the trophy that year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/oct/04/ryder-cup-europe>. They also 
point to Casey’s last appearance being in 2008, when he delivered one point 
during a comprehensive defeat for Nick Faldo’s disjointed and dysfunctional 
European side. Others, it should also be remembered, have suffered Ryder Cup 
rejection and lived to tell a successful, returning tale.

Casey would have brought obvious qualities next September. Experience is the 
key commodity among them, not least on the American soil that many of Clarke’s 
group may be unaccustomed to. But for months,Casey’s procrastination over what 
should be a perfectly simple affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/03/paul-casey-ryder-cup-gamble-honda-classic>
 hinted at a lack of conviction over being involved. For that purpose alone he 
should not be regarded as a loss, and any European pursuit of him would have 
been questionable. Month after month of speculation and circus over whether or 
nor Casey would commit to Europe was unhelpful in itself.

That the discussion promptly ended on Saturday was disappointing. This was the 
eve of an exciting climax to the European Tour season. Focus should have been 
fully onAndy Sullivan’s bid to wrestle the DP World Tour Championship from Rory 
McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/rory-mcilroy-world-tour-championship-race-to-dubai>
. Instead, Casey offered confirmation of his European exile partly to 
overshadow events in Dubai. Presumably, this couldn’t have waited even 48 hours.

When he chooses, Casey offers illuminating company and insight. He is smart. 
It is notable, though, that he is not widely heralded as a vital team member by 
his peers. Or, indeed, a deep loss to theRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> scene. This much is intriguing in 
itself. Casey won’t win golfing popularity contests, which isn’t troublesome in 
itself but is pertinent in a team environment.

The theory that only European players, and not necessarily members of the 
European Tour, should be eligible for Ryder Cup places isn’t valid. For all the 
biennial meeting with the US shouldn’t be a random demand to players, it would 
be nonsensical for the European Tour to abandon principles of membership 
entirely. They would be dissolving themselves in all but name.

Instead, the Tour’s new chief executive, Keith Pelley, has laid out perfectly 
reasonable playing demands. Casey has opted to remain on the outside looking 
in; that much is solely to his detriment, not that of Clarke or a competition 
which will continue to upscale without him.

DUBAI DOWNER

The precarious nature of life as a caddie has never been so readily evident as 
Sunday. Mick Doran was on the bag as Francesco Molinari finished fourth in 
Dubai, with a final round hole-in-one surely at least due in part to smart 
advice imparted to the Italian player. It later transpired that Molinari used 
the end of the European Tour season to inform Doran that he would be seeking a 
new caddie.

Doran is exceptionally experienced and will of course find new employment. To 
be fair to Molinari, it must also be pointed out that this would be a decision 
made regardless of his Middle East finish. It is only in very rare 
circumstances that such moves are taken on a whim. But still, the occasional 
riches of the caddie world are offset by the regular unknown.
 