
Swansea City’s search for a new manager took an unexpected twist when Chris 
Coleman’s wife publicly ruled him out of the job, leaving Paul Clement and Gary 
Rowett as the main contenders for the post. Coleman had emerged as the 
frontrunner to replace Bob Bradley but the 46-year-old remains committed to 
managing his country and, barring an unforeseen turn of events, will not be 
returning to club football soon.

Bob Bradley could not escape the stigma against a US coach in British football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/28/bob-bradley-swansea-city-fired-manager-premier-league>
With any move for Ryan Giggs also viewed as highly unlikely – Swansea’s 
American owners have never been sold on the idea of giving the job to the 
former Manchester United player – Clement and Rowett are now strong candidates 
to take over at the Liberty Stadium.

Coleman was at the top of Swansea’s shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/chris-coleman-ryan-giggs-swansea-city-manager-bob-bradley>
 but they have received no encouragement in pursuing the Wales manager. Swansea 
have not made an official approach to the Football Association of Wales, 
contrary to reports suggesting otherwise, and it appears as though the Premier 
League club would be wasting their time if they decided to go down that route.

Under contract with the FAW until the end of the 2018 World Cup qualification 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/chris-coleman-wales-exit-2018-world-cup-russia>
, Coleman says he has unfinished business with Wales and would need a lot of 
persuasion to believe that managing his home-town club is the right thing to do 
at this moment. Swansea, who are 19th in the Premier League, four points adrift 
of safety and looking for their third manager of the season, would probably 
represent too much of a gamble for a man who has rebuilt his reputation while 
in charge of his country and is settled in that role.

His wife, Charlotte Coleman, offered her own take via social media 
<https://twitter.com/CharLouJackson?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 earlier in the day, when she tweeted: “The Mumbles are lovely but my husband 
has said publicly after Wales we would hopefully move abroad – but good luck to 
Swansea!”

All of which turns the focus sharply on to the rest of the field, in 
particular Clement and Rowett. Clement was interviewed for the post only three 
months ago, when Swansea decided to appoint Bradley, and came across very well. 
The 44-year-old is assistant manager at Bayern Munich, where he is once again 
working with Carlo Ancelotti. He was reunited with the Italian in the summer 
after beingsacked as Derby County manager in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/08/derby-county-paul-clement-sacked>
, with the East Midlands club fifth in the table at the time.

A bright, young coach, Clement fits the Swansea prototype of old, as does 
Rowett, who is two years younger and impressed during his time as manager at 
Birmingham City and Burton Albion. Rowett washarshly sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
 as Birmingham manager just over a fortnight ago and has been the subject of 
plenty of interest in the Championship. He is holding out for the right 
opportunity, however, and it is understood that he would be receptive to an 
approach from Swansea. As yet there has been no contact, but that may well 
change over the coming days.

Swansea are keen to make an appointment as soon as possible to bring some 
stability to the club. Alan Curtis, the first-team coach, and Paul Williams, 
the assistant manager, will be in the dugout for Saturday’s home match against 
Bournemouth. Swansea then travel to Crystal Palace three days later for another 
crunch game and, ideally, the Welsh club will have a new manager in place for 
that fixture.

Curtis, who found himself in exactly the same position this time last year 
after Garry Monk was sacked as manager, described Swansea’s predicament as the 
worst position they have found themselves in during their six seasons in the 
Premier League. He also believes that the managerial focus should be purely on 
the short-term. “I think it’s immediate,” Curtis said. “Somebody has got to get 
us out of trouble.”

Bradley lasted only 85 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
 but Curtis was full of praise for the American. “Of all the managers I have 
worked under I don’t think anybody has given as much time and commitment as 
Bob,” he said. “He would be there from 7 o’clock in the morning until sometimes 
7 o’clock in the evening. It’s just unfortunate that the results could not come 
and he was always going to be tarnished with being an American with American 
owners.”
 