
Just under a year ago, a week after reaching the last 16 of the Europa League 
at the expense of Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/tottenham-fiorentina-europa-league-match-report>
, belief rippled through Fiorentina after they pulled off an even better result,
winning the first leg of their Coppa Italia semi-final 2-1 at Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/05/juventus-fiorentina-italian-cup-match-report-mohamed-salah>
. From flirting with the idea of ending their trophy drought, Fiorentina were 
daring to think about meeting the parents.

But wait. Hold on a minute. Lurking round the corner was a reminder about the 
danger of looking too far into the future and Fiorentina were unable to regain 
their poise afterJuventus won the second leg 3-0 in Florence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/07/juventus-fiorentina-coppa-italia-report>
.Sevilla thumped them 5-0 on aggregate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/14/fiorentina-sevilla-europa-league-semi-final-match-report>
 in the last four of the Europa League, they missed out on a Champions League 
place after a sequence of poor league results, tiring badly during the season’s 
final weeks, and that disappointment filtered through to the summer whenthey 
fired Vincenzo Montella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/08/fiorentina-sack-vincenzo-montella-lack-of-respect>
 over a dispute about finances and sold several key players.

Mauricio Pochettino hands new role to Tottenham coach John McDermott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/tottenham-coach-john-mcdermott-mauricio-pochettino>
The side who host Tottenham in the first leg of their Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> last-32 tie on 
Thursday will have a very different look to the one that beat them at this 
stage of the competition last year.

Not that Fiorentina should be taken lightly. For all that Mauricio Pochettino 
has transformed Tottenham from callow pretenders to authentic title contenders 
in the past 12 months, he will be wary of the threat posed byLa Viola, who are 
third in Serie A despite their restrictive budget. Seemingly tasked with making 
sure the walls were not going to cave in after replacing Montella,Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> have never looked like 
crumbling under Paulo Sousa. Instead, it was not long before they were proudly 
showing off their shiny new paint job to the rest of Serie A. They still hogged 
possession, but they were using the ball more incisively.

Yet it has not been hard for Sousa to understand why Montella was so irked by 
the tools at his disposal. Supporters are unhappy with the board’s low 
investment in new players and Sousa has occasionally sounded mutinous about the 
level of backing he receives in the transfer market, particularly when a move 
for the River Plate defender Emanuel Mammana fell through last month and 
Fiorentina’s defensive deficiencies were exposed when they lost to Milan 
without Gonzalo Rodríguez, who was serving a one-match suspension. The response 
was to sign Yohan Benalouane, who was out of favour at Leicester City.

Their frugal approach explains why expectations were low at the start of the 
season. Stefan Savic, Mario Gomez, Joaquín, Juan Vargas and Alberto Aquilani 
were sold or loaned out, Mohamed Salah decided to join Roma after aproductive 
loan spell with Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/12/mohamed-salah-fiorentina-cuadrado-chelsea-roma-europa-league>
 last season and the reaction was mixed when Sousa replaced Montella, who left 
after losing patience with what he perceived as the club’s lack of ambition.

Although Sousa arrived after winning domestic titles over the past two years 
with Maccabi Tel Aviv and Basel, those achievements were not enough to erase 
doubts that he was the right man to manage a club who were about to cut their 
wage bill. Dominating with the two biggest clubs in Israel and Switzerland was 
hardly conclusive proof Sousa was ready for Italian football, and the
Portuguese’s Juventus past meant that he was viewed suspiciously by supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/28/serie-a-hunchback-fiorentina-judgement-luck>
.

By the end of September, however, Fiorentina were top of Serie A for the first 
time since they had Gabriel Batistuta and Edmundo up front in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/28/serie-a-hunchback-fiorentina-judgement-luck>
, Sousa’s canny tactics, some astute work in the transfer market and Juventus’s 
slow start raising hopes of a first Scudetto since 1969. Nikola Kalinic, the 
former Blackburn Rovers striker, has scored 11 goals since signing from Dnipro 
Dnipropetrovsk. Josip Ilicic, the Slovenian attacker, has excelled, scoring 12 
goals. The experienced Borja Valero offers midfield nous and there is a chance 
Milan Badelj could return against Tottenham.

Badelj has not played since the 3-1 defeat by Lazio on 9 January and a side 
with a heavy emphasis on creativity has missed his snap in midfield. 
Inevitably, Juventus have recovered. Fiorentina have had to lower their sights 
now they are eight points behind the resurgent champions, but their form is 
improving after they stuttered in January. Although Mario Suárez left for 
Watford in the transfer window, the Porto winger Christian Tello has arrived on 
loan and Mauro Zárate is an unpredictable option from the bench after joining 
from West Ham United. Zárate scored a brilliant, curling winner in the 90th 
minute against Carpi on 3 February.

Fiorentina left it late again last Sunday and, hours after Tottenham ignited 
their title challenge withtheir win over Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/manchester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, there were jubilant scenes at the Stadio Artemio Franchi whenKhouma Babacar 
shattered the resistance of Internazionale’s 10 men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/fiorentina-beat-internazionale-milan-beat-genoa-serie-a>
 by bundling in the winner that helped Sousa’s side strike a potentially 
decisive blow in the race to qualify for the Champions League. Without a major 
trophy since their Coppa Italia triumph in 2001, Fiorentina are daring to dream 
once more.
 