
England’s last experiment with rugby league may have blown up in their faces 
when Sam Burgessreturned to the 13-man game  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/sam-burgess-bath-rugby-union-league>
after the disastrous World Cup last year but one of Eddie Jones’s lieutenants 
is convinced that union can learn a lot from the other code.

Jones’s England training squad are preparing in Brighton for two days before 
their four-match Test programme this autumn. But a year on from the Australian 
masterminding thebiggest shock in World Cup history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 when his Japan team beat the Springboks a couple of miles away at the Amex 
Stadium, England’s coaches are not on the south coast to enjoy this week’s 
sunny weather.

Rugby union: talking points from the weekend's Premiership action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/03/rugby-union-talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-action>
Paul Gustard, the England defence coach, has spent time since the 3-0 Test 
series win in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
 visiting rugby league clubs and he believes the England rugby union side can 
learn a lot from other sports.

He said: “I’ve visited New Zealand Warriors, Wigan and Warrington during the 
summer and picked up a lot about their defensive systems. We missed over 80 
tackles in the three Tests in Australia and in the third Test we were off the 
pace. I was in a dark place after that game because we didn’t perform 
adequately enough.

“That may seem like a strange thing after beating Australia but the game at 
this level is about small margins and, as coaches, we have to keep improving. 
That is Eddie’s mantra. He is always saying we have to get better. That’s not 
unfair criticism. The second Test was a true representation of where we are at 
but the third was not.

“Other sports can teach us a lot. That’s why we have turned to judo and rugby 
league, to learn new skills. We haven’t beaten South Africa since 2006 and no 
one in this squad has beaten the Springboks. We’re aware of that and we have to 
get better. They may be a side in transition but South Africa are hardened to 
Test rugby and they’ll come here with a lot of experience.”

England play South Africa on 12 November and the first of the autumn Tests 
will be followed by matches against Fiji, Argentina and Australia on successive 
weekends. Meanwhile, the squad is putting bodies on the line in Brighton to 
prepare for a demanding month.

Gloucester director David Humphreys condemns collapse against Bath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/gloucester-bath-collapse-david-humphreys>
On Monday members of the 37-man training squad took part in judo sessions with 
the GB Olympic coaches JP Bell and Kate Howey and the training session on 
Tuesday promises to be brutal. Gustard and the forwards coach, Steve Borthwick, 
have been impressed by the contribution so far from Leicester’s Mike Williams 
and Sam Jones of Wasps who are vying for the injured James Haskell’s No7 shirt 
this autumn.

Gustard said: “Sam Jones and Mike are very physical and confrontational and 
Sam is exceptionally explosive.”

Jones is also considering moving Maro Itoje from the second row to the 
open-side. All three players can expect to be called into the final squad for 
the game against South Africa which is named on 26 October. Four days later 
England will fly off to Portugal for warm-weather training. One man who 
sidestepped the judo session yesterday was Owen Farrell, whose back problem has 
sidelined him this season. The fly-half could return to club action this 
weekend when his Saracens side meet Premiership leaders Wasps.
 