
Paul Sturrock opens the door to the manager’s office at Yeovil Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/yeoviltown> and there is a strong smell 
of emulsion. Everything seems green at Huish Park but the wall behind 
Sturrock’s desk has recently been painted orange as a nod of respect to Dundee 
United, the club he represented with such distinction across four decades.

“I normally have more of my teams on the wall, but this is the one I support,” 
Sturrock says. “Sixteen years as a player [from 1974], five years as a coach 
and, stupidly, I took the manager’s job to keep them up for two and a half 
years. Normally this wall [to the left] would be green, light blue, dark blue, 
red – like a stick of rock.”

That eclectic colour scheme, Sturrock explains, is because he feels an 
emotional attachment to the clubs he has worked for over the years – a list 
that also includes St Johnstone, Plymouth Argyle, Southampton, Sheffield 
Wednesday, Swindon Town, Southend United and now Yeovil.

It is hard to think of another manager who would call a decorator in to do 
something similar, but then so much about Sturrock seems unique. The 
58-year-old is the quizmaster at The White Hart Hotel, his local pub in the 
village of Menheniot, in Cornwall, on a Saturday night and on Sunday he plays 
in the pool league. In the past he has also combined life in the dugout with 
working as a restaurant critic.

“Plymouth twice, I did a wee bit at Southend for the local paper and Swindon 
for a wee while as well. This ties in with my love of food. It was quite 
enjoyable going around, even though you weren’t critiquing, [sometimes] people 
thought you were!” Sturrock says with a chuckle.

“Over the years I’ve just started to enjoy cooking; it’s something I like 
doing for people. I struggle with the baking, I must admit. I’m having a 
nightmare with muffins at the minute, just trying to get them totally right. 
Muffins are hard, actually. Anyway, that’s another story.”

During an enjoyable hour in Sturrock’s company, plenty of tales are told, many 
of them humorous and one or two emotive, in particular the day when he was 
chatting with some Plymouth supporters at Home Park and realised that the cup 
of tea in his hand was shaking. “I knew there was something wrong,” Sturrock 
says. “Two days later I spoke to the club doctor and he sent me to a 
specialist. They found out I had the start of Parkinson’s.”

Sturrock was only 42 at the time. “I made a conscious decision I wouldn’t tell 
anybody, because I did feel it would affect my career. And I do feel since I’ve 
come out with it I’ve maybe lost several jobs because of it. But for a number 
of years the only people who knew in football were the club doctors who were 
tied to the oath and my two trusted henchmen, Kevin Summerfield and John 
Blackley [his backroom staff].”

It was 2008 when Sturrock, in his second spell as Plymouth manager, decided he 
needed to go public. “The tablets have done a fantastic masking job, but the 
flick in my left leg … it was becoming pretty obvious I had something. I was 
making out to people I had achilles trouble as a player. Also, just at that 
time, there was a strength change in my tablets which I thought was going to 
affect me a wee bit and I did feel that I did not want anyone surmising about 
my illness.”

Sturrock had a health scare in 1995, when he was managing St Johnstone and 
collapsed in the dugout after he hyperventilated, but the news that he was 
suffering from Parkinson’s, a degenerative disease that is much more common in 
people over the age of 65, came as a huge shock to many.

The one thing Sturrock has never wanted, he says, is sympathy. “The flick on 
my left leg will never go away and I do tire sometimes late at night, but I 
know now how to monitor my day so that I have enough energy for everything that 
I’ve got to do as a football manager. And, at the end of the day, it doesn’t 
affect this job, because this is clear as a bell,” Sturrock says, pointing to 
his head.

After spending two years in the wilderness, in part because of his reluctance 
to leave the south-west, Sturrock found himself in the strange position this 
month of taking two jobs in the space of a week. He started in an advisory role 
at Torquay United but walked out only four days later. The following afternoon 
he was unveiled as Gary Johnson’s replacement at Yeovil. “I had no contract at 
Torquay so when this job came along it was a no-brainer,” Sturrock says.

A slightly surreal week came to an almost inevitable end when Yeovil drew with 
Notts County and were relegated fromLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> only 48 hours after 
Sturrock had introduced himself to the players. “In my mind when I got here, I 
was relegated. I don’t think there was any other way of looking at it. It would 
have taken a damn miracle,” Sturrock says.

His track record suggests that he may well be the man to get Yeovil moving in 
the right direction again after the club slipped from the Championship to 
League Two in the space of two years. Sturrock has won promotion five times as 
a manager and the fact that the Glovers have already beaten Sheffield United 
and Swindon, two play-off candidates, under his watch hints at a brighter 
future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpaul-sturrock-yeovil-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430246312408%2Fb5b322b0-9395-4ac7-86e9-abf41be80df3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Sturrock%20looks%20to%20paint%20a%20brighter%20future%20for%20Yeovil%20after%20wilderness%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpaul-sturrock-yeovil-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Sturrock%20looks%20to%20paint%20a%20brighter%20future%20for%20Yeovil%20after%20wilderness%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpaul-sturrock-yeovil-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430246312408%2Fb5b322b0-9395-4ac7-86e9-abf41be80df3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Paul Sturrock exhorts his players at Yeovil’s training ground. The relegated 
side’s results have already improved since his arrival. Photograph: Adam 
Gray/SWNS 
Proud of his past achievements as a player and a manager, Sturrock picks up 
the DVD sitting on his desk. It is Dundee United’s famous win over Barcelona at 
the Camp Nou in the second leg of their Uefa Cup quarter-final in 1987 and has 
already been viewed on the Yeovil team coach.

“I did the tactics for the game against Swindon very much like what we did 
against Barcelona away from home. So they watched it on the bus going to the 
game, and then I mentioned it in the team talk. Yes, it was a bit of fun 
showing me playing in the game, but I said the serious part is: ‘Look at the 
organisation of that team and the way we played,’ and I think they took it on 
board.”

Sturrock talks with great fondness of his playing days at Dundee United, for 
whom he scored 171 goals in 576 games, and tells a lovely story about returning 
to Tannadice in November with four friends from Cornwall. They had been away on 
a golfing weekend in Scotland when Sturrock accepted an invitation to visit the 
club he helped to win the title in 1983. After speaking in several of the 
lounges before the game, Sturrock was running late for the match and had to get 
to the other side of the ground to return to his seat. He ended up walking 
around the side of the pitch and the standing ovation that followed is 
something that will never leave him.

“My four mates said they were crying, the tears were coming down my face as 
well. It was the best moment ever. It was like a Mexican wave, one boy 
recognised me and it went like wildfire all the way round. Incredible,” 
Sturrock says, smiling. “It’s a bit of a shame with the team now, because the 
players were going: ‘What’s all this clapping for?’ Half of them didn’t know me 
from Adam. They just saw this fat bastard walking along the track waving at 
everybody, thinking: ‘Who the fuck’s he?’”

Sturrock goes on to reveal that he is planning on bringing out an 
autobiography later in the year and it is safe to say that it will not be short 
of material. Never mind all his experiences on the pitch and in the dugout, 
this is a man who once made two St Johnstone players have a go at roofing for 
the day – “If you go on YouTube you’ll see the boys” – and two years ago 
travelled to Wembley with Southend fans after politely turning down an offer to 
lead the team out for the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy final a fortnight after he 
had been sacked.

“I got on a supporter bus and finished up at a pub next to Wembley with 4,000 
Southend supporters. I was mobbed. Drink everywhere. I had a kilt on, full 
regalia, Dundee United colours, and I had a fantastic day until I watched the 
game, which was my saddest moment in football,” Sturrock says. “I thought it 
should have been me there managing the team.”

Sturrock’s one shot at the Premier League in England ended prematurely. 
Appointed Southampton manager in March 2004, at a time when his stock was high 
after transforming Plymouth’s fortunes, Sturrock lasted only five and a half 
months at St Mary’s. He won five, drew two and lost six of his 13 games in 
charge but never saw eye to eye with Rupert Lowe, the Southampton chairman at 
the time. “People seem to think I got sacked, I never. It was mutual,” Sturrock 
says. “I had no qualms about leaving because I didn’t like working for the man.”

Management, Sturrock says, has been a “rollercoaster of a time” but Yeovil 
already feels like it could be a good fit on and off the field. He is only an 
hour and 50 minutes from his adopted home – “Devon and Cornwall is my type of 
living,mañana is the word they use down there” – which means that he has some 
valuable “thinking time” in the car when he is not staying over in Yeovil and 
he can also keep his job at the White Hart Hotel. “I can probably get down in 
time to get a quiz done on a Saturday night after a home game,” Sturrock says.

As for his health, Sturrock is doing much more than soldiering on. “The 
worrying aspect for me is people like Muhammad Ali and Michael J Fox, who have 
got a serious Parkinson’s ailment; the tablets are not helping them any longer. 
And that’s what people surmise that it looks like with everybody – which is 
totally untrue,” he says.

“There’s lots of people working out there with this illness. You’ve just got 
to be positive in your approach. Some days I feel hellish but you get up in the 
morning and as soon as you’re on your feet, you get going. One day it will win. 
But I can tell you now, I’m going to put up a hell of a battle.”
 