
Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola has told the club’s fans it is time to 
move on after the supporters again booed the Champions League anthem before 
kick-off againstBorussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> on Wednesday 
night in continuing protest at the governing body Uefa, with whom they have 
various issues.

Agüero hat-trick inspires Manchester City against Borussia Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report>
Guardiola, who won the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> twice as coach of 
Barcelona and describes the competition as “beautiful”, now wants City 
followers to get fully behind the challenge.

The Spaniard said: “I was not here for what happened but they must forget what 
happened in the past. We have to be so proud to play in this competition. I am 
going to work until the last moment to convince the people to come here to join 
us to see the Champions League games. Our players deserve the stadium 
completely full and hopefully against Barcelona and Celtic it is going to 
happen.”

City, who reached the semi-finals last season, are playing in the group stage 
for a sixth successive season but their fans’ enthusiasm has remained lukewarm.

The coach’s comments came in light of the fact that the 30,270 attendance at 
the Etihad Stadium could only partly be put down to the rearrangement of the 
Group C fixture at short noticeafter Tuesday’s postponement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
, and was well below the 55,000 capacity.

Manchester City fans should carry on booing but will Sheikh Mansour join in? | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/23/manchester-city-booing-uefa-sheikh-mansour>
Sergio Agüero’s hat-trick in his team’s 4-0 stroll  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report>
was the most positive aspect on the night and Guardiola was fulsome in his 
praise. “Sergio is one of the best, no doubts about that. He has a special 
quality in the box. He’s a special player,” he said. “I never won before 
against this coach and he always creates a lot of problems for my team but we 
created a really good performance, except for 10-15 minutes in the first half.”

Agüero was following up his treble against Steaua Bucharest in the play-off 
round and City have now won seven in succession since Guardiola took charge in 
the summer while Agüero – who will miss the next two matches as he completes a 
domestic suspension – has scored nine in just five appearances.

Kelechi Iheanacho grabbed the other goal late on as City established 
themselves as the side most likely to challenge competition favourites 
Barcelona for the top spot in the group.

Agüero put City ahead after nine minutes and added a second from the penalty 
spot after the impressive debutant Ilkay Gundogan was fouled. He completed his 
treble 12 minutes from time before Iheanacho scored the fourth in injury time.

André Schubert, the Mönchengladbach coach, said: “We had to get everything 
right, be very courageous, attack high up with high intensity. We didn’t manage 
to do that.”
 