
A new study provides the first evidence of a link between neonicotinoid 
pesticides and escalating honeybee colony losses on a landscape level.

The study found the increased use of a pesticide, which is linked to causing 
serious harm in bees worldwide, as a seed treatment on oilseed rape in England 
and Wales over an 11 year period correlated with higher bee mortality during 
that time.

The research, published in Nature scientific reports 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep12574> on Thursday, combined large-scale 
pesticide usage and yield observations from oilseed rape with data on honeybee 
loses between 2000 and 2010.

The total area of land planted with oil seed rape in England and Wales more 
than doubled from 293, 378 hectares (724,952 acres) to 602,270 hectares over 
that time and the number of seeds treated with the imidacloprid pesticide 
increased from less than 1% of the area planted in 2000 to more than 75% of the 
area planted with oilseed rape by 2010.

Comparing the pesticide usage data with honeybee colony losses, scientists led 
by Giles Budge at the Food and Environment Research Agency (Fera) in York - a 
former government agency that wasoutsourced to the private sector earlier this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/12/capitas-takeover-science-agency-fera-public-interest-research-risk-say-labour>
 - and US entomology professor Keith Delaplane at the University of Georgia, 
found a link between imidacloprid usage and honeybee colony losses. Losses 
varied between regions and low spring temperatures were also linked to higher 
bee losses in Wales.

The study, also found that famers who used seed pesticide treatments reduced 
the number of applications of other insecticides, but that the long-term 
benefits of treating oil seed rape seeds with imidacloprid on crop yields were 
negligible.

The honeybee is the most important commercial pollinator, globally responsible 
for pollinating at least 90% of commercial crops. They are the most frequent 
flower visitor to oilseed rape. The report’s authors said: “As long as acute 
toxins remain the basis of agricultural pest control practices, society will be 
forced to weigh the benefits of pesticides against their collateral damage. 
Nowhere is this tension more evident than in the system with the world’s most 
widely used insecticide, the world’s most widely used managed pollinator and 
Europe’s most widely grown mass flowering crop.”

The authors call for more large-scale field-based research to determine the 
impacts on pollinators of the use of a newer generation of neonicotinoids.

The UK government has always maintained that neonicotinoid pesticides do not 
threaten bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/04/will-the-uks-pollinator-strategy-be-enough-to-stop-bee-decline>
. It has laid the blame for high honeybee losses on theparasitic varroa mite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/07/honey-bees-virus-varrora-destructor-mites>
 which spreads viruses, and wet summers that prevent bees from foraging.

A European-wide two year ban on a number of pesticides linked to bee deaths 
cameinto force in December 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bees-european-neonicotinoids-ban>
. Last month, the UK governmenttemporarily overturned the ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/23/uk-suspends-ban-pesticides-linked-serious-harm-bees>
 on two pesticides on about 5% of England’s oilseed rape crop. The Department 
for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said the emergency 
authorisation did not apply to imidacloprid. It added that the use of this 
particular pesticide had fallen dramatically in the UK, down from 43,900 kilos 
in 2005 to just 7,250 kilos in 2013.

A Defra spokesperson said: “This paper provides evidence that neonicotinoid 
seed treatments can reduce the need for more pesticide use on crops. 
Large-scale field studies are needed to fully understand their effects on the 
environment. The government makes decisions on pesticides based on the best 
available scientific evidence.”

It added: “The EU commission has now begun a review of the science relating to 
neonicotinoids and bees, and the UK will contribute fully to this review.”

Paul de Zylva, senior nature campaigner at Friends of the Earth said the Fera 
study added to the growing evidence showing the harm neonicotinoid pesticides 
do to pollinators. “The pesticide industry can’t continue to maintain that 
there is no effect of their products on honey bees and wild bumblebees and 
solitary bees,” he said.

But Julian Little, a spokesman for Bayer Cropscience, manufacturer of 
imidacloprid, said the study’s findings were “at odds with several other field 
studies which showed no impact on honeybees under properly controlled testing”.
 