
Unpublished field trials by pesticide manufacturers show their products cause 
serious harm to honeybees at high levels, leading to calls from senior 
scientists for the companies to end the secrecy which cloaks much of their 
research.

The research, conducted by Syngenta and Bayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bayer> on their neonicotinoid 
insecticides, were submitted to the US Environmental Protection Agency and 
obtained by Greenpeace after a freedom of information request.

Neonicotinoids are the world’s most widely used insecticides and there is 
clear scientific evidence that they harm bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
 at the levels found in fields, though only a little to date showing the 
pesticides harm the overall performance of colonies. Neonicotinoids werebanned 
from use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
 on flowering crops in the EU in 2013, despite UK opposition.

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> and other insects are 
vital for pollinating three-quarters of the world’s food crops but have been in 
significant decline, due to the loss of flower-rich habitats, disease and the 
use of pesticides.

The newly revealed studies show Syngenta’s thiamethoxam and Bayer’s 
clothianidin seriously harmed colonies at high doses, but did not find 
significant effects below concentrations of 50 parts per billion (ppb) and 
40ppb respectively. Such levels can sometimes be found in fields but 
concentrations are usually below 10ppb.

However, scientists said all such research should be made public. “Given all 
the debate about this subject, it is hard to see why the companies don’t make 
these kinds of studies available,” said Prof Dave Goulson, at the University of 
Sussex. “It does seem a little shady to do this kind of field study - the very 
studies the companies say are the most important ones - and then not tell 
people what they find.”

Prof Christian Krupke, at Purdue University in Indiana, said: “Bayer and 
Syngenta’s commitment to pollinator health should include publishing these 
data. This work presents a rich dataset that could greatly benefit the many 
publicly funded scientists examining the issue worldwide, including avoiding 
costly and unnecessary duplication of research.”

Ben Stewart, at Greenpeace, said: “If Bayer and Syngenta cared about the 
future of our pollinators, they would have made the findings public. Instead, 
they kept quiet about them for months and carried on downplaying nearly every 
study that questioned the safety of their products. It’s time for these 
companies to come clean about what they really know.”

Syngenta had told Greenpeace in August that “none of the studies Syngenta has 
undertaken or commissioned for use by regulatory agencies have shown damages to 
the health of bee colonies”. Goulson said: “That clearly contradicts their own 
study.”

Scientists also noted that the companies have been previously been critical of 
the research methods they themselves used in the new studies, in which bees 
live in fields but are fed sucrose dosed with neonicotinoids.

In April 2016, in response to an independent study, Syngenta said: “It is 
important to note that the colony studies were conducted by directly feeding 
colonies with spiked sucrose, which is not representative of normal field 
conditions.”

In 2014, commenting on another independent study, Bayer told the Guardian the 
bees “are essentially force-fed relatively high levels of the pesticide in 
sugar solutions, rather than allowing them to forage on plants treated with” 
pesticide.

“If someone had done this type of study and found harm at more realistic 
levels, the industry would have immediately dismissed it as a rubbish study 
because it was not what happens naturally to bees,” said Goulson. “So it is 
interesting that they are doing those kinds of studies themselves and then 
keeping them quiet.”

Utz Klages, a spokesman for Bayer, said: “The study [Bayer] conducted is an 
artificial feeding study that intentionally exaggerates the exposure potential 
because it is designed to calculate a ‘no-effect’ concentration for 
clothianidin. Although the colony was artificially provided with a spiked sugar 
solution, the bees were allowed to forage freely in the environment, so there 
is less stress - which can be a contributing variable - than if they were 
completely confined to cages. Based on these results, we believe the data 
support the establishment of a no-effect concentration of 20ppb for 
clothianidin.”

He said a public presentation would be made at the International Congress of 
Entomology next week in which the new results would be discussed.

Two of the world's top three insecticides harm bumblebees – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/28/two-worlds-top-three-leading-insecticides-harm-bees-study-shows>
A spokesman for Syngenta said: “A sucrose-based mechanism was used on the 
basis that it was required to expose bees artificially to thiamethoxam to 
determine what actual level of residue would exert a toxic effect.”

Given the lower concentration usually found in fields, he said: “The reported 
‘no adverse effect level’ of 50ppb indicates that honey bee colonies are at low 
risk from exposure to thiamethoxam in pollen and nectar of seed treated crops. 
This research is already in the process of being published in a forthcoming 
journal and is clearly already publicly available through the FOI process in 
the US.”

Matt Shardlow, chief executive of conservation charity Buglife, said: “These 
studies may not show an impact on honeybee health [at low levels], but then the 
studies are not realistic. The bees were not exposed to the neonics that we 
know are in planting dust, water drunk by bees and wildflowers, wherever 
neonics are used as seed treatments. This secret evidence highlights the 
profound weakness of regulatory tests.”

Researchers also note that pollinators in real environments are continually 
exposed to cocktails of many pesticides, rather than single chemicals for 
relatively short periods as in regulatory tests.
 