
Peterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United have 
sacked their manager, Dave Robertson, after Saturday’s 2-1 defeat away to 
Southend on Saturday.

Robertson, the 41-year-old former Royal Marine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/03/peterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion>
, was appointed by the club in May, but has only managed a solitary League One 
win this season. He therefore picks up the unwanted accolade of being the first 
manager in the English Football League to be sacked this season.

In an official statement on the club website 
<http://www.theposh.com/news/article/statement-2672820.aspx>, the Peterborough 
chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, said: “I would personally like to thank David for 
stepping in last season when the club was at a low point after the previous 
manager’s departure. He steadied the ship, put a smile on everyone’s faces 
again and worked tirelessly each day to improve the clubs fortunes on the pitch.

Camera-happy Southend cut short Dave Robertson’s quest to make his name
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/sep/06/southend-dave-robertson-peterborough-phil-brown>
“After the season had finished, I felt it fair to give David a proper shot and 
appointed him first team manager on a full time basis with the remit to get our 
young squad ready and prepared for a proper promotion challenge this season 
whilst attempting to play the kind of football our fans have become accustomed 
to over the last 8 or 9 years.

“Unfortunately after yesterday’s result and the manner of defeat, I felt it 
was time to take action and make a change as it had become plain to see our 
young squad was under-performing and playing nowhere near their potential. Make 
no mistake, our players must also shoulder responsibility for this awful start 
to the season which has now led to a great person losing their job.”

Peterborough are currently 20th in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, one place above the 
relegation zone on goal difference. The remainder of the current coaching staff 
will prepare the team for the league match at Oldham next Saturday.
 