
Phil Neville looks set to join Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> as their assistant manager. 
Although he has denied any deal has been signed, the former Manchester United 
and Everton player is expected to work for Peter Lim’s project with the Spanish 
club, the Singaporian billionaire having bought them last year before Nuno, the 
club’s Portuguese coach, guided them to a Champions League return.

Manchester United yet to make formal approach for Everton’s Seamus Coleman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/28/manchester-united-seamus-coleman-everton-no-formal-approach>
Lim has a connection with Neville through the Northern Premier League side 
Salford City. Neville, along with his former Manchester United team-mates Ryan 
Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and brother Gary, are the joint owner of 
Salford along with Lim, who bought a 50% stake in the club last year.

Neville has been working as a pundit for the BBC since his coaching spell at 
United came to an abrupt end in May last year. The 38-year-old worked for David 
Moyes at Old Trafford but was not retained when Louis van Gaal became the 
manager. Valencia stated on their websiteon Sunday: “Valencia are pleased to 
announce the appointment of Phil Neville as assistant manager of the first 
team, joining the coaching staff headed by Nuno Espírito Santo. Neville offers 
a wealth of footballing knowledge to a club in constant growth.”

Nuno, who was appointed as Valencia coach last summer, said: “Phil Neville has 
great experience at the top level of competition but above all he has knowledge 
and values that fit perfectly with our team and our club. He has always been a 
team player, and our philosophy is based on teamwork. We are – and want to 
continue to be – a group. I am convinced he is going to help us a lot.”

Neville will replace Ian Cathro, the highly rated Scot who has agreed in 
principle to work for Steve McClaren as the assistant manager at Newcastle 
United.

Last season Nuno and Cathro guided Valencia to fourth in La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> and a qualification spot 
for the Champions League. Neville is set to join an ambitious club who have 
spent significant sums in the transfer market since Lim’s arrival.

Mother of Leicester winger Marc Albrighton’s partner killed in Tunisia massacre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/28/leicester-marc-albrighton-partner-mother-tunisia-massacre>
Neville won 59 caps for England during a playing career that included numerous 
trophies with Manchester United. Under Sir Alex Ferguson, Neville, who played 
in defence and occasionally midfield, won six Premier League titles, three FA 
Cups and a European Cup.

After leaving Old Trafford in 2005 he moved to Everton where he spent eight 
years playing for Moyes and became the club captain.

Neville made his debut as a BBC co-commentator at last year’s World Cup and 
received a lot of criticism following England’s opening match against Italy.
 