
Minnesota’s governor on Friday ordered the broadest restrictions yet in a US 
state on the use ofagricultural pesticides that have been blamed for hurting 
bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/high-pesticide-levels-on-oilseed-crops-harm-wild-bees-scientists-prove>
, fuelling concerns that farmers there will not be able to protect crops from 
insects.

Governor Mark Dayton issued an executive order that requires farmers to verify 
they face “an imminent threat of significant crop loss” before using the 
chemicals, called neonicotinoids.

High pesticide levels on oilseed rape crops harm wild bees, scientists prove
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/high-pesticide-levels-on-oilseed-crops-harm-wild-bees-scientists-prove>
Details of how farmers would prove their need have not yet been determined. 

Minnesota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota>, the country’s 
third-largest soybean producer, carried out a special review of neonicotinoids 
that prompted the new limits, the first US state to do so.

Honey bees have been in serious decline in the US for three decades, 
threatening billions of dollars in crops. In recent years, their death rate has 
become economically unsustainable, according to the government.

A survey of more than 20,000 honey beekeepers conducted by the Department of 
Agriculture and released in May showed there were 2.59 million or 8% fewer 
honey bee colonies on 1 January, 2016 than the 2.82 million a year earlier for 
beekeeper operations with five or more colonies.

Honey bees pollinate plants that produce about a quarter of the food consumed 
by Americans.

Leading insecticide cuts bee sperm by almost 40%, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
“Minnesota just became the national leader in protecting pollinators,” said 
Lex Horan, an organizer forPesticide Action Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
, a US activist group.

Restrictions on neonicotinoids come two years after the European Union limited 
use of the chemicals, made and sold by companies including Bayer CropScience 
and Syngenta, after research pointed to the risks for bees.

Neonicotinoids are used worldwide in a range of crops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
 and have been shown in lab-based studies to be harmful to certain species of 
bee, notably commercial honeybees and bumblebees.

The chemicals can be sprayed on crops to fight insects, but it is more common 
for US farmers to plant seeds treated with neonicotinoids to keep pests, such 
as aphids, off crops.

State officials said they want Minnesota lawmakers to grant them the authority 
to regulate the sale and use of such seeds, a power that now lies with the US 
Environmental Protection Agency.

Neonicotinoids: new warning on pesticide harm to bees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
Removing the pesticides would leave farmers more dependent on a smaller number 
of chemicals to control bugs, said Seth Naeve, an extension soybean agronomist 
for the University of Minnesota, thereby making it more likely that pests would 
develop resistance to those chemicals.

“We’re concerned about losing tools and a lack of flexibility to address 
issues,” said David Kee, director of research for Minnesota Soybean Growers 
Association.

Farmers said they hoped other US states would not follow Minnesota’s lead. 

Paul Schlegel, director of environment and energy policy for the American Farm 
Bureau Federation, said the governor was “restricting the ability of farmers to 
use all the tools the EPA has said they can use”.


“I don’t think that we’re aware of any other state that’s going to start 
taking away tools from farmers,” Schlegel said.
 