
Whitehall’s spending watchdog has criticised government plans to let patients 
see GPs every day of the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/22/secret-documents-reveal-official-concerns-over-seven-day-nhs-plans>
 as poorly planned and likely to cost much more than weekday family doctor 
services.

In a new report, the National Audit Office said that Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> has set targets for rolling 
out the scheme – a key Conservative pledge – without evaluating the cost or 
working out where the money for it would come from.

Seven-day NHS plan puts weekday surgeries at risk, warns top GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/01/seven-day-nhs-plan-puts-weekday-surgeries-at-risk-warns-top-gp>
Giving patients access to GPs from 8am to 8pm across the entire week by 2020 
was championed by David Cameron while he was prime minister.Ministers also 
pledged to increase the number of GPs in England by 5,000 by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/24/doubt-lingers-over-jeremy-hunts-pledge-5000-new-gps>
 – promises that have been backed by Hunt and Theresa May .

However, auditors who analysed the pledges found that the minimum additional 
capacity required by the new commitment equates to £230 per appointment hour at 
weekends and in the evening for every 1,000 registered patients. In GPs’ core 
contracted hours, from 8am to 6.30pm, the cost is just £154.

Hunt and the prime minister are under increasing pressure regarding serious 
problems within frontline services this winter. Ministers have been forced to 
denyclaims by the Red Cross that the service is facing a “humanitarian disaster”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
.

Dr Chaand Nagpaul, BMA GP committee chair, said the government had been 
“irresponsible” in making uncosted pledges and must deliver extra investment to 
ensure patients could receive timely, safe care.


“Given that funding in general practice has failed to meet patient demand, NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England and commissioners need to 
fully consider the consequences of their plans to extend access,” he said.

“To proceed without any sort of evaluation into the cost-effectiveness or the 
consequences of its objectives is irresponsible and could lead to much needed 
investment being spent on measures which don’t adequately meet patient needs,” 
he said.

The report, entitled Improving Patient Access, set out to evaluate how the 
Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (DoH) and the 
NHS are tackling concerns around access to England’s 42,000 GPs in 7,600 GP 
practices.

The report found an apparent lack of knowledge within the DoH about the cost 
of extending GP surgery hours.

“We have not seen evidence that the department and NHS England fully 
understand the effect of this commitment to extend hours on continuity of care 
or other arrangements for providing general medical services outside of core 
hours,” it said.


Auditors, keen to establish the reality of extending opening hours, found that 
nearly half of all GP practices – 46% – close during core working hours, while 
18% closed before 3pm one day a week.

Efforts to increase the workforce are at risk because GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> are leaving the service at a greater 
rate than they are entering it, thanks to shortfalls in recruitment, the report 
said.

Health Education England only filled 3,019 (93%) out of a target of 3,250 GP 
training places in 2016/17, according to auditors.

“The latest available data on part-time working in new GPs suggest there may 
be 1,900 fewer full-time equivalent GPs by 2020 than Health Education England 
had estimated there would be,” the report said.

The report sheds light on how patients registered with GP services open for 
fewer hours than average are more likely to attend accident and emergency 
departments. It found there were 22 more A&E attendances per 1,000 registered 
patients [8%] at practices open for 45 hours or less per week, after adjusting 
for differences in patients’ age and sex.


Meg Hillier MP, the chair of the public accounts committee, claimed that 
ministers were “trying to shoehorn in seven day access to general practice 
without a clear idea of the additional costs or benefits it will bring patients 
or taxpayers”.

Prof Helen Stokes-Lampard, chair of the Royal College of GPs, said the report 
“hits the nail on the head” by questioning the cost-effectiveness of forcing GP 
surgeries to deliver routine services seven days a week.

However, she went on to question why auditors failed to acknowledge the 
stresses that GPs are under or why surgeries may have to close temporarily 
during core hours for staff training, patient consultations or home visits.

Theresa May urged to get a grip on NHS as winter crisis spirals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
“If general practice fails, the rest of the NHS collapses behind it. That’s 
why we urgently need NHS England to deliver in full on the pledges it has 
promised ... swiftly and effectively, and for all governments in the UK to 
invest properly in the family doctor service, including more GPs,” she said.

The government claims that 17 million patients are already benefiting from 
evening and weekend appointments.

 In response to the report, the health minister David Mowat said evidence 
shows that extended GP access is helping to relieve pressure on other parts of 
the health service such as A&E.

“We’re also relieving pressure on GPs by cutting red tape and investing an 
extra 2.4 bn to recruit 5,000 more doctors – in fact, fill rates for GP 
training this year were at a record level,” he said.

An NHS England spokesman criticised the NAO report for raising “the rather 
obvious fact” that it costs more to provide evening and weekend urgent primary 
care services than it does during Monday to Friday, nine to five.

“The alternative would be that patients simply head to A&E, with all the 
consequences that brings for more major cases.


“No one is suggesting each individual GP practice should offer this extended 
access, but there’s quite wide agreement that, as GP numbers expand, practices 
do need to club together to offer this service, a bit like the out-of-hours 
duty chemist rota.


“Across much of London, Manchester and a fifth of the country, GPs are already 
doing this, and more areas will follow next year,” he said.

 