
Crickets bounce, bees wobble, hoverflies dart and Jessica Albarn 
<http://www.jessicaalbarn.co.uk/> stands in the middle of her steep, sunny 
meadow and scrunches up her hands in delight. “Quite a bit of my work is about 
layers,” she says, crouching down to investigate the depth of the grass with 
her fingers. “It’s about being able to get right in there and explore an area.”

Albarn is a visual artist best known for her beautifully detailed pencil 
drawings of spiders, bees, butterflies and other insects. Perhaps it is 
inevitable that peering through a microscope at dead insects in her London 
studio led her to the lanes of south Devon to create a meadow, and capture some 
of its richness in a series of artistic adventures.

If you feel there’s something familiar about the name, you’d be right: Albarn 
is the younger sister ofDamon of Blur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn>, and her meadow is on the old 
farm he bought for his family 20 years ago. “I’m lucky to have this antidote to 
London,” she says. “Damon bought this as a family place, so we could all have 
somewhere to meet. This work is part of him, because I wouldn’t have had this 
otherwise. It’s been wonderful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cccfaca2e078e0646bbf6e156ae254de93d28fd%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn's%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn%27s%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cccfaca2e078e0646bbf6e156ae254de93d28fd%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 Spider ... a drawing on paper. Photograph: Jessica Albarn 
Albarn spent most of her childhood in rural Essex. Her dad, Keith, taught at 
Colchester School ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>. “It was 
great for me as a kid. We had a bit of freedom. You could walk to the woods and 
down to the river, and I had loads of animals. That’s where it all began for 
me.” Her mum came from a farming family in Lincolnshire and Albarn thinks a 
love of the land “is also probably a bit in the blood”.

She took her art foundation course under her dad at Colchester (“He was great, 
but I had a bit of a hard time from some of the other staff”) and moved to 
London to complete her degree. She was just getting going as an artist when she 
gave birth to her daughter, who is now 21, and she has an 18-year-old son. But 
just when she might have had more time to make art, she had another daughter, 
who is five. Some artists struggle to continue working with family and 
financial demands. Albarn has “fought like crazy to keep going”, she says. 
“I’ve been very dogged about it. Being a woman and having children, your career 
takes a different path. I didn’t get the opportunity to do an MA, but I’ve 
found my path – and it’s made me very disciplined.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d54acbc34eecdbf2c41968fd44b5ae1098b3323%2F0_96_4211_2526%2F4211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn's%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn%27s%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d54acbc34eecdbf2c41968fd44b5ae1098b3323%2F0_96_4211_2526%2F4211.jpg>
 Field-good factor ... the artist’s meadow at the family farm in Devon. 
Photograph: Jessica Albarn 
She likes to go out on a forage, she says, and her art “usually begins with 
something I find”. She has been particularly inspired by bees, and undertook a 
“bee marathon” at the Natural History Museum, drawing bees all day in “homage 
to their industry”. She laughs. “Everyone is going on about the bees dying, 
which is very tragic and depressing, so it is nice to try and do something 
positive.”

Albarn began raising money for the Bumblebee Conservation Trust 
<http://bumblebeeconservation.org/> and learned of the importance of “creating 
corridors for wildlife and wild flowers”. And that’s when she decided to turn a 
small, steep south-facing sheep field into a meadow. “It’s incredibly lush down 
here and there’s a lot of wild flowers, so my parents thought I was a bit mad 
when I said I wanted to create a meadow. But I hope to encourage two species in 
particular –the shrill carder bumblebee 
<https://bumblebeeconservation.org/about-bees/identification/very-rare/shrill-carder-bee/>
 and theblaeberry bumblebee 
<https://bumblebeeconservation.org/about-bees/identification/scarce/>. They are 
around in this area but they are very, very rare.”

Following advice from a BCT outreach officer, she created the meadow. 
“Although I’ve been studying insects for a long time, I’m quite a novice and am 
learning as I go,” she says. Much of her art mixes insects with geometrical 
forms and the meadow is marked out in six hexagon shapes – inspired by beeswax 
– arranged in a triangular shape. She and her mum collected as much local seed 
as they could find (locally sourced seed is always best for “new” meadows) and 
bought extra BCT-approved native seeds, and scattered them over the slope.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1da4a23c907122fc268c9aacc389278b29ca82ad%2F197_0_2239_2798%2F2239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn's%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn%27s%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1da4a23c907122fc268c9aacc389278b29ca82ad%2F197_0_2239_2798%2F2239.jpg>
 ‘My parents thought I was mad’ ... Jessica Albarn Photograph: Ian West/PA 
“It feels as if you’re throwing money into the wind,” she says, “but it feels 
quite ancient too, a lovely thing to do. What comes up is what comes up. It 
will be what it will be. It’s a wonderful thing to watch.” This is Albarn’s 
second summer managing the meadow, and it is improving each year: crucially, 
yellow rattle is now established, a flower that is parasitic on grass and so 
creates more space for other flowers.


It is a kind of artistic study plot. “I wanted to create an archive, a piece 
of land that I could manage myself. I’m looking to gather as much information 
as I possibly can about the insects and the wildlife that passes through, and 
that will inform the work I’m doing.”

We’ve wired up these electric ink drawings – put your hand neart and it 
activates the sound

Her exhibition in London this September marks a midpoint in her three-year 
project. There will be drawings, obviously, but also an oil painting of her 
youngest daughter in the meadow, “which is a bit of a departure for me,” she 
says. “We’ve spent a lot of time on our own down here together, she really gets 
into it and she helped me broadcast the seed. Kids love a bit of manual work – 
well, for so long.”

Albarn has been painting and etching on glass and creating images from solar 
paper, an early form of photographic paper. By laying plants upon it when it is 
exposed to the light, you create shadowy outlines. “You get some wonderful, 
quite ghostly effects,” she says. She is also creating “archive boxes” from her 
meadow, inspired by the specimen cases of natural history museums: “That’s 
where things will end up if we’re not careful – things will be dead or behind 
glass.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36195f243068e9a62be4236ca6cc9a8a983161db%2F1012_511_7050_5709%2F7050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn's%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plantlife%3A%20Jessica%20Albarn%27s%20meadow%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fplantlife-jessica-albarn-creation-meadow-artwork%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36195f243068e9a62be4236ca6cc9a8a983161db%2F1012_511_7050_5709%2F7050.jpg>
 Everything’s electric ... Albarn’s interactive triptych Photograph: Jessica 
Albarn 
Her artistic renderings of the meadow include a stop-motion film called 
Creation, with photographs of her drawings developing and then receding (like 
the seasonal ebb and flow of the meadow) with music byNick Powell 
<https://soundcloud.com/nick-oskar>, a composer and sound designer who works 
with the National Theatre. Finally, she’s also doing “quite nutty things with 
electric ink”. There are three drawings of a wren, a meadow cricket and a 
bumblebee, all from her meadow. “Using electric ink, we’ve wired them for 
sound, so that if you put your hand near it, it will activate the sound.”

She showed this at the Art Car Boot fair <http://www.artcarbootfair.com/> in 
London this summer and “it worked really well. It is lovely because it brings 
out the child in people. Because you’re activating it through proximity, it 
feels like you are connecting with it a bit more.”
 A clip of Jessica Albarn’s Creation 
Albarn hopes to include more time-lapse work in a final exhibition next 
summer. “What I aim to do is transport the meadow from here to London,” she 
says. “I want to create quite a big film as it develops and recedes.” Next 
year’s show will probably mark the climax of the plot as an artistic project, 
but Albarn is determined to nurture this living patch of land as it gradually 
evolves. “I’ll definitely keep on with it. It is my little area. I love sitting 
up here. You get a lot of deer passing through and badgers. It will slowly 
develop over the years, and hopefully the next generation will take it on. It’s 
a very peaceful place and it’s joyous and fertile, too.”

• Creation by Jessica Albarn 
<http://www.lawrencealkingallery.com/events/creation> is at the Lawrence Alkin 
Gallery, London, until 24 September.
 