
David Attenborough’s blockbuster nature series Planet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/01/planet-earth-ii-a-form-of-therapy-for-viewers-says-attenborough>
 is “a disaster for the world’s wildlife” and a significant contributor to 
planet-wide extinctions, a rival natural history producer has claimed.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> programme concluded in 
December and drew audiences of more than 12 million viewers but presents “an 
escapist wildlife fantasy” that ignores the damage humans are doing to species 
everywhere, according to Martin Hughes-Games, a presenter of the BBC’s 
Springwatch.

The BBC’s Planet Earth II did not help the natural world | Martin Hughes-Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/bbc-planet-earth-not-help-natural-world>
In a direct attack on Attenborough’s flagship series, which features a 
soundtrack by the Hollywood composer Hans Zimmer and became the most-watched 
nature programme in 15 years when it was broadcast last month, Hughes-Games 
said the makers had ignoredevidence of mass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
, most recently from theWorld Wide Fund for Nature <https://www.wwf.org.uk/> 
and theZoological Society of London <https://www.zsl.org/>, which reported last 
year that between 1970 and 2012 there had been a 58% decline in the abundance 
of vertebrates worldwide.

“These programmes are still made as if this worldwide mass extinction is 
simply not happening,” he said. “The producers continue to go to the rapidly 
shrinking parks and reserves to make their films – creating a beautiful, 
beguiling, fantasy world, a utopia where tigers still roam free and untroubled, 
where the natural world exists as if man had never been.”

The result is that Attenborough and others “are lulling the huge worldwide 
audience into a false sense of security,” he said. “No hint of the continuing 
disaster is allowed to shatter the illusion.”

Attenborough, however, did use the series to make an impassioned plea for 
greater conservation. At the end of the final episode he spoke of “our 
responsibility to do everything within our power to create a planet that 
provides a home not just for us, but for all life on Earth”.

He has also insisted that his programmes enable an increasingly urbanised 
global population to remain in touch with nature. “More people are out of touch 
with the natural world than have ever been,”Attenborough said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/29/planet-earth-ii-bbc-sir-david-attenborough-nature-series-wildlife-animals>
 at a press conference to launch the series in October. “But since we depend on 
the natural world, understanding it is absolutely paramount. Television can 
provide that link better than ever before, in some ways. Fifty years ago, there 
was hardly a species on [Planet Earth II] that anyone would have seen. Now 
everybody has. It’s remarkable, and it’s valuable.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdavid-attenborough-on-climate-change-the-world-will-be-transformed-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Attenborough%20on%20climate%20change%3A%20'The%20world%20will%20be%20transformed'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdavid-attenborough-on-climate-change-the-world-will-be-transformed-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Attenborough%20on%20climate%20change%3A%20%27The%20world%20will%20be%20transformed%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdavid-attenborough-on-climate-change-the-world-will-be-transformed-video&media=>
David Attenborough on climate change: ‘The world will be transformed’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/29/david-attenborough-on-climate-change-the-world-will-be-transformed-video>
The BBC declined to comment on Hughes-Games’s criticism that the impression of 
pristine wildlife Attenborough’s shows create was misleading.

“Even as Planet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii> was being broadcast, 
it was reported that elephant and lion numbers were tumbling, and last month it 
became clear that the giraffe could be heading towards extinction, with numbers 
plummeting by 40% in the past 15 years,” Hughes-Games said.

There is, however, also evidence of improving fortunes for some species. Tiger 
numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/11/number-of-tigers-in-the-wild-rises-for-first-time-in-over-100-years>
 are thought to be increasing and thegiant panda 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-37272718> has recently been removed 
from the list of endangered species.


Hughes-Games said he was not arguing that programmes such as Planet Earth II 
should not be made. He said “fantasy should be balanced by reality” and urged 
the BBC to commit to making more wildlife programmes that overtly address 
conservation.

Hughes-Games proposed injecting conservation themes into TV dramas and 
children’s programming. He said: “As a matter of urgency, a ­development team 
should be set up to think how the reality of what’s happening to wildlife 
worldwide can be portrayed in ­innovative ways, integrated in dramas, in 
children’s shows – in collaborations with ­producers like Aardman Animations, 
perhaps, or video diaries of ­inspirational people working with animals.”
 