
Played eight, won none. A record that would have most managers taking receipt 
of their P45, even at this formative stage of the season. Instead, it is 
Scottish football that is questioning its self-worth.

Even leaving Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>' 
embarrassing European exit at the hands of FBK Kaunas aside — the Lithuanian 
outfit's subsequent 7-1 aggregate demolition at the hands of Sampdoria merely 
emphasises the theory that Rangers suffered a freak result — and remembering 
that Queen of the South should not have competed in the Uefa Cup in the first 
place, the experiences ofCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 
andMotherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> have been 
striking.

Eight games in, Scottish teams are yet to taste victory over continental 
opposition. Someone in Uefa's co-efficient department has a scythe hovering 
above "Ecosse".

Discussion surrounding Celtic's defeat in Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> surrounded that much vaunted 
"system" thing. Did Gordon Strachan's 4-2-3-1 (or 4-5-1, if you are blunt about 
it) really work as well as the manager and some of his players claimed it did?

In reality, Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> 
appeared short of their best but still looked capable of scoring more than 
Marcos Senna's excellent free-kick if they really needed to. Strachan, 
meanwhile, was not helped by the fact that his three creative players on 
display — Shunsuke Nakamura, Aiden McGeady and Shaun Maloney — each had nights 
to forget. And Georgios Samaras, when afforded a clear sight at goal, perhaps 
demonstrated why Manchester City were so keen to let him go.

The hard truth for Celtic is that Villarreal and Manchester United, given 
their relative spending power, were always likely to qualify from Group E. 
Until any seismic shift in world football occurs, the likes of Celtic andRangers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> will never compete with those 
at the top level in England and Spain. Celtic's best hope now is to emulate 
their city rivals in making worthwhile Uefa Cup progress in the new year; they 
have a genuine opportunity of glory in that tournament at least.

Villarreal, of course, are a wonderful success story in their own right; a 
small town club who have attracted some of the finest players on the continent 
and finished above the mighty Barcelona in La Liga last season. Celtic's fans 
should take heed of such progress while bleating about the award of the 
set-play which Senna despatched on Tuesday night. The better team won; few 
expected anything else.

AS Nancy's comprehensive dismissal of Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/oct/03/motherwell.nancy> — it was 
2-0 going on six or seven last night — was considerably more disheartening. 
Taken on a relative scale, a side who finished fourth in the French league 
should probably be of similar ability to Mark McGhee's side, an impressive 
third in the SPL last time round. Or so we thought. Was French football not 
also castigated amid Paul Le Guen's disastrous time at Rangers?

In any case, a vastly superior Nancy were bigger, fitter, stronger, more 
skilful and more capable of accurate passing than their hosts at Fir Park. When 
McGhee, not one for disingenuous statements, claims that his side could not 
play any better, people should sit up and take notice. It would be folly to 
disregardRangers' run to Manchester in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefacup0708>, Celtic's successive 
qualifications for the last 16 of the Champions League or the improvement in 
the Scottish national team in the last four years, albeit that improvement is 
yet to result in participation in a major championship. Nonetheless, whenGeorge 
Burley's latest squad is peppered with Championship players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/oct/02/scotlandfootballteam.worldcup2010qualifiers>
, there is a tacit illustration of what is on show week after week in the SPL.

A series of drab games and poor recent league crowds hardly helps matters; 
anyone who witnessed Hibernian's meek showing against Rangers last Sunday would 
struggle to argue that the gap between the Old Firm and "the rest" continues to 
narrow. We are hardly approaching the death of Scottish football, but such a 
chain of events should steady those who predicted imminent European domination, 
courtesy of a few backs to the wall victories on the domestic and international 
front.

Villarreal highlighted financial disparity. Nancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> served a latest harsh reminder of 
where Scottish football stands in the grand scheme of things.
 