
Five nurses on a busy ward greet patients in beds with cheery smiles. 
“Morning, Mr Matthews!” “How’s Mum today?” “I’m going to take your blood sugar 
– just a tiny prick”. As the day wears on, they grow tired and irritable. “No 
Mr Matthews,” one nurse snaps. “You absolutely cannot have a cigarette break 
now.” Another scolds a teenage diabetic for drinking too much alcohol, 
addressing him like a naughty child even though he is depressed and suicidal. 
“Don’t be silly,” she says. “You don’t want to end up in a coma.”

It might sound like an average day for overstretched NHS staff – but this 
isn’t a real hospital. It’s a simulated ward atKingston University 
<http://www.kingston.ac.uk/> and the nurses are actually performers, 
transforming typical nursing moves – hooking up drips and donning surgical 
gloves – into a dance routine, which they repeat over and over, speeding up 
each time until they fall out of sync and make clumsy mistakes. The bed 
occupants are student nurses taking part in a learning exercise designed to 
help them empathise with patients.

Kindness and compassion are thought of as prerequisites for becoming a nurse – 
and if you asked any of the students why they’re studying nursing, they would 
say they want to care for people. But even with the best of intentions, after 
several 12-hour shifts it is a real struggle to “be nice alongside all the 
other stuff you need to do,” says Philippa Hambly, one of the performers, who 
used to be a nurse herself on a paediatric unit. She adds: “Sometimes you’re 
working for four long days. That’s 46 hours of being on your feet, running 
around. Giving that little bit extra, the bit that people deserve – in everyday 
life, you get tetchy or short-tempered or you do things with a little less 
presence. The performance really explores empathy exhaustion, where you just 
get tired.”


Careful is both a standalone piece of theatre and a partnership between the 
drama and nursing faculties at Kingston University, which is exploring how 
theatre can help train nurses. The director, senior performance studies 
lecturer Dr Alex Mermikides, was inspired by her own experience when her 
brother Milton was diagnosed with leukaemia and she underwent an operation to 
donate stem cells which eventually saved his life. Mermikides was “astounded” 
by the highly-skilled work the nurses did, and their compassion in such 
demanding circumstances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftheatre-show-teaching-student-nurses-compassion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed72a7a756b9f01768ba1e43678857253d1fea6%2F0_196_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Play%20the%20part%3A%20theatre%20show%20teaches%20student%20nurses%20compassion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftheatre-show-teaching-student-nurses-compassion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Play%20the%20part%3A%20theatre%20show%20teaches%20student%20nurses%20compassion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftheatre-show-teaching-student-nurses-compassion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed72a7a756b9f01768ba1e43678857253d1fea6%2F0_196_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
 Careful is a standalone piece of theatre and a partnership between the drama 
and nursing faculties at Kingston University. Photograph: Ben Roost 
After the birth of her first child, Mermikides received what she describes as 
“rather less caring care” from midwives, who she felt were not responding 
urgently enough to various medical complications. Her own disappointment, 
coupled with the public outcry after theMid Staffordshire scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/06/mid-staffs-hospital-scandal-guide>
, led her to question why nurses – professionals who had chosen care-giving 
jobs – could be responsible for such failures.

While Mermikides doesn’t offer a definitive answer, the performance does show 
nurses as well-meaning human beings who go wrong sometimes, usually because 
they’re struggling with exhaustion and overwhelming workloads. As part of the 
project, she has led several drama-based workshops with nursing students aimed 
at helping them cope with these pressures in their future work so they can 
still give patients compassionate care.

A large focus has been on self-care, with breathing and relaxation exercises 
to teach nurses how they can “warm up” before 12-hour shifts and sustain their 
energy, as actors do when they prepare to go on stage. Role-play exercises have 
also featured strongly, with the Careful performers and actor Ganiat Kasumu 
(formerly a nurse in the BBC’s Casualty drama) playing patients in pain, 
distress, or with dementia, while the students took the role of nurses dealing 
with them, followed by a group feedback discussion with their nursing lecturers.

Hambly says: “Learning to improvise in a controlled setting can be a useful 
skill for crisis situations ... My theatre tutor used to say that theatre is 
the rehearsal for life. Nobody dies when you do a terrible performance, but you 
can learn something from it.”

Michal Kaim, a student nurse participant, agrees. “I’m much more aware of my 
body language now and how we can send nonverbal signals to patients.” Getting 
feedback after doing the role-plays was “precious”, he says – especially for 
his current placement on a busy day surgery ward, where he doesn’t usually have 
the chance to reflect on his bedside manner. With limited time to build a 
rapport with each patient – Kaim sometimes has just 10 minutes to meet someone 
and get them ready for surgery, during which time he needs to ask certain 
intimate questions. He has found that something as simple as walking over to a 
patient’s bed in the right way can help put them at ease. With a heavy 
workload, it’s easy to be too task-oriented, he says, and end up striding 
around briskly, concentrating on medical details rather than the human being in 
the bed. He says: “If you look like you’re on a mission, you don’t seem 
approachable. Everyone knows that one nurse who was horrible, or that doctor 
who came across as cold. Patients can be scared to share important concerns.”

After lying in beds for the simulated ward performance of Careful, Kaim and 
his fellow students feel they have a better awareness of the fear that comes 
with being a patient. Even though they weren’t really being prodded with 
needles, Mermikides says the trainees said that “seeing the ‘nurses’ from the 
perspective of lying down – being vulnerable and passive – was daunting. When 
someone comes at you with a needle, it seems magnified.”

Careful, which is still a work-in-progress, recently made its first appearance 
outside the simulated ward, at Kingston’s Rose theatre, with Kaim watching from 
a more conventional audience seat this time. Weighed down with written 
coursework assignments on top of working shifts from 7.30am to 8.30pm on his 
ward placement, seeing the stage performance seemed to lift his morale. He 
says: “Elevating nursing to the level of art gave me another reason to be proud 
of the choice I have made to become one.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 