
The plight of child refugees is at the heart of this year’s Guardian and 
Observer charity appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
. We supported refugees last year and we are proud to return to this theme 
again. It remains the great humanitarian crisis of our times.

The charities supported by the Guardian and Observer 2016 appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
The political mood has hardened around immigration, and in a volatile world 
the tragedy of forced migration can seem less visible. Yet the reality is 
inescapable: in Europe, thousands of children are stuck in squalid camps or 
sleeping rough, caught up in political turmoil beyond their control and exposed 
to multiple dangers.

This year, record numbers of children have drowned in the Mediterranean; 
others have been placed in detention for travelling without documents. Official 
figures indicate more than 90,000 children have travelled alone, fleeing war 
and destitution across Europe. Charities believe the real figure is higher, 
because so many have slipped beneath the radar.


The Guardian and Observer have consistently reported the dire conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
 faced by many children: therat-infested camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
, the unheated squats and the muddy ditches that they are forced to call home. 
We’ve published interviews with children of primary school age, travelling 
without parents, worried about how to feed themselves and how to get to safety.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplease-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ca9513adc8eed60b08f6d04b3a747ad6625c154%2F0_310_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Please%20help%20us%20help%20%23childrefugees%20survive%20the%20winter%20-%20Guardian%2FObserver%202016%20Appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplease-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Please%20help%20us%20help%20%23childrefugees%20survive%20the%20winter%20-%20Guardian%2FObserver%202016%20Appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplease-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ca9513adc8eed60b08f6d04b3a747ad6625c154%2F0_310_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Children play in a camp on the island on Chios in September. Photograph: 
Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images 
Child refugees running from war and violent unrest in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq 
and Sudan have told us Europe can seem an unwelcoming place. Many are shocked 
to find themselvesliving in camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/refugee-babies-milk-supplies-greek-detention-centre-chios>
 that may be safe from bombs, but where conditions are far worse than what they 
were used to at home. Most despair at being stuck in limbo, unable to continue 
their education, wasting their lives. They risk disease, trafficking, sexual 
exploitation and abuse. Let’s be clear: without help, some will not survive the 
winter.

The UK government’s response has been muted. It has resisted efforts to allow 
child refugees to be reunited with families in the UK, and delayed attempts to 
give shelter to the most vulnerable children travelling alone. The major aid 
agencies are clear that the UK has not accepted its fair share. The issue 
provokes both weariness and hostility from many in Britain; some find it 
convenient to conflate asylum seekers with economic migrants, and adopt a less 
than welcoming approach. Child refugees have been criticised for not looking 
sufficiently young.


Our view has not changed from last year. The political solutions to the 
refugee crisis may be complex, but that does not mean we should abandon our 
humanity. We should not close our hearts, retreat behind walls, real or 
imagined, or ignore the pressing moral imperative to provide assistance and 
sanctuary for some of the world’s most desperate people.

Guardian and Observer readers last year demonstrated extraordinary solidarity 
with refugees. Through our2015 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-2015-refugees-katharine-viner>
 you showed in your thousands that a more compassionate voice exists amid the 
rancour. You signalled a wish for a more tolerant, empathetic, kinder society. 
Above all, you showed amazing generosity: last year’s appeal raisedan 
astonishing £2.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/readers-generosity-charity-appeal-success-thank-you>
 for refugee charities.

This year we are asking readers to donate to three fantastic charities that 
offer practical and effective help and support to child refugees, whether they 
are travelling alone or with families, or have already arrived in the UK. All 
combine a passionate entrepreneurialism with a dynamic commitment to social 
justice.

Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/> brings a refreshing vitality 
and energy to the provision of emergency humanitarian aid. Set up just 16 
months ago bya group of friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/12/help-refugees-calais-accidental-activists>
 wondering what they could do to help refugees, it has grown to become one of 
Europe’s largest distributors of food, clothes, shelter and medicine to 
refugees, supporting over 50 projects across the continent.

Safe Passage <http://safepassage.org.uk/> is another new project, created by 
theCitizens UK <http://www.citizensuk.org/> charity last year to help provide 
legal support to hundreds of unaccompanied refugee children, so that they can 
apply for asylum in the UK – many of them to be reunited with family members 
resident here – rather than risking their lives smuggling themselves in on 
lorries.


Once refugee children are in the UK, adapting to their new surroundings can be 
a lonely and demoralising experience. A series of projects run byThe Children’s 
Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/donate/help-child-refugees-fleeing-war-and-violence>
 provide a range of services from legal advice to help youngsters access 
education and housing, to language lessons, social activities and mentoring. 
The aim is to help youngsters overcome the trauma of migration, and to support 
them to rebuild their lives.

Guardian and Observer journalists will over the next few weeks highlight the 
vital work of our three charities through words, pictures, and film, both 
online and in our newspapers. We have been inspired by them and their work, and 
we hope you will be too. Help us once again to show solidarity with refugees. 
Please give generously.

• Support the three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 