
For well over a week now the air under the plum tree has reeked like the dregs 
of a half-drunk bottle of red wine left opened for a fortnight â€“ alcoholic and 
vinegary. I can not remember such a good plum crop, ever. After the pies and 
the jam and the ones that were frozen or given away, the fallen plums could 
only be left to rot, but I piled some on the bird table in the sun. Soon thered 
admirals <http://www.ukbutterflies.co.uk/species.php?species=atalanta> arrived.

The insects of doom
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/03/insects-doom> 
Sometimes there were as many as seven butterflies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/butterflies> on just one of the wire 
mesh trays, drinking the juice that oozed from the plum flesh; eight if you 
counted the one underneath, drinking the liquid that seeped through from above.

By late afternoon the butterflies had all become stupefied. When I touched 
them, most merely responded with an irritated flick of their wings. Others flew 
in a circle, then returned. Two settled on me, on my arm and in my hair. They 
had completely lost their inhibitions.

In the warmth of an Indian summer the yeast that formed the bloom on the plum 
skin had fermented the sugar to alcohol. The anthropomorphic conclusion was 
inescapable; these butterflies were in a drunken stupor.

Further proof came from the hybrid buddleia  
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/buddleia>whose orange flowers arched 
overhead. The plant, aBuddleia x weyeriana, produces abundant nectar until the 
first frosts and it was crawling with bumblebees, though bereft of butterflies. 
For red admirals fermented plum juice seemed to be a far greater attraction 
than simple nectar; though I never saw bumblebees, models of sobriety, tempted 
by the plum juice.

Britons urged to help chart spread of thriving butterfly species
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/britons-urged-to-help-chart-spread-of-thriving-butterfly-species>
 Watching, it became clear there was a feeding hierarchy for butterfly 
species, with flare-ups of aggression. The red admirals tolerated each other as 
long as their wings or antennae did not touch, but they flicked their wings 
violently when apeacock 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/11908-848/peacock.html> landed. Two speckled 
woods that tried to join in were seen off in a matter of seconds.

Late this afternoon they were still there, some now with tattered wings, 
living their final days in their last chance saloon before cold nights, bad 
weather and the last of the plums brought their boozy feast to an end.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 