
You like smoking dope, have no particular educational qualifications, have 
designed your own knuckledusters, threatened to kill your dad with a knife and 
your gang has overturned a car with a rival gang inside it – so what do you 
choose as a career? The police, of course. This is what we learned fromAn 
Inspector Recalls by Graham Satchwell 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inspector-recalls.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (The History Press), one of a batch of increasingly frank police memoirs; the 
genre goes back two centuries and provides an invaluable prism through which we 
can see how and by whom our laws are enforced. Once the most senior detective 
working the railway beat, Satchwell gives usLife on Mars through the eyes of a 
remarkably frank Martian and much of it is winsomely light-hearted. We meet one 
of his colleagues whose specialty in chasing villains was shouting “Stop or 
I’ll let the dog loose!” followed by a realistic alsatian bark.

Next South Yorkshire police chief must show proof of ‘leading with integrity’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/15/next-south-yorkshire-police-chief-integrity-proof-hillsborough>
“It is a sad fact that when I became a policeman, and throughout my service, 
strangers would assume, because of my occupation, that I was a racist, a bigot, 
a bit thick and a right-winger,” writes Satchwell, whose career ran from 1968 
to 1999, by which time he was a detective superintendent (which does not lend 
itself so neatly to a book title). He does not shy away from tales of 
corruption and worse: a very senior officer at Hendon police college would 
unbutton the blouses of young female recruits and, if stopped, would tell his 
victim that it was just a test to see if they would let anyone take advantage 
of them. But there is much admiration for fellow officers, and reflections on 
kidnap, robbery, IRA bomb threats and train disasters. His investigation of the
1997 Southall fatal rail crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/sep/20/marktran> led to him being 
interviewed by David Hare for his playThe Permanent Way, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jan/31/theatre> which made Satchwell 
cry when he watched it at the National theatre.

Former undercover drugs squad officer Neil Woods confesses that he ended up 
having more empathy with the Brighton junkies he had infiltrated than with his 
fellow officers, whom he despised. We learn this inGood Cop, Bad War 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/good-cop-bad-war-476923.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
(Ebury), published in the summer, a remarkably frank tale of how Woods – who 
tossed a coin as to whether or not to join the police – ended up having to 
strip naked at gun-point to prove to heroin dealers he wasn’t wired up. Woods 
concludes that the “war on drugs” is both a failure and counter-productive and 
he now campaigns to end it.

For the genre, these are breaths of fresh air – and these are breezy times for 
police memoirs. At the Newark book festival this year, there were no fewer than 
four former officers with recently published tales. The earliest of such 
recollections go back to 1824 andHenry Goddard’s Memoirs of a Bow Street Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/06/james-mccreet-top-10-victorian-detective-stories>
. The police historian Martin Stallion has logged more than 500 memoirs and 
biographies, including those of former officers, such as the cricket writer and 
commentatorJohn Arlott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/28/my-hero-john-arlott-david-rayvern-allen>
 and the broadcaster Gilbert Harding, who were better known for their lives 
outside the service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124a802a07db2c1322e184b858f928654d63eae2%2F0_0_1800_2250%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124a802a07db2c1322e184b858f928654d63eae2%2F0_0_1800_2250%2F1800.jpg>
 This image, from William Merrilees’sThe Short Arm of the Law, is captioned: ‘A 
typical homosexual’. 
“The first boom in publishing was in the 1920s and 1930s, which was, of 
course, also the so-called golden age for detective fiction,” says Stallion. 
“The recent increase in output, from those who joined from about 1960 onwards, 
I would attribute to the success of [former inspector] Nicholas Rhea’s 
Constable series and theHeartbeat TV series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/mar/13/pressandpublishing.advertising> 
based on them, together with the rise in self-publishing.”

One of the most successful of the modern crop, Mike Pannett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2012/oct/08/round-up-boost-police-morale>
, who served in both the Metropolitan and the North Yorkshire police, has built 
a cottage industry for himself as the copper’s answer to James Herriot’s vet 
series. Pannett cheerfully recounts how he first created interest in the books 
by calling Waterstones in Harrods and telling them that he was from a 
Metropolitan police reading group which was studying his new memoir,Now Then, 
Lad 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/now-then-lad.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
. The shop duly stocked the books prominently, the Yorkshire Post was alerted 
about a local author’s success and a feature article followed and when his 
grandfather assured the Daily Mail that the book was a cracker, the Mail duly 
followed suit. Hey presto, he is now on his sixth memoir and is sponsored by 
Yorkshire Tea. He is a witty story-teller – how else would we know about North 
Yorkshire CID’s discovery of a new type of drug abuse, in which the user 
injects ecstasy directly into the mouth. It’s called “E by gum”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7b4f403fc465c445ab22436db4b9fb44e1bca4%2F0_0_2928_1756%2F2928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7b4f403fc465c445ab22436db4b9fb44e1bca4%2F0_0_2928_1756%2F2928.jpg>
 Richard Venables, a former detective inspector, was on duty on the day of the 
Hillsborough disaster: ‘I will feel guilt for the rest of my life.’ Photograph: 
Rex Features 
In a very different style is the sombre A Life in Death by Richard Venables 
(Thistle), a former detective inspector from Rotherham, who was on duty at 
Hillsborough and later became a specialist in identifying dead bodies. It is a 
touching and honest account. “My application form said I wanted to join the 
police to help people and to make a difference,” he writes. “In truth, I wanted 
to be a policeman because it would give me an identity ... I wanted the 
uniform.” Of the Hillsborough disaster, he writes: “I’d seen people die right 
in front of me and I’d been unable to help them, I will feel guilt for the rest 
of my life. It is real, permanent, devastating. Flashbacks strike whenever 
life’s not going well.”

His story is a reminder of some of the hellish things that officers can 
encounter. Of one rail crash in which 10 people died, he recounts: “We were in 
the process of  searching and undressing a victim when his mobile phone, which 
was in his trouser pocket, rang. The device’s ring was so eerie that we all 
froze … I saw the phone’s screen as I removed it from his pocket. The display 
said ‘Mum’. We let the rings finish and then placed the phone in a Faraday 
(forensic) bag.”

Venables follows a long line of specialists sharing their skills. In 1954 Fred 
Cherrill, the former head of Scotland Yard’s fingerprint branch, published his 
memoirs which tell of an era when someone’s “dabs” rather than their DNA or 
mobile phone were the surest way of tracking them down. “With all man’s mighty 
achievements he has never accomplished a feat comparable with that which Nature 
is achieving every hour and minute of the day,” he wrote inCherrill of the Yard
. “From the inexhaustible store of designs in her womb … she continues to mark 
every new finger with a stamp of individuality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb81904098810821f067ab1cca06f3699b9ef52%2F22_90_1879_2452%2F1879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb81904098810821f067ab1cca06f3699b9ef52%2F22_90_1879_2452%2F1879.jpg>
This Small Cloud: A Personal Memoirby Harry Daley includes this photograph of 
Daley in uniform, with a friend at a swimming pool. Photograph: Courtesy Harry 
Daley 
Memoirs from the last century can also be chillingly revealing. Willie 
Merrilees was Scotland’s most famous officer in the 1950s, even appearing on 
the TV programme,This Is Your Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/may/15/broadcasting1>. In his 
autobiography,The Short Arm of the Law – he was four inches shorter than police 
requirements of the time but was able to enlist nonetheless – he describes how 
he sought “to cleanse Edinburgh from the stain of having one of the most 
vice-ridden underworlds of any city” and drive out “rampant homosexuality”. He 
helpfully includes a photo of “a typical homosexual”, a simpering soul in a 
woman’s coat. Also included, without irony, is a picture of Merrilees himself, 
in full drag – “my disguise used to investigate many cases of robbery and 
assault”. His moral crusade led to his having to hide in bedrooms to observe 
the deviants’ sexual activity and he even posed as a gay man: “I am afraid I 
almost left myself with a permanent lisp, so authentic was my behaviour.” To 
get rid of undesirables, “I adopted methods as unorthodox as their own – 
sufficient to say that within a fortnight these gigolos left Edinburgh. I don’t 
think the east wind agreed with them.” As for pimps, he would “get hold of the 
bully, take him discreetly to some quiet spot and there ‘sing him a lullaby’”.

Contrast this with This Small Cloud by Harry Daley, a Met policeman between 
1925 and 1950. Openly gay at a time when this was even harder, Daley was the 
lover ofEM Forster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/17/e-m-forster-my-policeman>  and 
Duncan Grant, who painted his portrait. “The policemen hostile to me,” wrote 
Daley in his memoir, published posthumously in 1987, “were ex-Guardsmen ... who 
looked on homosexuals as a source of extra income. They couldn’t resist telling 
of their adventures … with rich old queers but anxious not to give themselves 
away completely always ended with ‘Of course – directly he touched me – biff 
bang wallop.’ Of course!” Daley also paints a picture of a time when villains 
knew their place: “I often had to lock up my friends and acquaintances - not so 
upsetting as it sounds. They were from families where such things are no 
disgrace.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3763751ef2dbb0e5a95ab3e7f8cb851d49ce6cea%2F0_107_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3763751ef2dbb0e5a95ab3e7f8cb851d49ce6cea%2F0_107_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
 Jack Slipper attempted to arrest Ronnie Biggs in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: 
Richard Young / Rex Features 
Things may have changed a bit since then but, as Brian Paddick recounts in 
Line of Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/24/biography>, 
published in 2008, not so much. Lord Paddick of Brixton, as he now is, was the 
most senior openly gay officer when his former partner sold a kiss-and-tell 
tale to the Mail on Sunday for £100,000 in 2001. “What does Brian say or do as 
he climaxes?” was one of the hundreds of questions – all in the public 
interest, of course – that the paper’s reporter wanted answered for her money. 
Paddick eventually won damages for some of the allegations and his account of 
the smear campaign mounted against him by the Mail group and its 
self-righteously prurient columnists is sobering and depressing.

Writing styles can vary from the plodding to the racy. “She was tall 
and blonde and slender,” writes former deputy assistant commissioner Ian Forbes 
of Kim Newell, convicted of being an accessory to the 1967 murder of her 
lover’s wife, June Cook, in a staged car crash. “She wore an elegant grey 
costume, silk stockings on her long legs, and she had an air of easy confidence 
as if she knew what effect she had on men and enjoyed every bit of it ... In 
different circumstances I would have been the first to admit that this 
23-year-old girl would have been a very attractive companion, but I knew I was 
looking at the most evil woman it was my misfortune to meet in my 30-odd years 
as a copper.” His memoir,Squad Man, published in 1973, gives copious thanks to 
Sunday Mirror crime reporter Norman Lucas, which may explain the breathless 
prose.

Some of the memoirs are dependent on an officer’s involvement in a famous 
crime. The late Jack Slipper, who unsuccessfully pursued train robber Ronnie 
Biggs to Rio, wrote a rueful account of it inSlipper of the Yard  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/oct/03/ukcrime.past>(1980). Leonard 
“Nipper” Read nailed the Krays. “I have long overcome any embarrassment when 
people say ‘I hope you don’t mind but tell me what were they really like?’ Of 
course I don’t mind,” writes Read inNipper (1990). “The Kray trial brought me 
fame which I would never have enjoyed had I not been selected to undertake the 
investigation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2129e18665d6310342fdc66fd1ebc66cc93bf0%2F0_167_2956_1773%2F2956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20memoirs%3A%20how%20officers%20are%20making%20crime%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpolice-memoirs-officers-crime-pay-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2129e18665d6310342fdc66fd1ebc66cc93bf0%2F0_167_2956_1773%2F2956.jpg>
 Leonard ‘Nipper’ Read: ‘The Kray trial brought me fame.’ Photograph: William 
Lovelace/Getty Images 
Another memoirist who, like Merrilees, was not plagued by self-doubt was 
Robert Fabian – “Fabian of the Yard”. In his 1950 memoir of that name he pays 
tribute to Winnie, “the wife – a most important part of a policeman’s 
equipment”, a reminder of just how male the profession then was. While the vast 
majority of the books are by men,Lilian Wyles  
<https://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/history-from-police-archives/Met6Kt/WomenPolice/wpFwp.html>
entered the field withA Woman at Scotland Yard in 1952; Alison Halford, once 
the most senior woman in the service 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/mol/exhibitions/liverpoollives/alison_halford.aspx>
, who encountered a mountain of sexism on her way to the top, wrote about it in
No Way Up the Greasy Pole (1993). Former Flying Squad officer, Carol Bristow, 
who once busted Francis Bacon on a drugs charge, described her 30-year career in
Central 822 in 1998.

Former Met commissioners, including Ian Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/02/ian.blair.resigns>, John 
Stevens <https://www.theguardian.com/observer/comment/story/0,,660953,00.html> 
andDavid McNee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/30/thatcher-government-liverpool-riots-1981>
, tend to go into print to “set the record straight”.Robert Mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/oct/01/sir-robert-mark-obituary>’s In the 
Office of Constable (1977) remains the most significant. Doubtless the 
beleagueredBernard Hogan-Howe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/sir-bernard-hogan-howe-to-retire-as-met-police-commissioner>
, who retires from the post next year, will be considering following their lead.

Who reads them? John Grieve, the former head of anti-terrorism, credits John 
Gosling’sGhost Squad (1959) as “one of many books that made me want to be a 
detective”, as did Peter Beveridge’sInside the CID (1947). “At the very least 
they expressed an ideal of what many officers were trying to achieve.” And why 
did Martin Stallion think that criminals’ memoirs sell more? “As a journalist 
you surely know that bad news is better than good news. As the Fat Boy said in
The Pickwick Papers: ‘I wants to make your flesh creep’.”

• We’ll All Be Murdered in Our Beds!  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-ll-all-be-murdered-in-our-beds.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
by Duncan Campbell is published by Elliott and Thompson.
 