
A Newsweek reporter who has epilepsy said he had a seizure after being sent a 
message onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> intended to 
trigger such an episode and is seeking information from the social media 
company to identify the person responsible for the tweet.

The image in question – which included a strobe effect and the words, “You 
deserve a seizure for your posts” – was apparently sent in response to Kurt 
Eichenwald’s outspoken criticism of President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Eichenwald, who has a home 
in Texas, said in court documents that the image triggered a seizure.

The tech winners and losers of 2016 (hint: Facebook – and Facebook)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/2016-tech-winners-losers-facebook-peter-thiel>
 Eichenwald posted a signed copy of a Dallas County district court order to 
Twitter on Tuesday that allows him to depose Twitter executives and orders the 
company to preserve any information or documents regarding the person who sent 
the image. Eichenwald wrote that “Twitter agreed to an expedited order”.

 A Twitter representative said via email that the company does not comment on 
individual accounts or investigations. Guidelines for law enforcement listed on 
the company’s website include a requirement for a court order or subpoena 
before it releases user information.

 That deposition request, filed on Monday, says Twitter suspended the account 
of @jew_goldstein “upon learning of the assault”. The sender had identified him 
or herself with the alias Ari Goldstein.

 The sender “succeeded in his effort to use Twitter as a means of committing 
assault, causing Petitioner to have a seizure which led to personal injury”, 
Eichenwald’s attorneys wrote.

 Eichenwald’s attorney did not immediately return a message seeking comment 
Tuesday, and the reporter did not immediately return an email seeking comment.

 Eichenwald told ABC’s Good Morning America that he has received numerous 
copycat strobe messages from “people who identify themselves as Trump 
supporters” and that he is reporting each of them to Twitter to ask that their 
accounts be suspended.

 “It is amazing to me that simply because I am a political reporter, simply 
because I write about Donald Trump that we have become so sick and twisted in 
this country that people think they have the right and obligation to inflict 
potentially very serious injury,” he said.
Kurt Eichenwald (@kurteichenwald) 
How have so many ppl become such sociopaths that they think its ok to assault 
someone if they write political stories they don't like?
 <https://twitter.com/kurteichenwald/status/811214971996696576> December 20, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/kurteichenwald/status/811214971996696576> 
 Mark Bennett, a Houston criminal defense and free speech attorney, said he 
believes a lawsuit alleging physical harm from a tweet would be “novel”.

 “I don’t know of a case where someone has been sued or prosecuted for speech 
online causing physical harm,” he said. “It’s a tough sell because there’s a 
lot of distance between the speech and the injury.”

 However, Houston attorney Joe Larsen said Eichenwald does not appear to be 
challenging the speech.

 “I don’t think it’s fair to say [Eichenwald] is saying he was harmed by the 
form of speech. I don’t think he’s suing about that. I think the ultimate suit 
will be one for assault,” said Larsen, who is a board member of the Freedom of 
Information Foundation of Texas.

 Twitter’s transparency report shows more than 2,500 requests for user 
information were made regarding criminal allegations in the United States in 
the first six months of this year. The company released some information in 82% 
of those requests, according to the report.
 