
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> chiefs have apologised 
unreservedly to seven women who were deceived into forming “abusive and 
manipulative” long-term relationships with undercover police officers.

The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
have also paid substantial, undisclosed amounts of compensation to the women 
who had intimate relationships, lasting up to nine years, with the undercover 
spies.

Lisa Jones, girlfriend of undercover policeman Mark Kennedy: ‘I thought I knew 
him better than anyone’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/20/lisa-jones-girlfriend-of-undercover-police-office-mark-kennedy-interview>
The comprehensive apology comes four years after the women launched legal 
action against the police, alleging the deception caused them emotional trauma.

As part of an out of court settlement, Martin Hewitt, an assistant 
commissioner at the Met,issued a statement 
<http://news.met.police.uk/news/claimants-in-civil-cases-receive-mps-apology-138574?utm_campaign=send_list&utm_medium=email&utm_source=sendgrid>
 saying: “Thanks in large part to the courage and tenacity of these women in 
bringing these matters to light it has become apparent that some officers, 
acting undercover whilst seeking to infiltrate protest groups, entered into 
long-term intimate sexual relationships with women which were abusive, 
deceitful, manipulative and wrong.

“I acknowledge that these relationships were a violation of the women’s human 
rights, an abuse of police power and caused significant trauma. I unreservedly 
apologise on behalf of the Metropolitan police service. I am aware that money 
alone cannot compensate the loss of time, their hurt or the feelings of abuse 
caused by these relationships.”

He added: “Most importantly, relationships like these should never have 
happened. They were wrong and were a gross violation of personal dignity and 
integrity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmetropolitan-police-apologises-for-undercover-officers-relationships-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F20%2F1448016522935%2FKP_600132_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metropolitan%20police%20apologises%20for%20undercover%20officers'%20relationships%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmetropolitan-police-apologises-for-undercover-officers-relationships-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metropolitan%20police%20apologises%20for%20undercover%20officers%27%20relationships%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmetropolitan-police-apologises-for-undercover-officers-relationships-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F20%2F1448016522935%2FKP_600132_crop_640x360.jpg>
Assistant commissioner Martin Hewitt apologises on behalf of the Metropolitan 
police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/nov/20/metropolitan-police-apologises-for-undercover-officers-relationships-video>
“The Metropolitan police recognises that these cases demonstrate that there 
have been failures of supervision and management. The Metropolitan police 
recognises that this should never happen again and the necessary steps must be 
taken to ensure that it does not.”

He described the conduct of the undercover officers as “totally unacceptable” 
and conceded that the woman had been “deceived pure and simple”.

On Friday, the women said 
<http://policespiesoutoflives.org.uk/met-police-concede-violation-of-womens-human-rights/>
: “Although no amount of ‘sorry’, or financial compensation, can make up for 
what we and others have endured, we are pleased the police have been forced to 
acknowledge the abusive nature of these relationships and that they should 
never happen.


“By linking our cases together we have been able to evidence a clear pattern 
of abusive, discriminatory behaviour towards women which amounts to 
institutional sexism by the Metropolitan police.”

“Five years ago, it would have seemed inconceivable to the public that state 
employees would go to such lengths but the scale of abuse uncovered 
demonstrates that this was accepted practice for many years.“

The women have criticised police for obstructing legal action through a variety
of tactics since they launched 
<http://policespiesoutoflives.org.uk/background-to-the-case/> it in 2011. On 
Friday, Hewitt accepted that the legal proceedings “have been painful 
distressing and intrusive and added to the damage and distress. The women have 
conducted themselves throughout this process with integrity and absolute 
dignity.”


Who pays the price of police spies’ betrayals? | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/22/who-pays-the-price-of-police-spies-betrayals>
The settlement is a significant moment in a controversy that has enveloped 
police since late 2010 when Mark Kennedy, the undercover spy who infiltrated 
environmental groups for seven years, was unmasked by activists.


The home secretary, Theresa May, has ordered a judge-led public inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2015/oct/08/more-than-140-people-given-key-role-in-public-inquiry-into-undercover-police>
 to examine the undercover infiltration of political groups since 1968, after a 
series of revelations.

Investigations by campaigners and the Guardian revealed that undercover 
officers have frequently formedsexual relationships with women on whom they had 
been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/22/undercover-police-lovers> 
sent to spy.


Kennedy was identified in the legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/09/undercover-office-green-activists> 
as one of five undercover officers who concealed their real identities from 
their girlfriends during the relationships.
One of the women, known only as Lisa Jones, had a six-year relationship with 
Kennedy before she and her friends exposed him.In her first media interview, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/20/lisa-jones-girlfriend-of-undercover-police-office-mark-kennedy-interview>
 she told the Guardian that gradually uncovering the truth about him felt like 
“long, slow painful torture – real psychological torture”.


Another undercover officer, Bob Lambert, had relationships with four women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/23/undercover-police-animal-liberation-front>
 while pretending to be an animal rights and environmental activist for four 
years in the 1980s.

Helen Steel, an environmental campaigner who was one of the two defendants in 
the McLibel legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/29/helen-steel-relationship-undercover-police-feel-violated>
 against restaurant chain McDonald’s, had a two-year relationship between 1990 
and 1992 with John Dines, who spied on leftwing groups. She said : “I am glad 
the Metropolitan police 
<http://policespiesoutoflives.org.uk/individual-statements-from-women/> have 
finally admitted that these undercover relationships were abusive and 
indefensible.”


Helen Steel on her relationship with an undercover policeman: ‘I feel violated’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/29/helen-steel-relationship-undercover-police-feel-violated>

 The fourth undercover officer named in the legal action was Jim Boyling, who 
infiltrated environmental and animal rights groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/19/undercover-policeman-married-activist-spy>
 between 1995 and 2000. During that time, he started a relationship with a 
campaigner andwent on to have two children with her. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jan/19/wife-fourth-police-spy-children>


The fifth undercover officer, 
<http://policespiesoutoflives.org.uk/individual-statements-from-women/> Mark 
Jenner,lived with a woman for four years in the 1990s while he gathered 
information about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/01/police-spy-fictional-character> 
leftwing groups.

However, an eighth woman in the legal action, Kate Wilson, has not accepted 
the settlement and continues her legal fight. Wilson,who had a two-year 
relationship with Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2012/oct/03/undercover-spies-intruded-into-personal-lives>
 between 2003 and 2005, said that following the discovery of his real identity, 
“my sense of who I am and what I can believe, have been devastating and I 
remain haunted by unanswered questions”.


It is understood that the police did not disclose any documents about the 
covert deployments of the undercover officers during the legal case.


Other women who were deceived into having relationships with undercover 
officers have yet to settle their legal actions against the police.

The announcement on Friday follows an out of court settlement reached last 
year with a woman who was profoundly traumatised after finding out by chance 
thatLambert was the father of her son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
. The woman,known as Jacqui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/24/undercover-police-spy-girlfriend-child>
, was paid more than £400,000 by the Met. She had made the discovery 24 years 
after Lambert abandoned her and her son.

Police chiefs have insisted their undercover officers were not permitted under 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/22/undercover-police-cleared-sex-activists>
 any circumstances to sleep with the targets of their covert missions.







 