
Oxford Dictionaries has declared that the word of 2016 is “post-truth” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries?CMP=twt_books_b-gdnbooks>
. I don’t agree. I’m with those who say the year’s most horribly relevant word 
is “normalisation”. That’s because, unlike all the other buzz phrases, it has 
two meanings, sneaking up on your mind in a creepy pincer movement. It either 
means: “Trying to kid yourself that President Trump will forget his bigoted 
views and accept he must govern more or less normally.” Or: “Trying to kid 
other people into forgetting President Trump’s views and into accepting bigotry 
in government as more or less normal.”

How Trump took middle America | Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/16/how-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election>
Normalisation has two sides – like the dismal practice of blaming liberals for 
Hillary Clinton’s loss, much indulged in by the gloating right and the 
self-hating left.

These are times when words matter. The glossy term “alt-right” or even 
“alt.right” (with the super-modern web-style dot in the middle) has replaced 
“extreme right”. I myself always objected to the subtly emollient “far right”. 
Well, there are now just 18 days to go before the Austrian presidential 
elections on 4 December, topping up our already brimming levels of fear with 
the expected election ofNorbert Hofer, the extreme-right candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/austrian-presidential-elections-candidate-norbert-hofer-criticised-god-slogans-posters>
 from the Freedom party.

Hofer’s victory would require a clarification of speech from the commenting 
world, and we will have to be less squeamish about the word “fascist”: an 
urgent de-normalisation of political language.

Strictly-style politics

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpost-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb269e6ac302c25fbeace6c9f938d0e388a8301b2%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Post-truth%3F%20My%20word%20of%20the%20year%20is%20normalisation%20%E2%80%93%20as%20applied%20to%20Trump%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpost-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Post-truth%3F%20My%20word%20of%20the%20year%20is%20normalisation%20%E2%80%93%20as%20applied%20to%20Trump%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpost-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb269e6ac302c25fbeace6c9f938d0e388a8301b2%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Ed Balls and Katya Jones Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
These are interesting times for Yvette Cooper, Labour MP and now chair of the 
home affairs select committee. Her husband Ed Balls is being fast-tracked to 
national treasure status with his increasingly glorious performances on TV’s 
Strictly Come Dancing, recently giving hishilarious interpretation of Gangnam 
Style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/12/ed-balls-performs-best-worst-dance-on-strictly-come-dancing>
, which was actually sort-of not bad at all.

Can Ed’s success have any bearing on a possible parliamentary comeback? Can 
reality TV celebrity be translated into political success? Are there any 
examples of … Ahem. Let’s not board that train of thought. Suffice to say that 
Cooper now has to be in the audience for Strictly every week and she knows the 
cameras are on her.

Her facial expression has to convey a number of complex things: good-humoured 
enjoyment, yes, but combined with a careful hint of goggle-eyed astonishment, 
to emphasise that being a good sport is fine, but political seriousness is not 
being abandoned just for the glamour of Strictly. Last week Cooper gave that 
great facial performance. I’d give it an enthusiastic, Bruno Tonioli-style 10.

The proper hangover place


I am in Amsterdam, for the international documentary film festival. The last 
time I was here, I timidly came to a coffee shop and consumed nothing but 
coffee, which was a bit like going to a 1930s American speakeasy and having a 
glass of R White’s lemonade.

So I am, of course, intrigued about the city’s newest tourist attraction: a 
hangover bar, open at weekends, in which sufferers can come in and have a bit 
of a lie down in soothingly subdued lighting, while sipping vitamin-enriched 
smoothies.

The catch is that you have to fail, or rather pass, a breathalyser test to be 
allowed in – to make sure that you still have alcohol in your system, that 
you’re properly hung over and not a healthy type who just fancies some 
pampering. That would be like some boring civilian trying to gain access to a 
bondage club on the grounds that his man-bag was made of leather. Of course, 
you could argue that the hangover bar is a soft touch for boozers, enabling 
alcohol abuse. I prefer to believe it will be one of Amsterdam’s great 
inventions: social methadone.
 