
The recession, having been weathered in large parts of the UK economy, may be 
starting to retreat. The British Chambers of Commerce survey - universally 
gloomy over a long period - notes that interest rate cuts since the autumn have 
improved export prospects and invigorated consumer confidence. It is not alone 
in expressing optimism. The shortly to be published OECD indicator for the 
Group of Seven economies is signalling that declining growth is bottoming out.

According to work by Michael Saunders at Salomon Smith Barney, the improvement 
is most marked in the US and the UK, although the British data is not yet 
showing much more than weak growth. Nevertheless, those private sector 
economists and the Opposition spokesman, who were so critical of Gordon Brown's 
economic forecasting post the global financial crisis last autumn and in his 
spring budget, may have to revise their numbers.

The critical area is the manufacturing sector, which remains fragile. It will 
have been helped by the reduction in headline interest rates to 5.25 per cent - 
in much the same way as the housing market is concerned. Moreover, if the G7 
economies are showing signs of upturn too - with Japan showing delicate 
indications of pick-up - then export market opportunities should also improve.

The BCC survey shows that, although investment remains weak across the 
economy, manufacturing investment in plant and machinery is rising for the 
first time since 1997, reflecting increased business confidence and improved 
order books.

Nevertheless, there remains a huge impediment to a full manufacturing 
renaissance - the strong pound. This has been the uncontrollable variable which 
has stymied the Government's economic policy since it took office. It was the 
three-way squeeze of a robust pound, a tight lid on public spending and the 
Bank of England's inflation fight which slowed the UK economy dramatically. The 
pound remains a serious impediment to exports and manufacturing growth.

There is a view that the pound will not fall until the UK brings its real and 
nominal interest rates down to levels comparable with those across the European 
Union where the benchmark repo rate is now 2.5 per cent against the UK's 5.25 
per cent. Even if one looks at real rates, those adjusted for inflation, those 
in Britain are the highest among G7 countries. Even so, there are some 
economists, including the Royal Bank of Scotland's Marion Bell, who argue that 
UK rates have fallen too far and that the UK's inflationary history still 
condemns us to higher real interest. If Ms Bell - one of the Guardian's panel 
of economic advisers - is right, then the Government has a problem.

High real interest rates mean a strong pound - it is trading strongly against 
both the dollar and the euro, which suggests that manufacturing will continue 
to struggle in the global marketplace.

The difficulty for policymakers will be getting the pound down sufficiently 
for eventual euro entry, without eroding the search for monetary credibility.

The UK economy cannot afford another catastrophe on the scale of that 
surrounding John Major's decision to take the pound into the Exchange Rate 
Mechanism at DM2.90 in October 1990.

Sainsbury gloom

 Anyone expecting an improved trading statement from Sainsbury when its 
unveils its first-quarter sales is likely to be bitterly disappointed. Indeed, 
there are likely to be fresh questions as to whether chief executive Dino 
Adriano, working with a divided team of executives, can limp on much longer. 
The deterioration in market share, which has been the story of recent years, 
may have been halted for the moment at close to 13.3 per cent, but that does 
not mean the end of the problems.

In terms of market share, Tesco, with 17 per cent, according to the latest 
data from retail researchers Taylor Nelson AGB, is disappearing over the 
horizon and Asda, which has lifted itself to 10.3 per cent of the market, could 
soon be snapping at Sainsbury's heels.

The real shock, however, is in like-for-like sales, year on year. While its 
competitors (with the notable exception of Safeway) have been putting on sales 
at an extraordinary rate in the first three months, Sainsbury has been losing 
them. Taylor Nelson AGB shows sales falling 1 per cent in the four weeks to 
April 4 1999 against the same month last year. Contrast this with Tesco which 
put on 8 per cent, Asda 11 per cent and even the enfeebled Safeway managed a 
gain of 2 per cent.

If this isn't enough for another jolt in the share price and a debate about 
the company's future, nothing will be.

Mormons to rescue

 At least one household name from the FTSE, Imperial Chemical Industries, may 
be through the worst. Charles Miller Smith has suffered an uncomfortable ride, 
in which he shelled out Â£5 billion on Unilever's speciality chemicals business, 
before arranging the sale of ICI's industrial chemicals companies - making it 
almost a forced seller. In the end, one of the world's largest private 
companies, the mystical Huntsman group from Salt Lake City, has come to the 
rescue. Who would have guessed that Brigham Young would lead ICI out of the 
wilderness.
 