
Geelong star Patrick Dangerfield says strike action during the AFL’s 
pre-season competition remains an option as the players association seeks a 
better deal for players.

On the day the AFL announced the fixture for its rebadged pre-season 
competition, the JLT Community Series, Dangerfield told reporters it could be 
affected by industrial action if theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
doesn’t resume stalled talks on a new revenue sharing model.


Port Adelaide ban and fine defender Jarman Impey over alleged car crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/port-adelaide-ban-and-fine-defender-jarman-impey-over-alleged-car-crash>
“It’s a chance, I’m not saying it’s a definite possibility, but certainly if 
nothing gets done then we need to look at all avenues to secure a deal,” 
Dangerfield said. “At the moment the AFL isn’t speaking to the PA [players 
association]... we’re not going to get anything done unless the conversation 
starts.

“Nothing’s off the table at the moment ... as [AFLPA chief executive] Paul 
Marsh has already stated, we haven’t reached an agreement and we’re a fair way 
away, so it would be good to sit down with the boss [AFL chief Gillon 
McLachlan] and hopefully strike a deal that’s fair for all parties.”


AFLPA delegates from around the country will convene in the Victorian coastal 
town of Torquay this week to discuss the stalled negotiations on a new 
collective bargaining agreement.


The AFL has baulked at the players’ demand for a new percentage-based revenue 
sharing model that they say gives them more incentive to help grow the game. 
And Dangerfield, a member of the AFLPA board, admitted it was frustrating that 
the league had broken off talks and reiterated the PA’s firm stance on the 
issue.

“We have a clear direction from all 850 players, who we represent, and it’s 
not until we satisfy the needs of those players that we’ll be satisfied,” he 
said. “It is a bit [frustrating] ... as players there is no game [without us].

“The game starts with us. We’re a part of the AFL, we understand there are 
other areas of the game that need to be catered for as well – fan engagement 
and stadiums – but without players there is no competition.”
 