
I’ve spent a lot of time lately staring up at the electricity pylon across the 
river. Hawks, wroteJA Baker in his 1967 classic book The Peregrine 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/311218/>, grow out of 
dead trees, like branches; I’ve learned that peregrines can also sprout from 
steel lattice and aluminium alloy.

David, a local birder, pointed out the peregrine on the pylon one morning in 
late September; it was mantling over a wood pigeon on the lowest crossarm, 15 
metres up. Since then, on every visit to the riverside, my gaze has been drawn 
insistently upward, checking for the falcon’s return.


We have kestrel and sparrowhawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/21/birdwatch-sparrowhawk-tawny-owl-raptor-predator>
 here, buzzard and kite, and a hobby on migration zipped through a couple of 
weeks ago – but nothing quite matches the peregrine for dramatic oomph. It’s no 
longer the scarce and totemic wilderness species it once was, but it can still 
cast a pall of predatory menace over the fields and spinney.

Fast and lethal, the hobby plucks a martin from the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/13/fast-lethal-hobby-plucks-martin-air-country-diary>
Not that the local wood pigeons seemed especially bothered. Sitting squat and 
stodgy on the power-lines, raising a clumsy racket in the canopy, they could 
see, I suppose, that the peregrine had already made its morning kill, and that 
they were safe for the time being.

Talking later, David and I agreed that it wouldn’t be wise to broadcast the 
location of the peregrine too widely. We’re in whatRichard Mabey 
<http://richardmabey.co.uk/> called the “unofficial countryside” here, just a 
few miles from the city, hemmed in by roads, towns, light industry – by people.

There are badgers in the spinney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/01/badger-cull-britains-largest-carnivore>
 and roe deer in the fields, and I know that there are people who come from the 
towns and villages to bait the badgers for sport andshoot the deer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/oct/30/exmoor-emperor-deer-hunting-on-exmoor>
 for meat. There’s a fox’s earth in the undergrowth by the river, and I know 
that people have been there to dig out the earth and kill the foxes. A 
different kind of predator, and a different kind of menace.

I crane my neck again. At the very top of the pylon, starlings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/29/starlings-uk-gardens-decline-rspb>
, neat black shapes against the cirrus, come and go in threes, fours, fives. 
They sit high up there and bicker and jockey and play their swannee-whistles.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>


 