
The schoolboy who appeared to have Preston striker Jermaine Beckford’s shirt 
snatched off him at last Sunday’s League One play-off final has been presented 
with another of the Wembley hat-trick hero’s jerseys.

Beckford sent North End into the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/preston-north-end-swindon-town-league-one-play-off-final-match-report>
, yet it was the top he was wearing that afternoon that quickly became the 
source of social media furore.

Having been substituted during the second half, the 32-year-old tossed his 
shirt to a group of kids in the Wembley crowd but television images showed a 
woman emerging with the garment instead following an apparent tug of war with 
Ted Dockray.
Thomas Scott (@iamtombola) 
GIVE THAT YOUNG LAD IN YHE YELLOW HIS BECKFORD SHIRT BACK AND GET OFF HIS ARM! 
#FL72 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FL72?src=hash> #PlayOffFinal 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PlayOffFinal?src=hash> #pnefc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pnefc?src=hash> #Wembley 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Wembley?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/EG7IxY4VmB 
<http://t.co/EG7IxY4VmB>
 <https://twitter.com/iamtombola/status/602541017984827392> May 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/iamtombola/status/602541017984827392> 
The video went viral <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sPgcs1IkCqo> and so the 
club and Beckford moved to ensure the eight-year-old got his hands on the 
striker’s spare Wembley shirt.

“He’s been through a lot this past week, I just thought it would be a really 
fitting end to a really memorable day for him,” said Beckford, a father of 
three children. “It’s something that once I’d seen and heard what had happened, 
it was a no-brainer for me. It’s one of the best feelings ever. It’s one of 
those feelings that you can’t really describe. It means an awful lot, not just 
to Ted and the other kids, but just to myself as well.

“To make kids happy is one of the hardest things ever, seeing that I’ve been 
able to do that today – it’s a great feeling.”

Ted, who attended Deepdale with his grandfather George, got his hands on North 
End’s League One play-off final trophy, a Preston scarf and a signed programme, 
that he was also given a tour of the stadium.

The schoolboy is yet to declare his football allegiance – although free agent 
Beckford did his best to persuade him to pledge his support to Preston – but 
his Oldham-supporting grandad admits he will be a frequent visitor to Deepdale 
thanks to the striker’s gift.

“It’s good, I’m happy and excited,” said Ted on receiving the shirt. “It’s the 
best way to spend half-term. He is a really skilful player and I’m going to put 
his shirt in a frame on the wall.”

Beckford will at least have one memento from his remarkable Sunday afternoon 
in the capital once the match ball makes its way back to him.
 