
Pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/14/pride-film-review-mark-kermode-power-in-unlikely-union>
, the heartwarming story of an unlikely alliance between LGBT activists and a 
Welsh mining community in the 1980s, was the big winner at the British 
independent film awards, with prizes in three categories.

The comedy-drama, based on true events, was named best British independent 
film, beating competition from Mike Leigh’sMr Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/02/mr-turner-review-mike-leigh-biopic-great-master>
 andThe Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/16/the-imitation-game-review-engrossing-thriller-benedict-cumberbatch>
, and picked up two other awards, with Imelda Staunton named best supporting 
actress and Andrew Scott awarded best supporting actor.

The film’s writer, Stephen Beresford, paid tribute to the original community 
that had inspired his film. “Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners and the 
people of the mining community in South Wales stood shoulder to shoulder 
against the Thatcher government in 1984 and in so doing, unknowingly, paved the 
way for many of the civil rights that LGBT people enjoy today, including an 
equal age of consent and an equal marriage,” said Beresford. “The lesson of 
that they did is that same as it was in 1984. It’s just as simple and just as 
compelling – unite.”

Yann Demange was named best director for his Belfast-set thriller, ’71 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/71-review-yann-demange-belfast-troubles>
, while the best actress award went to Gugu Mbatha-Raw for her first major 
role, the title part inBelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/belle-review-costume-drama-teeth-slavery>
, based on the true story of a mixed-race aristocrat in 1780s England. She 
praised the quality of storytelling and attention to detail in British 
independent film. “Belle has been such a special experience, showing a period 
of history that we’ve seen so frequently on our screens, that Jane Austen era, 
but from the unique perspective of a woman of colour in the 1780s,” said 
Mbatha-Raw. “I’m really, really proud to be a part of something that ensures 
little girls can grow up knowing that Dido Belle was also part of our history, 
so thanks so much.”

The ceremony held in London also saw Brendan Gleeson beat Timothy Spall’s 
depiction of JMW Turner and Benedict Cumberbatch’s Alan Turing to the best 
actor prize for his portrayal of a priest whose life is threatened by a 
parishioner inCalvary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/13/calvary-review-terrific-black-comedy>
.

“I genuinely am knocked for six” said Gleeson, as he accepted the award. “I 
want to thank the producers who have to try and make independent film when it 
is almost impossible for people to risk commercially what is required 
artistically. It’s an awful hard time to make proper films but one of the 
reasons this room so special is that art is front and centre of what is being 
celebrated here and I’m exhilarated by it, so thanks very much.”

Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/boyhood-review-richard-linklater-film>
 won best international film with director Richard Linklater dedicating the 
award to If… director Lindsay Anderson. Linklater said the film, which was made 
over a 12-year period, had been both “wildly impractical … but a wonderful life 
channel”. The director also confirmed he had just wrapped his follow up project 
to Boyhood – said to be an “almost sequel” to his 1993 cult coming-of-age 
classic Dazed and Confused – which begins with a teenager beginning university 
and was described by Linklater as “a big party film”.

The Richard Harris award for outstanding contribution to British film was 
given toEmma Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>, who, in 
typically flamboyant fashion, reminisced how she had once met Harris at an 
“unlikely dinner hosted by Russell Crowe” where the pair had bonded over their 
“lifelong devotion to alcohol, in all its forms”.

Thompson, 55, also used the occasion, in a speech tinged with irony, to 
apologise for her own numerous commercial and blockbuster film projects.

“I have to confess to you all, I have been with studios – I haven’t enjoyed 
it, I’ve tried very hard not to get sucked in, I’ve demanded smaller trailers,” 
she said. “I have also, and this is very hard to say, taken small roles in 
large studio films that could be described as formulaic, for money. In fact, I 
have done many things for money and I am sorry … I do apologise and I’d like to 
congratulate you all for being nobler than me in every way.”

Best newcomer, presented by Helen Mirren, was given to Sameena Jabeen Ahmed 
for her part inCatch Me Daddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/16/cannes-2014-catch-me-daddy-review>
 and the Douglas Hickox award for best debut director went to Iain Forsyth and 
Jane Pollard for the Nick Cave documentary20,000 Days on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/21/20000-days-on-earth-nick-cave-review>
.Next Goal Wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/08/next-goal-wins-review>, which 
chronicled the attempts of American Samoa to qualify for the 2014 world cup, 
was named best documentary.

The Bifas also gave Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> the Variety award 
for helping focus the international spotlight on the UK,which he dedicated to 
his fiancée Sophie, who was in the audience.

“All of us as freelance artists and filmmakers crave autonomy, and to be 
independent and free from outside controls, anything that makes us dependent on 
politics or money or an outside authority,” said Cumberbatch

“For me some of the most exciting moments in cinema are always when the odds 
are against you and authenticity is still achieved, the work triumphs in a 
spirit of independence.”

British independent film awards – the winners

British independent film Pride <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pride>

International independent film Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood>

Director Yann Demange – ’71

Douglas Hickox award for debut director Iain Forsyth, Jane Pollard – 20,000 
Days on Earth

Screenplay Jon Ronson, Peter Straughan – Frank

Actress Gugu Mbatha-Raw – Belle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/belle>

Actor Brendan Gleeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson> – 
Calvary

Supporting actress Imelda Staunton – Pride

Supporting actor Andrew Scott – Pride

Most promising newcomer Sameena Jabeen Ahmed – Catch Me Daddy

Achievement in production The Goob

Technical achievement Stephen Rennicks – Music – Frank

Documentary Next Goal Wins

The Raindance award Luna

British short The Kármán Line

Richard Harris award (for outstanding contribution by an actor to British film)
 Emma Thompson

The Variety award Benedict Cumberbatch

The special jury prize John Boorman
 