
In New Orleans on Friday, thousands turned out to honor Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>, the actor famous for her 
role as Princess Leia in the Star Wars movies.

My time with Carrie Fisher, a hurricane of energy, charisma and foul language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/29/carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-remembered>
Fisher, whose tough-talking princess defied Empire generals while tossing off 
one-liners such as “into the garbage chute, flyboy”,died on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
.

In New Orleans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans>, where death 
is marked by both mourning and merriment, a Mardi Gras group called the 
Intergalactic Krewe of Chewbacchus organized a parade in honor of the woman 
they consider royalty.

“This is a public demonstration of our love for Princess Leia,” said Brooke 
Ethridge, one of the founders of the Leijorettes, a dancing group made up of 
fans who dress like Princess Leia.

“Our first instinct was to hit the streets and parade and celebrate Princess 
Leia and Carrie Fisher.”

Chewbacchus is dedicated to all things sci-fi and fantasy related and has 
always drawn inspiration from theStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movies. The group’s logo features 
the head of Chewbacca, the furry Wookiee who was Han Solo’s close friend and 
co-pilot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8556af8bfede339a816d0fbeabf358288ab438ef%2F0_358_5722_3432%2F5722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Princess%20Leias%20turn%20out%20in%20force%20as%20New%20Orleans%20mourns%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Princess%20Leias%20turn%20out%20in%20force%20as%20New%20Orleans%20mourns%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8556af8bfede339a816d0fbeabf358288ab438ef%2F0_358_5722_3432%2F5722.jpg>
 A small Darth Vader and a small Leia. Photograph: Erika Goldring/Getty Images 
Fisher had been hospitalized since 23 December after falling ill aboard a 
flight and being treated by paramedics at the Los Angeles airport. One day 
after Fisher’s death, her actor mother, 84-year-oldDebbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, died too. A joint funeral 
for the two women has been announced.

In New Orleans, the parade was led by the Leijorettes, followed by a brass 
band playing the Star Wars theme as hundreds of people – many in costume or 
carrying lightsabers – walked behind them. Fans lined the road, taking photos.

“I didn’t know her. But as [she was] an iconic character and as a person, a 
writer and a smart, funny, fantastic woman and role model, I was heartbroken 
and devastated,” Dale Hrebrik said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d0b56d7003d65c5abd8cde939d2be4aaaf4a9d8%2F0_92_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Princess%20Leias%20turn%20out%20in%20force%20as%20New%20Orleans%20mourns%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Princess%20Leias%20turn%20out%20in%20force%20as%20New%20Orleans%20mourns%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fprincess-leia-new-orleans-chewbacchus-parade-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d0b56d7003d65c5abd8cde939d2be4aaaf4a9d8%2F0_92_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Leias check their phones. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
Debbie Reynolds did not die of a 'broken heart', says her son
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/31/debbie-reynolds-did-not-die-of-a-broken-heart-says-her-son>
But even in a crowd where Fisher’s Princess Leia role was front and center, 
many pointed out the contributions Fisher had made even after her Star Wars 
acting wound down. One marcher in the crowd held a sign calling Fisher, who 
spoke openly about her struggles with bipolar disorder, a mental health 
advocate.

Jacquelyn Ryan came with her husband and two children. Her hair was wrapped in 
the two side buns Fisher wore in the first movie, but Ryan said she was more 
impressed with Fisher’s other contributions.

“Probably my first introduction to her was Star Wars, but she as a person was 
really important. Her activism, her mental health awareness, her activism for 
women, her unapologetic attitude about youth and beauty in Hollywood really 
spoke to me,” Ryan said.
 