
Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles>, a vocal critic 
of climate change sceptics, has penned a Ladybird book on the subject after 
lamenting with experts the lack of a basic guide to the subject.

The prince has joined forces with two leading environmental campaigners to 
produce The Ladybird Book on Climate Change, the first in a new series aimed at 
adults, The Ladybird Expert, is to be published later this month.

 Prince Charles’s book, written with Tony Juniper and Emily Shuckburgh. 
Photograph: Penguin/PA 
The 48-page hardback, in the style of the iconic children’s Ladybird series 
popular in the 1960s and 70s, is co-authored by the former executive director of
Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth>, Tony Juniper, 
and Cambridge-based polar scientist, Emily Shuckburgh.

Perhaps mindful of the prince’s passionate views on the subject – he once 
called sceptics “the headless chicken brigade” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/31/climate-change-sceptics-headless-chickens-prince-charles>
 – publishers Penguin Books have taken the precaution of having the book 
“extensively peer reviewed by figures within the environmental community”.


The idea is said to have come to Charles when he was invited to address the 
United Nations conference on climate change in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/prince-charles-opens-paris-climate-talks-calls-on-world-leaders-to-act-now>
 in 2015. Speaking with experts on the subject of global warming, he discussed 
with them the lack of a basic guide to the complex subject, a source said.


Penguin was approached in spring last year and the publisher was enthusiastic. 
After the prince and his co-authors produced their first draft,Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> turned to David Warrilow, chairman 
of the climate science special interest group at the Royal Meteorological 
Society, and a team of seven other climate specialists to go through the 
5,000-word manuscript before publication.





The final version was agreed in August, at a meeting at Balmoral, where the 
prince was holidaying.


The Ladybird books have enjoyed recent success with the publication of new 
spoof guides. The successful pastiche humour series – The Ladybird Books for 
Grown-ups,offering a take on everything from hipsters to mindfulness, and 
grandparents to sickies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/12/ladybird-books-introduce-peter-and-jane-to-hipsters-and-hangovers>
 – have sold more than 3 million copies since 2015.


The approach to Penguin came at the right time. “It was a coincidence, where 
we were thinking about a new series for adults after the huge success of the 
spoof books, but this time wanted some factual books by experts on science, 
history and arts subjects,” White said. “So the call and the idea from Clarence 
House was the catalyst for the new series.”


Related: No plan B for climate change without forests, Prince Charles tells 
Paris summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/01/no-plan-b-for-climate-change-without-forests-prince-charles-tells-paris-summit>

The books feature illustrations in the old-fashioned style of the original 
Ladybird titles. The cover of Climate Change shows the East Sussex town of 
Uckfield, replicating a photograph ofthe devastating flooding there in October 
2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2011/feb/16/floods-2000-climate-change-pictures>
.


“His Royal Highness, Emily and I had to work very hard to make sure that each 
word did its job, while at the same time working with the pictures to deliver 
the points we needed to make. I hope we’ve managed to paint a vivid picture, 
and like those iconic titles from the 60s and 70s, created a title that will 
stand the test of time,” Juniper told the Mail on Sunday.


Penguin said the series offers a bite-sized understanding of a challenging 
subject and that all the books in the new series have been written by leading 
lights in their fields, and provide informed expert opinions. More authors, 
including historian Suzannah Lipscomb, space scientist Maggie Aderin-Pocock and 
classical music critic Fiona Maddocks, have been signed up to write for the new 
adult series.


Charles has himself been the subject of a Ladybird book, published in 1981, on 
the occasion of his wedding to Lady Diana Spencer.

 