
An extra 2,500 prison officers are to be recruited at a cost of £104m to 
tackle “unacceptable” levels of violence in jails across England andWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, the justice secretary, Elizabeth Truss, 
has confirmed.

She said the extra officers will be paid for out of new government funds, and 
include 400 new staff for the 10 “most challenging” jailscited at the Tory 
party conference last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/04/liz-truss-to-launch-recruitment-drive-for-ex-forces-prison-officers>
.

The justice secretary refused to accept that prisons were in crisis but said 
that levels of violence and reoffending rates were far too high. The extra 
prison officers represent a 15% increase on the existing 18,000 officers but 
only goes some way to restore the 30% cut in numbers since 2010 when they stood 
at 25,000.

Liz Truss to launch recruitment drive for ex-forces prison officers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/04/liz-truss-to-launch-recruitment-drive-for-ex-forces-prison-officers>
Truss told BBC Radio 4 that she would not consider “arbitrary reductions in 
the prison population” or expanding early release programmes for offenders to 
deal with the “serious situation”. She said she would only reduce the record 
85,000 prison population by cutting reoffending rates so that fewer people were 
sent to jail.

 She said: “This will be the first time ever that the secretary of state is 
not just responsible for housing prisoners but is responsible for their reform. 
We are going to put that in primary legislation. There will be new powers for 
the prisons inspectorate to identify failing prisons and a new legal duty on 
the secretary of state to intervene in them. That is the first time that has 
happened.”

She acknowledged there were difficulties in recruiting prison officers in 20% 
of prison areas, including London, and said governors would have new powers to 
recruit directly from their local employment markets. An apprenticeship scheme 
and a graduate recruitment Teach First-style scheme is to be introduced.





Prison violence epidemic partly due to staff cuts, MoJ admits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/27/prison-violence-staff-cuts-moj-deaths-assaults>
The latest prison safety figures show that assaults on staff and inmates had 
risen 40% in the past year to 65 a day, while there arerecord levels of prison 
suicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/29/prison-suicides-record-levels-scandal>
 and self-harm – although previous ministers did not accept there was a link
between prison funding and people killing themselves in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/17/-sp-inmate-suicide-figures-reveal-human-toll-prison-crisis>
.

A wider package of proposed safety measures also includes mandatory drug 
testing of all offenders on entry and exit from prison, and the creation of 
“no-fly zones” over jails to tackle the new problem of drones dropping drugs 
and other contraband over prison walls.

The white paper is not expected to include details of how these no-fly zones 
will be enforced but the prisons minister Sam Gyimah told MPs on Tuesday that 
he was keeping a close eye on the Netherlands, where eagles are being used to 
stop drones.

Underlining the pressures on the prison service, Truss agreed to meet 
representatives of thePrison Officers Association 
<http://www.poauk.org.uk/index.php?aid=2> (POA) earlier on Wednesday and to 
start urgent talks on health and safety inside prisons and serious problems in 
the recruitment and retention of staff. The POAhad threatened to hold emergency 
meetings outside every jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/prison-officers-suspend-planned-protests-over-violence-behind-bars>
 to protest at the level of violence, but suspended its action to allow talks 
with Truss to take place.

The white paper will include plans for a new “supersized” prison for 
1,000-plus inmates to be built at Wellingborough, new powers for governors, 
testing of offenders’ levels of English and maths, a system of prison league 
tables and a new duty on the justice secretary to take over failing prisons.


“It is absolutely right that prisons punish people who commit serious crimes 
by depriving them of their most fundamental right: liberty,” Truss is expected 
to say. “However, our reoffending rates have remained too high for too long. So 
prisons need to be more than places of containment – they must be places of 
discipline, hard work and self improvement.

“They must be places where offenders get off drugs and get the education and 
skills they need to find work and turn their back on crime for good.”

Earlier the head of the POA, Mike Rolfe, said jails have been engulfed by a 
“bloodbath”. He told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: “It’s a bloodbath in prisons 
at this minute in time. Staff are absolutely on their knees, lost all morale, 
all motivation. Prisoners are scared. They want prison officers to be in 
charge, and the prison officers feel incapable to do that.

“Low staffing numbers, people leaving the job in droves, it’s a real bad mix, 
and it’s dangerous for everyone, staff and prisoners alike.”

Publication of the prison safety and reform white paper follows the pledge 
made by David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/08/cameron-give-more-power-governors-prisons-shakeup>
 in February when he was prime minister to undertake a radical overhaul of the 
prison system. Truss’s reform plans come after a pause during which detailed 
work on the radical ideas of her predecessor, Michael Gove, was undertaken to 
ensure they were deliverable.


Individual prison governors will be given more powers over education, work and 
health budgets, alongside new measures to hold them to account on an agreed set 
of standards that will include publishing prisons’ annual performance in league 
tables for the first time. These will include the results of the new mandatory 
drug-testing regime and the English and maths testing of offenders so that 
progress made inside particular jails can be measured.

One of Gove’s ideas to be implemented in the reform package is the 
government’s £1.3bn“new for old” programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/17/michael-gove-pentonville-sale-new-for-old-prison-policy>
 of closing dilapidated Victorian inner-city prisons and replacing them with 
10,000 modern prison places by 2020.

The first site to be earmarked for potential redevelopment under the programme 
is Wellingborough in Northamptonshire, which formerly housed a youth detention 
centre, then an adult training prison, before closing in 2012.

The chair of the parole board and former chief inspector of prisons, Prof Nick 
Hardwick, said last month that violence inside jails was now at its worst ever 
level. He described the recent murder in Pentonville prison as “the most 
extreme example of the decline in safety” that he and othershave warned about 
for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/29/prisons-inspector-nick-hardwick-interview>
.
 