
On first look, 2016 was another groundbreaking year for Australian women in 
sport. Record ratings. Record pay deals. Brand new leagues. More women in 
sports media, appearing in it and reporting on it.

But as the year comes to an end it’s worth taking a second glance. Let’s start 
with wages. Netball Australia, Cricket Australia and the AFL all announced pay 
rises for their female athletes this year.

After splitting from their trans-Tasman partners to return to an 
Australian-only competition in 2017, Netball Australia’s new eight-team league 
boasts a club salary cap of $675,000. Across 10 players, that’s average wage of 
$67,500. The minimum wage of $27, 375 is double the previous amount. There is 
also up to two years of income protection for both injury and pregnancy, a 
parental care policy on top of that, and up to $1,500 each year for private 
health insurance. All caveats that indicate alegitimate turning point in 
women’s sport in Australia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/netball-australia-announce-landmark-pay-deal-for-australian-sportswomen>

Cricket Australia’s deal also put its best players in the living wage 
category, the top Southern Stars can now earn in excess of $100,000 and a 
minimum retainer is worth $40,000. The NSW Breakers also announced they would 
pay all members at least minimum wage for the 2016-17 season, making them the 
first fully professional domestic women’s team in Australia.

Pay talks postponed as Cricket Australia refuse to take part in 'public 
dispute'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/pay-talks-postponed-as-cricket-australia-refuse-to-take-part-in-public-dispute>
Yet in December a report in the Australian prompted the Fair Work Ombudsman to 
start an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/ombudsman-cricket-australia-pregnancy-clause>
 into the Cricket Australia contracts. The most talked-about issue? That CA 
asked players to state whether or not they were pregnant before signing their 
contracts. CA did clarify that the pregnancy clause is based on player safety 
and that they had paid out the wage of Sarah Elliott – so far only player to 
become pregnant while contracted.

The AFL Women’s league will start in February, with the league itself and each 
of the eight teams well backed by corporate sponsors. The presence of a new 
league is cause for celebration in itself; women now have the same pathway as 
men. On the surface it has also been enthusiastically backed by the clubs, 
given that more placed a bid for a women’s team than were granted licences.

Yet the AFL’s initial pay deal was widely lambasted. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/news-and-views/opinion/there-is-no-defence-for-failing-to-pay-players-in-the-afl-womens-league-a-living-wage-20160831-gr5mow.html>
 The AFL is Australia’s most popular and successful code yet the majority of 
female players were initially offered just $5,000 for the first season, no 
health insurance and no boots.The deal 
<http://www.afl.com.au/news/2016-11-10/new-minimum-set-as-womens-pay-deal-is-signed-off>
 the AFLPA ended up signing off on is marginally better. Marquee players will 
earn $27,000 in the first season, priority players $12,000 and the majority are 
on $8,500, though boots will also be included.

While critics will point out that it is premature to call for higher pay 
before the inaugural league, one of the highlights of 2016 was that women’s AFL 
already indicated it is a successful product. In addition to the 6,000 fans who 
turned up at Whitten Oval, the average Melbourne TV audience that tuned in to 
see Mo Hope’s six-goal haul in the final AFL Women’s exhibition match was 
387,000. It won its time slot, had a 31.6% share of the free-to-air audience 
and attracted 40,000 more viewers than any men’s match in the regular season. 
Nationally it reached more 1.05 million people.

And it’s not just AFL. Technically last seasons’ Women’s Big Bash League 
cricketoutrated A-League coverage 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-03/fact-check-does-womens-big-bash-league-outrate-the-a-league/7253846>
. The first Saturday night WBBL match of the 2016-17 season averaged 432,000 
viewers and peaked at 637,000. The Matildas collected 1.2 million viewers 
across their four Olympic qualifying matches shown on 7mate. In a saturated 
sports market, the fact that women’s sports are attracting significant ratings 
indicates their value.

The increasing audience for women’s sport on television also coincided with an 
increase in the amount of women broadcasting it. Yvonne Sampson was the first 
woman to host Channel Nine’s State of Origin coverage; later in the year she 
was headhunted by Fox Sports. Erin Molan consolidated her role as a key member 
of both the NRL Footy Show and Channel 9’s league coverage. Rebecca Maddern 
joined the AFL’s Footy Show. Sarah Jones hosted AFL matches on Fox Footy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fproblems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F180a56387b8b0d63a1ae9c45d5e364c3debb4f60%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Problems%20endure%20but%202016%20was%20a%20big%20year%20for%20women%20in%20Australian%20sport%20%7C%20Merryn%20Sherwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fproblems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Problems%20endure%20but%202016%20was%20a%20big%20year%20for%20women%20in%20Australian%20sport%20%7C%20Merryn%20Sherwood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fproblems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F180a56387b8b0d63a1ae9c45d5e364c3debb4f60%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 In October Alyssa Healy and her NSW Breakers team-mates became a 
groundbreaking full-time professional team in domestic cricket ranks. 
Photograph: Brendon Thorne/Getty Images 
Tune in to this season’s cricket coverage and you will find Mel Jones, Lisa 
Sthalekar, Alison Mitchell, Neroli Meadows and Roz Kelly. Lucy Zelic is a key 
member of The World Game team, and Anna Harrington added regular A-League 
commentary to her Socceroos calls. The new AFL Women’s league coverage is set 
to put more women front and centre, including bringing Kelli Underwood back to 
play-by-play AFL commentary.

The contribution of women in independent sports media also grew. Alongside 
stalwart Ann Odong and the team at The Women’s Game, podcasts popped up by a 
handful of others:The Sporting Wife <http://www.thissportingwife.com/>, This 
AFL Life <https://itunes.apple.com/au/podcast/this-afl-life/id1104819749?mt=2>, 
LadiesWhoLeague <http://ladieswho.com.au/index.php/lwl-podcasts> and its stable 
of spinoffs, andThe Outer Sanctum <http://www.outersanctum.com.au/>. After a 
successful initial season The Outer Sanctum was also broadcast on EON sports 
radio, and the six-woman team will partner with the Age in 2017 for a podcast 
about the AFL Women’s competition.

Yet it’s also worth acknowledging that The Outer Sanctum’s mainstream media 
traction came from one of the year’s more depressing episodes for women in 
sport, when Eddie McGuire led Triple M’s commentary team in a round of 
disparaging remarks about the journalist Caroline Wilson. Those comments only 
came to light at all after the podcast reflected upon them. Jones’ elevation to 
host Fox Footy was a direct result of that episode too, as McGuire stepped 
aside.

Moments like this indicate that archaic attitudes towards women in sport still 
exist. While still occasionally demonstrated by those who work within sport (see
Chris Gayle’s comments to Mel McLaughlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/08/ian-chappell-wants-world-cricket-ban-on-chris-gayle-for-mel-mclaughlin-interview>
 in January), it’s an increasing volume of online abuse that’s really worrying. 
A quick look at Facebook comments on a story likeJessica Halloran’s valid 
criticism <https://m.facebook.com/SEN1116/posts/1284589938224818> about the 
lack of women in AFL commentary provides a small window into a wider problem. 
And those are public responses. The private are worse; after Emma Quayle spoke 
out in support of Caroline Wilson,she received hardcore porn in return 
<https://twitter.com/emmasq/status/745025055357177857>.

This is a phenomenon not explicitly related to sports media work. The 
Guardian’sextensive comment analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>
 revealed women are more likely to be targeted with abusive comments, no matter 
the topic. But it has the potential to seriously affect those women working 
within sports media, as well as discourage more women from joining them.

Overall, there were enough highlights for women’s sport in 2016 to tip it over 
into the success category. But what can we expect in 2017? There is no doubt 
that the entry of Australia’s most popular and successful football code into 
the women’s market will continue to stir the pot. While it’s perhaps 
unsurprising that70% of players surveyed in the cash-poor W-League 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/soccer-wleague-players-eye-switch-to-afl-for-cash-boost-survey-shows-20160907-graudt.html>
 would consider switching to AFL, the code is also pulling rank over others.

Ombudsman investigation into CA pregnancy clause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/ombudsman-cricket-australia-pregnancy-clause>
Emma Kearney, Victorian state cricketer and Western Bulldogs priority-pick 
player, recorded her annoyance after Cricket Australia asked her to sign a 
document prioritising that sport over footy.She told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-06/cricket-administrators-intimidated-by-womens-afl-kearney-says/8094444>
 she thought cricket felt threatened by the AFL, and that it was football that 
had been more supportive.

The story is notable for two reasons. One is that it’s an interesting insight 
into how highly athletes place the AFL. Secondly, it’s a notable statement for 
women’s sport. So far female athletes have been less likely to speak out about 
the conditions under which they work, probably as most are simply grateful to 
play without actually having to pay for the privilege.

But if Kearney’s comments indicate that more female athletes are ready to 
speak their minds, in a media environment that is now more likely to cover 
them, and as Australian sports organisations try to trump each other to become 
the sport of choice for women? Well, that will be worth watching.
 