
Nurses, teachers and firefighters’ pay will drop by thousands of pounds in 
real terms by the end of the decade unless the government softens its stance on 
public sector salaries, theTUC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> has 
said in a new analysis.

The trades union organisation calculated that midwives, teachers and social 
workers will see their real pay, which accounts for the impact of inflation, 
drop by more than £3,000 by 2020 if the government sticks to plans tolimit 
salary increases to 1% a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/08/unions-1-per-cent-pay-rise-public-sector-workers>
.

Publishing its findings <http:// 
https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/Public%20Sector%20Pay%20Restraint%20in%20England%20-%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf) a day afterofficial figures showed UK inflation had jumped to 1.6% in 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/uk-inflation-hits-two-year-high>
, the TUC said living costs were set to rise further as a weak pound raised the 
price of the UK’s imports and that the pay of key public sector workers would 
fail to keep pace.


Related: UK risks return to pay squeeze, says thinktank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/uk-pay-squeeze-resolution-foundation-rising-prices-jobs-growth>

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said the government would struggle 
to fill public sector jobs if it stuck to its cap on public sector pay rises at 
a time of rising inflation andgrowing strain on workers such as paramedics and 
nurses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/nhs-crisis-hospitals-issue-alert-first-week-january>
.

“Everyone in the UK has bills to pay, and it’s only fair that wages should at 
least keep up with rising living costs. Workers in the public sector are 
already feeling the squeeze, and it seems like there’s worse to come,” O’Grady 
said.


“Government pay restrictions hurt staff in overstretched public services, and 
make it even harder to recruit good people. Particularly at a time of crisis in 
the NHS, we need to be recruiting the best people for the job.”

The TUC estimates that nurses, firefighters and border guards face losing more 
than £2,500 in real terms by 2020. For ambulance drivers, who earn 
significantly below the average UK wage, the figure is more than £1,800, the 
analysis found using the retail prices index (RPI) measure of inflation, which
hit 2.5% in December 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/inflationandpriceindices/timeseries/czbh/mm23>. 

Using the UK’s main consumer prices index (CPI) measure of inflation, 
real-term pay losses were still about £1,000 or more by 2020 for the workers 
covered in the analysis.

The TUC projections about further real-terms losses is the latest blow to the 
5.4 million people working in the public sector 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/publicsectorpersonnel/bulletins/publicsectoremployment/september2016>
, who account for almost one in five workers in the UK. The average public 
sector salary was already more than £1,000 lower in real terms than in 2010, 
the TUC analysis said.


It noted that many public sector workers were struggling to get by on their 
salaries and were relying on other forms of income either by accumulating debt, 
seeking agency work or employment outside of the sector.

O’Grady called for a shakeup in the setting of public sector pay to move away 
from a blanket national limit. “It’s time for ministers to give public 
employers the freedom to negotiate with unions for pay in their sectors,” she 
said.

Responding to the analysis, the government said the pay restraint was helping 
to protect jobs and it pointed to analysis from the fiscal watchdog, the Office 
for Budget Responsibility.

“The government has had to make difficult decisions on public sector pay to 
maintain fiscal discipline and protect jobs. The OBR has forecast that the 
current pay policy will protect approximately 200,000 jobs,” said a Treasury 
spokesman.
 