
Ian Holloway <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ian-holloway> has returned 
to Queens Park Rangers for a second spell as manager. The 53-year-old, who also 
made more than 150 appearances as a player at Loftus Road, has agreed a 
two-and-a-half-year contract with the west London club.

He replaces Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, who was sacked last week with Rangers 
lying 17th in the Championship.

Holloway said 
<http://www.qpr.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/ian-holloway-appointed-qpr-manager-3412596.aspx>
: “I feel honoured, privileged and proud. It’s a huge moment for me and I am 
delighted to be back here.

“ I feel this is the right time for me. I feel like I’m back home now and I 
can’t wait to get started.

“ I care deeply for this football club and I want to help Les [Ferdinand, 
director of football], Lee [Hoos, chief executive] and our wonderful owners 
create something we can all be proud of.

“Does anyone know this club better than me? Probably not. Has it changed much? 
Maybe. But I know what it means to everyone out there.

“People would die for this club - and I want our players to show that in their 
performance, and our fans to show them that they care about the players as much 
as I will do as their manager.

“My job is to try and help this squad improve and create an environment that 
the players can succeed in, especially at Loftus Road, where the fans love to 
see players express themselves.

“I want to try and galvanise this squad and make my owners smile. Hopefully 
this is the start of something here.”
QPR FC (@QPRFC) 
✍ ‘Ollie’ returns to the club he served as both a player and manager with 
great distinction:https://t.co/viLHbLFv4Z <https://t.co/viLHbLFv4Z> #OlliesBack 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OlliesBack?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/NUOj8Tt1By 
<https://t.co/NUOj8Tt1By>
 <https://twitter.com/QPRFC/status/797142421184229381> November 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/QPRFC/status/797142421184229381> 
Rangers were also linked with the Birmingham manager, Gary Rowett, and Tim 
Sherwood, who thios week became director of football at Swindon.

Instead they turned to Holloway, who spent five years in charge of Rangers 
during a turbulent spell when they went into administration and were relegated 
to League One. He remains a popular figure at the club after guiding them to 
the play-off final in 2003 and to promotion back to the Championship the 
following year.

Holloway left in 2006 and has since led Blackpool and Crystal Palace to 
promotion to the Premier League.

But he has been out of management since a disappointing spell in charge at 
Millwall was brought to an end in March 2015.
 