
Queens Park Rangers have moved swiftly to fill the striking void left by 
Charlie Austin’s absence by signing Conor Washington from Peterborough.Austin 
joined Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/charlie-austin-joins-southampton-4m-qpr>
 over the weekend and, just three days later, Washington has arrived at Loftus 
Road after agreeing terms on a three-and-a-half-year deal for an undisclosed 
fee.

Charlie Austin joins Southampton from QPR in £4m transfer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/charlie-austin-joins-southampton-4m-qpr>
The 23-year-old, who, like Austin, used to play non-league football, has 
scored 15 times forPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> this season and becomes 
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s first signing for QPR.

Speaking to his club’s official website, Hasselbaink said: “Conor is a player 
I’ve admired for a while now, so I’m delighted he’s agreed to join us. I’ve 
seen first-hand what he’s capable of and his all-round game has always 
impressed me. Of course he’s still got a lot to learn – he’s by no means the 
finished article – but I am convinced he has what it takes to succeed at a 
higher level with us.

“He’s raw, he’s hungry, he’s determined. He’s quick and he’s versatile, which 
is important. He can play on his own up there, in a two, or on the shoulder of 
another striker. He’s got great pace to get in behind and that’s something we 
need when you look at our current attacking options.”

Washington is hopeful he can progress further in the Championship and noted 
the role Hasselbaink played in his decision.

He said: “As a striker, having someone like Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink here as 
manager was a massive pull for me. He’s been there, seen it and done it at the 
very highest level and that can only benefit me as a player. I feel I’ve 
improved as a player over the last 18 months. My mentality has changed and I’m 
a better player for it. But I also feel there’s a lot more to come from me and 
I believe I can properly go on to fulfil my potential atQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr>.”

Peterborough have earned a reputation for developing players from non-league 
football before selling them on to clubs higher up the chain and Washington 
follows the likes of George Boyd, Craig Mackail-Smith and Aaron McLean in that 
respect.

The Peterborough chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, took to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/DMAC102/status/689462999296290816> after the deal was 
announced to defend their policy: “My promise to all young talent who we 
spot/unearth is to always allow them (price permitting) to make a move when it 
suits all parties.”
Darragh MacAnthony (@DMAC102) 
My Promise to all young talent who we spot/unearth is to always allow them 
(price permitting) to make a move when it suits all parties.
 <https://twitter.com/DMAC102/status/689462999296290816> January 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/DMAC102/status/689462999296290816> Darragh MacAnthony 
(@DMAC102) 
Also happy that @NewportCounty <https://twitter.com/NewportCounty> will 
receive nearly 7 figures for having done with business with@theposhofficial 
<https://twitter.com/theposhofficial> & thats how it should be!!
 <https://twitter.com/DMAC102/status/689463468936683520> January 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/DMAC102/status/689463468936683520>  