
The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> MP 
Steve Dickson has defected from the Liberal National party to join One Nation 
ahead of the next state election.

On Friday One Nation’s federal leader, Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson>, announced that 
Dickson, the member for Buderim, would recontest his seat for her party at the 
Queensland election, due in or before 2018.

Dickson was the minister for national parks, recreation, sport and racing in 
Campbell Newman’s government.

Victoria and Queensland announce medicinal marijuana trials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/19/victoria-and-queensland-announce-medicinal-marijuana-trials>
She was “very proud” Dickson had joined One Nation, she said, though she 
offered an apology to anybody disappointed he had switched parties.

She had not approached Dickson to defect and no “deal” was done; he joined out 
of “sheer frustration” because he didn’t want to be a “yes person” for the 
major parties.

Dickson will now be the only One Nation MP in the finely balanced Queensland 
parliament, a crucial crossbench vote in the 89-seat parliament Labor governs 
with 42 seats.

Hanson said the leader of the Queensland party was yet to be chosen because 
the party had not finalised its candidates. Nominations continued to roll in, 
she said, and One Nation was likely to field a candidate in every seat.

Queensland father pleads guilty to giving toddler cannabis oil for cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/queensland-father-pleads-guilty-to-giving-toddler-cannabis-oil-for-cancer>
Dickson declared he wanted to “put people before politics” and the two major 
parties had “lost their way”. He said had he met with Hanson in his electorate 
last October.

Explaining the circumstances of his defection, Dickson said the crucial issue 
for him was an amnesty for medicinal cannabis users. He had approached 
Palaszczuk and asked the prime minister’s office for help on Monday but not 
received a return phone call.

“The only politician in this country that came and offered me any help is 
standing beside me – Senator Pauline Hanson,” he said. “I am a proud 
Queenslander but at the moment I am not proud because we are letting children 
suffer.”

Dickson said Hanson had shown she “cares about the people of this country” 
because she supported “whole-plant medicinal cannabis, and wanting to save a 
child’s life instead of sitting back and being a bureaucrat and letting a child 
die”.

On Tuesday Hanson said on her Facebook page that she had been “working 
closely” with Dickson on the issue and she would lobby the prime minister to 
call a medicinal cannabis amnesty.

“Last year Queensland passed a bill to legalise the use of medical cannabis 
but as of yet there are no licensed suppliers,” she said. “Is it fair to say 
that medical cannabis has been declared legal because it is an effective 
medicine and then deny desperate families that medicine? I’m sorry but that 
fails the commonsense test.”

Dickson said he had reached out to former LNP colleagues to say he was “not 
the enemy”, would continue to work with them and wanted the parliament to be 
more bipartisan.

On Friday LNP leader Tim Nicholls said he was disappointed with Dickson’s 
decision, accusing him of acting out of self-interest.

“This is all about Steve Dickson and Pauline Hanson playing the types of 
political games that Queenslanders are sick and tired of.

“They didn’t vote for Dickson to change horses midway through a political 
term.”

Nicholls said the LNP had supported prescription access to medicinal cannabis 
through pharmacies, laws which will come into effect in March. He accused 
Dickson of “using the suffering of those poor families and kids” to justify 
jumping to One Nation.

In 2015 Dickson sponsored a petition 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/queensland/sunshine-coast-lnp-mp-steve-dickson-sponsors-petition-to-ban-sharia-law-20150409-1mhurv.html>
 seeking legislation to exclude any group which advocates violence, seeks to 
promote or impose sharia law, or rejects the constitution from the definition 
of “religion … and places of worship”.

Dickson’s son, Christian Dickson, cut ties with the LNP to run as an 
independent for Sunshine Coast council andover his involvement in an 
anti-mosque group 
<http://www.sunshinecoastdaily.com.au/news/dickson-ditches-lnp-local-elections-become-ideolog/2824284/>
.

In a statement the Queensland Greens convenor, Andrew Bartlett, said the 
defection was a “huge blow to the LNP’s credibility in Queensland, and shows 
the difference between One Nation and the LNP is smaller than ever”.

“It is virtually certain that the LNP – which once had principles on this 
issue – will now do a preference deal with One Nation.

“One Nation is voting almost always to back LNP legislation and do political 
deals with the LNP in the Senate, while more and more LNP members are echoing 
the socially and economically destructive rhetoric of One Nation.”

Hanson said no decision had been made on preferences and the defection had 
nothing to do with them.

Queensland One Nation candidates have already sparked controversy, after 
Guardian Australia reported two had come under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/one-nation-candidates-anti-gay-messages-port-arthur-conspiracy-theory>
 for promoting anti-gay messages and Port Arthur conspiracy theories.


The Mulgrave candidate, Peter Rogers, is the latest to face criticism after a 
post on his campaign website 
<http://peterrogersonenation.com/the-drowned-boy-the-lie-that-changed-the-world/>
 claimed that thedrowned Syrian toddler Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
 was “alive and well” and that thePort Arthur massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/it-took-one-massacre-how-australia-made-gun-control-happen-after-port-arthur>
 was “a fabricated incident”.

Hanson revealed that Rogers had offered his resignation but she accepted his 
explanation he was not the author of the posts.

“He, his own stupidity, he allowed someone to control his website,” she said. 
“Now, that person has put up these comments without Peter’s knowledge.”
 