
1. A local poet, David Dunbar, christened Dumfries the "Queen of the South" in 
an address to parliament following his election in 1857. The football club was 
founded in 1919 when three local clubs - Dumfries FC, the 5th Kings Own 
Scottish Borderers and Arrol-Johnston, a works side - joined together

2. Queens' most famous player was the Newcastle and Chelsea legend Hughie 
Gallacher. Their most-capped player is Billy Houliston, who won three for 
Scotland. Another former striker, Tommy Bryce, has an entry in the Guinness 
Book of Records having taken a mere one minute, 46 seconds to score a hat-trick 
against Arbroath in December 1993

3. The club's record appearance-holder is the "other" Alan Ball. As his 
namesake was performing on the world stage, Ball featured a staggering 819 
times for Queens between 1963 and 1982. A goalkeeper, he was handed two 
testimonials

4. Queens' modern-day hero, the somewhat rotund Stephen Dobbie, is the subject 
of this chant, sung to the tune of Que Sera Sera: "Steve Dobbie, Dobbie, we 
don't think you're overweight, your finishing's really great, Steve Dobbie 
Dobbie"

5. Queens can lay claim to being the only club in world football named in the 
Bible. "TheQueen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> will stand up and 
condemn the people living today, because she came from so far away to hear the 
wisdom of Solomon. But look, something greater than Solomon is here!" (Luke 
11:31). The queen, in this case, is the queen of Sheba

6. Robert Burns died in Dumfries in July 1796, having stayed in the town for 
five years. He is buried there, in St Michael's Churchyard. The Globe Inn, the 
poet's favourite bar, is still thriving

7. Highland Park, a whisky distillery, released an exclusive Queen of the 
South single malt to mark the final. Only 89 bottles were produced - one for 
every year of Queens' history - and sold out within hours of going on sale
 