
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> farmers 
campaigning against stronger tree-clearing regulations – and who have said 
farmers are “the country’s greatest environmentalists” – have bulldozed 
thousands of hectares of native vegetation.

Under the previous LNP government, regulations were relaxed to allow farmers 
to clear large areas.

The environmental group WWF said the clearing of almost all immature trees on 
one property in central Queensland – Corntop –appeared to go beyond what even 
the current regulations allowed.


The rules state that at least 30 immature trees per hectare – and all mature 
trees – must be left standing. Martin Taylor, conservation science manager at 
WWF, said these ecosystems could naturally have thousands of trees per hectare.

The Queensland Department of Natural Resources and Mines confirmed it was 
investigating a complaint about the clearing at Corntop.

“There used to be a forest there and now it’s just a pasture with a few 
scattered trees,” Taylor said. “That’s broadscale clearing.”

The practice was allowed under legislation 
<https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/legisltn/current/v/vegetmana99.pdf> 
relating to the “thinning” of vegetation, intended to “restore a regional 
ecosystem to the ... densities typical of the regional ecosystem”.

Queensland tree clearing blamed for dramatic rise in wildlife needing rescue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/06/queensland-tree-clearing-blamed-for-dramatic-rise-in-wildlife-needing-rescue>
Taylor said the regulations were unacceptable if they allowed this sort of 
clearing.

“Any pretence that this is some sort of legitimate correction of an ecological 
problem is just nonsense,” he said.

He said regulations that dictated an arbitrary number of trees per hectare 
could not have anything to do with “restoring” the ecosystem, since there was 
no requirement to compare the state of the property to more natural ecosystems 
in nearby national parks.

Draft changes to the regulations 
<https://www.dnrm.qld.gov.au/our-department/corporate-information/policies-initiatives/vegetation-management/new-laws>
, increasing the number of trees that must be left and banning clearing of 
endangered ecosystems, have been proposed and are expected to be tabled in the 
Queensland parliament this month.

The changes are fiercely opposed by the farming lobby, with AgForce organising 
a protest against them later this week. The owners of Corntop have been vocal 
campaigners against the tightened regulations.

In May, Janeace Anderson, one of the property owners, told a parliamentary 
inquiry into the tree-clearing laws: “Firstly, I state that this country’s 
greatest environmentalists are our farmers and our graziers.”

Anderson, who was presented to the inquiry as an AgForce regional 
representative, continued: “Radical media are portraying the image that we are 
practising large-scale land clearing, when this is clearly not the case.

“What we are doing on our properties is taking proactive expensive measurement 
steps to protect the long-term health of our environment and the viability of 
our business. We are doing this through the practice of thinning using the 
current vegetation laws to restore our land back to its original open woodland 
condition, as much as we are allowed.”

Repeated attempts to contact the landowners and Agforce for comment have been 
unsuccessful.

When former Queensland premier Campbell Newman weakened land-clearing laws in 
2012, tree-felling rates skyrocketed. In 2013-14, 300,000 hectares were 
cleared, double the rate in 2011-12.

The associated emissions from the land clearing that year were equivalent to 
those saved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/29/exclusive-land-clearing-surge-in-qld-set-to-wipe-out-direct-action-gains-report>
 by the federal government’s emissions reduction fund.

The changes were also thought to have caused a doubling the number of native 
animals that needed rescuing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/06/queensland-tree-clearing-blamed-for-dramatic-rise-in-wildlife-needing-rescue>
.
 