
In both your news report (UK schools failing to climb global league table, 
December 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/06/english-schools-core-subject-test-results-international-oecd-pisa>
) and your editorial (Slicing up the Pisa results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/the-guardian-view-on-the-pisa-tests-slicing-them-up>
) you make the mistake, common throughout the media and across many 
commentators, of assuming that the results from theOECD Programme for 
International Student Assessment 
<http://www.oecd.org/education/singapore-tops-latest-oecd-pisa-global-education-survey.htm>
, tell us anything useful about the relative performance of different 
educational systems.

Each of the 70 or so countries taking part in Pisa has a unique educational 
curriculum, structure and method of delivery, that reflect tradition, politics 
and social norms, and it makes little sense to try and judge them using a 
common test. This is in addition to all the myriad problems associated with 
translating across languages and cultures; the fact that the vast majority of 
test questions are not released for public perusal; and the technical 
difficulty of making any valid comparisons over time.

In addition, the notion that differing performances across nations can be 
ascribed to the characteristics of national education systems and associated 
policies is patently absurd. Educational performance is influenced by a variety 
of socioeconomic factors in addition to what goes on in schools, so that even 
if we could be satisfied that any given comparison was valid, we could not then 
simply ascribe it to any particular educational policy or feature.
Harvey Goldstein
Professor of social statistics, University of Bristol

• If we persist in outmoded, politically motivated gimmicks masquerading as 
education policies, what do we expect? The tragedy is that the children, who 
are blameless in this mess, are the sufferers, not just now, but also in their 
future potential and prospects. Presumably the government’s sycophantic 
“experts” will now advise shovelling money into their current (un-evidenced) 
hobby horse, selective schools. Why not try something original? Let’s go back 
to a model of pre-service teacher training that was rigorous, demanding and 
meaningful, and which prepared teachers to have a range of pedagogical methods 
to support learning. The current model of quick fix, minimum competency 
training isn’t working. Teaching is a profession and needs to be treated as one.
Professor Bill Boyle
Director, TETEC UK

• Your editorial suggests that the Pisa results for Scotland and Wales are 
inferior to those of England because the misguided Celts chose to “rebuff” Tony 
Blair’s educational “reforms”. This is unlikely, to say the least. Although 
indulging in an unconscionable amount of top-down meddling, much of it 
reactionary and nearly all of it completely pointless, the Blair governments 
enacted hardly any educational reforms – and certainly none of a kind that 
might have improved the country’s standing in Pisa.Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and Wales did not “rebuff” these 
reforms, such as they were, but decided to reject some aspects of the regime of 
testing and associated league tables introduced by the 1988 Education Reform 
Act. 

Whether this has affected their Pisa standing relative to that of England is 
not at all clear, but none of it has anything to do with Blair, who deserves 
credit for investing a lot of money in buildings and equipment, but whose 
record otherwise gives credence to the widely circulated story that, when he 
said in 1997 that his priorities were “Education, education, education”, it was 
because his autocue got stuck.
Michael Pyke
Campaign for State Education

• Your education letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/education-michael-wilshaw-ofsted-tertiary-colleges>
 (6 December) all refer in their different ways to a need for the secondary 
level curriculum to be broadened. This topic, debated endlessly for at least 
the last 40 years, had its last big chance with the 2004Tomlinslon report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2004/oct/18/1419education.furthereducation1>
, rejected by Tony Blair as risking unpopularity among middle-class voters.

The report aimed to modernise a curriculum and qualifications governed by 
academic subject fiefdoms and largely unchanged from their Victorian public 
school origins, which did not include any streams of vocationally inspired 
learning. So Mike Tomlinson’s report gathers dust in an education department 
cupboard, when it provides answers to many of the problems in underperformance 
of schools, especially that of pupils not engaged by academic courses. Yet it 
connects with Theresa May’s anxiety about social moblity – as well as the 
nation’s need for greater skills.
Michael Harrison
Formerly chief education officer of Sheffield

• So UK schools are failing to climb global league table. If the majority of 
pupils have some understanding of the changing world of work, with its falling 
wages, precarity and massive and growing inequality, what incentive do they 
have to do well at school?
Andrew McCulloch
Collingham, Nottinghamshire

• Singapore may be top of the Pisa chart, but youth suicide rates there are 
also rising. Academic pressure is cited as one of the causes. We need to be 
careful what we wish for.
Fiona Carnie
Parent Councils UK <http://www.parentcouncils.co.uk>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 