
Rémi Garde hopes the Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> owner, Randy Lerner, and the 
chief executive, Tom Fox, will break their silence soon and insists he 
understands fans’ anger after he and the players were abused.

The manager said he has asked Lerner to talk to supporters with the club in 
disarray and fury spilling over as Villa prop up the Premier League.

Aston Villa subject of crisis talks in New York after poor show at Wycombe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/aston-villa-crisis-talks-new-york-wycombe-remi-garde-micah-richards>
Garde and his squad were abused as they boarded the coach after Saturday’s 1-1 
FA Cup draw at Wycombe Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/aston-villa-crisis-talks-new-york-wycombe-remi-garde-micah-richards>
, while Micah Richards spoke to supporters to calm tensions during the game.

Lerner has barely spoken to the media in five years and Garde expects he and 
Fox, who has flown to New Yorkto hold crisis talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/aston-villa-crisis-talks-new-york-wycombe-remi-garde-micah-richards>
 with the owner, to address Villa’s situation.

Garde said: “This is something I asked from them a fortnight ago, or something 
like that. Not to take the pressure off me – if I didn’t want the pressure I 
wouldn’t have this job. It’s more because I’m facing [the media] every week but 
I know Villa from inside for only 10 weeks now. At some point I cannot explain 
and I am not in the position to judge what happened before and whether it was 
right or wrong because I wasn’t here.

“At some point it is important that the Aston Villa voice is not only mine. 
This is not to avoid my responsibilities. I will do it as long as I am in this 
position at this club.”

Villa are at home to Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> on Tuesday and are 11 
points from safety. They are seven points behind second-bottom Sunderland and 
tensions boiled over after Villa failed to beat League Two Wycombe.

Videos of the manager and players being abused after the game at Wycombe were 
posted on social media while the substitutes Brad Guzan and Joleon Lescott were 
also accused ofplaying a game involving who could spit chewing gum the farthest 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/aston-villa-fans-complain-were-10713166>
 during the match.

Garde tried to move on from the weekend but conceded he expected the reaction. 
“I know football, in every country it’s the same. I understand completely the 
fans’ frustration. I am not surprised because I know that from situations from 
different clubs I have played and worked for.”

He said he was not aware of the reported issue with Lescott and Guzan but 
reminded all players of their responsibilities. “As a professional player, you 
need to behave in the right way with respect for everybody. It doesn’t matter 
if you are top of the table or bottom. It’s just a question of being respectful 
to everybody.”

Against Palace, Garde is without Carlos Sánchez and Alan Hutton (hamstrings) 
while Jack Grealish (tonsillitis) and Gabriel Agbonlahor (back) are doubtful.
 