
Steve Wigley


Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>, Aug-Dec 2004

Wigley’s previous experience of first-team management had come at non-league 
Aldershot but Rupert Lowe nevertheless considered him the right man to steady 
the ship followingPaul Sturrock’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/aug/24/newsstory.southampton> two 
games into the new season. He managed one win – in the derby against Portsmouth 
– in his 14 games, losing seven.

Rémi Garde leaves Aston Villa by mutual consent after five months in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/remi-garde-leaves-aston-villa-mutual-consent>
Paul Jewell


Derby County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty>, Nov 2007-Dec 
2008

Jewell was in charge for two-thirds of Derby’s Premier League season in 
2007-08, and therefore missed its finest moment – a1-0 home win against 
Newcastle in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/sep/18/match.derbycounty>. They lost 
19 of their 24 remaining league games after his arrival and got relegated with 
a record low of 11 points but Jewell was considered the man to lead a promotion 
charge the following season. He quit in December, with Derby 18th in the table 
and five points clear of relegation.

Jim Fallon


Dumbarton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dumbarton>, 1995-96

Fallon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/nov/06/sport.comment2> was 
in charge for all but two of Dumbarton’s league games in the 1995-96 First 
Division – and his team earned more points in the two he didn’t have anything 
to do with than in the 34 he did. In all he oversaw one win, two draws and 31 
defeats that season, at the end of which he was, somewhat surprisingly, offered 
a new contract. He lasted 12 Second Division games, in which he doubled his 
overall tally of wins, and thus departed having toasted victory twice, and 
mourned victory on 39 occasions.

Les Reed


Charlton Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic>, 
Nov-Dec 2006

“One of the key features of our club during my time as chairman has been 
stability,” wrote Richard Murray when announcingLes Reed as Charlton’s 
permanent manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/nov/15/newsstory.charltonathletic>, 
replacing Iain Dowie in November 2006. “It is something I feel is essential in 
all successful businesses.” Charlton went on to prove how essential it is, as 
Reed was sacked 41 days later, his tenure featuring six defeats – one of them 
at home to League Two Wycombe in the League Cup – a draw and a win, as the 
Addicks careered towards relegation.

Lawrie McMenemy


Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, July 1985-April 
1987

When McMenemy arrived at Sunderland, as the highest-paid manager in the 
country, they had just lost a League Cup final and been relegated from the top 
flight, and the expectation was simple: he was to lead them straight back up 
again. In his first season they avoided relegation by four points and in his 
second they went down to the third tier for the first time. Mackem-Enemy, as he 
was by then known, left in April, the die already cast, at the end of a week in 
which his assistant was sacked for admitting the team were not very good, and 
the striker Terry Curran was also sacked for making V-signs at fans.

Lawrie Sanchez


Fulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham>, April-Dec 2007

Fulham spent 13 successive seasons in the Premier League despite a 
comparatively minuscule stadium and an a generally mediocre transfer budget but 
still could have made a decent mini-list of their own. Most of them worked in 
the season they eventually went down, whenMartin Jol was sacked in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/01/fulham-part-company-with-martin-jol-manager>
 and his replacement Rene Meulensteen had only 17 games in charge, winning 
four, beforebeing replaced by the even-worse Felix Magath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/14/fulham-sack-rene-meulensteen-felix-magath>
, who also won four games but out of a total of 20. Sanchez just pips them, 
having overseen an unusually lavish summer transfer spendonly to depart in 
December <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/dec/22/newsstory.fulham> 
having also won four games, out of 24.
 