
Rémi Garde was critical that it took his Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> players more than an hour to 
break down League Two promotion contenders Wycombe Wanderers, saving his most 
barbed comments for Jack Grealish, after late goals from Ciaran Clark and 
Idrissa Gueye enabled the Premier League’s bottom side to claim a home tie with 
Manchester City in the FA Cup fourth round.

Aston Villa v Wycombe, Bolton v Eastleigh and more: FA Cup replays – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/19/aston-villa-v-wycombe-bolton-v-eastleigh-and-more-fa-cup-replays-live>
Clark broke Wycombe’s sterling resistance within two minutes of Grealish, back 
after a fortnight out with tonsillitis, being withdrawn on a night when Villa 
were not only booed off at half-time but on their re-emergence for the second 
half. Villa have lost every league game when the former Ireland Under-21 
forward has played this season.

“You saw the game,” the Villa manager said. “Jack started and it was his first 
for quite a long time now. But I haven’t seen exactly what I wanted to see from 
him tonight. I know he has played in the part of the game when we were not good 
collectively. It’s not only about Jack; I was not happy with the way the team 
played the first hour. We were the Premier League team tonight but for too long 
tonight I did not see that.”

Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe>, back at the ground 
where they enjoyed an FA Cup semi-final with Liverpool 15 years ago, came out 
with most of the credit from this third-round tie, not to mention around 
£350,000. For a team boasting only one player signed for a fee, this has been a 
pair of games to cherish. “I’m extremely proud,” Gareth Ainsworth, their 
engaging young manager, said, “because for 70 minutes we matched them – more 
than matched them and had the better chances – but just ran out of steam.

“We’re full of players who we’ve got from here, there and everywhere who have 
been told they haven’t got a career. When we heard the reaction of their fans 
[at half-time] I said to my players, ‘Just listen that – that’s how well you’ve 
done.’”

Villa Park was enlivened by the 4,000 Wycombe fans who had driven up the M40, 
many allowed off work early by enlightened employers keen on supporting the 
town’s team.

Boasting the best defensive record on the road in all four divisions, having 
conceded only eight league goals away from Adams Park all season, Ainsworth’s 
side demonstrated their impressive defensive organisation, while breaking with 
effective directness.

Notwithstanding the 54 places between the teams, Villa barely caused the 
League Two side a problem in the first hour. The cries of ‘Come on Wycombe’ 
grew louder.

Sam Wood composed himself before unleashing a cleanly struck left-footed shot 
that Brad Guzan was relieved to parry to his left. Just before half-time Wood 
played in Joe Jacobson, scorer of the equalising penalty in the initial game at 
Adams Park, down the left wing and the left-back’s superb centre tempted Guzan 
out only for Garry Thompson to head just over the crossbar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Faston-villa-wycombe-wanderers-fa-cup-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F951f5cfc9d22e63afc1619eba9454a238fbd36d5%2F233_47_3696_2219%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%20criticises%20Jack%20Grealish%20after%20Aston%20Villa%20labour%20past%20stoic%20Wycombe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Faston-villa-wycombe-wanderers-fa-cup-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%20criticises%20Jack%20Grealish%20after%20Aston%20Villa%20labour%20past%20stoic%20Wycombe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Faston-villa-wycombe-wanderers-fa-cup-replay-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F951f5cfc9d22e63afc1619eba9454a238fbd36d5%2F233_47_3696_2219%2F3696.jpg>
 Idrissa Gueye makes sure of Aston Villa’s place in the fourth round of the FA 
Cup with his side’s second goal against Wycombe. Photograph: Laurence 
Griffiths/Getty Images 
At least Villa had gained four points and a new chairman since the first 
meeting; a four-game unbeaten run almost represents a golden era in the club’s 
recent history. Garde had hoped that the ignominy of Villa fans abusing their 
own players at Adams Park would continue to galvanise his squad but not too 
many of the nine changes from the side that drew 1-1 with Leicester City can 
expect to retain their places against West Bromwich Albion on Saturday.

On the hour mark it was Thompson again who headed just wide as Villa, despite 
replacing Carlos Sánchez with the more creative Gueye at the interval, 
continued to struggle for any attacking fluency. Last year’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> finalists continue to look 
sluggish and lacking in confidence, their relegation remaining a near certainty 
despite going four games unbeaten for the first time in 13 months.

Villa have fallen to too many lower-division sides in the past five years of 
knockout football to take anyone for granted. Sheffield United, Bradford City, 
Millwall and Leyton Orient have been among their conquerors.

There was a desperation about Villa to make their technical superiority count. 
Jordan Ayew ran all the way down the right wing only to skewer his shot wide of 
the far post. When he did hold the ball up after a good dash and pull it back 
towards Grealish, it spun out for Sinclair who lashed his shot well wide. Gueye 
shot wide as Wycombe, able to make only one change from the team that lost away 
to Hartlepool United, tired.

Finally, with Carles Gil instantly making a difference on replacing Grealish, 
Clark headed in Ashley Westwood’s right-wing cross in the 75th minute after 
Ayew played the ball back. In the 90th Gueye stroked home his first goal for 
Villa after Rudy Gestede laid back Sinclair’s left-wing cross. But it was the 
Wycombe players who were last on the pitch sharing applause with their 
supporters.
 