
This time last year Rafael Benítez was preparing Real Madrid for an assault on 
La Liga and the Champions League but, so far at least, he is finding life in 
the Championship atNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> far from a culture shock.

“We’ve prepared the players the same way as at Real Madrid,” said the 
Spaniard, whose side kick off their promotion quest atFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> on Friday night in the Football 
League’s opening match. “The difference is that this pre-season has been more 
football-orientated; with Real Madrid it was business, marketing and we were in 
Australia and China.”

Newcastle could barely believe their luck when Benítez – sacked by Real in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/rafael-benitez-sacked-real-madrid-manager-zinedine-zidane>
 – agreed to succeed Steve McClaren in March. Or when, having failed tostave 
off relegation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/12/newcastle-relegation-championship-mike-ashley-board-rafael-benitez>
, he opted to stay on.

Real Madrid to offer Newcastle loan players to seal Moussa Sissoko deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/real-madrid-newcastle-moussa-sissoko-diame-clark>
In exchange, the former Liverpool and Chelsea manager was offered a degree of 
control unprecedented under Mike Ashley’s ownership of the club. Given carte 
blanche to rebuild, he has invested £45m in eight signings, most notably Matt 
Ritchie from Bournemouth,Mohamed Diamé from Hull  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/newcastle-sign-mohame-diame-hull-city>
andDwight Gayle from Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/newcastle-dwight-gayle-signs-ritchie>
.

Most new faces are British and Benítez is suitably delighted. “I knew that, to 
create a positive atmosphere, I had to change things,” said the manager who has 
soldGeorginio Wijnaldum to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/football-liverpool-sign-georginio-wijnaldum-newcastle-jurgen-klopp>
 for £25m andAndros Townsend to Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/crystal-palace-andros-townsend-alan-pardew>
 for £13m and hopes to recoup even more by offloading Moussa Sissoko from a 
once heavily Francophone dressing room. “We needed players with experience of 
the Championship and of English football that knew about the physicality, the 
importance of every contact. It was important to get players with knowledge of 
this side of the game.”

Newcastle also gave serious consideration to signing the free-scoring Ross 
McCormack from Fulham but the Scotland forward hasended up at Roberto Di 
Matteo’s Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/aston-villa-sign-ross-mccormack-fulham>
 for £12m. Not that Benítez’s spending spree is over. “We’re still looking,” 
said the 56-year-old, who allowed Fabricio Coloccini, Papiss Cissé and Steven 
Taylor to leave before making Jamaal Lascelles his captain. “We’re looking at 
the loan market. Maybe there are Premier League players who aren’t going to get 
chances with their clubs – we’re waiting and analysing every option.

“The key is always the net spend but if you sell good players you have to 
invest. We’re able to spend because we’ve sold players. We also have a smaller 
wage bill and maybe a profit at the end of the summer because we’re doing good 
business. I’m happy we’re getting good value for money.”

Newcastle’s season-ticket sales are up on last year, with more than 33,000 
already taken. “It says a lot about our fans,” said Benítez. “They’re really 
disappointed about going down but they’re still positive. We’ve changed the 
atmosphere and the mentality.”

Not that he agrees with the notion relegation could be a blessing in disguise. 
“Going down is never good news. It was very difficult but it does mean we can 
start building something new, something different which will hopefully be good 
for the future. Relegation can never be a positive but it allows you to change 
things and move in another direction.”

Many outside Tyneside are surprised he stuck around. “I felt the love of the 
fans and the city,” he said. “The assurances the club gave me about the way 
we’ll go forward. I want to be here managing a top side. Hopefully we’ll be in 
theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> for just 
one season but it’s a very difficult division. There are a lot of good teams 
and it’s a very different league from past years. A lot of rich owners are 
spending big money. The prize of reaching the Premier League is so big in terms 
of TV money that everyone’s spending.

“We’re a good team and we can be one of the best teams but it’ll be tough. 
We’re still creating our style, there’s plenty of work to do to improve and 
it’ll take time. I’d like to say we’ll win easily at Fulham but I don’t think 
we will. For us, it’s going to be a long journey.”
 