
Raith Rovers have said they are “delighted” to announce a shirt sponsor deal 
with the crime author and lifelong fanVal McDermid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/val-mcdermid>. The front of Rovers’ shirt 
will be printed with her website, valmcdermid.com, for the 2014-15 season in 
the SPFL Championship.

Tom Morgan, Raith’s commercial director, said: “We are delighted to welcome 
Val on board. She has been a great supporter of the club and when she was 
approached about the sponsorship she knew it was a win-win situation for 
herself and the club. It is an honour for a provincial club likeRaith Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> to be involved with a world famous 
author.”

Rovers beat Rangers 1-0 in the Ramsden Cup final in April but finished in 
seventh position in the SPFL Championship, only two points above a relegation 
play-off place. Their survival was a key factor in attracting McDermid to 
sponsoring the shirt.

The 59-year-old writer said: “The benefit has never been clearer than in this 
coming season. With the arrival of Rangers, Hibernian and Hearts in our 
division, there will be many more visitors to Stark’s Park. There will be 
massively more media interest, with photographers and TV cameras sending images 
of our ground and our players all round the world. So whether you’re a local 
business or you’re aiming at a wider audience, this is the year to get involved 
with Raith Rovers.”

McDermid is best known for her crime fiction, namely involving the character 
Dr Tony Hill. She already had a stand named after her and is a board member. 
Her father was a scout for the club.

This is not the first time in recent memory that a writer has sponsored a 
lower-league club, with the award-winning author John Green, who is also known 
for his YouTube videos, putting up his own money into AFC Wimbledon in January.
 