
An 11-year-old Indian boy with a very long name is changing chess history. 
Already the youngest ever international master, the Chennai prodigy is likely 
to eclipse Sergey Karjakin’s long-standing world record as the only pre-teen 
player to achieve the grandmaster title. His early career is outpacing both 
Russia’s Karjakin (GM at 12 years seven months) and Norway’s reigning world 
champion Magnus Carlsen (GM at 13 years four months), whose title match starts 
in New York on 11 November.

Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa learned chess at five and soon made remarkable 
progress. He won the world under-eight title in 2013, the under-10 in 2015 and 
is currently the No1 seed in the world under-12 championships at Batumi, 
Georgia. He outclasses his peers but it is his advance in global adult chess 
which has set new all-time peaks for age achievement.

His first international master result at Cannes, France, in February this 
year, was quickly followed by his second at Moscow Aeroflot in March, then his 
third and final norm at Bhubaneswar, India, in May, so qualifying him as an IM 
at 10 years nine months and breaking Karjakin’s world record by more than a 
year. And the way he did it hints at much more to come. He recovered from a 
0.5/3 start in Moscow, while at both Cannes and Bhubaneswar he reached the IM 
score with a round to spare.

Several talents including Carlsen have reached IM at 12 but Karjakin (11 years 
11 months) and Praggnanandhaa are the only players to have qualified before 
their 12th birthday.

Once the first title breakthrough is achieved, the best of the best are likely 
to make further quantum jumps. Karjakin and Carlsen both took less than a year 
to progress from IM to GM. Praggnanandhaa still has 17 months in which to break 
Karjakin’s GM world record and the omens for his doing so are bright. He has 
already shown that he can play well outside India, at Cannes, Moscow, and again 
at this month’s Isle of Man Open. A property entrepreneur has sponsored his 
travel.

To become a GM a player needs three norms of 2600+ performances from 
individual tournaments plus an overall 2500 rating. His Fide world rating is 
already within range at 2454, his personal best and only 46 points short of the 
target.

Praggnanandhaa’s world GM age record chase is sure to interest every 
tournament organiser who wants to maximise publicity. Europe’s prestige events 
like the London Classic Open at Olympia in December along with Tradewise 
Gibraltar and Tata Steel Wijk B in January 2017 could all invite him.

Two of his replies near the end of his interview after his final round Isle of 
Man game revealed his ambition. Asked if he was pleased with his score of 
5.5/9, he answered that he would have liked another point or so, That would 
have put him close to 2600. Asked whether he hoped to become a GM, he replied “
in about a year <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5oeBYzo8tw>”. GM at 11 might 
be pushing it, but such is the speed of his advance that it cannot be ruled out.

Praggnanandhaa comes from Chennai/Madras and his chess hero is Vishy Anand 
<http://blog.chessgurukul.com/content/images/2016/07/Praggnanandhaa-with-Anand.png>
. His parents do not play chess but his older sister Vaishali has led the way 
for him, winning the world girls under-12 and under-14 championships and 
qualifying as a woman international master. He has been coached since the age 
of eight by GM Ramachandran Ramesh, who in 2002 earned his own place in chess 
history as the last player from his country to win the British championship 
before Indians were ruled ineligible.

It is not just that he plays very well. His style is rich in tactics, with two 
queen sacrifices at Moscow Aeroflot in addition to his Isle of Man 18-move 
miniature against one of the best players in South America, a 2645 GM from 
Paraguay.

This brilliancy is going round the chess world, has made many chess fans fully 
aware of the new Indian talent, and has been compared to Bobby Fischer’s Game 
of the Century against Donald Byrne in 1956. That game, played in New York 60 
years ago this month, was of much higher quality with deeply calculated knight 
and queen sacrifices, but Fischer was 13 against 11 while Praggnanandhaa’s last 
dozen or so moves were almost all the first choice of the computer and he saw 
and was ready for the better defences missed by his opponent. His victory is 
sure to become part of chess lore and be quoted in future as a classic example 
of dynamic attack.

After castling long, White should capture 9 dxc5, since in the game 9...c4! 
and 10...b5! already gives Black a dangerous attack. 11 exd5? (Nxd5) was too 
risky, and 14 Na3? was fatal. White had to try 14 Nc7 Qb7! 15 Bxc4 (if 15 Nxa8 
c3!) Rb8 16 Nb5 Be6! 17 Bxa2 Bxa2+ 18 Kxa2 Qxb5 though Black’s attack 
continues. At the end if 19 c4 Nb4+ 20 Kb2 Nd3+ forces mate.

Axel Bachmann v Praggnanandhaa

1 d4 Nf6 2 Bf4 g6 3 Nc3 d5 4 Qd2 Bg7 5 Bh6 O-O 6 Bxg7 Kxg7 7 O-O-O c5 8 e3 Nc6 
9 f3? c4! 10 e4 b5! 11 exd5 Nb4 12 Nxb5? Nxa2+ 13 Kb1 Qxd5 14 Na3? c3! 15 bxc3 
Rb8+16 Ka1 Qa5 17 Kxa2 Nd5 18 Ne2 Be6! 0-1

3465 1 Bd5! (threat 2 Qa8+ Kh7 3 Qg8+ Kg6 4 Bf7 mate) Kh7 2 Qa8 h5 3 Bf7! Ne1+ 
4 Kh3 and mates by Qg8+/Qh8. Not 1 Qf7?? Qc2! and Black draws.
 