
I grew up with Roald Dahl, just like everyone else. I knew what an Oompa Loompa
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZhs7w-FzeI> was, I loved Matilda, I was 
terrified ofThe Witches 
<http://www.roalddahl.com/roald-dahl/stories/1980s/the-witches> and deeply, 
deeply suspicious of Willy Wonka. I could pick out a Quentin Blake illustration 
from half a mile away.

But I’d never actually read a Roald Dahl book. I had absorbed the books via a 
sort of cultural osmosis, to the point that it felt as if I’d already read his 
work. Having seen a few film adaptations, I almost convinced myself that I had. 
Because surely I had. How could anyone born in the mid-80s not readRoald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>? Especially a book-loving kid 
like I was, sitting on an itchy library carpet under a blanket of open books.

I’m part of the #BookVsFilmClub <https://twitter.com/bookvsfilmclub>, and with 
The BFG chosen as our next book-and-film pairing, I finally had an excuse, at 
the age of 30, to explore the books that passed me by as a child.

Boy, was I missing out. I expected The BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg> to be a charming, easy read, 
probably quite dated. And compared to the thrill-a-minute kids’ books of today, 
it is extravagantly quaint. But Dahl, I discovered, has a surprisingly wicked 
sense of humour. He has a wonderfully sharp, deadpan turn of phrase, and many 
adult authors could learn a lot from the neatness of his descriptions. He’s 
also not above a good fart joke – or a whizpopping gag, as he might say – and 
quite right too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Try%20and%20be%20a%20Dinketysnipsy%20girl'%3A%20Ian%20McKellen%20reads%20two%20letters%20by%20Roald%20Dahl%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Try%20and%20be%20a%20Dinketysnipsy%20girl%27%3A%20Ian%20McKellen%20reads%20two%20letters%20by%20Roald%20Dahl%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Ftry-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video&media=>
‘Try and be a Dinketysnipsy girl’: Ian McKellen reads two letters by Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2016/jul/20/try-and-be-a-dinketysnipsy-girl-ian-mckellen-reads-two-letters-by-roald-dahl-video>
Despite having lived a Dahl-free existence until recently, I still read a lot 
of kids’ books, and perhaps this is me wearing my when-I-were-a-lass hat, but 
modern children’s books have grown overly keen on forcing their protagonists to 
grow up. Parents are stripped away (often in traumatic circumstances) and the 
fates of entire worlds are placed on the child hero’s shoulders. Dahl, however, 
allows his children to be children. Sophie, the heroine of The BFG, is an 
orphan and survivor of scary adventures, but she does it all under the 
protection of the BFG. Knowing that Sophie herself is never in any real danger 
gives Dahl a safety net to take the reader’s imaginations to some very dark 
places. How many of today’s kids’ books dwell in such cheerily gory detail on 
children getting chewed up by giants?

What surprised and delighted me most is Dahl’s love of words and stories. 
Matilda is the most obvious story-lover, but it’s there in The BFG too, in the 
beautifully indulgent portmanteau words littered through the book (“dreadly”, 
“delumptious”, “scrumdiddlyumptious”). I would have delighted in those words as 
a child; even the grownup me was excited by the freedom with which he throws 
made-up words around. It’s one of those things you do as a child that most of 
us sadly grow out of. Can’t find the right word in your limited juvenile 
vocabulary? Just throw some sounds together in a funny order.

Unsquashable squirts: the legacy of Roald Dahl's girl heroes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/21/unsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes>
The BFG is a classic (and literal) tall story, escalating its boasts with 
every page until we reach a barnstorming finale starring the Queen and the 
Royal Air Force for good measure. It all takes me immediately back to being a 
child, standing in front of my parents and explaining, with growing 
implausibility, that it wasn’t me who ate all the jam, it was a burglar. The 
BFG never feels juvenile or silly, because it captures that feeling of being a 
child so well. While child readers are whisked to the magical Giant Country, 
adult readers get a trip to the equally magical land of early-years nostalgia.

Thankfully, I never grew out of my tendency to pick up whatever book was to 
hand and stick my nose in it. Few children’s books that I have read as an adult 
have taken me back to being a child like The BFG did. I might have been reading 
it in a flat full of boring grownup furniture that I bought with my own money, 
but for a little while I was back on that library carpet, trying to read the 
first chapter of five books at once, overwhelmed by the richness of words and 
stories on offer. What an indulgent treat. I’m already planning on belatedly 
giving my seven-year-old self the role model she deserved by finally reading 
Matilda.
 