
Gareth Bale took home a souvenir from Zinedine Zidane’s first game as manager 
of Real Madrid, leaving the Santiago Bernabéu with the match ball signed by his 
team-mates. Unlike Bale, most of them welcomed the decision tosack Rafa Benítez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/rafa-benitez-real-madrid-thanks-fans>
 on Monday but his disappointment did not last long. It certainly did not show 
on the pitch where the Welshman scored a hat-trick in this victory against 
Deportivo de La Coruña, departing to a standing ovation with a quarter of an 
hour to go.

Real Madrid 5-0 Deportivo: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-v-deportivo-la-liga-live>
He was not alone; applause was the soundtrack of the night, the whistles of 
recent weeks gone. Five days can be a long time in football, especially when 
there is such a hurry to forget the past.

On Monday night Zidane’s family occupied seats in the front row of the 
Bernabéu press room before Benítez’s sacking had even been officially 
announced; on Saturday night he occupied his place on the edge of the technical 
area where he saw Karim Benzema’s first goal put his team on course and his 
second goal round off a perfect debut. Between those two Bale scored three.

“Gareth can be very happy about what he did tonight. It is not easy to score 
three goals,” Zidane said. So what now? “Continue like this.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fzinedine-zidane-speaks-first-match-real-madrid-coach-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F10%2F1452428823269%2FKP_1292459_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zinedine%20Zidane%20speaks%20after%20first%20match%20as%20Real%20Madrid%20coach%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fzinedine-zidane-speaks-first-match-real-madrid-coach-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zinedine%20Zidane%20speaks%20after%20first%20match%20as%20Real%20Madrid%20coach%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fzinedine-zidane-speaks-first-match-real-madrid-coach-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F10%2F1452428823269%2FKP_1292459_crop_640x480.jpg>
Zinedine Zidane: ‘The best thing for me was everyone’s attitude’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jan/10/zinedine-zidane-speaks-first-match-real-madrid-coach-video>
As an exercise in changing the atmosphere, maybe even in political survival, 
Zidane’s arrival had already proven an instant success; the doubt was whether 
it would be a lasting one. Or even if it would last beyond the first game. It 
did. At times, Madrid were impressive here, a dynamism and enthusiasm about 
their play that had been absent of late. “We played the ball well and created 
chances,” Zidane said. “We will improve, too. I’ve only just arrived; you have 
to give us time.”

Time is rarely given here, but he will anticipate more of it than his 
predecessor got. Pushed aside without a word,Benítez barely got a goodbye on 
Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/rafa-benitez-real-madrid-thanks-fans>
. Treated as if he had never even been there, no explanation offered and no 
time spent lamenting his departure or justifying its arrival only 13 days after 
the president, Florentino Pérez had insisted: “Zidane will not replace 
Benítez.” His sacking was, rather, the tiniest prelude to introducing Zidane; 
there was celebration, not contrition.

Here, that continued. Zidane shirts were on sale in the club shop and when his 
name was announced a huge roar greeted it, followed by applause. The mention of 
Benítez’s had been whistled weeklysince the clásico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/real-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
. Many of the players felt the same way – Bale’s disappointment was not widely 
shared – and Zidane’s arrival changed the atmosphere. It also left them without 
an excuse to hide behind.

As for Bale, Zidane promised that he would give him the same “affection” that 
Benítez had. He certainly had freedom of movement, coming inside from the right 
to great effect: all three goals were scored in a striker’s position,fears of 
an “exile” on the wing unfounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/gareth-bale-no-plans-to-leave-real-madrid>
.

Zidane’s first team was a 4-3-3 with Luka Modric, Toni Kroos and Isco in 
midfield, although the latter – returning after only 12 minutes in the last six 
league games – was often close to the front three, heading left and leaving 
Modric and Kroos behind. Up front were Bale, Benzema and Cristiano Ronaldo, as 
Zidane had promised. At the back, Dani Carvajal replaced Danilo.

Madrid led on the quarter-hour when Sergio Ramos’s volley from a corner was 
flicked in by Benzema. Until then Deportivo had been dangerous, Lucas Pérez 
just missing a cross from Fede Cartabia, while Madrid momentarily exhibited 
familiar flaws. The disconnect between the front three and the rest was reduced 
but Deportivo moved the ball well, encountering time and space. Pérez sliced 
one over, then took on two shots in a minute.

But Madrid were growing and they, and the fans, enjoyed this. At times the 
football was impressive: quick and offensive. Ronaldo cut inside and shot wide 
before Bale made it 2-0, heading in Carvajal’s cross.

Zinedine Zidane: the No10 overcomes his doubts to step into Real Madrid 
cauldron | Paul Doyle and Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/08/zinedine-zidane-real-madrid-deportivo-la-coruna>
Bale then clipped a lovely ball to Ronaldo which he headed against a post. The 
applause grew, as much for moments of intensity as inspiration. Modric most 
warmed their palms.

Five minutes into the second half Bale made it 3-0, neatly slotting home 
Ronaldo’s ball. Then he headed in Kroos’s corner for his 10th goal in seven 
games and his third of Zidane’s opening night, before Benzema crashed home in 
the final minute.
 