
Gareth Bale insisted he is happy at Real Madrid after scoring a hat-trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-gareth-bale-zinedine-zidane-deportivo-la-coruna-la-liga-match-report>
 on Zinedine Zidane’smanagerial debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-v-deportivo-la-liga-live>
 at the Santiago Bernabéu – but admitted he was disappointed Rafael Benítezwas 
sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/rafael-benitez-sacked-real-madrid-manager-zinedine-zidane>
 and that it is impossible to predict where his own future lies.

Bale scored three goals in a 5-0 victory over Deportivo de La Coruña, leaving 
the pitch to a standing ovation from the Real Madrid fans and departing the 
stadium with the match ball under his arm, signed by his team-mates. It was his
second hat-trick in four games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/real-madrid-rayo-vallecano-la-liga-report-bale-benzema-ronaldo>
 and he has now scored 10 times in seven. No player in La Liga has provided as 
many assists this season.

Real Madrid and Gareth Bale give Zinedine Zidane the perfect start
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-gareth-bale-zinedine-zidane-deportivo-la-coruna-la-liga-match-report>
The sports daily AS called Bale “colossal”, while Marca went for “fabulous”, 
the veteran match reporter Santiago Segurola writing: “Bale produced his best 
game atReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>, and as 
good as any of those [produced] by the great stars of this club.”

Zidane said: “Gareth should be very happy with the way he has played; it is 
not easy to score three goals.” Asked what he wanted from Bale now, the 
Frenchman replied: “For him to carry on like this.”

Bale said: “I had a very good relationship with Rafa. Obviously, it was a big 
disappointment to see him go but things like this happen in football: you’re 
professional and you get on with it, and carry on.” Asked directly if he was 
happy and planned to stay at the club, he responded: “I’m happy at the moment. 
Obviously, you can never predict what happens in the future but I’m enjoying my 
football at the moment, so I’ll keep going.”

The Wales forward, who admitted that he did not know if Zidane’s signature was 
among those scribbled on the ball, insisted that he had not had a point to make 
to his new manager, despite having been unhappy at the sacking of Benítez on 4 
January.

That move came less than a fortnight after the club’s president, Florentino 
Pérez, had promised the manager’s job was safe. “Zidane will not replace 
Benítez,” Pérez had said; 13 days and only one game later, that was exactly 
what happened. The president was aware that Bale was one of the few players in 
the squad who wanted Benítez to continue and that he was concerned by the 
change. So, too, was the new manager.

“I understand that he can be annoyed with the departure of Benítez because he 
was an important coach for him but he is going to have the same affection [from 
me] as with Rafa,” Zidane said. “He is important for the squad, fundamental for 
the team. He is phenomenal and what he has been doing recently is fantastic. 
I’m going to give him all my affection and support so that he plays well.”

The message was not only for public consumption. “That [was] nice of him to 
say. We had a chat when he first came in,” Bale revealed. “No matter what, I’ll 
always give 100% on a football pitch and that’s what I did tonight.

“I just want to keep playing my football. I don’t feel I need to make a 
statement to anyone. I know what I’m capable of and I just want to keep 
enjoying my football, and when I do that I play my best football.”

Bale had been concerned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/gareth-bale-no-plans-to-leave-real-madrid>
 that the change of manager would result in him returning to the wing. If that 
happens, he will consider where his future lies. All three goals came with him 
in a more central position as he produced arguably his best all-round display 
since joining the club fora world record transfer fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/gareth-bale-real-madrid-tottenham>
.

“There have been comments in previous interviews and stuff [commenting on the 
fact that] I’ve been stuck on the right, and I didn’t have that freedom but now 
on the right I’m able to come in and float around a bit as well. Obviously, my 
main position would be on the right. I’m enjoying my football, I’m enjoying my 
position at the moment and hopefully I continue to do so.

“My best position is being able to roam around the front and try and find 
weaknesses in the defence, I suppose. Everybody knows where I like to play and 
what I like to do on the pitch, and hopefully I can keep doing it.”

After Madrid had produced an improved display in an atmosphere that had 
changed entirely, the midfielder Luka Modric said: “We feel sorry for Rafa 
Benítez but you only have to see our performances; the change has been good for 
us.”

Bale insisted, however: “I don’t think there was too much difference, to be 
honest. We’ve been working hard of late and maybe we didn’t have a bit of luck 
before but I think we’re all working the same amount on the football pitch. 
We’re all giving 100% and the most important thing is we win games and win 
titles.”

That is something Bale believes they can still do, despite trailing both 
Barcelona and Atlético Madrid at the top of the table. “I think this time last 
year we were clear and we hadn’t lost in 22 games or something,” he said. “We 
know what can happen in the league, we know we have to keep fighting all the 
way; we’ll keep doing that until the last whistle.”

• This article was amended on 13 January 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Gareth Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> as the Wales 
captain. This has been corrected to say Wales forward. Ashley Williams is the 
Wales captain.

 