
Wolfsburg stunned Real Madrid with two goals in seven first-half minutes to 
take control of theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> quarter-final. The 
Spanish side, 10-time winners of the competition, face an uphill task to 
progress to the last four.

Wolfsburg 2-0 Real Madrid: Champions League quarter-final, first leg – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/06/wolfsburg-v-real-madrid-champions-league-quarter-final-first-leg>
Real’s Keylor Navas had not conceded in this competition before but he was 
beaten by an 18th-minute penalty from Ricardo Rodríguez before Maximilian 
Arnold doubled the advantage seven minutes later.

Four days on from a 2-1 win over Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 at the Camp Nou with 10 men, Zinedine Zidane’s side, shaky at the back, have 
it all to do in the return leg next Tuesday.

There were early hints this would not be a straightforward match for real 
when, 70 seconds in, Cristiano Ronaldo was flagged for a marginal offside call 
after he collected Karim Benzema’s pass and turned home. Moments later Gareth 
Bale was denied what appeared a clear penalty after Luiz Gustavo clattered into 
his leg inside the area.

By this stage Real should have led anyway through Benzema who, having returned 
to the pitch following treatment, moved beyond Dante before finding the leg of
Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> goalkeeper Diego 
Benaglio with his shot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fzidane-real-madrid-must-stay-calm-after-2-0-defeat-wolfsburg-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zidane%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20must%20stay%20calm%20after%202-0%20defeat%20at%20Wolfsburg%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fzidane-real-madrid-must-stay-calm-after-2-0-defeat-wolfsburg-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zidane%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20must%20stay%20calm%20after%202-0%20defeat%20at%20Wolfsburg%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fzidane-real-madrid-must-stay-calm-after-2-0-defeat-wolfsburg-video&media=>
Zidane: Real Madrid must stay calm after 2-0 defeat at Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/07/zidane-real-madrid-must-stay-calm-after-2-0-defeat-wolfsburg-video>
Wolfsburg were a threat on the counter and after Bruno Henrique had headed 
straight at Navas, the Real keeper finally conceded after 738 minutes in the 
Champions League when Rodríguez sent him the wrong way from 12 yards out.

The penalty call was debatable as André Schürrle appeared to kick his own foot 
as he swung his leg past Casemiro, who was caught on the wrong side of the 
former Chelsea forward.

Fernandinho’s equaliser gives Manchester City the edge against PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/paris-saint-germain-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Seven minutes later it was 2-0, Julian Draxler finding Henrique in space and 
from his cross Arnold stole a march on Sergio Ramos and finished first-time 
past Navas. Benzema then headed wide before injury eventually forced him off, 
Toni Kroos drew Benaglio into a save and Bale planted a 25-yard free-kick over 
his crossbar of the stroke of half-time.

Zidane’s side pushed for an away goal after the interval and Ronaldo missed 
the target with two attempts from Bale crosses. They almost found themselves 
three goals down as Schürrle took up the space once again left vacant by 
Marcelo, but, after taking a touch, he fired over. Marcelo’s frustration was 
evident when he kicked out at Arnold before comically falling to the ground 
after placing his head in the goalscorer’s chest, with only the victim and Bale 
booked in the subsequent skirmish.

Ronaldo was thwarted again by Benaglio after Isco had threaded a pass through 
with the outside of his boot, while Navas pushed away from Max Kruse at the 
other end to ensure the task facing Real in the second leg did not become even 
more difficult.
 