
Real Madrid’s 100% start to the La Liga season came to an end as they drew 1-1 
at home toVillarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>, halting 
their joint-record run of 16 straight league wins.

Barcelona lose Lionel Messi to groin injury during draw with Atlético Madrid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/barcelona-atletico-madrid-lionel-lessi-la-liga>
Captain Bruno Soriano gave Villarreal the lead on the stroke of half-time with 
a boldly chipped penalty after Sergio Ramos had handled in the area, although 
the Real captain made amends by heading in the equaliser in the 48th minute.

Real remain top of La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> on 13 points but failed 
to seal a new record of consecutive wins, having equalled the 16 straight 
victories set by Pep Guardiola’s Barcelona in 2010/11 on Sunday.

Cristiano Ronaldo returned to action after missing the 2-0 win at Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/la-liga-real-madrid-espanyol-james-rodriguez>
 and spurned two early chances, firing over the bar and heading at goalkeeper 
Sergio Asenjo, who had to punch away a close range header from Karim Benzema.

Former Real midfielder Denis Cheryshev forced Kiko Casilla into a save down 
the other end, while Nicola Sansone, who had scored from the halfway line 
against Real Sociedad on Sunday, sent a bicycle kick over the bar.

Real suffered a setback when Marcelo was forced off injured shortly before 
half-time but that was not the end of their woes. Villarreal found their way 
through when Ramos gave away a penalty by halting a Manu Trigueros shot with 
his hand, and tried to hide his guilt by burying his face in his hands.

Valencia sack Pako Ayestaran after he posts worst record as coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/valencia-sack-pako-ayestaran-la-liga>
Ramos had got away with a similar offence at Espanyol but referee Jose Luis 
González González showed no mercy, and Soriano, who had missed from the spot 
against Málaga earlier in the season, opened the scoring with an audacious chip.

The Spain captain, however, redeemed himself by heading in Toni Kroos’ corner 
early in the second half. From then on Real dominated proceedings as they 
searched for a winner.

Gareth Bale flashed a shot wide from a tight angle, Ronaldo narrowly failed to 
connect with a cross at the far post and later on shot straight at Asenjo, who 
had denied substitute Álvaro Morata from close range.

Ramos also tried to win a penalty late on following a challenge from Roberto 
Soriano, but failed to convince referee González.
 