
As 2015 closed out, philanthropy entered a new zenith. First, Mark Zuckerberg, 
joined the ranks of philanthrocapitalists, announcing thathe will give away 99% 
of his Facebook shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
. His intentions, thus far, are a bit vague – curing disease, education, 
connecting communities and “advancing human potential”. Perhaps he had McKinsey 
& Company’s guide: “Designing philanthropy for impact 
<http://mckinseyonsociety.com/designing-philanthropy-impact/>” as his bedside 
reading.

Meanwhile, on the eve of COP21, Bill Gates also announced his latest venture 
<http://www.euronews.com/2015/12/01/bill-gates-launches-breakthrough-energy-coalition-at-cop21/>
, to launch a multibillion dollar green tech revolution. It was hailed in 
alongside heads of state including President Obama and Prime Minister Modi. The 
model for his energy revolution follows a template from previous initiatives on 
vaccines and agriculture: bring in some billionaires, the private sector, match 
fund by governments, and solve the world’s biggest challenges.

It’s difficult to argue with such largesse. No doubt these new riches will 
find their way into the development funding landscape. Development finance is a 
hot topic, and private sources of finance are something that all NGOs rely on 
to varying degrees. I would be surprised to find any development organisation 
without a major donor strategy at the ready.

Large-scale change rarely comes from an NGO sitting in Oxford or Washington, 
drinking from the foundation well

But funding from the Gates or the Zuckerbergs also come with some fairly 
complex strings, the heart of which is that most of this funding may actually 
impede the real work of development – aptly described by Amartya Sen as being 
about freedom and wellbeing – not simply to increase income. The barriers to 
these aren’t necessarily technology, or even lack of funds: they’re more often 
political and, asthe recently deceased development economist Douglas North 
articulated <http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2015/11/big-questions>
, in the institutions that govern society.

Wealthy charitable foundations and/or not-for-profit LLCs (limited liability 
companies), as Zuckerberg’s venture will be, aren’t much different from the big 
foundations of their 20th-century forefathers, the Rockefellers, the Fords, the 
MacArthurs. All are founded on the backs of an unequal society, concentrating 
wealth into the hands of unaccountable private voices to determine what the 
priorities for society should be, and indeed who gets to benefit. And 
development actors all beg for the privilege to be involved.

Forget 'developing' poor countries, it's time to 'de-develop' rich countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/developing-poor-countries-de-develop-rich-countries-sdgs>
“I wake up every morning and pray they [the large foundations] will 
disappear,” says Mike Edwards, former head of civil society and governance at 
theFord Foundation <https://www.fordfoundation.org/>. “They’re past their 
sell-by date, un-reformable, and too focused on incremental change.”

Large-scale change rarely comes from an NGO sitting in Oxford or Washington, 
drinking from the foundation well, he argues. Edwards’ central issue is that 
larger foundations, which ultimately dominate development discourse, are not 
concerned with real, lasting change – change which needs a rich tapestry of 
grassroots civil society organisations that hold power to account, and shift 
the political game entirely. “They thrive on inequality between foundations and 
recipients, made up of conservative liberals,” he argues. “No one is going to 
relinquish control over money.”

Inderjeet Parmar 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281608627_The_Big_3_Foundations_and_American_Global_Power>
, a City University professor of international politics who has studied the 
influence of large foundations, argues that the wealthy foundations, whose 
boards are drawn from the upper classes, are among the most powerful 
institutions in the world today and that they sustain a social order that won’t 
challenge the power of elites.

Zuckerberg, for example, has been heavily criticised 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/access-now/open-letter-to-mark-zuckerberg-on-net-neutrality-advocacy-in-india/1048696751840666>
 in India, for promoting his version of offering limited internet access to 
everyone. He even wrotea letter for the Times of India 
<http://blogs.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/toi-edit-page/free-basics-protects-net-neutrality/>
 attacking his critics. Rights groups have argued that his proposal is a power 
grab for Facebook, and concentrates information into the hands of a few select 
companies, ultimately reinforcing poverty and class structures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmark-zuckerberg-facebook-philanthrocapitalist-inequality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf99133f56d0d4733803ace1882abcf3b5b27987%2F0_202_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20you%20really%20want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20Mark%20Zuckerberg%2C%20let%20go%20of%20your%20power&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmark-zuckerberg-facebook-philanthrocapitalist-inequality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20you%20really%20want%20to%20make%20a%20difference%20Mark%20Zuckerberg%2C%20let%20go%20of%20your%20power&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmark-zuckerberg-facebook-philanthrocapitalist-inequality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf99133f56d0d4733803ace1882abcf3b5b27987%2F0_202_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘Occupy would never have been funded by a large philanthropic organisation, 
yet it is almost wholly responsible for putting the issue of inequality on the 
political map.’ Photograph: Ed Jones/AFP/Getty Images 
There are modest differences between philanthropists, of course. The Soros 
Foundation <https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/> aims to promote open 
societies and improve democracies. But they still maintain power structures 
from within, by predominantly funding only “pre-selected 
<https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/about/policies/grantmaking%20>” 
organisations. Thus Soros gets to determine how democracy should be improved, 
rather than leaving it up to democracy itself – the antithesis, in some ways, 
of what they’re trying to engender.

Occupy would never have been funded by a large philanthropic organisation, but 
the spontaneous global movement is almost wholly responsible for putting the 
issue of inequality on the political map. Large private donors are prepared to 
fund technocratic causes, and in more enlightened cases – “democracy”, but 
they’re not prepared to relinquish power and control themselves. In fact, they 
only serve to concentrate power further into an increasingly narrower set of 
ideas about how change happens.

For example, the Gates Foundation makes a decision about vaccines and requires 
governments to match fund the donation to access it. Those governments then 
have to choose between saying no to funding for vaccinating, or diverting funds 
from something else, such as public health or education. Gates made the de 
facto decision for that government. Hisnew agricultural alliance 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/How-We-Work/Resources/Grantee-Profiles/Grantee-Profile-Alliance-for-a-Green-Revolution-in-Africa-AGRA>
 was similarly defined: bring together large agri-business and government to 
improve agriculture in Africa on a technology-rich, large-land-holder led 
platform. Green agro-ecology approaches, despite having been proving 
significant success in the region where it has been applied, get sidelined.

Enough of aid – let’s talk reparations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/27/enough-of-aid-lets-talk-reparations>
Parmar sees this as even more sinister. “There are other priorities other than 
those that are publicly stated – increasing the level of power, through 
increasing their networks in non-western countries,” he says.

The funding arena has become increasingly narrow, focused on issues like 
health or education. Very few focus on voice, power or challenging the 
mainstream. Anyone who has filled out long funding application forms, 
struggling to come up with short-term targets and outcomes, will have felt the 
limits of the donor relationship. Indeed, most foundations are now more focused 
on “value for money” than ever before, in spite of the fact that development is 
complex, and attribution for success can’t usually be ascribed to any one 
intervention.

Coupled with the trend towards governments limiting the ability of charities 
or grassroots organisations to campaign in many parts of the world – from India 
to China, and increasingly on western shores – development NGOs, enabled by the 
funding community, are at risk of becoming little more than contract agencies 
who deliver basic public services while further entrenching a system of 
inequality and divisions. If governments are stripping citizens’ rights, if 
communities are divided, if resources are extracted only to benefit the wealthy 
elite, then we will be aiding and abetting the status quo, leading to a 
shrinking and less vibrant civil society in the long run. And a less vibrant 
and agile civil society signals a reduction in long-term development for the 
many. “Is there a model of power and development which is more focused on local 
concerns through local participation itself?” asks Parmar.

Secret aid worker: How can we fight inequality if we live as privileged expats?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/29/secret-aid-worker-how-can-we-fight-inequality-if-we-live-as-privileged-expats>
A powerful letter 
<http://www.commondreams.org/views/2015/12/03/dear-mark-zuckerberg-lets-have-heart-heart>
 written by Jessie Spector, the executive director of Resource Generation, 
urges Zuckerberg to let go of power and to fund root causes. In an ideal world, 
Zuckerberg never would have been allowed to accrue this much wealth and dictate 
how it would be spent. But in the world of realpolitik, I would take Spector’s 
recommendations further, and say to Zuckerberg: set up an independent entity; 
don’t sit on the board; set some guidelines about tackling root causes like 
corporate power or tax justice; ensure smaller organisations have access to the 
funds without jumping through excessive hoops; make sure it’s governed openly 
by a broad group of stakeholders, representing gender, race, class, none of 
whom can sit on the board indefinitely and finally, agree to relinquish 
control. Only then can Zuckerberg truly begin to make a positive difference 
with his wealth and dent the power dynamics that dominate the funding community.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 