
In seasonal spirit, let’s sing along 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CIMNXogXnvE> with Ian Dury – and find some 
reasons to be cheerful in 2017.

One is the resurgence of council-run services. Reading buses 
<http://www.reading-buses.co.uk/>, run by Reading borough council and UK bus 
operator of the year, will prove in 2017 as it did this year that municipal 
enterprise works – and expose the dogma of those, including the transport 
secretary, Chris Grayling, who won’t allowlocal authorities to compete as 
transport providers 
<http://www.getreading.co.uk/news/reading-berkshire-news/reading-buses-could-face-real-11443218>
.

 Then there’s Rotherham council, its functions now being restored 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/powers-over-licensing-return-to-rotherham-councillors>
 as it moves along the path to recovery aftersignificant failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/11/child-abuse-failings-rotherham-council-rise-islamophobia>
 were discovered earlier this year with its taxi licensing procedures, which 
contributed to child sexual exploitation. With assistance, patience and, now 
that former communities secretary Eric Pickles has disappeared, an absence of 
grandstanding from the Communities and Local Government Department, troubled 
councils can recover.Tower Hamlets, too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/11/london-housing-mayor-biggs-builds-a-new-strategy-for-tower-hamlets>
.

London housing: Mayor Biggs builds a new strategy for Tower Hamlets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/11/london-housing-mayor-biggs-builds-a-new-strategy-for-tower-hamlets>
Blackburn has just won high street of the year 
<http://thegreatbritishhighstreet.co.uk/high-street-of-the-year-award> – a 
perfect example of local authorities putting effort and imagination into 
restoring and sustaining town centres, despite the impact of budget cuts and 
online retailing.

Collaboration is all the more durable when done voluntarily and not under 
financial duress

Across England, further productive conversations will take place between 
neighbours about sharing and collaboration, such as Barnet and Harrow’s joint 
legal serviceHB Public Law 
<https://www.barnet.gov.uk/citizen-home/council-and-democracy/one-barnet-transformation-programme/joint-legal-service.html>
, which has just been renewed for a further five years. It runs alongside Brent 
and Harrow’s joint procurement. Such arrangements are all the more durable when 
done voluntarily and not under financial duress.

Similarly, in West Yorkshire, the Midlands, London and elsewhere, council 
staff will do further good work with colleagues in NHS trusts, the police and 
security services on the Prevent strategy [pdf]. There has been criticism, but 
delicate, difficult judgments will be made daily about following up clues and 
indicators of actual or potential radicalisation.

Other positives for public services in 2017 include further progress on 
equality and diversity. We’ve been critical here of Sir Jeremy Heywood, the 
head of the civil service, for failing to give voice to the professional 
identity of public managers, not ony in Whitehall but across the public service 
– an identity that needs to be strengthened and affirmed as austerity bites and 
individual ministers trample on established convention.

How should councils sell the latest cuts to us? Here are four ways | Gerry 
Stoker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/councils-cuts-local-services-public-tax>
But Heywood has undoubtedly flown the rainbow flag and, with permanent 
secretary colleagues including Richard Heaton at the Ministry of Justice, and 
Melanie Dawes at the CLG, he has strengthened pillars of respect and equality.

Mention Dawes, of course, and the glaring gender imbalance 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/opinion/jane-dudman-where-are-female-permanent-secretaries>
 at the top of Whitehall becomes all the more striking. When Sir Martin 
Donnelly steps down from international trade, will a woman follow him? How good 
it would be if the successor to Sir Amyas Morse as comptroller and auditor 
general were one of the several eminently well-qualified female public finance 
leaders. Local government has shown the way, with Joanne Rooney, chief 
executive of Wakefield council, crossing the Pennines to succeed Sir Howard 
Bernstein at Manchester and Jo Miller, chief executive of Doncaster council, 
assuming the presidency of Solace, the organisation for local authority chief 
executives.

Let’s not get carried away. Prevailing financial gloom won’t disappear. The 
coming year won’t see pay restraints or pension caps lifted. Brexit willpile 
pressure 
<https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/publications/whitehall%E2%80%99s-preparation-uk%E2%80%99s-exit-eu>
 on both the domestic policy agenda and resources available to the rest of 
government.

Disastrous projects, such as contracting offender management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/14/ex-offender-prison-neglect-public-services-advice-support-criminal-justice-innovation?CMP=ema-1704&amp;CMP=>
, are nowhere near being rescinded, though a review due to be completed in the 
spring gives justice secretary Elizabeth Truss a pretext. The future of 
autonomous local government in Scotland is none too bright.

In England, whether or not local authorities use the earmarked council tax 
increments so generously approved by the prime minister to fund marginal 
improvements in social care, the 2017-18 financial year looks likely to be the 
toughest yet for them.

Birmingham council chief: years of cuts could have catastrophic consequences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/birmingham-council-chief-years-of-cuts-could-have-catastrophic-consequences>
Yet beneath the surface significant changes in the conduct of government will 
continue, albeit at moderate pace. Socitm’s “smart places 
<https://www.socitm.net/smart-places>” will get a bit smarter. Kevin Cunnington 
will be a pragmatic leader of Government Digital Service, making progress with
GOV.UK Verify 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/introducing-govuk-verify/introducing-govuk-verify>
 (allowing the public to create a single identity to access state services) and
GOV.UK Notify 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/govuk-notify/govuk-notify> (which 
speeds up messaging about applications and inquiries).

Departments will share (a bit) more information, but overblown claims about 
the possibility of “transforming” public services will fall as flat as ever.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 