
Rebecca Solnit’s political manifesto, published to encourage activists while 
George W Bush waged war in Iraq, has enjoyed a huge resurgence in sales since 
the election ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
as the next US president.

Hope in the Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/02/highereducation.globalisation> 
by activist and writer Solnit was published in 2004, but an updated third 
edition published earlier this year sold out in the US after the poll result, 
and digital downloads have topped 33,000, reports Publishers Weekly.

‘Hope is a​n embrace of the unknown​’: Rebecca Solnit on living in dark times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/15/rebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown>
The new edition includes a substantial new introduction, additional chapters 
and an afterword to reflect recent political changes. In the book, Solnit 
argues that the consequences of activism are slow to emerge and progressives 
should not see setbacks as defeat but as part of a long history of 
transformative victories.

Two days after Trump’s victory Solnit, who invented the term “mansplaining” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/mansplaining-explained-expert-women>
, gave away free downloads of the title. When she announced the giveaway, the 
feminist writer and historian wrote: “History is full of people whose influence 
was most powerful after they were gone.”

Her book has resonated with those on the left stunned by a political year that 
has seen their expectations upturned. Urging activists to remain hopeful, 
Solnit accompanied her giveaway with the message: “Hope is an embrace of the 
unknown and the unknowable, an alternative to the certainty of both optimists 
and pessimists … It’s the belief that what we do matters even though how and 
when it may matter, who and what it may impact, are not things you can know 
beforehand.”

The giveaway resulted in more than 30,000 copies being downloaded. Solnit’s US 
publisher Haymarket Books said in the immediate aftermath of the election that 
those who voted against him felt a sense of despair: “The message of the book 
[is] that hope can find root in an appreciation of our history, that ordinary 
people can and have changed the world.”

Her UK publisher Canongate Hope in the Dark has enjoyed unexpected sales 
boosts in the UK from Brexit as well as Trump. “Total sales of our Canons 
edition are 4,868 in print and 882 of the ebook since 28/07 – amazing for four 
months. This edition had peaks on publication following Brexit and again 
November following the result of the US election.”

Books to give you hope: The Faraway Nearby by Rebecca Solnit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/25/books-to-give-you-hope-the-faraway-nearby-by-rebecca-solnit>
Solnit is a world-renowned feminist and environmental activist. Her 2014 
bestseller Men Explain Things To Me became a global bestseller and March 2017 
will see her release a sequel, The Mother of All Questions, a book of 11 essays 
that examine rape culture, misogyny in the literary canon and the gender binary 
in the recent history of jokes about assaults on women.
 