
Australia’s weather was extreme in 2016, driven by humankind’s burning of 
fossil fuels as well as a strong El Niño, according to the Bureau of 
Meteorology’s annual climate statement.

That extreme weather led to devastated ecosystems both on land and in the sea, 
with unprecedented bushfires in regions that don’t usually burn, the worst 
coral bleaching on record, and has been attributed as the cause of damage to 
vast tracts of crucial kelp forests, oyster farms and salmon stocks across 
southern Australia.

The statement, released on Thursday, said the country as a whole had its 
fourth-warmest year on record, but locally, Sydney and Darwin broke records for 
both their hottest maximum temperatures and hottest minimum temperatures.

Hobart had its warmest night on record in 2016 and both Hobart and Brisbane 
had records for their hottest annual mean temperature fall as well. The hot and 
dry start to the year sparked bushfires in Victoria, Tasmania and Western 
Australia.

Tasmania bushfires leave world heritage area devastated – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/feb/02/tasmania-bushfires-leave-world-heritage-area-devastated-in-pictures>
The fires that swept through the Tasmanian world heritage forests were 
described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/22/tasmanian-bushfires-worst-crisis-in-decades-for-world-heritage-forests>
 as the worst crisis those forests faced in decades. The usually damp alpine 
forests there had been dried out by earlier dry weather and then a huge number 
of lightning strikes – which are expected to become more common as temperatures 
rise –burned through forests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/26/tasmanias-bushfires-a-human-made-calamity-on-par-with-the-razing-of-palmyras-temples>
, killing trees that were hundreds of years old.

While land burned, the sea around Australia broiled. The bureau’s statement 
said despite the surface temperature of the seas around Australia being 
consistently high in recent years, 2016 reached a new record temperature, being 
0.73C above the 1961-90 average.

Off the coast of Queensland, those record temperatures led to the worst coral 
bleaching on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/29/great-barrier-reef-scientists-confirm-largest-die-off-of-corals-recorded>
, where an estimated 22% of the coral on the entire 2,300km length of the Great 
Barrier Reef was lost.

In the northern, most remote and most pristine part of the reef, coral was 
devastated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
 by the unusually warm water, whichscientists say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/29/great-barrier-reef-bleaching-made-175-times-likelier-by-human-caused-climate-change-say-scientists>
 will become the norm in fewer than 20 years.

The bureau’s statement also notes that ocean temperatures were at record highs 
around Tasmania in 2016. The freakishly hot waters therehave been attributed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/22/tasmania-marine-heatwave-salmon-global-warming-climate-change>
 as the cause of damage to oyster, salmon and abalone industries, as well as 
increased stress to kelp forests,already devastated by warmer waters in recent 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/07/australias-vast-kelp-forests-devastated-by-marine-heatwave-study-reveals>
.

The Great Barrier Reef: a catastrophe laid bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
The record hot waters in Tasmania were caused by a strengthened east 
Australian current, which drags warm waters from the tropics, along the coast 
of Australia. “This was associated with the longest and most intense marine 
heatwave on record for the south-east Australian region,” thestatement said.
Australian region sea surface temperature anomaly 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-05T01:03:06/embed.html>
It added: “The pattern of above average temperatures over land and in the 
oceans reflects the background warming trend. The Australian climate in 2016 
was influenced by a combination of natural drivers and anthropogenic climate 
change.”

The hot temperatures around the country were followed up by unusually wet 
conditions for much of Australia too.

The bureau said Adelaide had its second-wettest year on record and its wettest 
since 1992. Sydney, Canberra and Hobart had above average rainfall. But the 
pattern wasn’t uniform, as Perth and Melbourne were close to average and Darwin 
and Brisbane were significantly drier than average in 2016.

“Widespread, drought-breaking rains led to flooding in multiple states,” said 
Neil Plummer from the Bureau of Meteorology. “Even northern Australia saw 
widespread rainfall, during what is usually the dry season, greening regions 
that had been in drought for several years.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxPhN5ArX60&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxPhN5ArX60>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxPhN5ArX60&media=>
 The BOM’s Annual Climate Statement is a snapshot of the Australian climate for 
the previous year including rainfall, temperature and significant events.  