
Captain Jake Friend led Sydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> to just their third NRL win 
of the season, a 32-18 victory over Wests Tigers in atrocious conditions at 
Allianz Stadium on Sunday.

Before the lowest NRL-era crowd of 3,622, hooker Friend put in a consummate 
wet weather performance to claim man-of-the-match honours. The Tricolours 
captain was in everything in defence and attack for the Roosters, who were 
without stars Mitchell Pearce and Boyd Cordner due to injury.

Leeds Rhinos’ transfer-listed Zak Hardaker looks to be heading for NRL
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/leeds-rhinos-zak-hardaker-nrl-super-league-rugby-league>
Friend was ably supported by rookie halves Jackson Hastings and Ryan Matterson 
and prop Jared Waerea-Hargreaves. Tigers captain Aaron Woods and fill-in hooker 
Elijah Taylor tried hard to spark the visitors, but the Roosters were deserved 
winners as they leapt above the Tigers to 14th spot on theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder.

Roosters fullback Latrell Mitchell opened the scoring in torrential rain via a 
clever Jackson Hastings pass in the seventh minute and Daniel Tupou extended 
the home side’s lead to 12-0 five minutes later when his centre Dale Copley put 
him over.

The Tigers hit back in the 17th minute when Tim Simona finished off a 
sensational 80m effort that belied the conditions but the Roosters regained 
their 12-point lead in the 31st minute as Blake Ferguson charged onto a Ryan 
Matterson pass close to the Tigers’ line.

But it was a Ferguson error than gave the Tigers a chance for points just 
before the break and David Nofoaluma took full advantage for a half-time score 
of 18-12.

After the break the sides swapped tries through Roosters backrower Aidan 
Guerra, in the 53rd minute and Tigers fullback James Tedesco, who returned from 
a shoulder injury, in the 63rd minute. That was before Roosters utility Connor 
Watson’s first NRL try in the 69th minute sealed the win.

Roosters duo Mitchell and Isaac Liu could be set for extended stints on the 
sideline after suffering suspected syndesmosis in the first half. Neither 
returned to the game, while Waerea-Hargreaves was put on report for a second 
half high shot on JJ Felise.

Taylor was a late inclusion at No9 for the injured Matt Ballin for the Tigers, 
who rested Origin rake Robbie Farah.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Flowest-ever-nrl-crowd-watches-roosters-claim-third-win-of-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548526fdb7e6b5beee480ae5740115370e846934%2F0_0_3900_2600%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Record%20lowest%20NRL%20crowd%20watches%20Roosters%20claim%20third%20win%20of%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Flowest-ever-nrl-crowd-watches-roosters-claim-third-win-of-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Record%20lowest%20NRL%20crowd%20watches%20Roosters%20claim%20third%20win%20of%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Flowest-ever-nrl-crowd-watches-roosters-claim-third-win-of-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548526fdb7e6b5beee480ae5740115370e846934%2F0_0_3900_2600%2F3900.jpg>
 The Titans secured a third consecutive victory with a golden point win over 
the Rabbitohs in Perth. Photograph: Richard Wainwright/AAP 
In Sunday’s late-finishing match, Gold Coast scrumhalf Ash Taylor nailed a 
golden-point field goal to lift his side to a dramatic 29-28 win over South 
Sydney in Perth.

The Rabbitohs thought they had won the match in the first half of extra-time 
when Adam Reynolds slotted a scrappy field goal from just 20m out. But the 
winning point was denied by the video referee, who ruled Rabbitohs prop Nathan 
Brown had obstructed a Titans defender who was attempting to charge down 
Reynolds’ kick.

The Rabbitohs’ ecstasy turned to agony in the second half of extra-time when 
Taylor made no mistake with his own field goal attempt. The result was Gold 
Coast’s third win on the trot, lifting their season record to 6-6. The 
Rabbitohs (5-7) now face a battle to reach the finals.

South Sydney looked dead and buried after going 18-0 down in the 45th minute 
in front of 13,142 fans, but the Rabbitohs pulled a rabbit out of the hat by 
scoring five second-half tries.

Cameron McInnes danced his way to the line with just 52 seconds remaining to 
get the Rabbitohs within reach, before Adam Reynolds nailed the conversion 
after the final siren to send the match to golden point. Reynolds had two 
missed field goal attempts in the first half of golden point.

Earlier, the Titans looked the more dangerous of the two sides in the opening 
half. A moment of brute strength from Titans prop Ryan James, and a mistake 
from Rabbitohs star Greg Inglis proved to be the two key moments of the first 
half.

James scored the opening try in the 13th minute when he outmuscled three 
Rabbitohs defenders to ground the ball. And the Rabbitohs conceded a second try 
just a minute before half-time when Inglis lost the ball as he tried to offload 
while being tackled. The Titans swooped on the loose ball, with Taylor 
sprinting 50m to touch down, giving Gold Coast a 12-0 lead at the break.

South Sydney’s bid for victory appeared over early in the second half when 
Tyrone Roberts crossed to make it 18-0 but from there the Rabbitohs finally 
came to life. Bryson Goodwin started the fightback with a smart sidestep to 
cross in the 49th minute. And when Dane Nielsen touched down in the 53rd 
minute, it was officially game on.
 