
Further to Michele Hanson’s protest at the anticipated sealing of urban red 
postboxes (A certain age, G2, 20 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/19/royal-mail-red-postboxes-birthday-cards-facebook-vince-cable>
), when in west Wales last week my wife went to send her sister’s 70th birthday 
card but inadvertently put it in an acquired residential red postbox 
marked Post Office set into someone’s wall. As the owners were out, we left 
them a note (red-faced), apologising for the inconvenience and requesting they 
put it in the official Royal Mail postbox nearby. The card duly arrived in 
London on time the next day. So perhaps the answer is more community-mindedness 
like this to help make the necessary savings, rather than using impersonal 
digital greetings.
YZ Klein
London

• We in Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> are being trained to 
accept the loss of our local pillar boxes; our nearest box says it is emptied 
at 9am daily, and at 7am on Saturdays, which feels as if I have missed the post 
every day before I have begun to surface or written the day’s letters. For me, 
that encouraging sign reading “Monday to Friday 5.30pm” meant a last-minute 
dash (no time for plodding at 5.25pm) and an amble home with a sense of 
achievement and some neighbourly chats en route.  

Now, when planning my day, I take note of which post office I will be passing; 
the achievement these days is to catch the earlier van at 3.45 rather than risk 
the 5.30 collection, because even a first class stamp no longer guarantees 
delivery the following day.

And what about post offices themselves? What a falling-off is here – our 
venerable old stone building, neighbour to the Guildhall, is now a 
Wetherspoons; and the main “facility” in WH Smith’s has queues akin to
TS Eliot’s on London Bridge <http://www.bartleby.com/201/1.html>.
Stephanie Wilson
Hull
 