
Smaller charities are being shut out of competition for government and council 
contracts by “shockingly complicated”, bureaucratic and inappropriate processes,
a study of 120 contract tenders has found 
<https://www.lloydsbankfoundation.org.uk/Commissioning%20in%20Crisis%202016%20Full%20Report.pdf>
.

The future of many smaller charities with priceless local knowledge and 
connections is being put at risk by their inability to comply with the myriad 
requirements and paperwork that typifies official tendering, the analysis 
suggests.

The public services you didn't know were run by charities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/20/10-public-services-run-charities>
In one case, an invitation to tender for a contract worth less than £350,000 a 
year was found to require answers totalling 27,000 words to 44 questions. In 
another, a four-stage tendering process included a third stage alone comprising 
six separate meetings over eight weeks.

One charity bidding for a mental health contract was found to have been marked 
down for not having a hard-hat policy – the process being used to decide the 
contract was the same as for procurement of building work.

Paul Streets, chief executive of grantmaker Lloyds Bank Foundation 
<https://www.lloydsbankfoundation.org.uk/>, which carried out the study, says 
it seems that “common sense has failed” in commissioning of services. “We are 
alarmed at the scale of the commissioning crisis which is engulfing small 
charities and threatening their very survival.”

The foundation, which specialises in supporting smaller charities, says in the 
report [pdf] 
<https://www.lloydsbankfoundation.org.uk/Commissioning%20in%20Crisis%202016%20Full%20Report.pdf>
, Commissioning in Crisis, that many of society’s most intractable problems can 
be solved only through the reach of grassroots organisations and their 
application of bottom-up solutions.

The survival of such groups is imperilled by their growing failure to win or 
retain service contracts, however. Usually without dedicated bid-writing teams 
or business development departments, they cannot compete with national 
charities, housing associations and for-profit service providers in 
increasingly onerous tendering processes.

Although most of the tenders analysed had an annual value of between £100,000 
and £600,000, with many falling below £150,000, the foundation says the 
processes “often appeared more suited to multimillion pound contracts for no 
discernible rhyme or reason”.

In addition to this, some tenders stipulated minimum turnover sizes for 
contractors that barred smaller charities from even bidding. In other cases, 
charities were informed they would have to work in partnership with another 
organisation not of their choice. One was even told it would have to merge its 
“back-office” administration with that of another bidder.

Streets insists that the foundation is not “commissioner-bashing” and that it 
recognises the pressures commissioners are under to get the best value from 
service contracts.

How sustainable are charity contracts for public services?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/09/how-sustainable-are-charity-contracts-for-public-services>
“It’s about change,” he says. “Change that is needed now and at every level. 
Both commissioners and government need to change the systems that govern 
processes, with corresponding work in the voluntary and community sector to 
increase smaller charities’ capacity to meet commissioners’ needs.”

The foundation’s report is calling on councils and government to adopt a more 
collaborative approach to commissioning, to take a proportionate view of 
necessary process and to place more emphasis on the social and long-term value 
of contracts.

Poor commissioning practice should be challenged by ministers, the report 
says. There needs to be greater transparency in process and a measurable target 
should be introduced to oblige commissioners to work with small and 
medium-sized charities.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary 
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary> and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 