
There is something uniquely startling about the vision of an international aid 
agency, usually found working in countries struck by famine and natural 
disaster, mobilising to provide emergency backup to theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

 So Mike Adamson, chief executive of the British Red Cross, will have been 
acutely aware of the potency of his description of the “humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
” facing the NHS, and his decision to outline the work being done by the Red 
Cross to alleviate the situation.

 His comments were described as “the biggest wake-up call ever” by Jeremy 
Corbyn. However, the response from Conservative politicians was more sceptical, 
questioning whether the problems gripping the NHS could accurately be described 
as a humanitarian crisis.

Share your experiences of the NHS this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/share-your-experiences-of-the-nhs-this-winter>
Education secretary Justine Greening said the term was “not appropriate”, and 
former health minister Anna Soubry said it was “irresponsible language”. Chair 
of the Commons health select committee, Sarah Wollaston – a former GP – said 
the term was “too strong”, adding: “This is not equivalent to Syria or Yemen.”

 No one is questioning the importance of the work the British Red Cross 
performs on the NHS frontline, relieving key NHS pressure points. But the image 
of the Red Cross swooping in to offer life-saving humanitarian aid is not 
entirely accurate because much of this work takes the form of contract work, 
paid for by the NHS or local authorities, rather than donor-funded charitable 
assistance of the sort we might associate with international crisis zones. 
Mostly these are services that the organisation has provided routinely for 
several years.

The work that the Red Cross provides is largely geared towards tackling the 
social care crisis, which makes it difficult for vulnerable patients without 
family to be discharged from hospital. The charity receives between £10m and 
£12m every year from NHS trusts and local authorities to fund this work. The 
Red Cross said they charged for some services because they did not believe it 
was appropriate to use the public’s donations to fund work that taxpayer-funded 
services are supposed to deliver.

 It provides an admission prevention service in around 30 accident and 
emergency departments, with staff on standby both to prevent unnecessary 
admissions and to help patients get home safely after treatment, to avoid 
people being moved on to a ward because they are not well enough to get home 
independently. When pressure increases, the Red Cross presence is stepped up. 
They have been doing this for about eight years, and a senior official said 
they were aware that A&E admissions problems were getting worse.

This year the Red Cross sent staff members to Derriford hospital in Plymouth 
to provide support by helping with transport for discharged patients. It was 
also called in for help at the East Midlands ambulance service across 
Nottingham, Leicester, Lincoln, Kettering and Northampton.


 The frequency with which hospitals contact the charity for help is rising, at 
a rate of about 10% a year. The number of patients helped has risen from around 
60,000 to 80,000 in the past three years.

 The charity says it has also stepped up its support at home 
<http://www.redcross.org.uk/What-we-do/Health-and-social-care/Independent-living/Support-at-home>
 service staffed by Red Cross volunteers, assisting people returning home after 
a hospital admission by collecting prescriptions, helping with shopping, and so 
on.

 “We have been called in to support the NHS and help get people home from 
hospital and free up much-needed beds. This means deploying our team of 
emergency volunteers and even calling on our partner Land Rover to lend 
vehicles to transport patients and get the system moving,” Adamson said. The 
charity has 77 Land Rovers in its UK operational fleet. A spokesperson for Land 
Rover said: “We are not lending Land Rovers for UK work with the NHS.”

 Casting the British Red Cross’s useful and important work as an emergency 
response to a humanitarian crisis was always going to be controversial. When
Oxfam 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/uk-poverty-blog/blog/2013/04/oxfam-foodbanks-in-the-uk>
starting funding food banks in the UK, it triggered accusations of political 
meddling. WhenSave the Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/mar/19/uk-families-helped-by-save-the-children>
 began funding child poverty programmes in deprived areas of the UK, there was 
a similar debate about whether the charity was trying to make a political point.

 Adamson insisted he was not “trying to embarrass anyone” with his comments, 
but the furious response from so many senior Conservatives shows that his words 
have hit home.
 