
The clean-shaven, spectacle free and suspiciously jocular Paul Lambert who 
faced the press after Blackburn’s win over Oxford United could scarcely have 
been further removed from the dour, defensive and irritable version of the Scot 
wholeft Aston Villa 12 months ago 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/11/aston-villa-paul-lambert-sacked-manager>
. So much so, he was asked if he had made a conscious decision to reinvent 
himself during his nine-month break from the game that does not appear to have 
been much of a break at all.

The Dozen: the weekend's best FA Cup photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/jan/31/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-fa-cup-photos>
“I loved my time off, I really did,” he said. “I did things I wanted to do – I 
was with Bayer Leverkusen, I was with Real Madrid, I was with Bayern Munich, I 
was with Dortmund … I was everywhere. I loved watching the training, it was 
great meeting different people and enjoying my life. I knew the job I’d done at 
Aston Villa, I knew the money I’d got [to spend] there was nowhere near what 
they’re getting now. Was I happy? Aye, absolutely, but I knew [the sack] was 
coming and I was happy because everyone can see now it’s just a little bit 
harder there than people think.”

What passes for Lambert’s new-found joie de vivre was reflected in the 
Blackburn Rovers team he took over in mid-November as they set about 
dismantling an Oxford team who hadbeaten Premier League Swansea in the previous 
round 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Rock solid in defence against a team two divisions beneath them, Rovers have 
had a torrid time in the Championship but tore into their hosts from the outset 
and all but settled the tie by the interval through a Ben Marshall penalty for 
a Joe Skarz foul on the always lively Simeon Jackson, followed by a fine 
21-yard diagonal drive from their new striker Tony Watt, in for Jordan Rhodes.

A pearler of a free-kick from Marshall ended Oxford’s resistance. Michael 
Appleton admitted they had “been a little bit naive”, unable to deal with 
Blackburn’s high press and physical approach, which would have pleased Lambert 
if he had been able to see it. Asked if his new look,sans glasses, had been 
achieved as a result of laser surgery or contact lenses, he confessed it is 
down to little more than vanity. “No,” he laughed. “I still cannae see.”

Man of the match Ben Marshall (Blackburn)
 