
A variety of boxing phrases have entered the lexicon of the general public. 
Probably the most well known is “roll with the punches”. It describes a 
specific skill within our sport, but almost everyone understands what it means 
on an intellectual and emotional level.

The exact boxing technique is something I learned when fighting, but not well 
enough to explain, so I reached out to boxing coachJoel Stern 
<http://www.twitter.com/efronb> for a fuller explanation. The gist is that you 
block as much of the incoming punch as you can but don’t brace for it, and 
allow the momentum from it move you into a position to punch back even harder. 
How the blow hits you will dictate what you can return fire with, but you have 
to be willing to take the force and use it to your advantage. It’s a skill that 
most fighters never master and even fewer people truly understand. It requires 
you to absorb pain and convert it into energy.

When I think about this technique, I think about all-time great junior 
welterweight,Aaron “The Hawk” Pryor who died from heart disease earlier this 
month <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/aaron-pryor-boxing-dies-60>
, 11 days before his 61st birthday. I was introduced to Pryor the way that many 
people my age (mid 30s) were, through the outstandingHBO series Legendary Nights
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXEj58Rk76U>. The show covered Pryor’s two 
fights with Nicaraguan iconAlexis Argüello 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexis_Arg%C3%BCello> in 1982 and 1983. Like 
every other episode, you get a healthy dose of backstory on the combatants and 
an insight into them as human beings.

Aaron Pryor, boxing great who thrilled fans with relentless style, dies aged 60
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/aaron-pryor-boxing-dies-60> 
If you’ve read anything about Pryor before, odds are excellent that the phrase 
“perpetual motion 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=perpetual%20motion%20aaron%20pryor>
” was used to describe him in the ring. Quite frankly, there’s no way of 
getting around it. Pryor was bottled rage in the ring. He was absurdly skilled 
and incredibly fast but his defining trait was his relentless aggression. He 
threw hard punches from every conceivable angle in a volume that few but prime
Henry Armstrong <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Armstrong> could manage. 
If you knocked him down, he absorbed the blow, stood up pissed off and doubly 
determined to detach you from your senses. Pryor owned whatever ring he was in. 
That was his space.

Pryor amassed a brilliant amateur record, including two national golden gloves 
championships, the second of which he won by defeatingThomas Hearns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/may/07/boxing.features>. He then came a 
breath away from making the Olympic team, only to lose a controversial decision 
to eventual gold medalist Howard Davis in the final of the trials. Instead of 
turning pro with promotional deals and salary in hand, Pryor fought for short 
money, supplemented by working as a sparring partner to Davis and Ray Leonard.

Not yet four years into his professional career, Pryor fought Antonio “Kid” 
Cervantes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonio_Cervantes> for the junior 
welterweight title. Cervantes was no match for The Hawk, who seemed to regard 
Cervantes’ temerity in knocking him down with a kind of sadistic glee.Pryor 
stopped Cervantes in the fourth round 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6Fiu_HdjwQ>. He followed this by cleaning out 
the rest of the division.

The undisputed king at 140lbs, Pryor was unable to entice Ray Leonard, or any 
of the other stars at welterweight into fighting him. Instead, the beloved 
Alexis Argüello,who was already considered an all-time great 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HiAu4J06lJw> and had just moved up from 
lightweight, challenged Pryor. The fight, which took place at the Orange Bowl 
in Miami in November 1982, isa classic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Battle_of_the_Champions_(boxing)>. 

Pryor owned the early rounds, before Argüello adjusted and began teeing off on 
him. Pryor rolled with every landed punch and adjusted, sliding inside and 
under Argüello’s shots, before unloading heavy shots of his own. Argüello 
succumbed in the 14th round. Pryor won the rematch in 10, doling out an even 
more savage beating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Faaron-pryor-boxing-welterweight-alexis-arguello%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93b592cbc91692deff86a0bfd3751e26213ab0d%2F89_88_2237_1342%2F2237.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembering%20Aaron%20Pryor%2C%20the%20all-time%20great%20boxer%20who%20rolled%20with%20the%20punches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Faaron-pryor-boxing-welterweight-alexis-arguello%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembering%20Aaron%20Pryor%2C%20the%20all-time%20great%20boxer%20who%20rolled%20with%20the%20punches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Faaron-pryor-boxing-welterweight-alexis-arguello%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93b592cbc91692deff86a0bfd3751e26213ab0d%2F89_88_2237_1342%2F2237.jpg>
 The classic Aaron Pryor v Alexis Argüello fight in November 1982. Photograph: 
Anonymous/AP 
Like many of the finest fighters, Pryor survived a hellish childhood that 
taught him to focus on something, anything, to ignore the hardship, abuse, 
neglect and pain that comprised his daily existence. That type of childhood 
often leaves a void that even the ring can’t cure, but the ring can give you a 
space to forget it. It provides a focus for the rage that builds within you and 
is amplified with every moment of misery. In the ring, the rage is set loose, 
and rather than impotently attacking circumstance, you can conquer a space that 
is truly your own. If you’re good enough, that can earn you millions of 
dollars, the adulation of fans and no shortage of hangers-on who wish to use 
you to lift themselves from the failings of the world around them and their own 
failings as people.

At some point though, the rage dies, or at least is tempered by the 
realisation that no matter how violently you quake and no matter what you 
accomplish, the emptiness will remain. The emptiness takes over and you are 
left in its grasp unable to do anything but try to numb the feeling. It never 
feels like a solution, you just want to forget that the void exists for a few 
hours. In those moments, we finally learn that the loneliness and despair we 
thought we knew were but pale glimpses of the horror our own psyche can wreak 
on our lives.

A portrait of a modern-day boxing gym, an authentic home for men and women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2016/jun/02/portrait-modern-day-boxing-gym>
Pryor lost what may have been his prime years in the ring, and hopefully would 
have been them in his life, to drug addiction. He attempted a couple of 
comebacks after retiring in 1985. None of them took, and he wound up in prison, 
another cautionary tale about a promising fighter who couldn’t handle success. 
Were it only so simple.

That Pryor lived to 60 is a miracle. That he stayed sober and raised three 
children with his fourth wife after getting clean for good in 1993 is more 
miraculous still. Pryor was a monster in the ring who was loved for his 
ferocity, lauded for his skill, and never fully appreciated for who he was. 
When you look back on his life and career, remember that he always reacted to 
the same way getting hit cleanly. He let the punch move him on to his opposite 
foot, pivoted, and fired back with shots of his own. Sometimes it just took a 
while for them to land.

• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://bloguin.com/queensberryrules/>
• Follow The Queensberry Rules <https://twitter.com/tqbr> and Matthew Swain 
<https://twitter.com/LiverPunch0351> on Twitter
 