
Before reading this article you might enjoy catching up with previous articles 
on thefirst 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/10/1984-85-fa-cup-first-round.html>
,second 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/12/1984-85-fa-cup-second-round.html>
,third 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/01/1984-85-fa-cup-third-round.html>
,fourth 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/01/1984-85-fa-cup-fourth-round.html>
,fifth 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/1984-85-fa-cup-fifth-round.html>
 andsixth 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/1984-85-fa-cup-sixth-round.html>
 rounds of the 1984-85 FA Cup.

From reading my past blogs you may have guessed that, when it comes to the 
1980s, I can perhaps get a little too nostalgic about a decade of sport that 
was far from perfect. Although my judgement on most issues may be clouded by 
childhood memories of events, in an era when I didn't seem to have a worry in 
the world, I will argue with anyone that theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> in this period was far better 
than anything we can offer today. At this time of year, when the weather picks 
up (usually) and the clocks go forward, I often find myself dreamily recalling 
the semi-final stage of the competition in years gone by.

The 1985 FA Cup semi-finals are a relevant example of this: over five hours of 
sporting drama that played out in front of thousands of passionate fans in 
neutral venues that were reasonably near to the clubs taking part. The twin 
forces of snow and violence had blighted the competition during this season, so 
from a pure footballing perspective, the matches between Luton and Everton, and 
Liverpool andManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, were just what the 
doctor ordered.

Manchester United v Liverpool

Once the draw had been made, there was no doubting the glamour tie of the 
round: Manchester United v Liverpool. Before the mouthwatering clash, both sets 
of players were made to earn their money though, contesting league, European 
and international matches, before their April 13 date at Goodison Park. United 
lost on penalties in the quarter-finals of the UEFA Cup to Hungarian side 
Videoton, and were still just about in the race for the title, although a 
defeat against Sheffield Wednesday the Tuesday before theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> game pretty much ended their 
hopes of a first league crown since 1967.

Liverpool had almost guaranteed their place in the European Cup final by 
demolishing Panathinaikos 4-0 in the first leg of the semi-final at Anfield. 
However, they were out of contention in the league, their recent 1-0 loss at 
home to United ending any remaining chance of a fourth successive title.

Just to add to the fixture congestion and pressure on the players, two 
international derbies took place featuring a number of United and Liverpool 
regulars; the England-Republic of Ireland friendly at Wembley gave Gary Bailey 
his first international cap, with Bryan Robson, Jim Beglin, Mark Lawrenson, 
Paul McGrath and Frank Stapleton alos playing. It was even more intense at 
Hampden Park, as Wales beat Scotland 1-0 in a World Cup qualifier. Ian Rush 
scored the only goal, with Mark Hughes, Steve Nicol, Arthur Albiston, Alan 
Hansen and Kenny Dalglish also featuring. The ties were a mere warm-up for what 
was to follow.

Despite Liverpool's dominance in the 1980s, two problems just wouldn't go 
away: both the FA Cup and their record against Manchester United. Their run to 
the 1985 semi-final was their best since 1980, and they had not won the 
competition for 11 years, an abnormality for a team so dominant and ruthless. 
Even stranger was their inability to beat their Manchester rivals in the league 
during the decade (although Liverpool fans can quite rightly point to a League 
Cup final win in 1983 for some solace).

In the 20 league games contested between the two clubs, Liverpool only won two 
during the 1980s. If there was one team that the red machine would have wanted 
to avoid, it was Ron Atkinson's United. And so it would prove, but not before 
two bona fide classic Cup ties.

United should have won the first match, twice clawing their way to the top of 
the cliff before having their fingers stamped on in agonising fashion. With 
Bailey and Whiteside returning to their starting XI, and Hughes passing a late 
fitness test, United were a different side to the one that had seen their 
league hopes end at Hillsborough in the week, raising their game once more at 
the very appearance of their Liverpudlian rivals. Inevitably,Bryan Robson gave 
them the lead in the 69th minute 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvdlXpjtxDA#t=0m12s>, arriving just at the 
right time after a near-post flick-on from a corner.

With Hughes and Stapleton constantly bothering Hansen and Lawrenson, and Paul 
McGrath expertly keeping 22-goal Ian Rush quiet, United looked to be heading to 
Wembley. But with just three minutes left,Ronnie Whelan curled a superb shot 
past Bailey <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvdlXpjtxDA#t=1m0s> – very 
reminiscent of his strike in the 1983 Milk Cup final – and, not for the first 
time, United would need to pick themselves up off the floor and start all over 
again.

United made the running in the first period of extra-time. Stapleton's 
deflected shot past Bruce Grobbelaar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvdlXpjtxDA#t=3m08s>, again after good work 
from Hughes, put United back in front, before Paul Walsh equalised in the last 
minute of the match, albeit in slightly controversial circumstances. As Kevin 
MacDonald launched a long ball forward through a crescendo of whistles from the 
United fans, the excellent Brian Moore commented that the linesman had his flag 
raised for an offside decision, but referee George Courtney did not spot this. 
Play continued, with Dalglish robbing Gordon Strachan of possession and 
swinging in a cross, and after Bailey saved Rush's header – the Welshman's only 
real contribution of the day –Walsh was left with the simple task of bundling 
the ball over the line <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvdlXpjtxDA#t=4m22s>. 
Atkinson immediately pointed towards the official in question, more in hope 
than expectation, but the goal stood.

As the swaying mass of Liverpool fans celebrated in the Gwladys Street end, it 
felt as if United had lost their best chance at reaching Wembley, having come 
so close on two separate occasions. Liverpool knew they had been lucky, manager 
Joe Fagan admitting as much: "We didn't really deserve what we got. When they 
went 2-1 ahead in the first half of extra-time I felt we could all go home, so 
I am very thankful we have got another crack at it."

Last-minute equalisers in FA Cup semi-finals examine every inch of a player's 
mental resolve – just ask Stoke in 1971 and Oldham in 1994 – and common wisdom 
suggested the momentum was now playing as Liverpool's extra man. Surely there 
could only be one winner in the replay at Maine Road four days later?

Fortunately, football isn't always predictable. A hamstring injury ruled Rush 
out of the replay (not that his goalscoring record against United was in 
keeping with his overall strike rate), but asMcGrath put through his own goal 
in the first half <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qD2qwTLZaA#t=3m23s>, anyone 
associated with United must have feared the worst.Steve Nicol then missed a 
gilt-edged chance to really hammer home Liverpool's advantage 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qD2qwTLZaA#t=4m10s>. As the teams left the 
field at half-time, United needed inspiration. In the 1980s that could mean 
only one thing.

Bryan Robson had earned the tag "Captain Marvel" for both club and country, so 
it should have been no surprise that United's skipper dragged his team back 
into the match. Picking up a Stapleton pass just inside Liverpool's half,Robson 
surged past Lawrenson and unleashed an unstoppable 25-yard drive past Grobbelaar
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qD2qwTLZaA#t=5m40s>, the sort of strike that 
would nowadays see the scorer immediately called world-class and probably 
linked with a move to Barcelona.

Robson had yet again taken the team upon his shoulders and given United the 
belief they needed.Hughes may have scored the winner in the 59th minute 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qD2qwTLZaA#t=7m21s> – a goal hotly disputed by 
Liverpool, who felt the Welshman was yards offside – but there was no doubting 
who was the real man of the hour. Robson was chaired off the pitch as United 
fans streamed on to the turf in celebration at the end of the match. It made a 
change for Robson to be carried for once.

If the atmosphere at Goodison Park had been electric, then Maine Road on that 
infamous Wednesday night was simply nuclear. At the time we must have taken 
this for granted, but it was only on watching the replay a few years ago that I 
truly realised what a fantastic theatre of noise had been created in Manchester.

Goodness knows what it must have been like to play within the four walls of 
noise surrounding the players that night, but I was intimidated just sitting at 
home. The whole occasion was a marvel to behold, "a raw embodiment of the best 
British football has to offer", as the Express' Steve Curry wrote at the time. 
Rob Smyth once opined in aJoy of Six article about FA Cup semi-final memories 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2011/apr/15/joy-of-six-fa-cup-semi-memories>
: "This was football as nature intended, a relentlessly attacking slugfest 
played by proper men in front of proper men, in an atmosphere that, 26 years 
on, effortlessly shivers the spine." Quite. Do yourself a favour: watch the 
highlights and drink in the occasion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5qD2qwTLZaA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5qD2qwTLZaA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5qD2qwTLZaA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Luton v Everton

Apologies to any supporters of Luton and Everton. There was another semi-final 
and it was equally as dramatic. Treble-chasing Everton were red-hot favourites 
to see offrelegation-threatened Luton Town 
<http://www.statto.com/football/stats/england/division-one-old/1984-1985/table/1985-04-13>
 – who were priced at 9/2 with some bookies – and it was easy to see why. 
Unbeaten in all competitions in a run of 20 games that stretched back to 22 
December 1984, Everton had just gone to Munich and drawn 0-0 in the first leg 
of the Cup Winners' Cup semi-final, even with Trevor Steven playing as an 
emergency centre-forward in place of the injured Andy Gray, though the Scot 
would be back for the Villa Park clash, "raring to go" in the words of his 
manager Howard Kendall.

Luton's main concern centred on the Cup-tied midfield pairing of Peter 
Nicholas and David Preece. Wayne Turner and Garry Parker stepped in, placing a 
big burden on the experienced Ricky Hill who, like Brian Stein, was out of 
contract in the summer. Hill had been encouraged by some of the new signings 
made by David Pleat – including Steve Foster, Nicholas, and Mick Harford – but 
was still undecided on his future.

The press were sure that a shock win for Luton could keep Hill at the club, 
and the noises coming out of Luton in relation to the Everton match were 
reasonably positive. "We all fancy our chances. We knowEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> are favourites, but we have been 
playing well lately," said Hill, who almost proved to be the match winner.

The cautious optimism emanating from the Luton camp before the match appeared 
to be well founded, as immediately they tore into the champions elect. In a 
frantic opening, Emeka Nwajiobi had three chances to give the Hatters the lead, 
the striker on one occasion only being denied via a desperate goal-line 
clearance from Gary Stevens. Everton looked half asleep as Luton continued to 
swarm forward but, for all their domination, they were lacking a deserved goal 
for their display so far.The goal finally arrived in the 38th minute through 
Hill's fine strike from the edge of the area 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8T2CooCEFo#t=1m46s>. The 18,000 Luton fans, 
some waving straw boaters in delight in the Holte End, were in raptures. At 
half-time, Everton's treble vision was becoming blurred.

Everton couldn't play as badly as they had in the first half, and gradually 
they began to work their way back into the game. Paul Bracewell hit the outside 
of the post as the tide began to turn, although Hill made Neville Southall 
stretch to keep out another long-range effort as the half progressed.

The clock ticked down, too quickly for Everton's fans and too slowly for 
Luton. With just five minutes left, it looked as if Luton were about to pull 
off a shock that could have had serious repercussions for the rest of Everton's 
season, but a slightly dubious free-kick given against Foster and Harford on 
the edge of Luton's box presented the favourites with one more chance. As Kevin 
Sheedy stood over the ball, his left foot poised, those inside Villa Park held 
their breath.

Sheedy's curler wasn't the cleanest strike of his career, but it may well have 
been the sweetest <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8T2CooCEFo#t=3m46s>. The 
ball curled past Sealey's despairing dive and just inside the keeper's post, 
deflating Luton's players and lifting the weight from Everton's shoulders.

"Luton, who must have thought they were at the gates of Wembley, have suddenly 
been dragged back," cried John Motson, as the distraught expressions on the 
faces of Sealey, Foster and Stein showed just how painful a moment had just 
occurred. There was even time for Stevens to almost win the match before 
extra-time, his volley narrowly going past the post. In hindsight it may have 
put Luton out of their misery sooner.

As soon as extra-time commenced it was apparent that the relieved Everton 
players were now in the ascendancy. Mal Donaghy cleared an Andy Gray effort off 
the line after fine work down the left by Pat Van Den Hauwe, and Sealey was 
forced to pull off a fine save from Peter Reid as the first half closed. Luton 
were struggling to repel the waves of blue flowing towards their goal, and 
eventually their resilience cracked. The final knock-out blow was again landed 
in front of the Holte End from a Sheedy free-kick.Centre-back Derek 
Mountfield's header <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8T2CooCEFo#t=7m04s>, his 
tenth of the season, broke Luton hearts once more, with just five minutes left. 
Stein missed a half chance with a few minutes left, but Luton's brave race was 
run. Everton had made it back to Wembley once more, and Luton were now left 
with just the grim prospect of a relegation battle.

"It went through my mind that we were out of the FA Cup," declared Kendall 
after the match, before adding "We have a will to win – a determination not to 
be beaten. Even when we are not playing well we have the quality needed to get 
us out of trouble."

Everton displayed the kind of attributes required in any top team, yet Luton 
came out of the match with a great amount of credit. Despite the heartbreak of 
their semi-final experience,they would take 19 out of the remaining 30 points 
available to stay up 
<http://www.statto.com/football/stats/england/division-one-old/1984-1985/table> 
and build for the future – a future that would include Hill and Stein, and a 
League Cup triumph in 1988 (although, as an Arsenal fan, I'd rather forget 
about that).

After the trials and tribulations of the 1985 FA Cup, the famous old 
competition finally got the matches it deserved in the semi-finals. Two 
memorable tussles - one a titanic battle between great rivals, the other a near 
triumph for the underdog - played out in pulsating atmospheres, at neutral 
venues, at 3pm on a Saturday afternoon, and not a penalty shootout or a rotated 
squad in sight. Apologies for sounding like an old man, endlessly harking on 
about the good old days and conveniently forgetting any negatives, but there 
was a great deal to like about the FA Cup back then. And just wait until I get 
started on the 1985 FA Cup final and all that day entailed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp8T2CooCEFo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp8T2CooCEFo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp8T2CooCEFo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>

• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 