
Human-caused climate change appears to have driven the Great Barrier Reef’s 
only endemic mammal species into the history books, with theBramble Cay melomys 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/cgi-bin/sprat/public/publicspecies.pl?taxon_id=64477>
, a small rodent that lives on a tiny island in the eastern Torres Strait, 
being completely wiped-out from its only known location.

It is also the first recorded extinction of a mammal anywhere in the world 
thought to be primarily due to human-caused climate change.

An expert says this extinction is likely just the tip of the iceberg, with 
climate change exerting increasing pressures on species everywhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/one-in-six-of-worlds-species-faces-extinction-due-to-climate-change-study>
.


One in six of world's species faces extinction due to climate change – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/one-in-six-of-worlds-species-faces-extinction-due-to-climate-change-study>
The rodent, also called the mosaic-tailed rat, was only known to live on 
Bramble Cay a small coral cay, just 340m long and 150m wide off the north coast 
ofQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, 
Australia, which sits at most 3m above sea level.


It had the most isolated and restricted range of any Australian mammal, and 
was considered the only mammal species endemic to theGreat Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef>.

When its existence was first recorded by Europeans in 1845, it was seen in 
high density on the island, with sailors reporting they shot the “large rats” 
with bows and arrows. In 1978, it was estimated there were several hundred on 
the small island.

But the melomys were last seen in 2009, and after an extensive search for the 
animal in 2014, a report has recommended its status be changed from 
“endangered” to “extinct”.

Led by Ian Gynther from Queensland’s Department of Environment and Heritage 
Protection, and in partnership with the University of Queensland, the survey 
laid 150 traps on the island for six nights, and involved extensive 
measurements of the island and its vegetation.

The Earth stands on the brink of its sixth mass extinction and the fault is 
ours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/21/mass-extinction-science-warning>
In their report 
<https://www.ehp.qld.gov.au/wildlife/threatened-species/documents/bramble-cay-melomys-survey-report.pdf>
, co-authored by Natalie Waller and Luke Leung from the University of 
Queensland, the researchers concluded the “root cause” of the extinction was 
sea-level rise. As a result of rising seas, the island was inundated on 
multiple occasions, they said, killing the animals and also destroying their 
habitat.

It was estimated the area of the cay above high tide has decreased from 4ha in 
1998 to 2.5ha in 2014. And worse for the melomys, they lost 97% of their 
habitat in just 10 years, with vegetation cover declining from 2.2ha in 2004 to 
just 0.065ha in 2014.

“For low-lying islands like Bramble Cay, the destructive effects of extreme 
water levels resulting from severe meteorological events are compounded by the 
impacts from anthropogenic climate change-driven sea-level rise,” the authors 
said in their report.

Globally, averaged sea level has risen by almost 20cm between 1901 and 2010, a 
rate unparalleled in any period during the last 6,000 years. But around the 
Torres Strait, sea level appears to have risen at almost twice the global 
average rate between 1993 and 2014.

“Significantly, this probably represents the first recorded mammalian 
extinction due to anthropogenic climate change,” the researchers said in their 
report, quietly published on the Queensland government’s website last week.

Indigenous rangers track rare mole resembling 'autonomous toupee'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/14/indigenous-rangers-track-rare-mole-resembling-autonomous-toupee>
As a result, the Queensland government website now recommends 
<https://www.ehp.qld.gov.au/wildlife/threatened-species/endangered/endangered-animals/bramble_cay_melomys.html>
 suggested recovery actions not be taken. “Because the Bramble Cay melomys is 
now confirmed to have been lost from Bramble Cay, no recovery actions for this 
population can be implemented,” it says.

Although small, the island is significant for many people and animals. It is 
the most important breeding ground for green turtles and a number of seabirds 
in the Torres Strait, the researchers said, and has long been visited by its 
traditional custodians, the Darnley Islanders, who caught fish, turtles and 
birds.

The authors said the IUCN lists one other mammal 
<http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/full/9003/0> that was driven to extinction, 
partly by extreme weather – the Little Swan Island hutia – but introduced cats 
on the island were considered the main driver of extinction.

In contrast, the researchers say the melomys was driven to extinction due 
“solely (or primarily) to anthropogenic climate change”.

The one hope for the species, the authors say, is that there might be an 
undiscovered population in Papua New Guinea. They say the melomys might have 
arrived on Brambles Cay on rafting debris from the Fly River region of Papua 
New Guinea. If that is true, then either the Brambles Cay melomys, or a close 
relative, may still live undiscovered there.

There is absolutely no doubt we will lose species due to the increasing 
pressures being exerted by climate change.
John White, Deakin University 
The authors recommend targeted surveys in Papua New Guinea be carried out, to 
see if they are there.

John White, an ecologist from Deakin University in Australia, who was not 
involved in the study, said this extinction is the tip of the iceberg. “I am of 
absolutely no doubt we will lose species due to the increasing pressures being 
exerted by climate change,” he said. “Species restricted to small, low lying 
islands, or those with very tight environmental requirements are likely to be 
the first to go.”

A report in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/one-in-six-of-worlds-species-faces-extinction-due-to-climate-change-study>
 found one sixth of the world’s species face extinction due to climate change, 
and scientists have warned that the world is on the edge of thesixth mass 
extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/21/mass-extinction-science-warning>
.

“Certainly, extinction and climatic change has gone hand in hand throughout 
the history of the world,” he said. “So, if this is one of the first, it is 
more than likely not going to be the last.”
 