
Jon Dutton has conceded there have been “highs, lows and frustrations” during 
theFour Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> but the Rugby 
Football League tournament director said ticket sales are on target for 
Sunday’s final between Australia and New Zealand at Anfield. The RFL is hopeful 
of attracting about 40,000 fans to Anfield, with sales currently around the 
37,000 mark.

Following disappointing attendances in Hull, Coventry and London, Dutton said 
the RFL has learned lessons for the next time it hosts international rugby 
league, which will be 2018 at the earliest. “We set out a schedule at the start 
which was a mixture of traditional and expansion,” he said. “There’s been some 
highs, lows and frustrations. We made the right decision to go back to London 
but we would have hoped for more people there [35,569 watchedAustralia beat 
England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/england-australia-four-nations-match-report>
 at London Stadium last Sunday].

England blew their perfect chance to reach the Four Nations final. What next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/nov/16/england-australia-four-nations-new-zealand-scotland-london>
“In terms of Coventry, we didn’t hit our targets and the stadium is quite 
unforgiving for a double-header event. Being on Bonfire Night made it difficult 
too. In hindsight we’d have a rethink about the first game and how we went 
about it. We were disappointed more people [5,337] didn’t come to Hull on the 
opening night to watch the Kangaroos [play Scotland] in all honesty.”

Dutton said a crowd anywhere between 35,000 and 40,000 would be considered a 
success at Anfield. “Where we’re at in terms of sales is a positive for us. It 
will look presentable on TV and there’s a feelgood factor in Liverpool with 
them being top of the Premier League. The players are excited to play here and 
we always wanted a marquee stadium for the final: we’ve delivered that.”

The Rugby League International Federation will shortly reveal the calendar 
leading up to the 2021 World Cup and Dutton said that while there is unlikely 
to be any England fixtures in this country next year, they are intent on 
securing some big matches the following year. “The important thing for us now 
is to set the international calendar from 2018 running up to a home World Cup 
in 2021 as quickly as possible,” he saidDuttonsaid theRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl>, along with the NRL and the NZRL, will 
hold meetings this week to determine the future of the Four Nations. It is 
understood the tournament is likely to remain part of the international 
calendar.
 