
Wayne Bennett will be named as the England coach this month after the Rugby 
Football League confirmed it expected to complete its review of the national 
setup in the next few weeks.

Super League 2016 preview: Still going strong after 20 years of ups and downs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/super-league-2016-preview-20-years-wigan-st-helens-hull>
Reports in Australia over the weekend said Bennett, a former Australia coach 
and the most successful Australian coach in rugby league history, had been 
approached by the RFL to replace Steve McNamara, who is not expected to be 
retained, despite guiding England to aseries victory against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/england-steve-mcnamara-new-zealand-series-win>
 last year.

Bennett will bring his Brisbane Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brisbane-broncos> side to England later this 
week for the World Club Series, the tournament that pits three NRL sides 
against their Super League counterparts. He is then expected to finalise the 
England details in meetings with the RFL chief executive, Nigel Wood.

The RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> would not comment on 
speculation linking Bennett with the job but it did issue a statement on the 
status of the review that began in November after the series against New 
Zealand, which read: “As we have previously stated, it is only right and proper 
we conduct a thorough review of the England programme following the conclusion 
of Steve’s contract. We expect that review process to be completed this month 
and we won’t speculate or comment further until the process is complete.”

Bennett confirmed the approach about taking over from McNamara and could even 
complete the deal before he arrives in the UK. Of paramount importance to the 
66-year-old was that he was able to continue coaching the Broncos. He told the 
Brisbane Courier Mail: “It may be before then. If someone picks up the phone in 
the next week, the next couple of days. I have to find out what I want to do 
and how they see me involved.

“I’ve told the Broncos what I’m doing and the people who matter are across it 
– they are totally supportive of it, as they were of me when I applied for the 
Australian coaching job. I could do the Australian job without impinging on 
what I was doing with the Broncos. It is the absolute priority for me.”

What remains to be seen is whether Bennett appoints an assistant coach based 
in the Super League to help prepare England for the Four Nations. McNamara was 
based in the NRL like Bennett, working as the assistant coach at Sydney 
Roosters. The Castleford coach, Daryl Powell, and Wigan’s Shaun Wane would be 
the two favourites to join Bennett.
 