
Dealing with everything from “the Classification of Names of Dust and its 
Qualities” to “Poetic Descriptions of the Down on the Young Male Cheek”, via 
the ingredients of an omelette which increases sexual potency, a 14th-century 
Egyptian scholar’s attempt to catalogue all knowledge has been translated into 
English for the first time.

Shihab al-Din al-Nuwayri lived from 1279 and 1333. He was a civil servant in 
the Mamluk empire until he retired from government service in the 1310s and 
decided to catalogue everything known to exist, in an encyclopaedia which 
eventually spanned more than 9,000 pages and 33 volumes. Penguin Classics, 
which publishes the first ever English translation of The Ultimate Ambition in 
the Arts of Erudition in October, said that the compendium of knowledge from 
the classical Islamic world was “as important a work to civilization as Pliny’s 
natural history”, and “an astonishing record of the knowledge of a 
civilization”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006024128ae0caf424c13b37a47fb1ba99bbfe84%2F0_0_784_1200%2F784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rhino-escape%20tips%20to%20omelette%20Viagra%20%E2%80%93%2014th-century%20Arab%20encyclopaedia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rhino-escape%20tips%20to%20omelette%20Viagra%20%E2%80%93%2014th-century%20Arab%20encyclopaedia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006024128ae0caf424c13b37a47fb1ba99bbfe84%2F0_0_784_1200%2F784.jpg>
 The cover of the Penguin edition. Photograph: Penguin Classics 
Ranging from history to poetry, and from biographies to natural history to 
medicine, The Ultimate Ambition contains everything from information on 
worshippers of the moon, to the names the Bedouin Arabs had for the sky, 
“including the Encrusted, because of its abundance of stars, and the Forehead, 
because of its smoothness”, to advice on how to escape from an angry 
rhinoceros. “A trustworthy person among the Abyssinians told me that 
rhinoceroses in Abyssinia charge at human beings to kill them whenever they spy 
them,” writes the author. “If a man climbs into a tree to escape, the 
rhinoceros will seek to smash it and kill him, but if the man urinates on the 
rhinoceros’s ear, it will run away and not return to him. That way, the man 
will escape from it. God knows best.”

His goal, al-Nuwayri writes in a preface, was “securing the essential and 
banishing the incidental, adorning it with the necklace of my own sayings, and 
the pearls of my predecessors”.

“My own words in it are like the night clouds leading the rain clouds, or the 
patrol followed by the squadron. They merely interpret the book’s contents and 
frame them like eyebrows over the eyes,” he writes, adding, warningly, “I have 
followed the traces of those excellent ones before me, pursuing their path and 
connecting my rope to theirs. So if there should be any complaint, the 
dishonour is upon them and not me.”

Nothing escapes al-Nuwayri’s all-encompassing eye. Considering dust, he writes 
that “Alnaqʿ walʿaqu¯b is the dust that swirls around the hooves of horses 
and camels.Alʿaja¯j is dust stirred up by the wind. Alrahaj wa’lqast˙ al is 
the dust of war;alkhayd˙ aʿa, the dust of a battle. Alʿithyar, the dust of 
feet.” He looks at the difficulties the female bear experiences in childbirth, 
and at eyebrows. “When the eyebrows are connected, this is calledalqaran, 
which the Arabs despised [as they did]alzabab, which refers to hairy eyebrows, 
andalmaʿat, which are patchy eyebrows.”

“Settling on what parts of The Ultimate Ambition to include and exclude was 
one of the great challenges,” said Brown University professor Elias Muhanna, 
who edited and translated the book. “The original work encompasses over 30 
volumes, and I felt it was important to give the reader as broad a sampling of 
its contents as possible. That meant that I tried to include something – even 
just a snippet – from as many discrete chapters of the work as I could.”

But eventually, he said, he “still had to set aside a huge proportion of the 
text from al-Nuwayri’s history of the world”. He compromised by offering his 
readers “two bookends from that section: the story of Adam and Eve, which makes 
up the beginning of history, and some of the events of the author’s lifetime, 
which makes up the end of history.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e3034cbc260bfcc9527afc3c586b1594f566f8d%2F0_335_3113_1868%2F3113.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rhino-escape%20tips%20to%20omelette%20Viagra%20%E2%80%93%2014th-century%20Arab%20encyclopaedia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rhino-escape%20tips%20to%20omelette%20Viagra%20%E2%80%93%2014th-century%20Arab%20encyclopaedia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fthe-ultimate-ambition-arts-of-erudition-published-in-english-penguin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e3034cbc260bfcc9527afc3c586b1594f566f8d%2F0_335_3113_1868%2F3113.jpg>
 Tree of knowledge … ‘if the man urinates on the rhinoceros’s ear, it will run 
away’. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
In his introduction to the book, which now spans just 352 pages, Muhanna 
writes that al-Nuwayri is “not so troubled by contradiction or ambiguity”, with 
“a chapter on the religious prohibition of sodomy and the punishment of the 
homosexual ... followed by a much longer chapter of poetry celebrating the 
charms of the male beloved”, and “a list of authoritative reports on the 
prohibition of singing ... followed by a catalogue of equally authoritative 
reports on the virtues of song, which introduces a 200-page stretch of 
biographies of famous singers in Islamic history”.

“Unfettered by the doctrinal shackles that moderns tend to associate with the 
medieval era, the world that The Ultimate Ambition presents is full of paradox 
and pleasure – which is to say, alive,” he writes.

Muhanna told the Guardian that in the past, people have “approached historical 
encyclopaedic texts in an instrumental way, reading them to answer questions 
rather than to appreciate them as literature”.

“If you think of an encyclopaedia primarily as a reference work containing 
objective information about the world, it is not apparent why you would want to 
read, let alone translate, a work that was woefully ‘outdated’. But if you 
think of an encyclopaedia as reflecting a vision of the world from a certain 
time and place, then there are many good reasons to read it,” he said.

“I hope that readers will recognize in al-Nuwayri’s work a sign of just how 
rich and colourful the intellectual heritage of Islamic civilization is. 
Perhaps more than any other literary genre, the medieval encyclopaedic 
compendium reflects the full range of a culture’s selves, not just its best 
self. It contains its official history, but also its browser history, if that 
makes any sense: the kitschy, crass, and embarrassing alongside the noble and 
self-important.”

The instructions for that potency-increasing omelette, meanwhile: “Take 
chickpeas, broad beans, eggs, and white onions, and cook them in milk until the 
moisture boils off. Then put it all into a mortar and pound it fine until it is 
all mixed together. Then add the yolks of ten eggs, put the whole mixture into 
a skillet, and fry it in oil.”
 