
The vast and growing gap between rich and poor has been laid bare in a new 
Oxfam report 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2016/01/62-people-own-same-as-half-world-says-oxfam-inequality-report-davos-world-economic-forum>
showing that the62 richest billionaires <http://www.forbes.com/billionaires/> 
own as much wealth as the poorer half of the world’s population.

Timed to coincide with this week’s gathering of many of the super-rich at the 
annual World Economic Forum in Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos-2016>, the report calls for urgent 
action to deal with a trend showing that 1% of people own more wealth than the 
other 99% combined. 
<https://www.credit-suisse.com/uk/en/news-and-expertise/research/credit-suisse-research-institute/publications.html>
62 richest 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/the_wealthy_few/giv-27167U0yPFubkX3O0/>
Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> said that the wealth of the 
poorest 50% dropped by 41% between 2010 and 2015, despite an increase in the 
global population of 400m. In the same period, the wealth of the richest 62 
people increased by $500bn (£350bn) to $1.76tn.

Number of female billionaires increases sevenfold in 20 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/number-of-female-billionaires-increases-sevenfold-in-20-years>
The charity said that, in 2010, the 388 richest people owned the same wealth 
as the poorest 50%.This dropped to 80 in 2014 before falling again in 2015. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/20/oxfam-85-richest-people-half-of-the-world>


 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/20/oxfam-85-richest-people-half-of-the-world>

Mark Goldring, the Oxfam GB chief executive, said: “It is simply unacceptable 
that the poorest half of the world population owns no more than a small group 
of the global super-rich – so few, you could fit them all on a single coach.

“World leaders’ concern about the escalating inequality crisis has so far not 
translated into concrete action to ensure that those at the bottom get their 
fair share of economic growth. In a world where one in nine people go to bed 
hungry every night, we cannot afford to carry on giving the richest an ever 
bigger slice of the cake.”

Leading figures from Pope Francis to Christine Lagarde, the managing director 
of the International Monetary Fund, have called for action to reverse the trend 
in inequality, but Oxfam said words had not been translated into action. Its 
prediction that the richest 1% would own the same wealth as the poorest 50% by 
2016 had come true a year earlier than expected.
wealth by declies 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/share_of_wealth/giv-27167d6hGhONxQy3x/>
The World Economic Forum in Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> 
comes amid fears that the turmoil in financial markets since the turn of the 
year may herald the start of a new phase to the global crisis that began eight 
years ago – this time originating in the less-developed emerging countries.

Oxfam said a three-pronged approach was needed: a crackdown on tax dodging; 
higher investment in public services; and higher wages for the low paid. It 
said a priority should be to close down tax havens, increasingly used by rich 
individuals and companies to avoid paying tax and which had deprived 
governments of the resources needed to tackle poverty and inequality.

Three years ago, David Cameron told the WEF  
<http://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/prime-minister.>that the UK would 
spearhead a global effort to end aggressive tax avoidance in the UK and in poor 
countries, but Oxfam said promised measures to increase transparency in British 
Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies, such as the Cayman Islands and 
British Virgin Islands, had not been implemented.

Goldring said: “We need to end the era of tax havens which has allowed rich 
individuals and multinational companies to avoid their responsibilities to 
society by hiding ever increasing amounts of money offshore.

“Tackling the veil of secrecy surrounding the UK’s network of tax havens would 
be a big step towards ending extreme inequality. Three years after he made his 
promise to make tax dodgers ‘wake up and smell the coffee’, it is time for 
David Cameron to deliver.”

Oxfam cited estimates that rich individuals have placed a total of $7.6tn in 
offshore accounts, adding that if tax were paid on the income that this wealth 
generates, an extra $190bn would be available to governments every year.

The charity said as much as 30% of all African financial wealth was thought to 
be held offshore. The estimated loss of $14bn in tax revenues would be enough 
to pay for healthcare for mothers and children that could save 4 million 
children’s lives a year and employ enough teachers to get every African child 
into school.

To see true inequality just look to the north | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/to-see-true-inequality-just-look-to-the-north>
Oxfam said it intended to challenge the executives of multi-national 
corporations in Davos on their tax policies. It said nine out of 10 WEF 
corporate partners had a presence in at least one tax haven and it was 
estimated that tax dodging by multinational corporations costs developing 
countries at least $100bn every year. Corporate investment in tax havens almost 
quadrupled between 2000 and 2014.

The Equality <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> Trust, which 
campaigns against inequality in the UK, said Britain’s 100 richest families had 
increased their wealth by at least £57bn since 2010, a period in which average 
incomes declined.

Duncan Exley, the trust’s director, said: “Inequality, both globally but also 
in the UK, is now at staggering levels. We know that such a vast gap between 
the richest and the rest of us is bad for our economy and society. We now need 
our politicians to wake up and address this dangerous concentration of wealth 
and power in the hands of so few.”

 