
At first glance it looks like any normal fixture. London Irish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> v Richmond in the Greene King 
Championship, kick-off 3pm. Tickets still very much available if you are free 
on Saturday afternoon. Beneath the low-key facade, however, lies an occasion 
awash with irony. For anyone with a passing interest in the strange economics 
and murky past politics of English club rugby this is not any old game.

‘The RFU Championship has become the wild west of professional rugby’ | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/17/championship-wild-west-professional-rugby-union-dangers>
It must be significant because Nigel Melville, the Rugby Football Union’s 
director of professional rugby, will be among those present. On one level there 
is the whole acrimonious story of Richmond’s ejection from the leagues in 1999 
when they were subsumed, against their wishes, into a holding company bearing 
Irish’s name. The grand old club have spent 16 years trying to recapture their 
lost status; small wonder their chairman, Peter Moore, frequently uses the word 
“resurrection”.

Yet beneath Richmond’s understandable pride – as well as the still-simmering 
resentment at their abandonment by some supposed Premiership friends – there is 
another layer of intrigue. Richmond may be back but not as a professional 
outfit. Having won promotion they have opted to stay a strictly part-time 
squad, combining their rugby with jobs in the City and elsewhere and training 
together for only a handful of hours each week. For better or for worse, it 
feels like the 1980s reincarnated.

That would be fine – and prudent given Richmond attract 2,500 paying souls for 
their most attractive matches – if they were playing against clubs doing the 
same thing. But London Irish, relegated from the Premiership last season, are a 
fully professional operation with an All Black, Ben Franks, in their starting 
front row. Richmond have an old Etonian prop named Timmy Walford. Even setting 
aside the potential safety concerns, it raises an urgent question: what exactly 
is the Championship’s raison d’etre?

As highlighted last season in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/17/championship-wild-west-professional-rugby-union-dangers>
 there are all sorts of issues for players operating beneath the Premiership: 
poor salaries, insufficient medical insurance, no union assistance in 
negotiating fairer contracts. Several clubs are creaking, withLondon Welsh’s 
high court appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/london-welsh-avoid-winding-up-order-high-court-pay-debts>
 this week the latest example of financial instability. “It’s not just London 
Welsh, four or five are on the edge,” Moore says. “I can’t see how this model 
can continue. To have 24 professional clubs in England, to my mind, is not a 
financially viable option.”

Something has to give. While the Premiership salary cap has risen – the base 
level is £6.5m per club with an allowance for two extra “marquee” players on 
top – Championship clubs receive £530,000 in central funding per annum. A 
fully-professional squad of 35 pro players at a basic £30,000 apiece – not 
enough to buy an open-air potting shed in Richmond – costs double that. “It was 
quite clear to me when I researched the other clubs that theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> is not a business 
opportunity,” Moore says, dryly. “I think the RFU has got to redefine what the 
purpose of the league is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frichmond-london-irish-championship-rugby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bf5608a74e705bfc1477a6ad6b46d4f65ec661%2F0_138_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richmond%20at%20London%20Irish%20a%20reminder%20of%20Premiership%20promise%20and%20unfairness%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frichmond-london-irish-championship-rugby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richmond%20at%20London%20Irish%20a%20reminder%20of%20Premiership%20promise%20and%20unfairness%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frichmond-london-irish-championship-rugby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bf5608a74e705bfc1477a6ad6b46d4f65ec661%2F0_138_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
 London Irish’s Ben Franks featured for the All Blacks in last year’s World Cup 
final but is set to face Richmond’s team of amateurs on Saturday. Photograph: 
Andrew Matthews/PA 
The good news is Melville is grasping that nettle. Quite why it has taken 
previous RFU regimes so long to do so is the subject of numerous conspiracy 
theories: surely it should have been obvious aspiring English players, coaches 
and referees need a healthy environment in which to develop. Happily, the 
former England scrum-half and captain, who cut his own teeth in Otley, is alive 
to the ridiculous fact more Premiership academy players are dual-registered 
further down the pyramid than with second-tier clubs.

“The Championship is critical to us for the development of young players,” he 
said this week. “We need to get these kids into these games and I think we can 
create a really attractive product.”

To that end, Melville has been touring the country discussing options with 
clubs and sponsors. He accepts “something’s broken and we have to fix it” and 
met Sir Ian McGeechan, among others, in Nottingham on Thursday for further 
talks. Simply throwing money at the problem, he says, is not the answer. “Let’s 
not fool ourselves that by pumping a ton of money into a level-five club that 
it’s somehow good for the game. It’s probably not. We have to determine levels 
of professional rugby and make sure we police those to help people create 
sustainable rugby. It can’t just be money going out of the game to a washed-up 
pro from the Premiership.”

The Richmond way is one possible avenue but is still problematic. What about 
clubs outside London where there are fewer well-paid banking jobs? If the whole 
league goes semi-pro will the gap with the Premiership become too cavernous? 
Might it lead to a closed shop with no promotion or relegation? What about the 
head-spinning logistics? Richmond’s Canada international lock Tyler Hotson 
arrives at his desk at Goldman Sachs at 6.45am. Try doing that on a Monday 
morning in December having played away in Penzance the previous day. “I’m a lot 
busier than I used to be,” says Hotson, who has had stints at Doncaster, 
Plymouth Albion and London Scottish. “We try to train in a short and sharp way 
simply because we have to.”

Hopefully there will be a happier ending than last time, when the club’s 
backer Ashley Levett abruptly pulled the plug and Richmond, who finished fifth 
in their first Premiership season, were treated badly after going into 
administration. The board of English First Division Rugby had spotted a 
convenient opportunity to reduce the Premiership from 14 clubs to 12, prompting 
Richmond’s then-coach John Kingston to accuse those in charge of “cannibalism”.

Moore concedes the episode “does still rankle” but also has clear memories of 
the Levett era when Richmond briefly masqueraded as the world’s most ambitious 
club. “There was no normality. We went from one employee to about 70 in three 
months. There was no business plan, there wasn’t time. My background was 
financial and when I came in I said: ‘I don’t understand how this can possibly 
work.’ It still doesn’t work 20 years later.”

Good luck, regardless, to the gallant optimists of Richmond as they seek to 
improve on their opening 16-41 defeat to Jersey and remain a thriving local 
club for all. “The most important thing for us is to come out of this season 
solvent,” Moore says. Even if there is the occasional mismatch, he promises the 
team will relish the opportunity and raise a communal glass in the bar 
afterwards. “Rugby is to be enjoyed, not endured. Once the players do their 
warm-downs and get past 7pm we’re back to normal traditional rugby. Otherwise 
there’s no point in playing.”
 