
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> today described 
rumours he would fight Oscar De La Hoya as "absolute rubbish" â€“ although, 
remarkably, he still refuses to rule out a comeback.

The former world light-welterweight and welterweight champion, 32, whose last 
fight was a devastating second-round knockout by Manny Pacquiao in Las Vegas 18 
months ago, has shed nearly two and a half stones in the five weeks since 
leaving the Priory in Cheshire, where he was treated for depression.

This fuelled talk of a possible return against De La Hoya, whose last fight 
was also against Pacquaio, a seventh-round retirement in December, 2008.

"Oscar said he was angry over the story and I don't blame him," Hatton said 
today. I can say it is absolute rubbish. Nothing was ever said to me."

However, Hatton still refuses to put an end to talk that he will fight again. 
"As far as a comeback goes, I am still of the opinion I had 18 months ago. I 
have no ambition to come back.

"Even if I did, at this moment in time I am banned by the British Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control [after being filmed 
taking what appeared to be cocaine] so I am unable to make a decision whether I 
want to fight or not.

"Although I feel the board was correct in punishing me, hopefully in time they 
will offer my licence back and I will be free to make a decision on my future. 
After all I have done in boxing, I have the right to retire Ricky Hatton and 
nobody else.

"I have been five weeks out of rehab and dropped two-and-a-half stone. I used 
to drop that much in a 12-week training camp.

"I am not working as hard as I did when I was fighting [but], when I made the 
decision to enter rehab, I weighed 14st 6lb. Now I am down to 12 stone. I am 
feeling fantastic and I am happy.

"People are talking about a comeback because they see me healthy. They look at 
all that weight I have lost in five weeks and think he must be fighting.

"It is just because of the advice from people like Samir Kiami [his 
nutritionist] and the exceptional products I have been taking that I look so 
well."

Hatton's main focus is promotion. His next show is at Bolton's Reebok Stadium 
on 26 November, when his younger brother Matthew defends his European 
welterweight title against Switzerland's undefeated Roberto Belge.
 