
Just because something does not come as a surprise does not mean it cannot 
shock and there will be few people, inside and outside boxing's fraternity, who 
did not shake their heads on hearing that Ricky Hatton's long-mooted plan to 
return to the ring barely a year after retiring is set to be confirmed on 
Friday.

Comebacks are not uncommon in the fight game and in some cases, such as the 
returns of Sugar Ray Robinson and George Foreman, can prove glorious, even 
inspirational. But these tend to be the exceptions and where Hatton is 
concerned it is hard to escape the sense that this is a man who is putting his 
gloves back on for the wrong reasons and at the wrong time. Humiliation, more 
than anything else, surely awaits the Hitman.

The obvious question to ask is – why? As with most fighters who quit at a 
relatively young age (Hatton announced his retirement in July 2011, three 
months before his 33rd birthday), boredom is likely to have taken over.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> provides order and structure and 
even for a man such as Hatton who, to put it politely, has interests outside 
the ring, there would have been a sense of immense loss when he suddenly found 
himself with no goal, no reason to go for an early-morning run or pound a punch 
bag at his gym in Hyde late into the evening, having done just that since his 
days as a teenage amateur.

Hatton has tried to fill the void by transforming himself into a promoter but 
success proved difficult to achieve and in April Sky Sports announced it would 
not be renewing its contract to televise his fighters, a stable that includes 
exciting young talents such as the Bury-born super-bantamweight Scott Quigg. 
"If you want loyalty buy a dog," Hatton tweeted in response to Sky's decision, 
his frustration evident, and it was perhaps then that he decided to get back 
inside the ropes.

By doing so, Hatton may well also be striving for redemption. He has made no 
secret of the hurt he continues to feel at the manner in which the 47th and 
final fight ended; a brutaltwo-round pounding at the fists of Manny Pacquiao 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/may/03/ricky-hatton-manny-pacquiao-knockout>
 at the MGM Grand in May 2009. The images of Hatton splayed on the canvas, his 
eyes rolling around his head, mouth open in shock and anguish, showed a boxer 
outclassed and left with little option but to knock on the door marked 
retirement.

Hatton did just that but he has always given the impression of someone who, 
while accepting the loss, felt it was not as conclusive as did the majority of 
those who witnessed it. That is where the hurt comes from and by returning to 
action he may believe he can prove wrong those who doubt his credentials.

That would be foolish. At his peak, Hatton was a fine fighter, a front-foot, 
brave, powerful puncher who lit up the light-welterweight division, no more so 
than in June 2005 when hedefeated Kostya Tszyu on a fervent night in Manchester 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2005/jun/06/boxing.rickyhatton> to win the IBF 
light-welterweight title. But, ultimately, Hatton was never a true high-calibre 
star and his defeats by Pacquiao and byFloyd Mayweather Jr in December 2007 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2007/dec/09/boxing.rickyhatton2> proved that. 
They were the bars he could not reach.

Older, slower, and rusty, Hatton has even less chance of beating the 
welterweight kings, a group that continues to include Pacquiao despite his
recent defeat by Timothy Bradley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/jun/11/manny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-mess?INTCMP=SRCH>
, and Mayweather despite his release from a Las Vegas prison just over a month 
ago. Then there are Bradley, Robert Guerrero, Randall Bailey and Sheffield's 
own Kell Brook to consider. Hatton would last as long as a bowl of jelly at a 
children's party with any of those opponents.

Whatever his motivations (and money should not be one of them given his 
personal fortune of close to £26m), Hatton should at least be praised for 
showing dedication. According to reports, he is in decent shape having worked 
off the lager and burger-induced extra weight he puts on when not in fight mode 
and thus could provide a genuine challenge on his return, which is likely to be 
at the MEN Arena on 24 November –Paulie Malignaggi, whom Hatton beat in Las 
Vegas four years ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2008/nov/23/boxing-rickyhatton1?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
has been tipped to fill the role.

Hatton's enduring personality means that his hometown venue should be packed 
and pulsating, a reminder that he remains one of Britain's most popular ever 
fighters. He may provide a decent show, then, but he and those around him are 
deluded if they think he can compete for a world title; too much time has 
passed for a man who was never quite the best anyway. All we can hope for is 
that Hatton gets back in and back out without suffering anything more than a 
wounding to his pride.
 