
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> will be granted a 
new boxing licence providing he successfully completes all parts of a medical, 
the British Boxing Board of Control (BBBC) has confirmed.

The former two-weight world champion, 34 next month, retired three years ago 
but is set to relaunch his career at a press conference in Manchester on Friday.

Hatton, who has been crowned light-welterweight and welterweight champion, 
attended a BBBC meeting on Wednesday after shedding almost three stones in 
training this year.

The BBBC general secretary Robert Smith said: "He [Hatton] came before the 
board yesterday. I'm not a doctor but once we get the medicals in, our doctors 
will look at them. If they are fine they will be signed off. That's all we're 
waiting for.

"He's been granted it [the licence] pending his medical – so subject to the 
completion of all his medicals. We've got some parts of it but there are a few 
parts to a medical.

"We have received some of it but we are just waiting for the rest of it and 
when we get the rest of it, I presume at the beginning of next week, we'll put 
it all together and our doctors will consider it."

Hatton was the subject of allegations of cocaine abuse two years ago but the 
general secretary claims the Manchester-based boxer has cleaned up his act. "He 
was very frank," Smith said. "He admitted things he had done wrong and was 
looking to put it behind him. He looked very well and spoke very well and is 
entitled to another opportunity, pending his medicals."

Hatton's last fight was a brutal second-round knockout by Manny Pacquiao in 
May 2009 and he has since established his own promotions company which ran into 
problems in May when he lost a TV deal with Sky.

For the comeback fight it is likely the undercard would feature a majority of 
Hatton Promotions boxers, including Martin Murray, Anthony Crolla, Rendall 
Munroe and Scott Quigg.

However the promoter Frank Warren has urged Hatton to abandon his comeback 
plans, fearing the inevitable decline of his skills will render his return an 
anti-climax.

Warren, who split from Hatton in 2005 after guiding him to the IBF world 
light-welterweight title, doubts the 33-year-old has anything left to offer. 
"I'd prefer Ricky not to box. He's not going to get any better at the age of 
33, but it's his decision," he said.

"He's returned to the gym and that has given him focus and direction, but I'd 
rather he stay there training and not fight. I hope he's still got it, but it 
won't be there … it just doesn't happen like that.

"He's had a lot of problems outside the ring for a long, long time and it just 
won't happen. I believe he's had a good career and he should reflect on that. 
No one should be encouraging him to return and I just hope it doesn't wind up 
being a big disappointment for him."

Only Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather beat Hatton during a magnificent 47-fight 
career that peaked with his points win over Kostya Tszyu in 2005.

While there is no shame in losing to his generation's finest two boxers, 
Hatton's longevity was threatened by an indisciplined lifestyle that saw him 
balloon in weight between fights. Retirement ushered in the darkest period of 
his life and he reached his lowest ebb in 2010, when he checked into rehab to 
be treated for depression.

"The writing was on the wall from his last fight that he should retire. Then 
he had his personal problems," Warren said. "But the one thing he's done that 
we should give him credit for is clean up his act.

"When it came to fighting Mayweather and Pacquiao, it was a step too far for 
him, but then it is for virtually all fighters. For me, after beating Kostya 
Tszyu, he never looked the same again. He never capitalised on that win and 
allowed his lifestyle to ruin his boxing career. You can't get that back."

The WBO light-heavyweight champion Nathan Cleverly supports Hatton's decision 
to return, however, and insists he could once again be crowned world champion, 
although he accepts it is unlikely.

"It's a good shout for him to come back. He's only 33 and has had a good break 
from the sport," Cleverly said. "He may have the hunger again now and go out on 
a high after that loss to Pacquiao. I support the decision.

"He was a great fighter – hungry, determined and would fight anybody, taking 
on the very best. He was a great champion and a fighter to look up to. Winning 
a world title after having so long out of the sport is a long shot, especially 
after living that lifestyle, but it's possible.

"He's still got the foundation there from many years ago. And he could still 
beat someone like [the WBA world welterweight title holder] Paul Malignaggi."
 