 Richard Bond will not be in Paris for today's celebrations. 'It's best to go 
in the off-season and savour the moment on your own. I'm going to a pub in 
London instead.'
Plenty of others will be jostling for his place at Pere Lachaise cemetery, 
final home of sixties iconoclast Jim Morrison , The Doors singer who would have 
been 50 today.

The years have been kind to Morrison's myth if not his grave , daubed with 
graffiti, adorned with junk. 'I am the Lizard King, I can do anything,' he 
said. He couldn't, of course. What he could do was make music, die young and 
leave a not very beautiful corpse.

The blend is what seduces devotees like Mr Bond, the 41-year-old president of 
the Doors Appreciation Society, and a magician in real life. 'I've been there 
three times in the past two years. The first time was indescribable, it was 
quite a deep feeling. You wonder how they got a 6ft guy into such a small grave 
.'

 And how they got such a big legend from such a small legacy. In a six-year 
career which ended at the age of 27, Morrison produced seven albums, only three 
of them hailed even then as outstanding two largely derided collections of 
poetry and was involved in two films, both of which struggled for screenings.

 Yet today people are struggling with security guards to get closer to his 
remains. Morrison came to Paris in 1971 looking for poetry and literature but 
found only more alcohol.

Michelle Campbell, from Texas, doyenne of the grave -watchers, came to Paris 
for a year in 1989 and has been there ever since.

'I'm here every day to take pictures for a photographic project, this is the 
second time I've been today.

 'At first there was nobody, it was hard to find a postcard of him in Paris.' 
Then Oliver Stone's movie, The Doors, opened in 1991. 'A lot of young French 
people discovered him. It was chaos,' said Ms Campbell, who is in her fifties.

 The grave is said to be one of the most visited attractions in Paris, with 3 
million customers a year. The first sign of Morrison in the tree-lined burial 
ground comes three or four minutes before his plot. 'Jim' is written in blue on 
a tomb and an arrow points the way.

 A few yards later Anna Marguerita Kutsch's vault bears the message: 'Jim is 
not dead' and the frequency increases. 'Jim forever. Jim, I love you, I need 
you. The King Snake lives forever. See you later.'

 Morrison would have appreciated the company in Pere Lachaise, and that the 
date of his birth coincides with the death 13 years ago of John Lennon. They 
are all there: Edith Piaf, Maria Callas, Yves Montand, Sarah Bernhardt, Chopin, 
Isadora Duncan, Modigliani, Pissaro, Proust and Gertrude Stein. But it is 
Morrison postcards they sell at the gate.

 The grave , cramped on all sides by others, is littered with flowers, 
cigarettes, messages scribbled on Metro tickets, more considered paens typed 
carefully, a peace sign, random bits of trash and a condom still in its wrapper.

 Youths stand around smoking, drinking beer, gazing silently, filching a 
little sand, as if expecting something to happen. Which it does. Cemetery 
officials arrive and tell the disciples to move on, which they do not. When it 
is not the cemetery men it is the city's security team and when it is not them 
it is the police.

 'He didn't give a shit about authority and I think that's really important to 
remember,' said Mat Juhl, a 20-year-old from California. 'He would have wanted 
the youth to write on his grave . He was a celebrator of life, a real in-depth 
guy.'

 Two lamps hang from a stand, playing light on his stone. Above one is a slot 
for a video camera, above the other an opening for a camera which shoots a 
still every three seconds. When the crowd exceeds 50 the security monitors 
arrive.

 'I was a good friend,' said Georgie Pulos, former wife of Paul Ferrara, 
co-director of The Doors documentary Feast Of Friends. 'It's wonderful all 
these people being here. Jim would have loved it. Would he have tackled the 
security men? It would have depended on his mood.'

 It is a little different for 19-year-old Simon Willey, a literature student 
at the University of Essex. 'This is terrible. You can't just sit and look, 
there's so many people.'

 Dirk is a 36-year-old taxi driver from Munich with a plastic bag full of 
beers. 'I am the only driver who plays only The Doors and young people ask me: 
'What is that fantastic music?' We came to Paris to see Jim. We understand his 
special style of living, problems, visions and dreams 20 years ago. Twenty 
years later it's the same.'

 Paris is staging a week of events for Morrison, who was born in Melbourne, 
Florida, but fancied that he got his real start in life aged about six when his 
soul was entered by that of a dead American Indian. The apprentice rebel 
dropped out of one course after another and wound up studying cinematography at 
University College Los Angeles. That did not last either, but his relationship 
with another student, trainee mystic and future Doors keyboard player Ray 
Manzerak, did.

 The events mirror Morrison's successes and failures: concerts by tribute 
bands rare showings of his two films readings from his poetry and photographic 
exhibitions.

 Morrison's style was born on Venice Beach in 1965, where he found the things 
which would stay with him for the rest of his life - drugs and Manzerak 
(again). Morrison could not play an instrument but had an ear for melody and a 
way with apocalyptic words.

 The two men decided to form a band, took the name from Blake's poem and the 
drummer, John Densmore from the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. The guitarist, Robbie 
Krieger, was also roused from meditation.

 Six years later Morrison was granted the traditional mystery rock death but 
first he had to acquire the fact and fantasy to build the myth.

 HE WAS already a good friend of acid and booze by 1966 when The Doors 
recorded their first album, a mix of rock, blues, theatre, malice and menace, 
especially menace, a quality previously absent from American rock. For that 
they had to listen to the Rolling Stones.

 Not that Britain was really throbbing with dissent in the sixties. The top 
ten of 25 years ago shows the standard of the counter-culture being waved by 
such as The Scaffold with Lily The Pink and Des O'Connor's One Two Three 
O'Leary.

 The Doors record included Light My Fire, Morrison's best-remembered moment 
though written by Krieger, and their first and most daring epic, The End, used 
years later by Francis Ford Coppola in Apocalypse Now.

 The singer's father Steve was a rear-admiral, not exactly a hip reference 
point for a fledgling fury. So he wrote the parents out of the script. They 
were dead, he told anyone who cared to ask.

 The End put it like this: 

 Father (yes, son?): I want to kill you. 

 Mother: I want to . . . (cue tempestuous musical and vocal workout). 

 If the studio version is ambiguous, live audiences were treated sometimes to 
the song's full incestuous intentions.

 The critics got what they wanted. The more serious ones saw the music as a 
'Joycean stream of conciousness pop,' or a 'Dionysian word drama.' The teen 
magazines saw Morrison as a great pin-up.

 Strange Days, the second album, recorded in 1967, contained their second 
extended piece, When The Music's Over, which had the memorable line: 'We want 
the world and we want it now.' The evidence suggests that, given the chance, he 
would have used the power to declare a round the clock happy hour.

 Increasingly, the music was not enough for a drunk, drugged, cop-baiting 
Morrison. Inciting the audience became part of his performance and trouble 
broke out at concerts. Morrison was on a riotous roll and the release of an 
insipid third album carrying all the punch of a milk shake could not stop it. 
He arrived in Miami in February 1969, hours late, drunk and dangerous.

 Whether his penis became the fifth member of the band on stage that night - 
two Doors say no, one says well, maybe - he was charged with indecent exposure, 
profanity, drunkenness, and lewd and lascivious behaviour.

 Perhaps this all seems rather quaint compared with today's gangsta rap 
heroes. Flavor Flav of Public Enemy has been charged with attempted murder 
Tupac Shakur has been accused of shooting two policemen and Snoop Doggy Dogg 
faces a murder charge. No one ever accused Morrison of killing anyone except 
himself.

 The Miami affair was enough to make promoters cancel Doors concerts all over 
the country and in October 1970 Morrison received the maximum sentence, a 
Dollars 500 fine and six months' hard labour.

 Surrounded by trouble and looking to all the world like a burned-out band, 
The Doors went back to work in the recording studio. LA Woman was to become a 
triumph after three sub-standard albums but Morrison was moved only to leave 
its completion to the rest of the band and to head for Paris with Pamela 
Courson, his long-time girlfriend.

 Four months later, on July 3 1971, he was dead, bearded and bloated. When 
rumours reached the States, no one was surprised.

 Morrison had been reported dead many times before, and when The Doors manager 
Bill Siddons flew to Paris he found Pam, a sealed coffin and a certificate 
giving the cause of death as a heart attack brought on by respiratory problems.

 She had found him dead in the bath and called police, a doctor and 
paramedics. The name of the doctor was never made known, there was no autopsy, 
and claims that heroin was found in their flat led many to believe the real 
cause of death was a mixture of drink and drugs.

 The surviving Doors returned to the studio, produced two 'for addicts only' 
records and that was it - or would have been.

 In death Morrison makes a good living. The records sell a steady 250,000 a 
year in the UK, hitting 600,000 in the year of Stone's movie there are numerous 
books, the best known of which is Danny Sugerman's No One Here Gets Out Alive, 
otherwise known as Nothing Here But A Load of Lies and at least four bands, 
Riders On The Storm, The Soft Parade, Wild Child, and the Australian Doors ply 
a trade as soundalikes.

 Since Morrison's death he has been seen in San Francisco, the Greek Islands, 
an obscure midwest radio station and working in a video shop in Salford, 
wrestling with a Manchester accent.

 Fellow Pere Lachaise inmate Oscar Wilde was always more likely to get it 
right.

 When good Americans die they go to Paris. 

 An angel and a demon from hell 

 It seems that whoever met Jim Morrison walked away with a different 
impression: Southern gentleman, prick, poet, brute, charmer etc - John 
Densmore, Doors drummer.

 He was drunk a lot. That's not to say I never saw him sober, but it didn't 
usually last - Herve Muller, Doors biographer.

 Jim Morrison as Dionysus, a Greek god reincarnate. The man onstage was an 
absolute genius, a human theatricon from one performance to the next you never 
knew what he was going to be. Sometimes a devil, sometimes a saint. Sometimes 
an angel, sometimes a demon from hell - Ray Manzerak, Doors keyboard player.

 Part of my relationship with Jim was because I'd met Dominic Behan and he 
thought that I knew Brendan Behan, whom he admired. Which wasn't true. I got to 
be a companion of Jim's, to the point at which he became a pain in the neck and 
I had to get rid of him - Eric Burdon (of the Animals).

 Jim's spirit often left his body and he returned from magical cities with 
strange tales to tell. This time he didn't come back, that's all - Pamela 
Courson, long-time, long-suffering girlfriend.

Thoughts of chairman Jim 

 The souls or the ghosts of those dead Indians - maybe one or two of 'em - 
were just running around, freaking out, and just landed in my soul, and I was 
like a sponge, ready to sit there and absorb it.

 There are things known and there are things unknown and in between are The 
Doors.

 I want freedom to try everything. I guess I want to experience everything at 
least once.

 I'm interested in anything about revolt, disorder, chaos, especially 
activity that appears to have no meaning. It seems to me to be the road towards 
freedom.

 I don't want to say too much because I haven't studied politics that much 
really. It just seems that you have to be in a constant state of revolution, or 
you're dead.

 I think of myself as an intelligent, sensitive, human being with the soul of 
a clown which always forces me to blow it at the most important moments

 I see myself as a huge fiery comet, a shooting star. Everyone stops, points 
up and gasps 'Oh,look at that.' Then - whoosh, and I'm gone and they'll never 
see anything like it ever again, and they won't be able to forget me - ever.
 