
It was hard not to feel uneasy when the president of the International 
Paralympic Committee stood in front of the press a fortnight before the start 
of the Paralympic Games and warned that anunprecedented funding crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/rio-paralympics-downsized-disappointing-ticket-sales>
 had left the movement facing the most challenging circumstances in its 56-year 
history. Sir Philip Craven was not being flippant. There were concerns over low 
ticket sales, accommodation for athletes, transport, cuts to venues and media 
facilities, and above all a gnawing fear that we were about to witness a major 
setback in the development of disability sport in Rio, four years after the 
advances that were made in London.

Rio 2016: amid the politics Olympics were a kaleidoscopic fortnight of sport | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/rio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport>
Those misgivings were far from unfounded, bearing in mind that only 200,000 
tickets – just 12% of the Games’ capacity – had been sold with two weeks to go. 
Pessimists envisaged a repeat of Atlanta 1996, when events took place in front 
of rows of empty seats, fretting about the impact a poor response from the 
public might have on the next generation of Paralympians.

By the time the closing ceremony began at the Maracanã, however, it was 
tempting to wonder what all the fuss was about. Although it was impossible to 
miss the uncertainty upon arrival in Rio, a mood of pride and celebration soon 
replaced the tension as it became clear the locals were on board, tempted by 
affordable tickets and a concerted publicity drive by the organisers. Imagine 
the IPC’s joy and relief when a sellout crowd of 167,675 flocked to the Olympic 
Park on the first Saturday, beating the attendance of 157,000 on the busiest 
day of the Olympics. More than two million tickets were sold in the end, making 
Rio 2016 the second most attendedParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> in history.

Perhaps it was not a surprise to see the IPC salvage the situation given that 
the body, responding with the decisiveness sorely missing from its Olympic 
counterparts, had already demonstrated its resolve bybanning Russia from the 
Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/russian-athletes-banned-paralympic-games-rio>
 because of evidence of state-sponsored doping. The IPC stayed firm despite an 
appeal from the Russian Paralympic Committee, although there was a show of 
mutinyfrom Belarus at the opening ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/paralympics-belarus-stages-pro-russia-protest-during-opening-ceremony>
 whenAndrei Fomochkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/belarusian-russian-flag-kicked-out-of-paralympics>
, a Belarusian sports ministry official, smuggled a Russian flag past security 
and waved it during the parade of athletes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba33734430f9c668e2aed9c1b277b21e512d11f%2F209_269_3028_1816%2F3028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20an%20inauspicious%20start%2C%20but%20then%20the%20Paralympics%20delivered%20again%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20an%20inauspicious%20start%2C%20but%20then%20the%20Paralympics%20delivered%20again%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba33734430f9c668e2aed9c1b277b21e512d11f%2F209_269_3028_1816%2F3028.jpg>
 Kadeena Cox celebrates taking gold in the C4-5 500m time trial final. 
Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
While Russia were banished, it was a Games to savour for ParalympicsGB. UK 
Sport set a 264-strong squad the task of beating their tally of 120 medals in 
London andMission 121 was completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/paralympics-gb-best-games-total-bronze-kare-adenegan>
 with two days to go. Britain finished second behind China in the medals table 
after winning 147, while Dame Sarah Storey became the most successful British 
Paralympian of all timewith her 14th gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/100-tours-100-tales/2016/dec/02/dame-sarah-storey-roadmap-womens-cycling-paralympics>
,Kadeena Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/13/kadeena-cox-rio-paralympics-gold>
 became the first British Paralympian to top the podium in two different sports 
since 1984, Jonnie Peacocklost and found his lucky charms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/jonnie-peacock-lucky-charms-found-rio-track>
 after defending his T11 100m title and Ellie Simmonds became the first SM6 
swimmer torace below three minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/ellie-simmonds-british-swimmers-paralympic-gold>
 in the 200m medley.David Weir’s struggles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/david-weird-paralympics-let-country-down>
 on his farewell to track racing were the only disappointment, but the veteran 
wheelchair racer hardly had a bad career.

Perhaps I am remembering it through rose-tinted glasses, but my memory of the 
short journey from my hotel to the main park is of smiling volunteers noisily 
greeting fans who were wearing yellow shirts and waving Brazilian flags, 
creating a wonderful, welcoming atmosphere, full of colour and positive energy.

Imagine the IPC's joy and relief when a sellout crowd of 167,674 flocked to 
the Olympic Park on the first Saturday.

There were imperfections. The Olympic Stadium was an unpopular destination, 
remote and difficult to reach, lowering the sense of occasion during the 
athletics sessions. The atmosphere at the venue was often flat, even for the 
most attractive events.

That was a minor gripe, however, and it was possible to find a wall of noise 
elsewhere. Packed crowds and brilliant acoustics meant that it was often 
difficult to hear yourself think at the Aquatics Centre and the Velodrome, 
while the atmosphere inside Pavilion 3 at Rio Centro was raucous and 
intimidating when ParalympicsGB’s Will Bayley faced Brazil’s Israel Pereira 
Stroh in the final of the men’s class 7 table tennis. A feisty match ended with 
Bayley, who was born with a rare congenital disorder that affected all his 
limbs and diagnosed with non-Hodgkins lymphoma at the age of seven,climbed on 
the table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/will-bayley-table-tennis-paralympic-israel-pereira-stroh>
 to soak up the acclaim after winning his first gold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d6667a07f9df3f7b2b854d2eba9de6729e328ff%2F0_194_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20an%20inauspicious%20start%2C%20but%20then%20the%20Paralympics%20delivered%20again%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20an%20inauspicious%20start%2C%20but%20then%20the%20Paralympics%20delivered%20again%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-paralympics-ipc-russia-team-gb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d6667a07f9df3f7b2b854d2eba9de6729e328ff%2F0_194_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Will Bayley takes to the table to celebrate his gold medal in the class 7 
table tennis. He received a yellow card from the judge, but hugged him in 
response. Photograph: Adam Davy/PA 
It is easy to become unintentionally condescending towards Paralympians. It is 
understandable that some of them feel as though they are being patted on the 
head when they are called brave or fighters. Yet Bayley was someone who had 
repeatedly been written off. It was a triumph of resilience.

There were moments which brought home the challenges that face Paralympians, 
none more so than when Marieke Vervoort, a Belgian wheelchair racer, gave a 
press conference in response to reportsshe was planning to kill herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/marieke-vervoort-now-my-fear-of-death-is-gone>
 after the Games. But Vervoort explained that signing euthanasia papers has 
allowed her to cope with the relentless pain of living with an incurable and 
degenerative spinal condition.

Sadly this was the first Games to see a Paralympic athlete die in competition. 
Bahman Golbarnezhad, an Iranian cyclist,lost his life on the penultimate day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/iranian-cyclist-bahman-golbarnezhad-dies-c4-c5-road-race-crash-paralympics>
 after a crash in the men’s C4/C5 road race.

I prefer to think of Vervoort’s message as she showed us her silver medal. 
“Believe you can!” she shouted. “Yes, you can!” Her motto encapsulated the 
Paralympic spirit.
 