
A week ago, Kim Brennan’s Olympic dream very nearly went up the spout. In one 
of the most extraordinary settings in world sport and in one of the most 
demanding Olympic events – an event she has dominated for several years and 
pretty much dedicated her entire adult life to – her boat came perilously close 
to sinking.

The most meticulous and diligent of athletes, even Brennan had not anticipated 
the crosswinds and wild chop of Lagoa Stadium. White-capped waves crashed into 
her boat, which quickly filled with water. At one stage, she was wobbling all 
over the place in fourth, but rallied to finish third behind an unknown Mexican 
and Zimbabwean. “Un-rowable,” she later labelled the course.

Australia's Kim Brennan wins gold in rowing as Meares takes keirin bronze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/australias-kim-brennan-wins-gold-in-rowing-as-meares-takes-keirin-bronze>
“One of the traits that rowers share is a stubborn determination to persist,” 
Brennan told Guardian Australia in the lead up to the Games. “Ours is a sport 
where you will get injured and you will get sick and your body will constantly 
be on edge. It’s a sport where so much can go wrong. And the ones who end up 
doing well are the ones who can get up when things go horribly wrong.”
Rowing 2,000m demands a fuller suite of skills – power, endurance, technical 
precision and core, lower and upper body strength – than almost any other 
Olympic sport. Because it’s non-impact, rowers are capable of astonishing 
workloads and in full flight Brennan trained up to eight hours a day – on a 
freezing Canberra lake, in the gym, in the pool, on her bike and in the pilates 
studio. Sunday was her day off, which she spent working as a lawyer.

If you’ve ever watched a rower at the end of an Olympic final, or even just 
some poor sap on the ergometer at your local gym, the sport seems unusually 
arduous. It’s the ultimate physical lie detector. Most gold medallists struggle 
to raise an arm in celebration. “It’s a bit crazy in some ways,” she says. “In 
any rowing race, after 250m, you could quite happily stop there. You’re an 
eighth of the way through and you feel like there’s no way you can keep going. 
Some enjoy that feeling, some struggle with it. But it’s not actually ‘pain’. 
It’s actually an intense discomfort of your mind and your body saying ‘I don’t 
want to do this’. Your eyes fail you. You can’t see anything anymore. It’s 
grey, it’s black, it’s speckled. Your body’s not doing what you tell it to do. 
It’s actually shutting down.”

Her’s has been an atypical and occasionally rocky path to Olympic gold. Unlike 
most rowers, who learn in the private school system, Brennan stumbled into the 
sport as a 20-year-old hobbled ex runner. Like so many newcomers, she regularly 
fell into Melbourne’s fetid Yarra River. She endued the indignities of the 
Crawford Report, and the bureaucratic gordian knot that followed, as she and 
many other elite athletes struggled to make a living. Becoming a single 
sculler, she had to quickly master a new discipline. In London, she thought her 
boat was going to sink at the start line. Four years earlier, she had missed a 
medal in the women’s pairs and briefly considered packing it in, moving back to 
Melbourne and pursuing a career in the law.

“I was pretty devastated,” she says. “And at the time it was also pretty 
confusing. I didn’t have the experience to put it into context and understand 
what had gone wrong. I’d trained as hard as I could possibly train, I’d done 
everything that was asked of me. And I couldn’t understand why that resulted in 
such a poor performance. You start thinking, ‘is that all I’m capable of?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Frio-2016-kim-brennan-rises-above-sinking-feeling-to-claim-golden-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31940c5cfea837b7149a98ab6a026afac24977b2%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20Kim%20Brennan%20rises%20above%20sinking%20feeling%20to%20claim%20golden%20moment%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Frio-2016-kim-brennan-rises-above-sinking-feeling-to-claim-golden-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20Kim%20Brennan%20rises%20above%20sinking%20feeling%20to%20claim%20golden%20moment%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Frio-2016-kim-brennan-rises-above-sinking-feeling-to-claim-golden-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31940c5cfea837b7149a98ab6a026afac24977b2%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
 Kim Brennan poses with her gold medal after winning the single sculls 
competition in Rio. Photograph: Lukas Coch/EPA 
In Rio, if conditions had worsened and the quarter-final had been cancelled, 
that would have been curtains. But on her 31st birthday, on calm waters, she 
brained them. Fast forward to Saturday and she sat on the start line, pondering 
Christ the Redeemer. It was a far cry from the the icy, poo-stained pontoons of 
Canberra’s Lake Burley Griffin, where she does the bulk of her training.

“In every big event, I get nervous,” she says. “But I’ve learned to embrace 
the joy in that – that feeling of your stomach in knots. And I always have this 
moment of calm where I think ‘Oh well, I’ve done as much as I can do, I’ve 
trained as hard as I can train, all I can do is make the next stroke better 
than the one before.

“When I’m racing well, there’s almost an emptiness. No distractions, no fears, 
just faith in your training and your body. It’s my time.” And the Olympic final 
was her time. Her main rival, New Zealand’s Emma Twigg, was never really a 
factor. After a few hundred metres, Brennan had a boat length on her nearest 
competitor. In a race she describes as “a blur”, she won comfortably. In many 
ways, her gold medal was won earlier in the week, when she kept her cool and 
avoided capsizing.
Afterwards, she immediately thanked all the people who helped her to the start 
line. She singled out her husband, Scott Brennan, the last Australian to win an 
Olympic rowing gold medal. She dedicated her win to former team-mate Sarah Tait,
who died this year from cervical cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/03/australian-olympic-rower-sarah-tait-dies-aged-33>
. She mentioned how the life of an Olympian is actually quite a selfish one, 
with partners, families, social lives and careers all put on hold. She hinted 
this would be the perfect way to bow out, having achieved what she’s been 
dreaming about since, as a seven-year-old, she watched a Paralympic archer fire 
an arrow to light the cauldron in Barcelona.

“There’s this common perception that to be good at top level sport you have to 
be totally obnoxious,” Brennan says. “There’s this perception that we’re living 
this luxury lifestyle sponging off the taxpayer. I’m not making money as a 
sportsperson but I do have the luxury of being able to combine the sport I love 
with a career. But the idea that if you win an Olympic gold medal that you’ll 
be rolling in money couldn’t be further from the truth. I’ve got no interest in 
having my face on the side of a bus, putting my name to a company I don’t 
believe in.”

In an Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> suffused 
with cynicism, Brennan’s win was the perfect tonic. At the risk of sounding 
twee, it’s hard to think of anyone who better embodies what the Olympics are 
actually supposed to be about. It’s hard to think of an athlete who trained 
harder and who kept a clearer head. It’s hard to think of anyone who deserves 
this gold medal more.
 