
On the seventh day of the Games, it seemed, for a brief, bewildering moment, 
as though a bomb had gone off in the Olympic Park. A thunderclap sounded around 
the aquatics stadium and echoed across the food court. No one fled. Instead 
everyone sped towards the scene. It turned out that Brazilian police had 
detonated a discarded rucksack – they later explained that it had contained a 
jacket and a pair of socks – and then opened the gates to the basketball arena, 
where Spain were about to play Nigeria. All those running people were just in a 
rush to take their seats. Otherwise, no one blinked because it was the third 
similar incident in a week. There had been another detonation during the men’s 
cycling road race and a third outside the Maracanã. That familiar phrase, 
“controlled explosion”, seems now to sum up the Rio Olympics.

Simone Biles the bandleader of a US quintet that might never be bettered | 
Bryan Armen Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/simone-biles-us-gymnastics-olympics-rio-2016>
If anything it implies that the authorities had more control than they really 
did. Brazil was in the midst of its worst recession since the Great Depression. 
In March the man who brought the Olympics to the city, the former president 
Lula Inácio da Silva,was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/brazil-police-raid-home-former-president-lula-petrobas>
 as part of the investigation into government corruption. In May, his successor 
Dilma Rousseffwas suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/dilma-rousseff-brazil-president-impeached-senate-vote>
 after the senate voted to start impeachment proceedings against her. Neither 
were welcome atthe opening ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/olympic-opening-ceremony-rio-2016-fernando-meirelles>
 of the very Games they had arranged, and which was supposed to have been their 
legacy. Instead, the interim president, Michel Temer, was there. He took the 
precaution of arranging for the music to be turned up extra loud when he took 
to the stage. You could still hear the boos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e78501e40f82fa8c9adb9f8a657fb1e80ee47c%2F0_27_3452_2072%2F3452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e78501e40f82fa8c9adb9f8a657fb1e80ee47c%2F0_27_3452_2072%2F3452.jpg>
 USA’s Simone Biles bewitched the world, winning four golds as she lit up the 
gymnastics arena. Photograph: Dmitri Lovetsky/AP 
Earlier that same day hundreds of protestors gathered on the waterfront. They 
were cut off from the grand Copacabana Palace hotel, where the IOC’s mandarins 
had gathered, by a cordon of riot police, part of an army of 85,000 out on the 
streets. Many of them were working to try to suppress crime in the favelas, 
where residents found themselves under“a state of semi-siege” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/rio-police-killings-favela-residents-olympic-security-segregation>
, with soldiers stationed at the ends of the streets and helicopters hovering 
overhead. They were more conspicuous than the mosquitoes, although many medical 
experts hadsuggested that the Games should be postponed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/rio-olympics-zika-amir-attaran-public-health-threat>
 because they feared the Zika virus would lead to a global health emergency.

The IOC had a crisis of their own. In July, the World Anti-Doping Agency 
published thefirst part of the independent McLaren report into Russian doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics>
. The IAAF had alreadysuspended Russian track and field athletes from competing 
in the Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/17/russia-rio-olympics-ban-doping-iaaf-sebastian-coe>
. Now McLaren announced it was “beyond a reasonable doubt” that Russia had 
organised systematic cheating at the Sochi Winter Olympics. Wada recommended 
that the Russians should be suspended from the Rio Games but the IOC fudged the 
decision anddeferred it to the federations running individual sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/russia-team-escape-blanket-ban-ioc-rio-olympic-games>
. So it became a free-for-all and a busy time for lawyers travelling 
back-and-forth at the court of arbitration for sport.

An uneasy atmosphere settled over Rio. The Russian athletes were indignant, 
many of the rest incensed. Everyone was leery, even paranoid. No one knew what 
they could believe. At the swimming pool, the Russian competitors were booed 
and bad-mouthed. Yulia Efimova, who had repeatedly tested positive for banned 
substances in the past, was singled out and, she said,made a scapegoat in a new 
“cold war” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/yuilia-efimova-olympics-critics-cold-war-swimming-lilly-king-rio>
. At the athletics track, the first question every record breaker faced was a 
variation on “why should we believe you’re clean?”

In the first few days the Games seemed to teeter, almost topple, into utter 
chaos. The athletes’ village was unfinished, all leaky pipes, faulty locks and 
unlit stairwells. Protestors targeted the Olympic torch relay, which had to be 
diverted. A kayaker capsized after hitting a sofa floating in the water at 
Lagoa. Awayward bullet hit the media tent at the equestrian centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/bomb-squad-investigating-possible-blast-rio-games-olympics-mens-cycling>
. Two bad crashes on the road race course leftAnnemiek van Vleuten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/annemiek-van-vleuten-intensive-care-olympic-road-race>
 and Vincenzo Nibali in hospital. There was feverish talk of robberies, 
photographers who refused to use taxis because they had been warned they were 
being targeted by criminals – but soon enough everyone grew accustomed to the 
crazy rhythm of things.Another bullet was found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/police-find-second-bullet-inside-olympic-equestrian-centre>
, a bus was attacked, thewater in the diving pool turned bright green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/why-has-the-olympic-pool-turned-green-the-good-news-is-its-not-urine>
, Ryan Lochteshot a guerilla version of The Hangover IV: Blame It On Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/ryan-lochte-rio-robbery-timeline>
. The Games swept on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ae49825b870492a05915bdc3709b737f813de5%2F59_189_5446_3268%2F5446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ae49825b870492a05915bdc3709b737f813de5%2F59_189_5446_3268%2F5446.jpg>
 The American swimmer Michael Phelps underlined why he is the most successful 
Olympian. Photograph: Christophe Simon/AFP/Getty Images 
Because, in among all this, there was a lot of brilliant sport. Michael Phelps 
became the most successful Olympian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/michael-phelps-200m-individual-medley-gold-rio-2016-swimming>
 of this, that and every other era, and never looked more of a champion than he 
did when helost to a 21-year-old kid from Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/michael-phelps-taught-a-lesson-for-once-by-singapores-joseph-schooling>
. Simone Bilesbewitched the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/simone-biles-us-gymnastics-olympics-rio-2016>
, won four golds and one solitary bronze after she slipped on the balance beam. 
Fiji’s rugby sevens team bewildered everyone andwon their country’s very first 
gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/fiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final>
. Usain Boltbeat all-comers, again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/20/usain-bolt-triple-treble-greatness-rio-olympics>
, but still found himself sharing the stage with his young friend Wayde van 
Niekerk, whoshattered the 400m world record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/wayde-van-niekerk-olympic-gold-400m-world-record>
. Caster Semenyaeased to victory in the 800m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/caster-semenya-wins-gold-but-faces-scrutiny>
 and then refused to be hostage to the press’s questions. The Britishhad their 
best Olympics in a century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/great-britain-team-gb-second-rio-2016-olympic-medal-table>
.

The Brazilians turned out for their own. Rafaela Silva, a 24-year-old from the 
City of God,won gold in the women’s judo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/rafaela-silva-judo-wins-brazil-first-gold-rio-olympics>
. Thiago Braz da Silvabeat the great Renaud Lavillenie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/brazilthiago-braz-da-silva-elevated-to-national-hero-status-after-pole-vault-gold>
 in a late-night pole vault duel, one-on-one at the Olympic stadium. Alison 
Cerutti and Bruno Schmidt lit up the beach volleyball arena, the one stadium 
that was guaranteed to be packed every night of the Games. And back at the 
Maracanã the Brazilian football team achieved some measure of redemption for 
the calamities of their World Cup bybeating Germany on penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/brazil-germany-rio-2016-mens-football-olympic-final-match-report>
, the winning kick taken by – who else? – Neymar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe03a85bac116f855957a9c7eabee5ea027ef0967%2F59_141_3225_1934%2F3225.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%202016%3A%20amid%20the%20politics%20Olympics%20were%20a%20kaleidoscopic%20fortnight%20of%20sport%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe03a85bac116f855957a9c7eabee5ea027ef0967%2F59_141_3225_1934%2F3225.jpg>
 Abbey D’Agostino of the US, right, is assisted by New Zealand’s Nikki Hamblin 
in the 5,000m heats at Rio 2016. Photograph: Ian Walton/Getty Images 
But the Games are always about more than who wins what. There were 11,544 
athletes competing in Rio – and every one with a story worth telling. Pita 
Taufatofuabecame a heartthrob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/tongas-olympic-flag-bearer-turns-hand-to-cross-country-skiing>
 after carrying the Tongan flag. Two Korean gymnasts, Hong Un-jong and Lee 
Eun-ju,posed for a cross-border selfie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/olympics-2016-daily-briefing-everything-that-happened-at-the-rio-games>
. The USA’s Ibtihaj Muhammad spoke out about how it felt to be an American 
Muslimin the time of Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/ibtihaj-muhammad-fencing-olympics-2016-bronze>
. Egypt’s Islam El Shehaby wassent home because he refused to shake the hand of 
an Israeli opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/egyptian-judoka-sent-home-israeli-opponent-hand-shake-olympics>
. The Irish boxerMichael Conlan flicked his fingers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/michael-conlan-boxing-black-eye-rio-olympic-games>
 at his judges, Tserenbaatar Tsogbayar and Byambarinchen Bayaraastripped down 
to their underpants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/21/mongolian-wrestling-coaches-banned-stripping-off-bizarre-rio-olympics-protest>
 in protest at theirs. The Chinese diver Qin Kaidropped to one knee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/chinese-diver-proposes-medals-podium-rio-olympic-games-he-zi-qin-kai>
 to propose to his team-mate He Zi on the medal podium. New Zealand’s Nikki 
Hamblin and the USA’s Abbey D’Agostinohelped each other after a collision in 
the heats of the 5,000m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/olympic-spirit-new-zealand-and-american-runners-help-each-other-after-collision>
.

Why is the Olympic diving pool green? The good news is it's not urine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/why-has-the-olympic-pool-turned-green-the-good-news-is-its-not-urine>
However, the enduring image will be that shot of Bolt sporting his cartoon grin
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/27/rio-2016-usain-bolt-getty-images-dawn-airey-bbc>
, striding out ahead of the field in the 100m semi-finals, a road runner 
trailing so many Wile E Coyotes. Around him, everything is a blur. Which works 
because the Rio Games were a whirl, a kaleidoscopic fortnight of sport that 
left everyone dizzy. All human life was there, for better, for worse, in 
victory and defeat, chaotic, corrupt, endearing, enraging, inspiring.
 