
A few days ago, I visited the Flamborough Head “no take zone”, one of the UK’s 
three areas in which commercial fishing is prohibited.

Here marine life is allowed to proliferate, without being menaced by trawlers, 
scallop dredgers, drift nets, pots and all the other devices for rounding it 
up, some of which also rip the seabed to shreds. A reef of soft corals, 
mussels, razorfish and other species has begun to form, in which plaice and 
cod, crabs and lobsters can shelter, unmolested by exploitation. Fantastic, 
isn’t it?

Well curb your enthusiasm. Here’s a map of the no take zone, from the display 
board above the beach. It’s the area in dark blue:
 A map of Flamborough Head’s ‘no take zone’, shown in blue. Photograph: 
Rebecca Wrigley 
When I saw it, I thought of the scene from Blackadder Goes Forth, in which 
General Melchett explains to Lieutenant George how much ground the army has 
recaptured. Melchett shows him a three-dimensional representation of the land, 
on top of a table.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D09HTBiT3_lE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D09HTBiT3_lE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D09HTBiT3_lE&media=>
 Blackadder Goes Forth 
 General Melchett: “Em, what is the actual scale of this map, Darling?”

Captain Darling: “Er, one to one sir.”

General Melchett: “Come again?”

Captain Darling: “The map is actually life-sized sir.”


General Melchett: “So the actual amount of land retaken is?”

Captain Darling (measures it): “Seventeen square feet sir.”

General Melchett: “Excellent. So you see young Blackadder didn’t die horribly 
in vain after all.”

This reserve, dear reader, is one-fifth of the total area of the UK’s no take 
zones. Yes, we have managed so far to protect five square kilometres from 
commercial extraction, out of the 48,000 sq km of our territorial waters.


In the US, there’s a lively movement called Nature Needs Half 
<http://natureneedshalf.org/why-nature-needs-half/>. It campaigns for half the 
area of the land and sea to be set aside for the protection of wildlife: not 
very much to ask when you consider (as Alan Watson-Featherstone, founder of
Trees for Life <http://treesforlife.org.uk/> points out) that this means a 
single species gets 50%, while millions of others must make do with the rest.

But how about Nature Needs 0.01%? How does that sound? Well that’s what our 
government believes the correct allocation should be.


And this, it seems, is how it’s going to stay. It’s not just that the 
government, which was supposed to have designated127 marine conservation zones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/sep/08/england-marine-conservation-zones>
 four years ago,has so far managed to leave 100 of them off the list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/21/england-27-new-marine-conservation-zones>
, it’s also that the small number which have been approved are pretty well 
useless. They are little more than paper parks, lines on the map which make 
almost no difference to the life of the sea.

You might have imagined that a marine conservation zone would be a zone in 
which marine life was, well, conserved. That was certainly the expectation of 
the 500,000 people who signed the MarineConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society’s petition 
calling for 30% of our seas to be designated strict marine reserves in 2009.

Doh! How naïve can you get? Conservation in a conservation zone? You must be 
out of your mind. Conservation zones, obviously, are places that fishing boats 
can continue to smash to pieces through beam trawling, scallop dredging and 
other weapons of mass destruction.

In fact even special areas of conservation, which supposedly enjoy the 
strictest form of protection in the European Union, can still be treated as if 
the life they contain is worthless. Across most of these areas, trawling and 
dredging continue unhindered. But even where they have supposedly been stopped, 
the ban, it seems, can be overturned with a nod and a wink.

In August, the Duchy of Cornwall Oyster Farm applied to the government to 
annul a local law banning dredging in the Fal and Helford special area of 
conservation (SAC) in Cornwall. The bylaw had just been passed, to protect the 
fragile life of the seafloor. But the oyster farm, which hadn’t objected when 
the proposed law was put out for consultation, suddenly decided that it wanted 
to dredge for oysters there. Who owns the Duchy of Cornwall? Oh yes, that 
celebrated patron of conservation, Prince Charles.

 The oyster farm leases the area in which it operates from the Duchy of 
Cornwall, and the income accrues to Prince Charles. I’m told that the rent the 
Duchy receives is based on the farm’s turnover, in other words that the more 
money it makes, the richer Prince Charles becomes. But the Duchy has not yet 
confirmed this to me.

 The Duchy has sought in the past to prevent public access to information 
about the oyster farm and its environmental impacts, but this was overturned in 
court, which ruled that the Duchy should be classed as a public authority, 
which should be open to public scrutiny. The judge also concluded, 
astonishingly, that he believed the Duchy of Cornwall hadcarried out no 
assessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/nov/03/prince-charles-duchy-environment> 
of the farm’s environmental impacts.

 For years the government has offered Prince Charles a veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/31/prince-charles-veto-planning-legislation?intcmp=239&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 over legislation that might affect the Duchy of Cornwall.

Without consulting anyone, the government instructed the Cornwall Inshore 
Fisheries and Conservation Authority to rescind the ban on dredging. Then, 
before the authority had a chance to respond, Westminster decided that this was 
such an urgent case that it couldn’t wait for any boring decisions by the local 
authority. It immediately issued an order rescinding the ban 
<http://www.cornwall-ifca.gov.uk/sitedata/Byelaw_review/EMS_Byelaw_Amendment_2014.pdf>
 throughout Cornwall, on the grounds that the bylaw was “unnecessary, 
inadequate and disproportionate”.


The order was made on 7 August ... and came into force the same day. The man 
responsible was the environment minister Rupert Ponsonby, or the 7th Baron de 
Mauley, who, like Prince Charles, owes his authority to tell us what to do 
entirely to heredity.

 The Duchy says that while it is “clearly interested in understanding the 
impact of all new legislation which impacts on activity on the Helford and 
liaises with the appropriate authorities accordingly”, in this case it has “not 
been involved in changes to these bylaws. Tenants are free to make their own 
representations .... dredging has been judged to be an acceptable activity on 
the Helford. On this basis the bylaw is being amended.”

It looks to me like a royal stitch-up by a boot-licking baron of the kind you 
might have expected in the 14th Century, but that appears to sit comfortably 
with political life in the 21st. It could scarcely be a better illustration of 
the way in which the pre-democratic past continues to cast a shadow over 
democracy.







In her new treatise, Conserving the Great Blue: overturning the dominant 
paradigm of the oceans <http://www.marinet.org.uk/>, Deborah Wright proposes 
reversing our approach to marine conservation.

Instead of assuming that everywhere can be exploited except those areas 
(generally tiny ones) designated as marine reserves, the assumption should be 
that everywhere is protected. If the fishing industry wants to exploit parts of 
the sea, it would first need to demonstrate that it can do so without lasting 
harm, in which case it would obtain a licence to go ahead. Destructive and 
damaging practices, instead of being the norm as they are today, would become 
criminal acts.


But for this to happen, we need to confront not only the fishing industry but 
also certain conservation groups.

That map of the pathetic no take zone occupies one of a number of display 
boards, which together comprisethe Flamborough Storyboard project 
<http://www.ywt.org.uk/flamborough-storyboard-project>. Another provides a 
folksy eulogy to the local fishing industry. It’s entertaining, but there are 
two minor problems. The first is that it says not a word about the destructive 
impacts of the industry. In fact commercial fishing is portrayed as so benign 
and heroic that you feel it would be churlish even to raise the question. The 
second is that the boards were erected by the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust. Perhaps 
in future it should be known as the Yorkshire fishing industry’s marketing arm.

It gets worse. Here’s what another of its boards says about the local farming 
industry.
 Yorkshire Wildlife Trust storyboard on farming and wildlife at Flamborough 
Photograph: Rebecca Wrigley 
Behind it was the standard mixture of industrial monocultures – sheep pasture 
and arable fields – extending right up to the cliff path.


Just as the fishing industry is the principal cause of the loss of wildlife at 
sea, the farming industry is the principal cause of the loss of wildlife on 
land. Surely the role of the YorkshireWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust is to defend wildlife 
from these industries, rather than to produce misleading propaganda on their 
behalf?


Explaining these display boards, the trust’s website states 
<http://www.ywt.org.uk/sites/yorkshire.live.wt.precedenthost.co.uk/files/Flamborough%20storyboard.pdf>
 that “scrub is controlled and the well-managed grassland provides an important 
habitat for insects alongside nesting sites for skylark and meadow pipit”.

But scrub tends to be far richer in bird species than meadows, and provides an 
essential resting and nesting place for the migrating birds – many of them much 
rarer and in greater need of help than skylarks and meadow pipits - that make 
Flamborough Head famous.

It’s a classic example of where conservation on land has gone wrong: the 
bodies charged with conserving our wildlife make decisions about which habitats 
to protect that look as if they are designed to accommodate not wildlife but 
powerful industrial interests. Farmers prefer sheep pasture to scrub, so 
wildlife trusts celebrate sheep pasture and wage war on scrub.

Now the same thing is happening at sea. Instead of campaigning to keep the 
fishing fleet out of large areas, to allow the proliferation of the magnificent 
life forms they could contain, the Wildlife Trust tells me it’s working 
“alongside the in-shore fishing industry to build wildlife-friendly fishing 
into the industry”.

Wildlife-friendly industrial fishing? It reminds me of the “green bombs” 
military scientists once claimed to be developing. 
<http://www.cnet.com/uk/news/german-scientists-developing-green-bombs/>

Sure, some forms of fishing are less damaging than others. That doesn’t make 
them wildlife-friendly.

What is desperately needed – paradoxically for the fishing industry as well as 
wildlife – are large areas of seabed in which there is no fishing at all. Here 
fish, crustaceans and other species can mature and breed in peace. The 
“spillover effect”, as fish migrate out of large marine reserves, greatly 
boosts the overall catch levels.

But so resistant have fishing interests been to the very idea of reserves that 
they would rather forgo this prospect than cede an inch of seabed to 
conservation. And so spineless are certain conservation groups, despite their 
huge memberships, that they would rather accommodate this attitude than 
confront it.

The result is that destruction is locked in, as the conservation policies that 
have done so little to help wildlife on land now spread to the sea. Instead of 
simply declaring large reserves off limits and letting wildlife do what it does 
best, the approach of governments and groups like the Wildlife Trust is to 
identify “interest features” and design plans for their “management” (slight 
modifications of industrial practice) to keep them in “favourable condition” 
(which means only 80% trashed).

While there are many problems with this approach on land, at sea it’s even 
worse. There it’s much harder to assess the condition of the “interest 
features” being “managed”, harder to prevent the damaging industry from 
carrying on as before, and harder to assign responsibility when someone does 
the wrong kind of damage rather than the “right” kind.


When I contacted the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust, its chief executive, Dr Rob 
Stoneman, told me:

We are not apologists for farming and fishing, nor pushing out propaganda for 
them ... The [display] board does not take a view on farming – it offers no 
support nor is it designed to campaign against the appalling state of British 
farming today. Likewise for fishing. We, of course, understand that fishing has 
devastated the North Sea’s wildlife – it is why YWT has built capacity to 
campaign on marine wildlife protection over the last five years. But again, 
regardless of our views on fishing, fishing has been part of the Flamborough 
community for thousands of years – it is part of the story of the people who 
live and work at Flamborough.

So an organisation that believes British farming is in an appalling state and 
that fishing has devastated the North Sea’s wildlife is happy to tell the 
opposite story, sanitising and celebrating these industries, to the tens of 
thousands of people who visit Flamborough Head each year.

When a conservation group censors itself on behalf of the interests it should 
be confronting, you get an inkling of how much trouble we’re in. And by the 
way, if stating that “the farmers’ immense sense of pride in their land has 
resulted in the headland you see today; productive and rich in wildlife” is not 
taking “a view on farming”, I’m a monkey’s uncle.

In 1776, Oliver Goldsmith described the arrival 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/res/unnatural-history-of-the-sea/about/> of a typical 
body of herring on the British coast. It was “divided into distinct columns, of 
five or six miles in length, and three or four broad; while the water before 
them curls up, as if forced out of its bed … the whole water seems alive; and 
is seen so black with them to a great distance, that the number seems 
inexhaustible.”

These shoals, he noted, were harried by swarms of dolphins, sharks ... and 
pods of fin and sperm whales. In British waters, within sight of the shore.


They were also accompanied by great shoals of bluefin tuna, blue, porbeagle, 
thresher and mako sharks. On some parts of the seabed the eggs of the herring 
lay six feet deep.

Should that not be our ambition? To revive the astonishing abundance of the 
sea and its magnificent living wonders? Instead we fiddle with tiny variations 
on the theme of universal destruction. Except, that is, in the 0.01% of our 
waters that the government has so generously allocated to wildlife.

Monbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com/>


• When this article was first published George Monbiot was under an 
obligation, to a third party unrelated to the Guardian, to assist the charity 
Trees for Life. This note was added on 1 September 2016.

 