
“I’ve never been much of a traditionalist,” says Lopè Ariyo 
<http://www.lopeariyo.com/>. “Whenever my mum and grandma see me doing stuff, 
they’re like, ‘O-kaaay’.” She mimics a Nigerian woman looking askance at jollof 
rice made with grated cauliflower instead of actual rice, or fish and chips 
with cassava batter and spicy yams for chips. “It’s only once they’ve tasted it 
that they say, ‘OK, I see what you’re doing.’ Now my mum gets a bit upset when 
I don’t cook for her.”

As well she might. Last September, her daughter, who is 24, went from being an 
undergraduate with afood blog <https://lopeariyo.wordpress.com> on the side, to 
an author whose first book,Hibiscus, out in June, may change the way we see 
African food in Britain.

Ariyo was in her final year of a maths degree at Loughborough when she heard 
about a competition to find a cook who would “break an African cuisine into the 
home kitchens of the UK”. The competition,conceived by Red magazine and 
HarperCollins 
<http://www.redonline.co.uk/food/best-recipes/lope-ariyo-the-food-worlds-new-star>
, was responding to a lack of diversity in British cookery writing.

With encouragement from friends, Ariyo sent in an application, which she 
rushed home from her final exam to complete, and was called in a week later to 
cook alongside four other finalists representing North, East, South and Central 
Africa. Her freewheeling, boldly flavourful take on Nigerian cuisine won out 
and landed her a book deal with HarperCollins.

“My cooking is a union of English and Nigerian,” Ariyo says when we meet near 
her family home in East Croydon. Like any born-and-bred south Londoner, she was 
exposed to a wide variety of flavours growing up: “We did eat Nigerian food at 
home but not on a daily basis.” It was when she went to boarding school in 
Lagos at the age of 11 that she got a proper taste for traditional dishes such 
as jollof rice, pounded yam and egusi soup.

Returning to London two years later, she craved the food she’d left behind and 
set about recreating it at home – but in a liberal fashion, improvising with 
whatever was available and sneaking in ideas from other cuisines. Purists such 
as her Nigerian grandmother may raise an eyebrow (at least initially) but her 
British friends were unanimous in their approval.

As were the competition judges. “She jumped out instantly,” says Pip McCormac 
<https://twitter.com/pipmccormac>, lifestyle director at Red. “Her recipes 
seemed really approachable – interesting and exciting but not beyond the realm 
of comprehension.” Having tasted her sticky-sweet hibiscus chicken and that 
jollof cauliflower rice, which is intense, satisfying – and healthy without 
seeming virtuous – I heartily agree.

For all its richness and mindboggling variety, African food has yet to cross 
over in the UK. With her lively, accessible take on Nigerian cuisine, Lopè 
Ariyo could be the person to make it happen.

Three more to watch

■ Another standard bearer for West African food, Irish-Ghanaian Londoner Zoe 
Adjonyoh <https://twitter.com/ZoeAdjonyoh> started out selling peanut butter 
stew at festivals and now has her ownrestaurant in Brixton 
<http://zoesghanakitchen.co.uk/category/events/>, with a book, Zoe’s Ghana 
Kitchen, out in April.

■ Ex-Clove Club <http://thecloveclub.com> sous chef Tim Spedding 
<https://twitter.com/Tim_Spedding> is turning out incredible food, solo, at 
tiny east London wine barP Franco <https://www.facebook.com/pfranco.e5/> until 
the end of January. The 30-year-old plans to open his own place in Cornwall 
later this year.

■ Fast-rising 28-year-old Elizabeth Allen <https://twitter.com/the_modernchef> 
helped London’sPidgin <http://www.pidginlondon.com/> gain its first Michelin 
star but had already left by the time it was awarded. Her new ventureKaizen 
<http://kaizenhouse.co.uk/> opens in September.
 