
As a theatre director, William Oldroyd <http://www.williamoldroyd.com/> has 
done his share of Shakespeare. But his film-making debut,Lady Macbeth 
<http://www.williamoldroyd.com/lady-macbeth/>, out this spring, has nothing to 
do with the Bard. Featuring a mesmeric lead performance byFlorence Pugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/28/rising-stars-2015-actor-florence-pugh>
 – the discovery of Carol Morley’s filmThe Falling – it’s the 19th-century 
story of Katherine, a young married woman in the north of England who frees 
herself from the shackles of patriarchy in the most drastic way. Written by 
playwright Alice Birch, it’s adapted fromLady Macbeth of Mtsensk, an 1860s 
Russian novel by Nikolai Leskov, which also inspired an opera by Shostakovich.

The book is almost forgotten today but Oldroyd says: “It’s a cracking read. 
We’re used to so much literature of that period where women either suffer in 
silence or run away. Katherine full-bloodedly takes her destiny in both hands. 
It’s in the Jacobean tragic tradition.”

Despite being visibly exhausted from the film’s festival tour – he’s been on 
the circuit since it debuted in Toronto in September – Oldroyd, 37, comes 
across as more buoyant, and boyish, than you expect from his early publicity 
photos, in which he sported a solemn Old Testament beard. This former theology 
student originally planned to become a priest but lost his faith at university 
in Durham and discovered theatre instead.

I short my first short in a field from one angle. I thought, why doesn’t this 
work?

He got into directing by accident, when taking part in a revue in Edinburgh: 
“When you weren’t actually on stage, you were sitting back and telling your 
mates why they weren’t funny. That, I realised, was basically directing.”

He went on to be an assistant at theatres including the Almeida and the 
Barbican, where he worked on Deborah Warner’s epicJulius Caesar; had a 
directing residency at the Young Vic; and has travelled the world staging 
Beckett in Germany, Sartre’sKean in Japan, baroque opera in Portugal and 
Donizetti at Sadler’s Wells.

Raised in Guildford, Oldroyd first tried his hand at film during a stint at 
art school, making video diaries on the short-lived Flip camera. But it took 
him a long time to evolve the rigorous style ofLady Macbeth. “The first short I 
made was a scene from a play. I shot it in a field from one angle, because that 
was where I was used to sitting in a theatre. I thought, why doesn’t this work?”

He became a lot more confident on his 2013 short Best, a five-minute 
two-hander that won theSundance London Short Film Competition 
<http://www.thebritishblacklist.com/best-starring-jotham-annan-wins-sundance-london-short-film-competition-congrats-runner-sebastian-thiel/>
. Now he is poised for his first US project, an adaptation of Walter Mosley’s 
novelThe Man in My Basement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/05/fiction.waltermosley>.

For the record, Oldroyd has done an actual Macbeth – a 2004 production 
starring Bertie Carvel. “We filled the Union theatre in Southwark with peat and 
a whole load of candles and fur. I was really happy with that.”

Three more to watch

■  Formerly assistant to Todd Solondz, Scottish-based writer-director Hope 
Dickson Leach <http://hopedicksonleach.com> recently premiered her feature 
debut The Levelling <http://hopedicksonleach.com/#/thelevelling/>, a rural 
family drama; 2016 also saw her winning the first ever IWC Filmmaker Bursary 
Award.

■ Fourteen-year-old Lewis MacDougall 
<http://www.edinburghnews.scotsman.com/news/edinburgh-schoolboy-stars-in-pan-with-hugh-jackman-1-3918566>
 made his debut in Joe Wright’s JM Barrie-inspired Pan and stays in fantasy 
mode for his breakthrough role in A Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
, opposite Liam Neeson, who plays a talking tree.

■ Up-and-coming Princess of Weird Tallulah Rose Haddon 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm7552807/> made her mark in 2016 with period 
supernatural TV series The Living and the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/28/phantoms-in-the-four-poster-will-the-living-and-the-dead-outspook-tvs-scariest-ghosts>
 and leftfield British teen angst feature Spaceship. She turns up next in Tom 
Hardy’s mini-series Taboo 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-02-26/tom-hardy-is-the-anti-poldark-in-first-taboo-trailer>
.
 