
Rising sea levels could topple the proud status of some British mountains, 
reducing them to the status of mere hills. Those in greatest danger of demotion 
include a peak in the Yorkshire Dales that was only reclassified as a mountain 
a few weeks ago.

The Ordnance Survey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ordnance-survey> (OS) uses 
mean sea level as the starting point for measuring the absolute height of 
mountains, which must be a at least 609.6 metres (2,000ft) above sea level – 
but several peaks in England, Scotland and Wales are only a few centimetres 
taller than that.

 Mean sea level, the halfway mark between high and low tides, is measured by a 
gauge at Newlyn in Cornwall. But the point used by the OS was established 
almost a century ago, and since then sea levels have risen and are continuing 
to rise at an accelerating rate, mainly through climate change.

“We have to measure from a fixed point, and there are no immediate proposals 
for a change, but rising sea levels could obviously be a factor if there is a 
change in the future,” an OS spokesman said. “Clearly if the fixed point was 
taken from a higher level, the heights measured would drop by the same amount, 
and that certainly could affect many hills and mountains.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ef3c095c94003f08f5e6492638aab9f43a7feb%2F0_288_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20sea%20levels%20could%20reduce%20several%20UK%20mountains%20to%20hills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20sea%20levels%20could%20reduce%20several%20UK%20mountains%20to%20hills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ef3c095c94003f08f5e6492638aab9f43a7feb%2F0_288_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Thack Moor in Cumbria, which was only recently reclassified as a mountain. 
Photograph: Andy Sutton/Alamy Stock Photo 
Calf Top in the Yorkshire Dales only achieved mountain status in September 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-37289472>, after the OS 
determined its true height is a few centimetres taller than was concluded when 
it was last measured in 2010, putting it just over the required height for a 
mountain. Any change in the base point would knock it back down again.

Myrddyn Phillips <http://mappingmountains.blogspot.co.uk/> is an amateur 
surveyor who worked on Calf Top with Hill Data and Mountain Surveys, one of 
several amateur groups whose hours of unpaid work, out on the slopes in all 
weathers, has produced new data that has been accepted by the authorities.

 Thack Moor in Cumbria also recently became a mountain through Phillips’s work 
with John Barnard and Graham Jackson, of G&J Surveys. Their measurements, 
repeated at the request of the OS, confirmed its true height was just 2cm over 
the 609.6-metre qualifier.


Phillips was enthusiastic about the possibility of change: “That would be 
fantastic, on the whole I like change.

“It will be incredibly interesting if Ordnance Survey change their datum point 
as this will affect all known heights throughout Britain, and even if this 
change equates to only 40-45cm it will affect a multitude of hill and mountain 
classifications,” he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e103eece7f9e58b7c51397990d75c21add51b3%2F0_88_4338_2603%2F4338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20sea%20levels%20could%20reduce%20several%20UK%20mountains%20to%20hills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20sea%20levels%20could%20reduce%20several%20UK%20mountains%20to%20hills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frising-sea-levels-reduce-several-uk-mountains-hills-ordnance-survey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e103eece7f9e58b7c51397990d75c21add51b3%2F0_88_4338_2603%2F4338.jpg>
 Looking towards Tryfan in Snowdonia national park, north Wales. The hill is 
part of the Nuttall group of hills. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
A change could affect the status of many sites cherished by walkers who like 
to tackle all the mountains in a group, includingthe Munros in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/mar/14/scotland.walkingholidays>, 
which are all over 914 metres (3,000ft), the slightly less challenging 
762-metre (2,500ft) Corbetts, and theHewitts 
<http://www.walkhighlands.co.uk/hewitts/>, Nuttalls 
<http://www.hill-bagging.co.uk/Nuttalls.php> and Deweys 
<http://www.hill-bagging.co.uk/Deweys.php> in England and Wales.

“In a general sense it does not matter whether a peak is classified as a hill, 
mountain, Munro or a Pedwar [a hill inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> between 400-499 metres], but we do seem 
to have an inner need to categorise and this is as applicable to hills as any 
other form of commodity,” Phillips said.

“Certainly for the hill bagging community it is essential to get hill 
classifications correct, and it is also justifiable to say this in relation to 
the wider hill walking community as there are upwards of 6,000 people who have 
now completed the Munros and probably twice as many working their way through 
this list, and all of these people will want to know that they have completed 
each and every Munro that should be listed.”

He acknowledged that many people would be upset if their cherished mountain 
view was downgraded but insisted it would be an exciting process.

“As I am a person who is open to change this would also cause a lot of fun as 
there would be a Munro reclassified to Corbett status, a Corbett reclassified to
Graham <http://www.walkhighlands.co.uk/grahams/> status, Simms 
<http://www.rhb.org.uk/updates/simmupdate201601.htm> would disappear, Hewitts 
and Nuttals would become Deweys, a Dewey would become a Pedwar and a number of 
Pedwarau would become 300mTwmpau 
<http://mappingmountains.blogspot.co.uk/2014/06/hill-lists-cymru-wales-200m-p30-bryniau.html>
 hills.”
 