
After much deliberation from translator Matthew Fitt, the Oompa-Loompas have 
become the Heedrum-Hodrums in the latest in a series of Scots translations of 
Roald Dahl’s books, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.

Roald Dahl's BFG becomes Guid and Freendly in Scots translation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/30/roald-dahl-bfg-becomes-guid-and-freendly-in-scots-translation>
Dahl’s classic 1964 children’s story is renamed Chairlie and the Chocolate 
Works in Fitt’s translation, published tomark the centenary of the author’s 
birth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/13/my-grandfather-cast-a-spell-over-my-childhood>
. Telling the story of Mr Wullie Wonka’s invitation of five children into his 
chocolate factory – “Has Violet Boakregarde bitten aff mair than she can chaw? 
Will Mike Teeveeheid finally end up on TV? Will Chairlie go up and oot in 
Wullie Wonka’s Muckle Gless Lift?” – it follows in the footsteps of Black & 
White Publishing’s Scots translation of The BFG, renamed The Guid Freendly 
Giant, which was released earlier this year.

Novelist and poet Fitt, who has translated Dahl’s The Twits (The Eejits) and 
George’s Marvellous Medicine (Geordie’s Mingin Medicine) in the past,said at a 
Scottish Book Trust event in September 
<http://www.scottishbooktrust.com/video/authors-live/matthew-fitt> that coming 
up with a Scots equivalent for the Oompa-Loompas had been one of the most 
challenging elements in his latest translation.

“I took ages trying to get one for that,” he said. “You think a oompa, well 
it’s kinda got a oompa, it’s a kinda trombone sound, oompa, oompa, stick it 
your joompa feel to it, there’s a musical element. And I was thinking, well how 
dae ye, ye dae wi this? And I had lots of ideas. I remembered there’s a great 
word for old-fashioned Scottish music … which is Heedrum-Hodrum and so once I’d 
settled on that, that was it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Froald-dahl-scots-translation-chairlie-and-the-chocolate-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47837cd8dffd4588d2f7b002838dd9a684889133%2F0_0_782_1199%2F782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roald%20Dahl%20gets%20'mair%20serious'%20Scots%20translation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Froald-dahl-scots-translation-chairlie-and-the-chocolate-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roald%20Dahl%20gets%20%27mair%20serious%27%20Scots%20translation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Froald-dahl-scots-translation-chairlie-and-the-chocolate-works%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47837cd8dffd4588d2f7b002838dd9a684889133%2F0_0_782_1199%2F782.jpg>
 Cover of Chairlie and the Chocolate Works. Photograph: Quentin Blake/PR 
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, he said, was one of the more serious of 
Dahl’s novels. “Although it’s funny, and it’s honkin and terrible things happen 
to the bairns in the story, the spoilt bairns, it seems to be a much mair 
serious, one of the mair seriousRoald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> stories. Because the story begins 
in poverty and Chairlie and his grandfaither … are jist aboot dying o 
starvation and he looks longingly at this chocolate factory and wins this 
gowden ticket,” Fitt said. “I think that there is a much mair sophisticated 
development of the relationship between Wullie Wonka and who he is, as a 
person. And daeing that in Scots was great because it didnae aw have to be the 
honkin and hackit and mingin stuff, you could tell some o the mair serious 
parts of life.”

But taking on any translation of Dahl was, he admitted, “a bit worrying to 
start with”, particularly with the plethora of words the author made up.

Fitt said he hoped Dahl would have appreciated his efforts. “He would, a wid 
hope. Quentin Blake, the illustrator of Roald Dahl’s books, he got a copy of 
one of the translations I did a wee while ago …. I think it was The Eejits, and 
he keeps it on his mantelpiece in his studio in London. [He says] that’s his 
favourite edition of any of the Roald Dahl books that he’s worked on, which was 
brilliant for us, but it’s also great for the Scots language to hear that folk 
ootsideScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> think it’s great and 
think it’s valuable.”
 