
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> salvaged a 
late 2-0 win at Schalke in the Bundesliga on Friday, maintaining new coach 
Carlo Ancelotti’s winning start.

Minutes after missing a golden opportunity, Robert Lewandowski opened the 
scoring in the 81st minute, finding the top left corner after being set up by a 
fine pass from Javi Martínez. The Poland striker then set up substitute Joshua 
Kimmich to seal the result in injury time, with Ancelotti’s other substitutes, 
Arturo Vidal and Douglas Costa, both involved in the buildup.

How RB Leipzig became the most hated club in German football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/why-rb-leipzig-has-become-the-most-hated-club-in-german-football>
“We knew we had to be patient,” said Lewandowski, who took his goal tally to 
four from two gamesafter scoring a hat-trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/bayern-munich-werder-bremen-match-report>
 in the opening defeat of Werder Bremen. “That was a very important win.”

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke>, who were hoping to 
bounce back from the opening weekend defeat at Eintracht Frankfurt, took the 
game to the defending champions, snapping at the visitors’ heels, winning 
challenges and forcing mistakes.

“It’s bitter for us,” said the Schalke coach, Markus Weinzierl, who added that 
he was nevertheless encouraged by his side’s performance.

Ukraine winger Yevhen Konoplyanka and French midfielder Benjamin Stambouli 
made their Schalke debuts, while new loan signings Nabil Bentaleb and Baba 
Rahman impressed for the home side. Bayern’s 19-year-old Renato Sanches, who 
helped Portugal win the European Championship, also made hisBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> debut.

Bundesliga club Darmstadt add name of tragic fan to stadium title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/05/bundesliga-club-darmstadt-name-fan-stadium-title>
Schalke had the game’s first big chance when David Alaba blocked Leon 
Goretzka’s header almost on the line, before Konoplyanka’s shot was deflected 
wide for a corner and Goretzka went close again.

Lewandowski should have put away Bayern’s first big chance minutes later, 
turning the ball wide after being set up by Thomas Müller.

The hosts might have gone ahead in the 38th, when Alaba and Manuel Neuer, back 
at his old club, could only scramble the ball away from the lurking Klaas-Jan 
Huntelaar after Konoplyanka had pulled it back, all set up by a great run from 
Baba.

Huntelaar rattled the crossbar early in the second half, as Neuer got 
fingertips to the ball. Ancelotti reacted to Schalke’s growing confidence by 
bringing on Vidal and Costa for Xabi Alonso and Franck Ribéry, respectively.

Costa fired over in the 72nd minute before Lewandowski missed an open net from 
close range. The Poland striker had no time to react to Alaba’s cross and the 
ball ricocheted over – but just when it looked like the visitors would have to 
settle for a point, Lewandowski made amends, then set up Kimmich, to gather all 
three.
 