
A frustrated Roberto Di Matteo said his Aston Villa side would recover after 
they lost more early ground in the race for promotion. Villa fell 10 points 
behind the leaders,Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>, after being held 2-2 by 
Nottingham Forest despite dominating.

Two goals in two minutes from Ross McCormack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/aston-villa-sign-ross-mccormack-fulham>
 andRudy Gestede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/31/aston-villa-jordan-veretout-nantes-five-year-deal>
 put them 2-1 ahead with 16 minutes to go only for Henri Lansbury to rescue a 
draw for Forest on Sunday. They had only three shots to Villa’s 26 but scored 
twice as Apostolos Vellios opening the scoring, and had Hildeberto Pereira sent 
off for celebrating with fans after the late equaliser.

Aston Villa v Nottingham Forest: Championship – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/11/aston-villa-v-nottingham-forest-championship-live>
Villa hit the woodwork through McCormack and Jordan Ayew but have only six 
points from their first six games. They have blown leads in four of their seven 
games in all competitions after alsolosing at Luton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/league-cup-efl-burton-liverpool-luton-leeds-qpr>
 and Bristol City anddrawing with Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/aston-villa-huddersfield-match-report>
.

Di Matteo  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-di-matteo>said: “We 
need to win these games, it’s as simple as that. That’s why I was shaking my 
head at the end, it’s really difficult to take. I’m frustrated by the result 
because the performance was very good. We dominated the whole game. We hit the 
post, the bar, the keeper makes a couple of world-class saves but we are moving 
in the right direction.

“With time we will learn and improve in these situations where we will be able 
to finish games off. Right now we have made a lot of changes in the transfer 
window. It’s really frustrating but the performance was really good.”

Vellios scored his first goal for Forest – and first in England since 2011 – 
when he fired home from 25 yards against the run of play in the second half. 
McCormack and the substitute Gestede then turned the game for Villa only for 
Lansbury’s fine finish to steal a point. It was Forest’s first away point in 
the league this season and even their manager, Philippe Montanier, admitted 
Villa deserved to win.

The joke has been on Nicklas Bendtner for far too long | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/nicklas-bendtner-ego-nottingham-forest>
“It was a tough game for us because Villa started very strongly,” he said. “It 
was better from us in the end of the first half but we conceded a lot of 
opportunities to score. Villa deserved the victory but sometimes you can win a 
point when you are a little lucky. We showed good character.”

The Forest substitute Pereira, who was already on a yellow card, was dismissed 
for apparently celebrating with the Forest fans in the aftermath of Lansbury’s 
equaliser and Montanier said he would fine the midfielder if he deserved it.

He added: “He knows the rules, it’s not to jump into the crowd so we have to 
check on the video if he did. If he did then it’s a big fine for him. If you 
are near the crowd it’s different to jumping.”
 