
As opening appraisals from a new boss go, it was not the most immediately 
encouraging. “[It was] a house that needed to be knocked down and start 
afresh,” Roberto Di Matteo said of hisfirst impressions of Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/aston-villa-roberto-di-matteo-rebuilding-job>
. “That’s so far what I have seen.”

Not exactly a rallying cry to demoralised troops, but a message that Villa 
needed. Not so much a house that needed to be knocked down, more bulldozed, 
every brick to be ground into dust and the site exorcised by at least one 
priest.

After the desperate failure of last season, when relegation looked more or 
less certain from October and things did not get much better from there, a 
fresh start is required for the newChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> season. As such, 
expectations at Villa Park for this season should be modest.

Championship 2016-17 season preview | Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/04/championship-2016-17-season-preview>
While fellow relegated sides Newcastle United and Norwich City will expect to 
bounce straight back into the Premier League, a season of consolidation would 
be a more sensible aim: nine months of steady growth and free from crushing, 
oppressive failure would be a good start to this new version of Villa.

“I’m a positive person,” Di Matteo told the Mirror this week, “so I regard 
this as a big opportunity.” Villa will need some of that optimism, especially 
since the rebuilding work is still very much in progress. Some of the more 
perplexing players from last term remain in the squad, such associal media’s 
Joleon Lescott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/15/joleon-lescott-apology-aston-villa-commitment>
 andGabriel Agbonlahor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/gabriel-agbonlahor-aston-villa-quits-captain>
, left out at the end of last term for “fitness issues”.

Part of the hangover from last season is not so much to do with the quality or 
attitude of the players, but more the psychological aspect, according to Di 
Matteo. “We need to tune into the right mental attitude to face the challenge,” 
he said. “The hardest thing to overcome is going to be the disappointment of 
last season. I think that has weighed on the players’ minds and we’ve been 
trying to move on.”

Di Matteo’s positivity has been matched by Villa’s new owner. Tony Xia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/roberto-di-matteo-tony-xia-aston-villa>
, the Chinese businessman who bought the club this summer, certainly seems to 
be good value: in May he declared his aim was forVilla to become one of the top 
six clubs in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/tony-xia-revamp-aston-villa-top-three-world-owner>
 inside five years, then when that modest aim is achieved, to crack the top 
three.

On Twitter he seems to oscillate between broadsides against pundits who 
predict doom for Villa (Ian Holloway was the target for his ire recently) and 
the sort of philosophical maxims you would find in one of those impulse-buy 
books. “It was because of impatience that they were expelled from Paradise. It 
is because of indolence that they do not return,” he tweeted recently. Kafka, 
since you ask.

Despite last season’s catastrophe there is enough talent buried deep in that 
squad to form the basis for a decent Championship side. Rudy Gestede, Jack 
Grealish and Ashley Westwood might not have been up to scratch in the top 
flight, but they should be handy enough in the tier below, particularly when 
augmented by their signings so far this summer.

It took a little while for the transfer gears to creak into motion, but 
central defender Tommy Elphick was a brilliant first signing, Italian 
goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini and midfielder Aaron Tshibola are riskier yet 
still with potential, and the big one came this week.

Eyebrows might be raised and hands wrung that, for the second time in two 
years, a striker with no top-flight experience was sold for more than £10m, but
Ross McCormack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/aston-villa-sign-ross-mccormack-fulham>
 has been one of the best players in the division for some time. He managed 42 
goals in two seasons for a largely terrible Fulham, so it was not especially 
surprising that Villa shelled out £12m (slightly more than the Cottagers paid 
Leeds in 2014) for the Scot, and with him buzzing around the vast Gestede, 
Villa could be a fairly brutal attacking prospect. Slowly, they are building a 
fine side to cope with the rigours of this most relentless division.

If Di Matteo had hoped for a gentle introduction to the Championship then he 
is out of luck, as Villa travel toSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> on Sunday, one of the 
division’s most impressive sides last season under Carlos Carvalhal.

And as Newcastle displayed in losing to a theoretically weak Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/fulham-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
 on Friday night, reputations and famous players mean little here. The house 
needs rebuilding, and Di Matteo is just laying the foundations.

IN … From … Fee

Ross McCormack Fulham £12.16m

Aaron Tshibola Reading £5.02m

Pierluigi Gollini Verona £4.25m

Tommy Elphick Bournemouth £3.32m

OUT … To … Fee

Idrissa Gueye Everton £7.23m

Ciaran Clark Newcastle £5.10m

Benjamin Siegrist Vaduz £0.21m

Callum Robinson Preston free

José Ángel Crespo PAOK Saloniki free

Brad Guzan Middlesbrough undisc

Carles Gil Deportivo loan

Charles N’Zogbia released

Kieran Richardson released

Janoi Donacien released
 