
Chairman of selectors Rod Marsh has resigned, effective immediately, after 
Australia’s fifth straight Test defeat. The 69-year-old revealed last month he 
would leave the key post when his contract expired at the end of this financial 
year but Australia’s recent form, most notably woeful losses to South Africa in 
Perth and Hobart that featured inept batting collapses, has expedited his exit.

Darren Lehmann promises changes to squad after Australia's series defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/darren-lehmann-promises-changes-to-squad-after-australias-series-defeat>
The board of Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia 
will hold an extraordinary meeting on Wednesday night, when a decision on an 
interim chairman of selectors will be made. It is likely Mark Waugh or Trevor 
Hohns, who both sit on the selection panel, will temporarily hold the top job 
before CA appoints Marsh’s successor.

The former Test wicketkeeper insists he has not been pushed. “This is my own 
decision and no one within Cricket Australia has pressured me or even suggested 
that I should do this,” Marsh said in a statement. “Clearly, though, it is time 
for some fresh thinking, just as it is for our Test team to welcome some new 
faces as we build for the future. I have always had the best interests of 
Australian cricket foremost in my heart, and that’s why I have made this 
decision.

“I have thoroughly enjoyed the role and want to thank the coach, the staff, my 
co-selectors and all the players for their support and honesty over the past 
two-and-a-half years. It was a thrill for me to be involved in many successes, 
including the World Cup win in 2015. I wish the captain, coach and the team all 
the best going forward. We will be great again.”

CA chief executive James Sutherland, national coach Darren Lehmann and team 
high-performance manager Pat Howard had all recently expressed their support 
for Marsh to see out his tenure.Sutherland sent a firm message on Wednesday 
morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/under-fire-cricket-australia-chief-james-sutherland-stands-firm-over-position>
 that Marsh was going nowhere after Australia’s dismal innings-and-80-run loss 
to South Africa at Bellerive.

“Rod’s ... like everyone else – they’re doing the best job they can and 
working very hard at it,” Sutherland said. “He’s said that he’s going to finish 
up in June and we’ll make decisions about that and how we transition that in 
the future.”

No hiding place for Australia's embarrassment after latest batting shambles | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/no-hiding-place-for-australias-embarrassment-after-latest-batting-shambles>
Sutherland met Marsh in Hobart after Wednesday’s media conference but only 
learned of his desire to step down on returning to Melbourne. Howard had 
previously suggested he wouldn’t contemplate Marsh’s potential successor until 
January, but that would become his top priority.

Ricky Ponting and Steve Waugh have been floated as potential candidates but 
both former skippers have busy schedules and might not be willing and able to 
sign up for what is a full-time job. Waugh and Hohns will be watching Sheffield 
Shield matches that start on Thursday, with the squad for the third Test 
against South Africa expected to be named on Sunday. The Proteas hold an 
unassailable 2-0 lead in the three-Test series.
 