
Real Madrid continued their serene progress under their new coach Zinedine 
Zidane when Cristiano Ronaldo and Karim Benzema each helped themselves to two 
goals in a 5-1 drubbing of the La Liga strugglersSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> on Sunday.

Gary Neville sees positives as Valencia rescue late point against Rayo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/valencia-rayo-vallecano-la-liga-match-report>
Real hammered Deportivo La Coruna 5-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-gareth-bale-zinedine-zidane-deportivo-la-coruna-la-liga-match-report>
 last weekend on Zidane’s debut and Sunday’s dismantling of Gijón, who are 
second from bottom, lifted them above the champions Barcelona, who play later 
on Sunday, into second place on 43 points from 20 matches, one behind leaders 
Atlético Madrid, who also play later on Sunday.

Real tore into promoted Gijón at the Bernabeu and were 4-0 ahead inside the 
first 20 minutes as Ronaldo, Gareth Bale and Benzema, collectively known in 
Spain as “BBC”, ran riot.

Bale headed in a Toni Kroos corner in the seventh minute and Ronaldo smashed 
in a second after some poor Gijón defending two minutes later.

Bale crossed for Benzema to score with an acrobatic volley in the 12th minute, 
Ronaldo turned in a Dani Carvajal centre in the 18th and Benzema got his second 
to make it 5-0 four minutes before the break after neat work from the playmaker 
Isco.

Gijón pulled a goal back in the 62nd minute when some slack marking allowed 
Ismael López time and space to clip a smart finish into the bottom corner.

Ronaldo, who was lucky to escape a red card when he kicked out at Gijón’s 
midfielder Nacho Cases shortly after halftime, and Benzema top the scoring 
charts with 16 goals apiece, one ahead of the Barça pair Neymar and Luis 
Suárez. Bale has 13.

It was another morale-boosting performance from Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> following the sacking of the 
unpopular Rafa Benítez, under whom they failed to impress against any of their 
main rivals in Spain and Europe.

The victory may have come at a cost, however, as Bale was forced off with an 
apparent calf injury late in the first half and Benzema limped out with around 
25 minutes left after hurting his foot in a collision with team mate James 
Rodríguez.
 