
Ronda Rousey’s UFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> comeback didn’t 
even last a minute.

Rousey was stopped 48 seconds into her first fight in 13 months Friday night, 
losing to bantamweight champion Amanda Nunes at UFC 207.

Ronda Rousey's defeat to Amanda Nunes is a cautionary tale for UFC fighters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
Rousey (12-2) never managed to get her footing against Nunes (14-4), who 
rocked Rousey with her very first punches. Rousey showed little defensive 
acumen as she staggered and stumbled backward with Nunes relentlessly pursuing 
her and landing 27 punches in the brief bout.

“Forget about Ronda Rousey!” Nunes shouted to the sellout crowd. “She’s going 
to go do movies. Forget about her. She has a lot of money already.”

Indeed, Rousey’s future in the sport is clearly in question. The biggest star 
in the women’s game, who left the arena without giving an interview, is likely 
considering retirement shortly before her 30th birthday.

“That’s it for her,” Nunes said. “For sure, she’s going to retire.”

Referee Herb Dean stopped the bout with Rousey still on her feet, and Rousey 
briefly protested the stoppage before leaving the cage in her mother’s arms. 
Nunes put her finger to her lips and circled the cage after the stoppage, 
pausing to taunt Rousey’s much-maligned coach, Edmond Tarverdyan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91f5e4fff13dda557a53369c800e75c94aed780%2F230_0_3889_2979%2F3889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronda%20Rousey%20beaten%20in%2048%20seconds%20as%20UFC%20comeback%20ends%20in%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronda%20Rousey%20beaten%20in%2048%20seconds%20as%20UFC%20comeback%20ends%20in%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91f5e4fff13dda557a53369c800e75c94aed780%2F230_0_3889_2979%2F3889.jpg>
 Joy for Amanda Nunes after she retains her title. Photograph: Josh 
Hedges/Zuffa LLC via Getty Images 
“Her coach put some crazy things in her head, and her career started going 
down,” Nunes said. “I’m the real striker here.”

UFC 207: Ronda Rousey beaten by Amanda Nunes in 48 seconds – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/30/ufc-207-ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-live>
Cody Garbrandt won the men’s bantamweight title in the penultimate bout at UFC 
207, battering champion Dominick Cruz to earn a surprising decision victory at 
T-Mobile Arena in the promotion’s traditional end-of-the-year show in its 
hometown.

But the sellout crowd left shocked when Rousey couldn’t compete in her first 
fight since losing her belt to Holly Holm 13 months ago in her first career 
defeat.

Rousey became arguably the world’s most famous female athlete and a combat 
sports trailblazer while she rocketed atop the UFC, but a year away from the 
sport apparently did little to heal the holes in her game. She made a 
guaranteed $3 million for her comeback bout, while Nunes’ guaranteed payday was 
just $200,000.

“I knew I was going to beat (Rousey),” Nunes said. “I’m the best on the 
planet.”

Rousey hadn’t fought since November 2015, when Holly Holm stopped her with a 
head kick in one of the biggest upsets inMMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> history. Rousey had never lost or been 
in much trouble while the former Olympic judo medalist earned a series of 
one-sided victories, but Holm’s veteran striking made Rousey look unprepared.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-and-amanda-nunes-weigh-in-at-ufc-207-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronda%20Rousey%20and%20Amanda%20Nunes%20weigh%20in%20at%20UFC%20207%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-and-amanda-nunes-weigh-in-at-ufc-207-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronda%20Rousey%20and%20Amanda%20Nunes%20weigh%20in%20at%20UFC%20207%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-and-amanda-nunes-weigh-in-at-ufc-207-video&media=>
Ronda Rousey and Amanda Nunes weigh in at UFC 207 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-and-amanda-nunes-weigh-in-at-ufc-207-video>
. 
Rousey’s return fight was similar, but even quicker.

Nunes claimed the belt at UFC 200 in July with a violent stoppage of Miesha 
Tate, who had beaten Holm in March. Nunes made an impressive ascent after 
losing three fights earlier in her career to opponents beaten easily by Rousey.

Rousey nearly vanished from public view after her first loss, taking time away 
from the gym and attending to her acting career. The UFC also was sold during 
her absence to WME-IMG, the entertainment conglomerate that also represents 
Rousey’s career.

But Rousey refused to promote this pay-per-view show, leaving Cruz, Garbrandt 
and Nunes to do most of the work. While Rousey’s media blackout will hurt her 
cut of the pay-per-view revenue, it didn’t affect her guaranteed payday, which 
matched Conor McGregor for the biggest disclosed check in UFC history.

Earlier, Garbrandt (11-0) remained unbeaten with a virtuoso performance to 
claim the belt held for the past 11 months by Cruz (22-2), who ended up with a 
gaping cut over his left eye.

Garbrandt used precise striking, multiple takedowns and remarkable charisma to 
win over the judges, who all favored him by scores of 48-46, 48-46 and 48-47.

Cruz hadn’t lost an MMA fight since March 24, 2007, winning 13 straight bouts 
in a career marked by multiple comebacks from major injuries.

The 25-year-old Garbrandt is a native of Uhrichsville, Ohio, who trains in the 
Sacramento-area gym of veteran fighter Urijah Faber.

Cruz and Garbrandt taunted each other repeatedly during the promotion of their 
bout, and their genuine dislike translated into a frenzied five-round fight. 
Garbrandt lived up to his boundless promise with a resourceful effort against 
Cruz, who was favored to defend his belt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83dc58b4cf75db485af1d034ec0cd7010936115%2F62_0_3477_2633%2F3477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronda%20Rousey%20beaten%20in%2048%20seconds%20as%20UFC%20comeback%20ends%20in%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronda%20Rousey%20beaten%20in%2048%20seconds%20as%20UFC%20comeback%20ends%20in%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83dc58b4cf75db485af1d034ec0cd7010936115%2F62_0_3477_2633%2F3477.jpg>
 Cody Garbrandt taunts Dominick Cruz during their fight. Photograph: Jeff 
Bottari/Zuffa LLC via Getty Images 
“If you don’t lose, you don’t grow,” Cruz said. “We’re all competitors here, 
and it’s a game of inches. He beat me by a couple of inches tonight, and that’s 
OK. There wasn’t one second of this fight I wasn’t trying to win. I chased him 
around the cage the whole night.”

While Cruz threw 100 more strikes, Garbrandt landed a higher percentage of his 
shots and did more damage.

The fight game reloaded: how MMA and UFC conquered the world | Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/the-fight-game-reloaded-how-mma-conquered-world-ufc>
Both fighters landed significant strikes in the first two rounds, but 
Garbrandt turned the fight in his favor early in the third during the exchange 
that opened the cut on Cruz’s face.

Garbrandt put on a performance in the fourth round, repeatedly knocking down 
Cruz when he wasn’t dancing away from the champion.

After receiving his belt, Garbrandt wrapped it around the waist of Maddux 
Maple, a 10-year-old leukemia survivor from northern Ohio who has been his 
motivational talisman.

Garbrandt’s first title defense could be against T.J. Dillashaw, who dominated 
John Lineker in a unanimous-decision victory moments earlier at UFC 207, 
winning 30-26 on all three cards. Dillashaw (15-3) showed off precise striking 
and a superior ground game to trounce the Brazilian brawler.

“Come try me!” Garbrandt shouted at Dillashaw afterward.
 