
Ronda Rousey’s head was snapped back enough times in the opening moments of 
her return to the UFC for the crowd to see what was coming.Defeat and despair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes>, 
yes. Victory and redemption, no.

“I knew if I had a chance in the beginning of the fight, if she gives me the 
opportunity, that I would finish her there,” said Amanda Nunes, who battered 
Rousey on Friday at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas to retain theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> bantamweight title for the first time.

Forty-eight seconds after the opening bell, Rousey’s night – and perhaps her 
career – had been ended by 27 strikes thatcontorted the former champion’s face 
in awful ways 
<http://deadspin.com/amanda-nuness-destruction-of-ronda-rousey-in-photos-1790648473>
. This was the worst case scenario for Rousey, whose record now stands at 12-2. 
An all-hands-on-deck moment met with a meek response, the kind of performance 
that we don’t see from great competitors.

Ronda Rousey beaten in 48 seconds as UFC comeback ends in misery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes> 
Many of the 18,533 spectators at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, a record 
attendance for anMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> event in Nevada, 
went wild when Rousey stepped on to the floor wearing her familiar glare. 
Fighting is a gritty, emotional exercise in which statistics often mean 
nothing. But prior to Friday’s bout, one foreboding figure loomed for the 
challenger.

Nunes, a boxer/puncher with a black belt in Brazilian jiu-jitsu, had averaged 
as many strikes per round as any fighter scheduled to compete at UFC 207, while 
Rousey, the deposed queen of MMA, had been hit the most. Bad numbers for 
anyone, let alone a fighter making her first appearance in the Octagonsince 
Holly Holm crushed her with strikes 13 months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/15/holly-holm-stuns-ronda-rousey-for-ufc-womens-bantamweight-title>
. The disparity couldn’t be ignored, and one of the major questions surrounding 
Rousey in the lead-up to her return centered on whether or not she could handle 
being punched again.

She could not.

For months there was speculation that she had been significantly altered by 
the loss to Holm. The joy of producing dominant fast victories was gone, 
replaced by the harsh reality that comes with experiencing what it’s like to 
lose by having a shin slammed into your neck. So Rousey did the only thing she 
could to deal with what happened. She tried to disappear, a tactic that included
sequestering herself from fans and media during fight week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/29/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc-207-mma>
.

Rousey’s bubble did not serve her well in the end, Nunes said. By skipping the 
normal traditions of fight week, Rousey created tension and sparked questions 
where there weren’t any. She may have sought to alleviate stress by avoiding 
it, but that rarely works, particularly when the pressure is about to beturned 
up. And that was exactly what Nunes had in mind as she unloaded heavy punches 
in Rousey’s direction from the start of the fight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b2ff1100d3977df3f213b7520562c344c8a184%2F0_64_3494_2097%2F3494.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronda%20Rousey's%20defeat%20to%20Amanda%20Nunes%20is%20a%20cautionary%20tale%20for%20UFC%20fighters%20%7C%20Josh%20Gross&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronda%20Rousey%27s%20defeat%20to%20Amanda%20Nunes%20is%20a%20cautionary%20tale%20for%20UFC%20fighters%20%7C%20Josh%20Gross&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b2ff1100d3977df3f213b7520562c344c8a184%2F0_64_3494_2097%2F3494.jpg>
 Amanda Nunes (left) celebrates her win as Ronda Rousey comes to terms with 
another defeat. Photograph: John Locher/AP 
It seemed only Rousey’s controversial and maligned trainer Edmond Tarverdyan 
<http://nesn.com/2016/12/amanda-nunes-blames-edmond-tarverdyan-for-ronda-rouseys-loss-demise/>
 remained entranced with the idea that his fighter had the chops to draw out 
Nunes. From his corner, Tarverdyan shouted in increasingly shrill tones as each 
punch connected. Just as he had when Rousey went down to Holm in Australia, 
Tarverdyanraved like a madman 
<http://www.bloodyelbow.com/2016/12/31/14133130/ufc-207-audio-transcript-ronda-rouseys-corner-amanda-nunes-edmond-tarverdyan-advice>
 who could not comprehend what he was seeing.

“I knew she’s going to strike with me because her boxing coach told her she 
has good striking,” Nunes said. “She thinks she’s a boxer. He put this in her 
head and made the girl believe that. She had a great judo and she could go more 
forward in this division, but he put some crazy thing about his boxing [in her 
head] and her career went down.”

How Kimbo Slice and MMA challenge our notions of celebrity and humanity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/07/how-kimbo-slice-mma-challenge-celebrity-humanity>
After referee Herb Dean rescued Rousey from further punishment, Nunes walked 
over to an inconsolable Tarverdyan and put a finger to her mouth: “shush”. Then 
Nunes went to Rousey and offered a hug. The story will be focused on Rousey for 
a while, but Nunes hopes the world accepts that it’s time to move on and that 
some attention is shifted her direction. Rousey, she said, is done. If true 
that makes Rousey the second female MMA pioneer Nunes will have retired in 2016.
Miesha Tate called it quits 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mma/news/ufc-205-results-miesha-tate-announces-retirement-after-loss-to-raquel-pennington/>
 when Nunes hammered her in July to capture the belt at UFC 200.

“Now the division is getting interesting,” Nunes said. “New everything. Now 
people aren’t only going to talk aboutRonda Rousey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ronda-rousey> or Miesha. There’s a lot of 
talent in this division. People will see this and make up their mind. This is 
MMA. You have to keep moving forward.”

The UFC president, Dana White, later said that Rousey was in better spirits 
than she had been after the Holm defeat, but he is not sure if the former champ 
would fight again. “I don’t know. Ronda obviously needs to go home and take 
some time,”he told ESPN 
<http://www.espn.com/mma/story/_/id/18381201/amanda-nunes-defeats-ronda-rousey-first-round-tko-ufc-207-main-event>
. “She’s very rich. She doesn’t need to fight anymore. She’s super competitive. 
Maybe she wants to, I don’t know. We’ll see what happens.”

Rousey showed that in the UFC there is no height from which a star can’t fall. 
No limb he or she can’t hit on the way down. And no thud they won’t feel. Her 
stardom reached well beyond the cage, but no amount of fame could save her from 
a second consecutive drubbing in the Octagon. Rousey’s dominance then 
difficulty should serve as a cautionary tale to fighters everywhere.
 