
Ronnie O’Sullivan insists a “car-boot sale” mentality is responsible for 
snooker’s continued omission from the shortlist for theBBC Sports Personality 
of the Year Award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/andy-murray-heads-spoty-list-but-there-is-no-place-for-chris-froome-and-others>
.

The five-times world champion described the sport’s treatment by the programme 
as “a complete insult” but says it is inevitable given what he believes is a 
continued cheapening of the game.

Ronnie O’Sullivan should give snooker a break and show some respect | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/16/ronnie-osullivan-show-snooker-respect-ewan-murray>
No snooker player has made the Spoty shortlist since it was introduced in 2010 
and the last snooker player to reach the top three was Stephen Hendry who came 
second in 1990.

O’Sullivan, who reached the last 16 of the UK Championship with a 6-1 win 
against Michael Georgiou, said: “Snooker is becoming a nothing-type sport – 
it’s kind of like a car-boot sale but with the other sports it’s like shopping 
at Harrods.

“They’re putting so much of it out there it’s cheap TV. I think snooker has 
lost that respect amongst other sports – the Olympics is such a massive thing 
now as are sports like golf and tennis.

“You look at Formula One and see beautiful-looking people and you look at 
snooker and think ‘God’ – you look at some of the qualifiers and it costs a 
fiver to get into Barnsley.

“It’s all about media and money and business, and snooker is nothing compared 
to Formula One and tennis and the Olympics. They’ve got corporate people 
involved and they have a massive say in who is big and who is not big.”

Steve Davis is the only snooker player to win the award, in 1988, and 
O’Sullivan, who was overlooked when he won his fifth world title in 2013 after 
returning from a year out, says attitudes in the sport and the corporation will 
have to change for that run to end.

“Maybe if it went to China and you found some billionaires out there who would 
put the sport on and have million-pound prize money you could start looking at 
snooker as a core sport again,” O’Sullivan said.

“[But] you’re competing with Formula One, tennis, golf and the Olympics. They 
give it like 10 seconds onBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Sports 
Personality – it’s a complete insult to the sport, but it’s what they think of 
it and what they believe it warrants, and that says it all really.”

The shortlist was drawn up by a panel consisting of media representatives and 
sports stars including Ryan Giggs and Victoria Pendleton. Barry Hearn, the World
Snooker <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> chairman, is likely to 
address O’Sullivan’s comments on Tuesday.
 