
Jared Waerea-Hargreaves has dragged Sydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> to their ninth successive 
NRL win as they survived a first half scare to prevail 28-18 over Parramatta.


Waerea-Hargreaves’ bullocking 72nd minute try, in which he shrugged off four 
Parramatta defenders in a 25m run, put the home side 22-18 ahead; their first 
lead of the game. A late Jake Friend effort sealed the Tricolours’ victory in 
front of a crowd of 11,255 and created their longest winning streak in 13 years.


The win moves the Roosters into the top two on the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder for the first time since round 
one.


But it did not come easily, after Parramatta dominated the first half to lead 
18-4 at the break and threaten one of the upsets of the season. The Roosters 
though found form in the second half scoring four-tries-to-none.


Tim Mannah crashed over through some soft defence in the 11th minute to open 
the scoring for the visitors.


The Roosters struck back four minutes later through James Maloney.


On the back of 58 per cent of possession Parramatta had the better of the rest 
of the half against a below-par Tricolours outfit.


The NRL’s leading tryscorer Semi Radradra scored the Eels’ second, and his 
19th try in 15 games this year, in the 16th minute as they jumped out to an 
unexpected 12-4 lead.


A strong defensive effort from the Eels repelled a number of attacking raids 
from the Roosters, before the visitors went further ahead when Corey Norman 
streeted away.


Parramatta enjoyed a 14 point buffer at the break before the Roosters finally 
found gear to score two tries in five minutes after halftime.


Mitch Aubusson scored out wide from a Jared Waerea-Hargreaves long ball in the 
50th minute and Roger Tuivasa-Sheck skipped over shortly after for a scoreline 
of 18-16 to the Eels.


Waerea-Hargreaves’ barnstorming effort put the Roosters ahead with little time 
left.


Roosters skipper Friend scored late to set up a minor premiership showdown 
with Brisbane next week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56b424364875d297114448b4c02187a9340bea6b%2F0_177_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roosters%20survive%20early%20Eels%20scare%20to%20record%20nine%20straight%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roosters%20survive%20early%20Eels%20scare%20to%20record%20nine%20straight%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56b424364875d297114448b4c02187a9340bea6b%2F0_177_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
 Bryce Cartwright of the Panthers passes as he is tackled during the round 23 
NRL match between the Penrith Panthers and the New Zealand Warriors. 
Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, the Warriors’ NRL top-eight hopes are officially on life support 
after falling 24-10 to Penrith.

The loss extends the Warriors’ winless streak to five and leaves them two 
points behind eighth-placed Canterbury, who meet Gold Coast on Sunday.

Penrith, who led 20-10 at halftime, snapped their own five-game losing streak 
that temporarily lifted them out of wooden spoon contention with three 
regular-season games left.

Two long-range efforts either side of halftime set up the Panthers win, 
including a David Simmons special in the 49th minute.

A Bryce Cartwright offload deep in his own territory sent Tyrone Peachey into 
the backfield, before the veteran winger expertly finished off a James Segeyaro 
grubber one play later.

Just before the break it was Will Smith who turned defence into attack with a 
50-metre run and Peachey cut through not long after to score.

Lewis Brown’s wicked left-foot step opened the scoring for the home side in 
the ninth minute before rookie prop Reagan Campbell-Gillard doubled the 
advantage with his first try of the year five minutes later.

Jamie Soward kicked his team out to a 14-0 lead but the Warriors were then 
able to turn momentum around with two tries in just four minutes.

First Sam Tomkins crossed for his first try of the season when he collected a 
31st-minute Charlie Gubb offload from the top shelf.

Then Jonathan Wright helped get the visitors within a try when he toed a 
Tomkins grubber ahead for Konrad Hurrell.

Campbell-Gillard was put on report for a high shot on Tuimoala Lolohea midway 
through the first half.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e52921d2f0b48971546155d043bee5925b4efc0%2F0_0_2372_3017%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roosters%20survive%20early%20Eels%20scare%20to%20record%20nine%20straight%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roosters%20survive%20early%20Eels%20scare%20to%20record%20nine%20straight%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fnrl-round-23-saturday-wrap-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e52921d2f0b48971546155d043bee5925b4efc0%2F0_0_2372_3017%2F2372.jpg>
 Tyrone Roberts of the Newcastle Knights and Kyle Lovett of the Tigers contest 
a bomb during the round 23 NRL match between the Wests Tigers and the Newcastle 
Knights. Photograph: Craig Golding/AAP 
Earlier, Newcastle halfback Tyrone Roberts scored a brace of tries to lift the 
Knights to a 24-18 win overWests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers>, giving caretaker coach Danny 
Buderus his first win of the season since taking over from Rick Stone.


Roberts sealed the Knights’ win with just more than a minute remaining when he 
twisted his way through the Tigers’ defence to plant the ball down out wide in 
a seven-try thriller.


Newcastle, who were last on the ladder going into the match, have drawn level 
with a bunch of teams, including the Tigers on 18 points with three rounds of 
the regular season remaining.


The Knights spent the bulk of the game trailing and only hit the lead for the 
first time when Tyler Randall scored on 46 minutes.


The Tigers’ loss was compounded by a knee injury to prop Aaron Woods who was 
forced off the ground early in the first half.


Coach Jason Taylor’s side went into the halftime break leading 16-12 after an 
exciting opening 40 minutes.


The Tigers blasted out to a 10-0 lead after nine minutes with tries to wingers 
David Nofoaluma and Pat Richards.


Newcastle hit back soon after on the back of a penalty when Akuila Uate was on 
the end of a right-edge shift.


The home side produced the play of the opening half when Mitchell Moses got 
the ball on the right edge before he grubber kicked inside to a flying James 
Tedesco to score a converted try to make it 16-6.


Newcastle made the most of back-to-back penalties seven minutes before the 
break when halfback Roberts touched down after an in-goal bat back from Tariq 
Sims off a Kurt Gidley cross-field kick.


Beau Scott came up with a huge play on the stroke of halftime when he somehow 
held up a rampaging Ava Seumanufagai over the line.
 