
It may turn out the stress fracture to Rory McIlroy’s rib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/rory-mcilroy-withdraws-injury-hsbc-abu-dhabi>
 has a silver lining. Had the injury been to his back, as he initially 
believed, McIlroy may have had more reason to worry. Back trouble and golf, 
especially at an early stage in a career, is never a useful combination.

He will have to endure short-term discomfort, which will give rise to 
speculation about how well prepared the world No2 will be at Augusta National 
in April. No timescale has been put on McIlroy’s return but it would be a 
surprise if he reappeared at the Dubai Desert Classic in early February. When 
coupled with his withdrawal from the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship this week, 
that would mean two events wiped from his Masters buildup. On a personal level, 
McIlroy will endure frustration at the enforced inactivity doctors have 
advised. He is not the type to sit in front of an Xbox for hours.

Related: Rory McIlroy withdraws from HSBC Championship due to fractured rib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/rory-mcilroy-withdraws-injury-hsbc-abu-dhabi>

This should not be disastrous, just as the timing could have been a whole lot 
worse. McIlroy has shown he can return from concerted absences before 
competing. He deliberately arranged a busy spell pre-Augusta, meaning several 
tournament opportunities – as many as six – remain.

In a specific Masters context, his mindset has always appeared the key barrier 
to claiming a Green Jacket more than matters of golf mechanics. The worst-case 
scenario would involve painkillers and some protective tape.

But speculation is natural. An orthopaedic surgeon from Indiana told the Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Channel that McIlroy faces an extended 
layoff. “If you do not give it time to heal, it can result in a full fracture,” 
Dr Sandy Kunkel said. “Typically, an injury of this sort will take a minimum of 
six weeks.”

Then again, Dr Kunkel has not seen McIlroy’s scans. Albeit educated, this 
constitutes guesswork. “The modern golf swing is hard on the body,” he said. 
“To have athletes in their 20s experiencing these types of injuries is very 
concerning for the long term.”

It is also very rare. McIlroy has not experienced a problem like this before. 
His only serious injury came on a football field, which undermines the wider 
point about how he swings the club. McIlroy’s medical team, including the 
respected Dr Steve McGregor, are among the best in sport. McIlroy’s ankle woe 
of 2015, which was far more acute than this rib injury, was noteworthy yet is 
not mentioned at all now.

McIlroy’s ailment is thought to have been caused by the number of shots he hit 
when testing new equipment and particularly drivers. Until the pain of his rib 
occurred, his only unease would surely be when asked about what clubs are in 
his bag; with no contracts signed, McIlroy would be affording equipment 
companies mass and free advertising should he speak expansively on topic. And 
make no mistake, McIlroy knows his own worth.

Related: As a former pro, Golf Magazine's Most Beautiful Women makes me 
shudder | Anya Alvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/17/most-beautiful-women-golf-magazine-sexism>

In Abu Dhabi, his absence will be keenly felt. Dustin Johnson, Ian Poulter, 
Henrik Stenson and the defending champion Rickie Fowler claim gallery support 
but McIlroy is the blue-chip man. While he is not on the same scale as Tiger 
Woods, McIlroy gives European Tour events a fresh dynamic.

“It’s a bummer that Rory is not going to be able to play this week,” Fowler 
said. “He’s one of the best players in the world. It was fun to have him in 
contention with me last year here.

“But the biggest thing is for him to take care of himself and make sure he’s 
healthy. So hopefully he’s able to get back quickly. He’s definitely a fan 
favourite and I love playing against him. We’ve had a lot of good battles and 
good times together. Like I said, hopefully he’s not out long and able to get 
back, and he’s obviously playing well. He played well [in South Africa] last 
week.

“Does that make me look at the tournament any differently? No. It’s one less 
top player in the world I’m going to have to beat, but the field here is one of 
the best fields on the European Tour. Three of the major champions from last 
year are here. It’s not going to be any easier to win.”

McIlroy will be looking on. This injury, though, is not cause for deep 
despair; rather a footnote when career dust settles.
 