
The RSPCA is hunting for the owner of an African pygmy hedgehog which was 
found on the side of a road.

The unusual pet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2014/jun/10/prickly-issue-african-pygmy-hedgehog-pets-european-hedgehog-wildlife-conservation>
 was spotted by a member of the public in Cardiff on the morning of 5 November.

The hedgehog appeared to be frightened and was shaking. The RSPCA found it was 
very cold when they collected it. The animal is recovering following treatment 
by a vet.

The RSPCA said pygmy hedgehogs look similar to the native European species 
found in the wild in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/14/hedgehogs-continue-to-disappear-from-british-gardens-wildlife-survey-shows>
 but are very different. They need to be kept at a specific temperature and 
would not cope in the wild in the British climate.

Animal collection officer Stephanie Davidson said: “We don’t know how this 
exotic pet ended up on the side of the road like this – but it is likely the 
hog escaped and has an owner out there who we are keen to find. An African 
pygmy hedgehog cannot survive in the wild here like our native hedgehogs and 
this little animal would have died if left where found.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Frspca-seeks-owner-of-african-pygmy-hedgehog-found-at-side-of-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ba92b7a33d7ac854e5013c7d9adbc09d59064a%2F0_118_2513_1507%2F2513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RSPCA%20seeks%20owner%20of%20African%20pygmy%20hedgehog%20found%20at%20side%20of%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Frspca-seeks-owner-of-african-pygmy-hedgehog-found-at-side-of-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RSPCA%20seeks%20owner%20of%20African%20pygmy%20hedgehog%20found%20at%20side%20of%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Frspca-seeks-owner-of-african-pygmy-hedgehog-found-at-side-of-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ba92b7a33d7ac854e5013c7d9adbc09d59064a%2F0_118_2513_1507%2F2513.jpg>
 An African pygmy hedgehog like this one was found on the side of the road in 
Wales – the species cannot survive in the wild in the UK. Photograph: Grzegorz 
Michalowski/EPA 
The RSPCA recommends that people do not keep African pygmy hedgehogs as pets 
as they can be more difficult to care for than many people realise.

Nicola White, senior scientific officer for exotics and trade at the RSPCA, 
added: “We’re very concerned by claims that the African pygmy hedgehog is being 
classed as a latest pet craze. They have very specific needs … and require a 
heated enclosure with a carefully controlled temperature of between 24C (75F) 
to 30C (86F).

“These hedgehogs are nocturnal, travel long distances in the wild and anyone 
keeping one in captivity would need to allow for this natural behaviour, 
providing as large an enclosure and space as possible with plenty of hiding 
places and opportunity for digging, foraging and exercise.

“African pygmy hedgehogs are not domesticated like cats or dogs – and the 
RSPCA would strongly advise against any member of the public considering 
getting one.”
 