
Had anyone at the Rugby Football League predicted in January how the first 
season of their new league structure would unfold, they would surely have been 
laughed out of office, but there has been drama, excitement and even history at 
every corner in 2015.

If you had said Wakefield would win three games against Super League 
opposition and still stay up, thatKevin Sinfield would finish his rugby league 
career a treble winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/leeds-rhinos-kevin-sinfield-rugby-league-career>
 –I tipped Leeds to finish fifth at the start of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/05/super-league-2015-team-by-team-guide>
 – and thattop spot would have been decided in the final second of the regular 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/huddersfield-leeds-super-league-match-report>
, you would have attracted more than a few peculiar looks.

So, to fill the gap between the end of Super League and England’s Test series 
against New Zealand, here are the Guardian’s alternative 2015 gongs, following
last week’s announcement of the official awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/05/zak-hardaker-leeds-man-of-steel-rugby-league>
.

Player of the season

We can be as alternative as we like here but I’m not going to go completely 
off on a tangent for this first one. Zak Hardaker was the man of steel but it’s 
another man on that three-man shortlist who gets my vote. Leeds’ Adam 
Cuthbertson has been a breath of fresh air in Super Leaguesince arriving from 
the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/26/leeds-australian-prop-adam-cuthbertson-newcastle-knights>
, and has almost single-handedly reinvented the role of a ball-playing prop.

Coach of the year

Again, no disrespect to the official winner but the Leeds coach, Brian 
McDermott, is nudged into second place by hisCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> counterpart Daryl Powell. Again 
they were tipped to struggle but again they survived with ease, and looked more 
like top four candidates than relegation fodder. An England coach of the future?

Unluckiest player of the year

Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> has had plenty of 
injuries in 2015 but none has been as gut-wrenching as the one suffered by the 
St Helens full-back Jonny Lomax. The 25-year-old missed the Saints’ run to 
Grand Final glory last year with a serious knee injury, and he suffered a 
relapse in March this year which struck him off for 2015.

Coaching meltdown of the year

Thrusting the Bradford coach, James Lowes, in front of the television cameras 
shortly after losing the club’s biggest game in years was perhaps not the 
wisest idea. “If this is the future of rugby league I won’t be in it,” he said, 
afterhis side’s defeat to Wakefield in the Million Pound Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/wakefield-trinity-wildcats-bradford-bulls-super-league-qualifiers-match-report>
. “I just don’t think it’s the way forward for the game.” Lowes even caused 
unnecessary panic when he hinted the former Super League champions could go 
part-time – thankfully that is not the case and they will surely provide the 
biggest threat for promotion again in 2016.

Coup of the year

Wakefield’s mid-season appointment of Brian Smith as their head coach, a 
decision which ensured they stayed in Super League. He has been confirmed as 
coach for 2016, which is another impressive move from the club.

Match of the year

So many contenders – evidence in itself that the new system has been a hit. 
But in terms of sporting drama, nothing will top that balmy September night at 
Huddersfield when Leeds forced a helicopter carrying the League Leaders’ Shield 
to turn round afterRyan Hall’s late, late try ensured part two of a historic 
treble for the Rhinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/huddersfield-leeds-super-league-match-report>
.

Try of the year
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4BQsIVoSdeY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4BQsIVoSdeY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4BQsIVoSdeY&media=>
Two clear contenders in terms of skill; Kevin Penny’s leap of faith against 
Leigh <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F0BzZxcLbRc> in the Challenge Cup, which 
seemed to defy the laws of physics, andJosh Griffin’s try after the Salford 
half-back Rangi Chase passed to himself 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4BQsIVoSdeY> and then hurled a ball to Griffin 
behind his back the other.

Flop of the year

Kevin Locke. Not content with disappointing at one club, he managed to fail 
spectacularly at Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/29/wakefield-release-kevin-locke-off-field-incident-million-pound-game-bradford-bulls>
 too afterleaving Salford mid-season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/wigan-salford-rugby-super-league-hull-catalans-dragons>
.

Frustration of the year

Huddersfield’s play-off form yet again. They looked title contenders as the 
play-offs approached after finishing third in the league but adrab performance 
in the semi-finals against Wigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/wigan-huddersfield-rugby-league-super8s-match-report>
 saw their season end with a whimper.

Non-playing person of the year

Perhaps the most important award of the lot. Leeds’ Challenge Cup win in August
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/leeds-emphatically-shut-out-hull-kr-to-win-challenge-cup>
 may be remembered for Tom Briscoe’s five tries but before the kick-off Lizzie 
Jones showed incredible bravery to perform a magnificent version of Abide With 
Me in front of over 80,000 fans. Robbed of her husband Danny in May whenhe died 
after suffering a cardiac arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/danny-jones-cardiac-arrest-keighley-rugby-league>
 during Keighley’s game at London Skolars, she lit up Wembley brighter than any 
player could have done. She is a true hero of our sport and my person of the 
year.
 