
Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s deputy prime minister, said the country will accept an 
International Olympic Committee plan to retest all drug test samples given by 
its athletes at the 2012 and 2014 Olympics.

“The IOC has now decided to retest all the samples; let them retest,” Mutko, 
who was sports minister at the time of the 2012 and 2014 Olympics, told the 
Russian state news agency R-Sport. He added thatRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> will keep a careful eye on the 
process.

IOC’s Rio ban failure exposed by deepening of Russian doping scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/ioc-rio-ban-failure-russia-doping-scandal>
The IOC’s declaration on Friday followed the second and final part of an 
independent commission report by the World Anti-Doping Agency investigator Prof 
Richard McLaren. It said thatmore than 1,000 Russian athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
, including medal winners at the Summer Games in London and the Winter Olympics 
in Sochi, had benefited from a state‑backed campaign of doping and drugs test 
cover-ups.

Mutko, whose brief as deputy prime minister covers sports policy, also 
suggested that he does not expect Russia to be barred from the 2018Winter 
Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> in PyeongChang. He 
said the IOC set a precedent when it decided against a blanket ban for Russia 
from this summer’s Olympics in Rio .

“I think that the IOC has chosen its direction, that there should be no 
collective responsibility in this situation,” he said. If a specific athlete is 
found to have committed an offense, “then let’s punish him,” Mutko added, 
rather than excluding the whole Russian team.

Mutko repeated the Russian government’s claim that it has never given state 
support to doping and that there was no widespread doping of the Russian team 
at the Sochi Olympics.

Mutko did not address allegations in McLaren’s report that he directed 
so-called washout testing – unofficial internal tests before major competitions 
to ensure banned substances would not be detectable when doped athletes later 
gave samples at the event.

The 144-page McLaren report “sharpens the picture and confirms the findings” of
his interim report published in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics>
, three weeks before the start of the Rio Olympics.

As well as the report, Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> has 
provided a searchable database of emails, forensic reports, laboratory tests 
and spreadsheets totalling more than 1,100 items.

Even this, McLaren said, is “not the complete picture” as his team was denied 
access to the Moscow anti‑doping laboratory’s computer server and the hundreds 
of athletes’ samples still in its freezers.

Meanwhile, the Chinese swimmer Chen Xinyi has been banned for two years by 
Fina, the sport’s governing body, forfailing a drugs test at the Rio Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/chinese-swimmer-bulgarian-athlete-fail-drug-tests-rio-2016-olympics>
. The 18-year-old, who finished fourth in the women’s 100m butterfly, tested 
positive for banned substance hydrochlorothiazide – an illicit masking agent – 
and accepted a provisional ban at the time. 

Russia orchestrated state-sponsored doping cover-up, says Wada report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics> 