
A Russian official has admitted for the first time the existence of a doping 
campaign that involved hundreds of the country’s athletes.

“It was an institutional conspiracy,” Anna Antseliovich, the acting director 
of Russia’s national anti-doping agency Rusada,told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/27/sports/olympics/russia-doping.html> on 
Tuesday. The government’s top officials were not involved, however, 
Antseliovich said.

Second McLaren report: five questions on the Russian doping scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/second-mclaren-report-questions-russian-doping>
Rusada said on Wednesday that Antseliovich’s comments had been distorted and 
taken out of context. A statement given to the Tass news agency said the 
impression had wrongly been given that its leadership recognised there had been 
an “institutional conspiracy”.

The Kremlin said it would check the veracity of the NYT report to make sure 
Antseliovich had been accurately quoted. “We are not inclined to consider this 
information as first hand,” said its spokesman Dmitry Peskov. “The accuracy of 
these words first needs to be checked.”

The report details how the director of one laboratory tampered with urine 
samples at the Olympics and provided performance-enhancing drugs to athletes. 
The operation was assisted by the Federal Security Service and a deputy sports 
minister.

Russia has long denied such an operation existed. But a report commissioned by 
the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) asserted this month that more than 1,000 
Russians athletes across more than 30 sports – were involved in or benefited 
from state-sponsored doping between 2011 and 2015. The report, authored by a 
Canadian law professor, Richard McLaren,said the London 2012 Olympics were 
“corrupted on an unprecedented scale” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
 due to Russian doping.


After the McLaren report’s publication, the International Olympic Committee 
said it had opened disciplinary proceedings against 28 Russian athletes who 
competed at the 2014 Games in Sochi. An IOC statement read: “At this point in 
time, these 28 new cases are not AAFs [adverse analytical findings], like a 
positive doping test. However, the manipulation of the samples themselves could 
lead to an anti-doping rule violation and sanctions.”

 