
A promising chess grandmaster has plunged to his death from a Moscow apartment 
block in what appeared to have been a feat of daring gone wrong.

Yuri Yeliseyev, 20, fell from the 12th storey on Saturday, dying of his 
injuries before an ambulance arrived. Authorities are investigating the death.

Yeliseyev was reportedly a fan of parkour, an urban sport also known as 
freerunning, which involves climbing or jumping up walls, across roofs and over 
fences and other buildings.

Daniil Dubov, a fellow grandmaster, wrote on social media that his friend had 
been trying toclimb from a window 
<https://vk.com/blitzorddd?w=wall13060998_3893> to a nearby balcony but 
slipped. Yeliseyev’s flatmate, Shamil Arslanov, who was in a different room at 
the time, told Ren TV that “Yuriloved extreme things 
<http://ren.tv/novosti/2016-11-27/drug-rasskazal-kak-umer-rossiyskiy-grossmeyster-po-shahmatam-yuriy-eliseev>
” and had previously climbed between the window and the balcony.

A neighbour told the Life channel that Yeliseyev had been seen performing the 
stunt over the summer. A social media account photo showed himhanging by his 
hands <http://www.ntv.ru/novosti/1722997/> from a ledge high above the ground.

Yeliseyev won a world junior chess championship in 2012 and became a 
grandmaster in 2013. He won this year’s Moscow Open and was ranked 212th by the 
WorldChess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> Federation.

Chess masters show virtues of a slower pace of sport | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/chess-masters-show-virtues-slower-pace-sport>
His death has shocked the chess world and made national headlines in a country 
that reveres the game. The tragedy came just before the finalworld chess 
championship match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/world-chess-championship-magnus-carlsen-sergey-karjakin>
on Monday between the title-holder, Magnus Carlsen, and the Russian challenger 
Sergey Karjakin.

The Russian deputy prime minister, Vitaly Mutko, expressed his condolences and 
said Yeliseyev was “very talented. He could have brought a lot of benefit to 
his sport and his country”.

Coaches and acquaintances described Yeliseyev as an idiosyncratic player and 
personality. The national chess team coach, Sergei Yanovsky, told state news 
agency R-Sport that Yeliseyev was one of themost talented young grandmasters 
<http://rsport.ru/chess/20161127/1112837514.html> in Russia and praised his 
“colourful individuality”.

“His uniqueness and search for his own path was very evident in all his 
decisions; he rejected any existing blueprints,” Yanovsky said.

“Even as a boy he always wanted to show off his fearlessness and climb up on 
something, but not to this extreme level,” he added.
 