
It might feel slightly implausible now, at a time when Ryan Giggs seems to be 
drifting to the edges of the game, but if it had gone to a poll last season 
amongManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
players about who they wanted to replace Louis van Gaal, a manager they found 
both bewildering and impenetrable, the majority of votes would not actually 
have been for José Mourinho.

No slight intended. The idea was always appealing and Mourinho had a certain 
mystique that players find intriguing. Mourinho once reminisced about life at 
Porto with its “beautiful blue chairs, the Uefa Champions League trophy, God 
and, after God, me”. He was always going to be a natural fit for a club with 
United’s haughty self-regard, where one banner, in happier times, proclaimed 
“not arrogant, just better”.

Yet there was still a consensus in favour of Giggs. Wayne Rooney was in the 
Giggs camp. Rooney, the captain, is the player all the younger ones look up to 
at Old Trafford but, even putting that aside, it is easy to see why Giggs had 
so much support within the dressing room. Giggs was football royalty at Old 
Trafford. He was the boy who played football like a man, then became a man and 
played football like a boy. And in his older years, once the hair whitened 
above his ears, he was afforded the kind of reverence that all the great 
one-club men – Maldini, Puyol, Totti and so on – were due. Giggs knew Old 
Trafford inside out. And, as far as the players were concerned, he was also 
much less likely than Mourinho to fall out with everyone after two years.

To be overlooked was a grievous setback – not least as there was no contact 
whatsoever from Mourinho during the following severance process – and it isn’t 
easy knowing what is next for Giggs when it has reached the point whereSwansea 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea>, a club desperately in need 
of some new impetus, have already turned their backs on him once and barely 
given him a second look now their job has become available again.

Perhaps that should not be a surprise when, on the first occasion, Giggs was 
summoned for an interview about taking over from Francesco Guidolin but 
apparently blew his chances because the club’s American owners were unimpressed 
by the way he projected himself (a revelation that, out of common courtesy, the 
relevant people really ought to have kept to themselves).

It ended up as public rejection from the club currently bottom of the Premier 
League and it does throw up a question about where, or when, another 
opportunity might materialise in the top division, or whether Giggs might have 
to realign his sights now it is becoming increasingly apparent that potential 
employers are not seduced by big-name players in the way that was once the case.

Paul Pogba caps dramatic fightback to save Manchester United’s winning run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/manchester-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
Not that it is a necessarily a bad thing to start a little further down the 
food chain. Sir Alex Ferguson’s managerial career began at East Stirling, where 
he inherited eight players and his first signing was a goalkeeper who, at a 
conservative estimate, was two stone overweight. Brian Clough started at 
Hartlepools United, with its leaky roof and superfluous “s”, and Bill Shankly 
had spells at Carlisle United, Grimsby Town, Workington and Huddersfield Town 
before all the glory at Liverpool. Antonio Conte, the manager of the current 
Premier League leaders, was relegated to Serie C1 with Arezzo in his first year 
of management and if Giggs wanted examples more relevant to his own career he 
might reflect that Steve Bruce, his former United colleague, had spells at 
three different clubs in England’s second tier, and Wigan Athletic another rung 
down, before working his way up.

The question is whether Giggs would be willing to do the same and, though it 
would be a climbdown for the man Van Gaal anointed as his natural successor, he 
is reaching the point where if he wants to come in from the edges it might have 
to be that way.

In total, 35 of the 92 clubs in England’s top four divisions have hired new 
managers – six more than once – since Mourinho’s appointment on 27 May. Swansea 
did at least interview Giggs, but Crystal Palace, Hull City, Everton and 
Sunderland did not. There was a brief link with Nottingham Forest, one of the 
Championship’s many basketcases, but so little otherwise it is tempting to 
wonder whether Giggs may have suffered indirectly as a result of Gary Neville’s 
failure at Valencia. Or, to put it another way, would potential employers be 
more emboldened if Neville, with the same kind of qualifications and 
background, had not found it so difficult transferring all that insight and 
opinion into the sharp end of the business?

All that can really be said is that 2017 holds a certain amount of uncertainty 
for Giggs if he left Old Trafford hoping his lofty status might help open a few 
doors, and if he really meant it in October when he claimed it was his decision 
to turn down Swansea because “their ambitions did not really match mine”.

Giggs is trying to buck the trend, in one sense, when there is a natural 
suspicion throughout the sport these days about whether formidable footballers 
can also excel in management. Pep Guardiola is the obvious exception and 
Zinédine Zidane, approaching his first anniversary at Real Madrid, has had 
precisely the uplifting effect at the Bernabéu that Giggs presumably saw 
himself having at Old Trafford.

Overall, though, it is not a common theme. Many more have failed and, without 
wishing to be too downbeat about Giggs’s chance, there is a risk here that he 
will go through the rest of his professional life with the same kind of regrets 
that always consumed Phil Neal about the passing of the baton at Liverpool. 
Neal had positioned himself as next in line to Joe Fagan but the inheritance he 
envisaged never materialised and, to his dismay, the job went to Kenny 
Dalglish. “The dreams and ambitions I had striven for, for a decade, had been 
shattered,” Neal later wrote.

In Giggs’s case, United’s most decorated player is far too savvy to have 
assumed it would be a seamless progression and, though anyone with his 
collection of medals is probably entitled to a reasonably high self-opinion, it 
would be a disappointment if he had pinned all his hopes on coaching at elite 
level.

Sir Alex Ferguson tells Ryan Giggs ‘it is time to stand on your own feet’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/04/ryan-giggs-manchester-united-alex-ferguson-jose-mourinho>
Giggs, unlike Neville, is not a natural fit in the world of punditry and he 
did not take all those coaching badges, becoming the first individual to 
complete the mandatory qualification for Premier League and Champions League 
managers while still playing, for the odd appearance on ITV trying to make 
England’s latest friendly sound exciting.

First, though, Giggs has to be given a way in and, unfortunately for him, he 
is also associated with those difficult days as a coach in the David Moyes era, 
followed by the leaden appearances alongside Van Gaal in the dugout, trying to 
make sense of the Dutchman’s football philosophy and succeeding only in looking 
as blank as the rest of us.

At 43, Giggs is at an age when the next stage of his career could have years 
to run and he could be forgiven for thinking it might be Swansea’s loss bearing 
in mind how everything worked out with Bob Bradley.

Yet it has been seven months of drift and Giggs might also want to take note 
of the advice Ferguson used to pass on in his role with the League Managers 
Association. Don’t spend too long out of work, Ferguson would say, because it 
is amazing how quickly the people in the profession can be forgotten.

Why is it different for Rooney?

Can you imagine the outcry if Wayne Rooney had been caught drink-driving 
after a party in London, asrecently happened with Yaya Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/yaya-toure-admits-to-drink-driving-but-denies-intentionally-consuming-alcohol-manchester-city>
?

Likewise, it is fair to say there might have been an awful lot more brouhaha 
if it had been Rooney, not Roberto Firmino of Liverpool, who had beenarrested 
for the same alleged offence in the early hours of Christmas Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/roberto-firmino-charged-drink-driving-liverpool>
 but was allowed to play for his team a couple of days later and now faced a 
court appearance on the same day as a top-of-the-table encounter against 
Chelsea?

Rooney does not always help himself and, lest it be forgotten, the England and 
Manchester United captain issued a public apology after his last blow-out on 
international duty. Yet he does have a point when he says he seems to be judged 
differently to just about every other footballer in the country.

Now even refs are in the window

The transfer window is swinging open and already, I fear, we might have peaked 
too soon with the news that one of our gelled, tanned, ultra-successful 
superstars – and I’m not talking Cristiano Ronaldo - is being linked with a 
big-money move to China on the back of being honoured with his industry’s 
equivalent of the Ballon d’Or.

Until now, with Mark Clattenburg modestly fending off speculation about a 
lucrative move to the Chinese Super League, I must confess I did not realise 
there was such a thing as referees taking advantage of the Bosman rule or being 
the subjects of transfer gossip.

Where it all ends is not clear. Will they have press conferences to announce 
their arrivals? Will they be “unveiled”? All that can really be said is that 
Clattenburg, sounding every bit like a man in demand, isn’t ruling it out, 
finds the speculation flattering and, just as Oscar, Carlos Tevez and all the 
rest have already made clear, would hate for anyone to think it might be about 
the money.

“If an opportunity came along I am contracted to the Premier League but I have 
to look at my long-term strategy of my career,” Clattenburg said. “There is no 
offer on the table but if they made an offer it would be under consideration.”

It sounded suspiciously like a come-and-get-me plea. And he should probably 
give Jorge Mendes a ring.
 