
Had the United States not been harshly subjected to an earlier, harrowing run 
which led to public denouncement of captains and the formation of a task force, 
they might ponder how straightforward this all was. TheRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> that had everything produced a 
result of wider benefit with Hazeltine the venue for the reinvigoration of the 
US in context of this event.

For once screaming triumphalism had basis in an emphatic victory, by 17 points 
to 11. There was to be no fourth success in a row for Europe, a handy scene for 
those who were growing weary both of one-sided contests and self-aggrandising 
statements.

Rory McIlroy: Ryder Cup defeat hurts but USA win is good for golf
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/rory-mcilroy-ryder-cup-usa> 
The outcome was beyond any reasonable dispute. The USA dominated Europe for 
four sessions out of five, the conclusion of which was a singles element which 
the hosts won 7½ to 4½. The deciding moment with the claiming of 14½ points 
belonged to Ryan Moore, the last man into Davis Love III’s contingent, as he 
saw off Lee Westwood on the 18th green. Bubba Watson wailed again, Darren 
Clarke looked helplessly into the distance and Love contemplated redemption 
after the bruising debacle of Medinah he had presided over in 2012. Tiger 
Woods, a quiet but significant figure in Love’s backroom team, confirmed he has 
travelled full circle in terms of the relationship with the biennial challenge 
he once viewed as a nuisance by forming a warm and demonstrative part of the 
celebrations. U-S-A, U-S-A, indeed.

Sharp-eyed investigators are not necessary to cut to the reason for this 
victory. The trouncing of Europe by 4-0 in the Friday foursomes provided a 
platform from which it would always be difficult to implode. When Europe did 
claw their way back into the contest, American strength in the fourballs on day 
two created a three-point lead. Given what had transpired four years ago, Love 
and his players were forewarned and forearmed from there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fusa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5213bcfe07331ae5648b525c99a623b470173eb%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20USA%20sweep%20to%20victory%20as%20Rory%20McIlroy%20and%20Europe%20taste%20defeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fusa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20USA%20sweep%20to%20victory%20as%20Rory%20McIlroy%20and%20Europe%20taste%20defeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fusa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5213bcfe07331ae5648b525c99a623b470173eb%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Phil Mickelson cracks open the bubbly. Photograph: John David Mercer/Reuters 
Day three provided memories which will rise as reference points for years to 
come. The collective standard was wonderful. Patrick Reed’s battle withRory 
McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy>, the first match on 
the course, leapt out from the draw sheet the moment it was confirmed.

The pair did not disappoint, most pertinently during a four-hole stretch from 
the 5th which saw a combined total of nine under par. Three of those holes were 
halved in birdies, the 8th especially notable as McIlroy’s 65ft putt for a two 
was followed in by Reed from half that distance. The sportsmanship which 
followed was a handy antidote to some of the moronic cries which have partly 
overshadowed the competition. Reed was to prevail by one hole, that result 
always looking ominous for Europe’s quest to pull down their ravenous hosts.

Ryder Cup diary: Thomas Pieters the busy rookie joins trio of European greats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/ryder-cup-diary-thomas-pieters-rookie>
Match of the day involved Sergio García and Phil Mickelson. By the time they 
took to the 18th tee they had produced 17 birdies. Another two followed on the 
last, meaning a halved match and respective rounds of 63.

When pieced together with the last day of the Open at Royal Troon Mickelson 
has been a star performer in two of the classic denouements of not just this 
year but plenty of others. The scary part? He is 46. Wider meaning relates to 
Mickelson’s prominent position not only in criticising previous American setups 
but being a routinely outspoken force in this one. Had the USA been toppled 
again, Mickelson would have been firmly in the spotlight.

“This is a great way to cap the year,” he acknowledged. “This is something 
that we pulled together to try to accomplish. This is something we’re going to 
build on as we move forward. Otherwise it’s all for nothing. We have got to 
take this experience and continue to add to it.”

Criticism of Clarke will not be slow in coming. As he knows, this comes with 
losing territory. Westwood, a wildcard pick, returned nothing from three 
matches. The Englishman’s dreadful missed putt on the final green of the 
Saturday fourball session starved Europe of precious hope. If Westwood’s Ryder 
Cup playing experience ended here, as may well be the case, this was a sad way 
to bow out.

Westwood’s showing was at least offset in part by Thomas Pieters. The young 
Belgian became the first debutant in European Ryder Cup history to deliver four 
points, the latest arriving courtesy of a 3&2 win over JB Holmes. “I didn’t 
feel like a rookie,” Pieters said with the straight face and shrug which partly 
defines his excellence.

Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy’s heavyweight clash is exquisite theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/rory-mcilroy-patrick-reed-heavyweight-hazeltine-ryder-cup>
Captain analysis may be overstated. Europe were always legitimate underdogs 
against a superior team, a matter most glaring on the greens. A bit like two 
years ago at Gleneagles, when everything actually fell in Europe’s favour when 
cold analysis is applied, it would have been a shock had the USA been toppled 
again here. Perhaps the secret is that, this time, Love knew how to achieve the 
best results from a group who had so commonly underperformed as a collective.

Henrik Stenson’s 3&2 dismissal of Jordan Spieth was in vain. So, too, was the 
impressive win by Rafa Cabrera Bello over the US PGA champion, Jimmy Walker. 
Martin Kaymer rallied from three down after eight to see off Matt Kuchar. In 
the red corner Rickie Fowler, Moore, Brandt Snedeker, Dustin Johnson, Brooks 
Koepka and Zach Johnson ensured the USA crashed through the finishing tape. 
“I’m so proud of these guys,” said Love. “They have had a lot of pressure on 
them for the last two years.”

This represented the largest margin for a USA victory since 1981. They are 
entitled to relish it; a nation which does not take kindly to being dominated 
at anything had been the Ryder Cup whipping boys for too long. Paris and 2018 
cannot come quickly enough for either side.
 