
Fighting does not have to be loud. Fighters, most of them naturally timorous 
but encouraged to be professionally aggressive, do not have to “play the game”. 
While it might be heresy for the off-stage suits whose job it is to pump up the 
volume, the most dangerous undertaking in sport can be conducted with mutual 
respect bordering on civility.

Rarely has that concept been so manifest as in Las Vegas this week, when Saúl 
“Canelo” Álvarez and Amir Khan refused to be drawn into the cacophony.On 
Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/03/amir-khan-floyd-mayweather-bitter-las-vegas-canelo-alvarez>
, they will try to rip the other’s head off for as long as their world title 
fight lasts but, in preparation for that health-threatening experience, both 
champion and challenger have been quiet to the point of a cloister-level 
whisper.

Amir Khan succeeds 'bitter' Floyd Mayweather as poster boy in Las Vegas | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/03/amir-khan-floyd-mayweather-bitter-las-vegas-canelo-alvarez>
After their orchestrated arrival in the MGM Grand on Tuesday, a noisy event 
embellished by a mariachi band and designed solely for the excitement of the 
hundreds of fans who had gathered in the casino’s lobby with their mobile phone 
cameras clicking constantly, Álvarez and Khan sat down with a few members of 
the media in a small VIP room nearby to share their considered thoughts. 
Unusually, it was enlightening – in a downbeat way.

What we already know is that Álvarez, the WBC’s middleweight champion, is 
dropping down nine pounds to 155lb to accommodate the move up through two 
divisions of Khan, who is a natural welterweight, a disparity in size that 
Floyd Mayweather, for one, would never have considered – when hefought and beat 
Álvarez in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/15/floyd-mayweather-beats-canelo-alvarez>
, they also accommodated a catchweight, 152lb.

Khan would have liked the limit set at 153lb but says he has been able to 
“train up” to the weight since last November, an unusually long and perhaps 
profitable preparation. Álvarez, four years younger at 25 but naturally a 
bigger man, will weigh around 175lb when they begin hostilities, about a stone 
heavier than Khan. Yet not even this core issue disturbed the good manners of 
the antagonists. If anything, it was the champion whose serenity slightly 
outshone the challenger’s quiet confidence. This is a fight between two of the 
nicest guys in boxing.

I asked Álvarez if the image we had of him – cool, respectful, relaxed – was 
so at odds with his “fight face” that it might be difficult for outsiders to 
appreciate how he makes the switch. He smiled and, through an interpreter, 
said: “I keep my excitement within me but it’s always there. As I grow older 
and gain more experience, I’m more comfortable with everything. I’m more 
mature, and I understand everything better.”

As for stepping into the historically significant Mexican celebration of Cinco 
de Mayo – a tradition stretching back to the more animated days of Julio César 
Chávez – he said: “It’s a great honour. There’s extra motivation to fight on 
this holiday.” However, he will not be lured into producing a performance that 
goes against his gameplan or his nature.

Steve Carp, who writes about boxing for this city’s main newspaper, the 
Review-Journal, observed last year: “He’s only 25, but if there’s one thing 
Álvarez has learned in the 11 years he has been in boxing, it’s don’t say too 
much. And if you have to talk, don’t say anything that may rile your opponent.”

The champion was true to that characterisation this week: “People expect me to 
deliver a knockout but I never plan on it. If it comes, it comes.” At times, it 
seemed he might be more likely to bore Khan into submission than hammer him 
physically. His eloquence flows from his gloves, though – no question. He is a 
silent assassin, a ruthless stalker who keeps opponents in a permanent state of 
anxiety. In 32 of his 48 fights since his professional debut, Álvarez has put 
his opponent away early. He can hit. Hard.

Much of it is in his genes. For all his sanguinity, he can trace his fighting 
spirit to days scrapping on the streets of Juanacatlán, a town of 25,000 people 
in rural Mexico. The family lived on a farm, where Álvarez learned to ride a 
horse, but he was just as fascinated by the exploits of his seven older 
brothers, all of whom have boxed.

His combative nature was given substance by one simple physical feature: his 
red hair. He gladly adopted the nom de guerre, “Canelo”, to embrace the 
cinnamon-coloured topping on his head; he had no trouble engaging tormentors, 
all of whom left bloodied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fsaul-canelo-alvarez-amir-khan-boxing-fight-las-vegas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c19ea98ec34827566824f5e0476c9ec8a79932%2F19_285_4131_2478%2F4131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sa%C3%BAl%20%E2%80%98Canelo%E2%80%99%20%C3%81lvarez%20plays%20fight%20game%20to%20be%20proud%20not%20loud%20in%20Las%20Vegas%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fsaul-canelo-alvarez-amir-khan-boxing-fight-las-vegas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sa%C3%BAl%20%E2%80%98Canelo%E2%80%99%20%C3%81lvarez%20plays%20fight%20game%20to%20be%20proud%20not%20loud%20in%20Las%20Vegas%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fsaul-canelo-alvarez-amir-khan-boxing-fight-las-vegas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c19ea98ec34827566824f5e0476c9ec8a79932%2F19_285_4131_2478%2F4131.jpg>
 Amir Khan trains for his fight against Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez. Photograph: 
Andrew Couldridge/Reuters 
It would have been seriously counterintuitive if the kid called Canelo did not 
learn how to handle himself in these elemental macho confrontations. It was his 
brother Rigo who triggered the switch from bare fists to gloved combat – and it 
was clear to young Saúl from the first punch he threw that this was a calling 
he could not ignore. Many of his early fights are unrecorded. It is often the 
way in Mexico.

Fighting comes naturally but is not always recompensed. Álvarez got lucky. He 
had a talent and inclination for it as well as single-mindedness. His demeanour 
disarms, as well. He would not look out of place in a bank.

However, Álvarez is his own bank. For this little dust-up he will earn $9m. 
Khan gets $5m. The winner can expect far greater returns up the road, possibly 
against Gennady Golovkin, the best middleweight in boxing. Although Khan 
sounded less than enthusiastic this week about that prospect, Álvarez has no 
choice but to accept the challenge.

He is, after all, more physically suited for the task of fighting at 160lb – 
and he would not be able to show his face in Juanacatlán were he to somehow 
wriggle free of the ultimate challenge in his sport. That is why this fight is 
so important to him. He will not mention Golovkin’s name but there cannot be a 
night when he goes to sleep without imagining what such a fight would be like. 
Later probably than sooner, he will know.
 