

Some residents of Grimsby have been outraged after the Lincolnshire town was 
portrayed as a deprived den of iniquity in the latest film fromSacha Baron Cohen
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen>.

Titled Grimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby>, the Borat 
comic's new movie centres on a spy who is forced to go on the run with his 
football hooligan brother. Cohen has been filming scenes in the Essex port town 
of Tilbury, which has been transformed into a rundown "Grimsby", complete with 
householders urinating out of their windows and children being offered beer.

Gardens have reportedly been strewn with rubbish and graffiti painted on walls 
in an apparent effort to increase the town's "Grimsbyness". Shops have had 
their fascias and hoardings altered, with Tilbury Wines transformed into 
"Grimsby Fired Chicken” and Right Time African restaurant becoming wedding 
store "Maids and Brides”.

Tilbury residents gathered in the rain last week to watch scenes being filmed, 
with some saying they did not recognise their home town. “I’d been away for two 
weeks and came back last night so confused because all the shops had changed 
and said Grimsby on them – I thought I was drunk," Bethany Casey, 19, told the 
local Thurrock Gazette newspaper 
<http://www.thurrockgazette.co.uk/news/11333903.Getting_wet_for__Ali_G_/>. “I 
tried to get to the off-licence and thought ‘what’s going on here?’ so I went 
to the other one further down and noticed a run-down park had sprung up – but I 
didn’t think anything of it because, if they did put a new park in Tilbury, it 
would get wrecked straight away.”
North East Lincolnshire councillor Matthew Brown told the Mail Online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2689385/Grimsby-gets-Borat-treatment-Anger-depressed-fishing-town-backdrop-Sacha-Baron-Cohen-s-new-blockbuster-hooligans-binge-drinkers.html>
 he was "disappointed" to see Grimsby portrayed as a rundown town with hooligan 
problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-grimsby-tilbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F14%2F1405323434023%2Ff2d177aa-13cd-4823-8319-1f2a30f33fbf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacha%20Baron%20Cohen%20angers%20residents%20of%20Grimsby%20and%20Tilbury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-grimsby-tilbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacha%20Baron%20Cohen%20angers%20residents%20of%20Grimsby%20and%20Tilbury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsacha-baron-cohen-grimsby-tilbury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F14%2F1405323434023%2Ff2d177aa-13cd-4823-8319-1f2a30f33fbf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Thurrock MP Jackie Doyle-Price outside Tilbury power station. Photograph: 
Martin Godwin 
He said: "It is using the town's name in potentially a poor light. What also 
worries me is that there is no benefit to the local economy which is carrying 
the town's name. Anything that you associate with football hooliganism is going 
to be negative, but I hope people will be open-minded when they watch the film.


"My view is quite simple. We don't have a massive issue with hooliganism. 
There is very good stewarding at the [Grimsby Town FC] ground. In general we 
are not in the same category as other clubs like Millwall who have a history of 
it."
Sylvia Robinson from Grimsby's real Brides and Maids store, told the Grimsby 
Telegraph 
<http://www.grimsbytelegraph.co.uk/GRIMSBY/story-21455066-detail/story.html#ixzz37QNSGzfg>
 that Baron Cohen was "ridiculous", but said she saw the funny side of the 
ersatz movie version.


"We have a good reputation, so this won't affect us at all. They should, 
however, make a point to stress that the shop in the film doesn't represent any 
real shop," she said.
Grimsby, set for release in 2015, also features Mark Strong, Ian McShane and 
Isla Fisher. Last December, French director Louis Leterrier was the surprisename
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/04/louis-leterrier-sacha-baron-cohen-grimsby-spoof>
 chosen to helm the film.


• Johnny Vegas and Gabourey Sidibe join Sacha Baron Cohen comedy Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/10/grimsby-sacha-baron-cohen-johnny-vegas-gabourey-sidibe>
 