
Sabrine, 52, has worked as a stallholder at the Breitscheidplatz for more than 
10 years. And every night since the truck careered through the Christmas market 
she has had nightmares.

“In my head I can still hear the explosive bang as the lorry crashed into the 
market and the crunching sound as it scraped along the stalls,” she said. “Our 
bosses have advised us to keep our thoughts to ourselves but for me it’s better 
to talk about it.”

Despite the horrors she witnessed that night, Sabrine said she was grateful to 
return to work when the market reopened on Thursday for the first time since 
the attack.

“Firstly it shows the terrorists that they will not stop us; it’s like giving 
them the middle finger,” she said. “And, secondly, sitting at home watching it 
all on the media was just eating me up.”

Even though the market had reopened, it was far from an ordinary day. 
Stallholders had been urged to keep bright lights and music turned off and 
there were no customers at her tin-can alley stall. “We don’t expect people to 
want to throw balls at tin cans today,” said Sabrine, who prefers not to give 
her surname. “We won’t make money today, but that doesn’t mean we don’t want to 
be here.”

Fingerprints in Berlin truck match those of suspect Anis Amri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/police-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri>
Passers-by consisted of other stallholders, or police officers who patrolled 
the market in lines of three or four, hands poised on the triggers of their 
submachine guns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75c860dcf9a71c654db09cf4eccdd2248a10123%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadness%20and%20defiance%20mark%20the%20reopening%20of%20Breitscheidplatz%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadness%20and%20defiance%20mark%20the%20reopening%20of%20Breitscheidplatz%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75c860dcf9a71c654db09cf4eccdd2248a10123%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Visitors walk through the reopened Christmas market on Breitscheidplatz in 
Berlin. Photograph: Michael Kappeler/AP 
“It feels important to talk and to be here,” said Hilde, who in between 
serving mugs of Glühwein at her stall, held her hands over the hotplates to 
keep them warm amid sub-zero temperatures. Ahead of the 11am opening, she had 
visited the service held for stallholders and market-goers in the Kaiser 
Wilhelm memorial church, at the foot of which the lorry had come to a halt. “It 
was a good thing to get everyone together, even though there’s little comfort 
to be had from words right now,” she said.

Martin Germer, the church’s pastor who has been acting as a counsellor for 
stallholders and some of the relatives of the 12 people who died and the dozens 
of others injured in the attack, told the congregation: “It feels right to be 
opening up the market again as a sign of our determination to keep going.”

On the door of his church he had put up a sign which read: “Shocked and 
saddened, we think of the people who died on Monday, 19 December, right next to 
our church. They have been torn out of our lives so suddenly. Our thoughts and 
prayers are with the injured [of] body and soul and with the families of all 
the victims.”

Inside the church, bathed in the calming marine light of its stained-glass 
windows, members of the public queued to sign condolence books. At numerous 
points inside and outside the market, thousands of candles, flowers and 
handwritten notes had been left by residents and tourists. Some wiped away 
tears as they read the messages, while others linked arms or embraced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a82424ff3e22c1670f30cde5401c4bd4a3d3ca%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadness%20and%20defiance%20mark%20the%20reopening%20of%20Breitscheidplatz%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadness%20and%20defiance%20mark%20the%20reopening%20of%20Breitscheidplatz%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fsadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a82424ff3e22c1670f30cde5401c4bd4a3d3ca%2F0_274_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Authorities have stepped up security at the reopened market. Photograph: 
Michael Kappeler/EPA 
Soft toys and prayer books were among the mementoes and trinkets left at the 
scene. There were the flags of Israel and Italy in honour of the two victims 
from those countries, Dalia Elyakim and Fabrizia di Lorenzo. Someone had placed 
a vinyl single of a song made famous by the legendary Berlin singer and actress 
Hildegard Knef: “Das Glück kennt nur Minuten” (Happiness is fleeting).

Berlin attack: security services feared suspect would commit 'act of violence'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-german-police-leads>
Mohamad, 25, visiting with his mother, Elham, 49, said he had been confronted 
by the carnage on his way home from work at a nearby sports-shoe stall. “It was 
half an hour afterwards, at about 8.30,” he said. “At first I thought it must 
have been an accident – then the reality sank in.”

Born in Berlin to Palestinian parents living as refugees in Lebanon who 
arrived inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in the early 
1990s, Mohamad said: “These attackers are ruining the name of Islam. We have to 
come here to prove that there is another side to our religion.”

A stallholder in his 40s selling cocoa-dusted chocolates on the side of the 
market adjacent to the Kürfurstendamm, the city’s largest shopping promenade, 
said he had suffered from insomnia since the attack. On hearing the crash, he 
recalled, he had run over to help rescue the injured – and had stumbled over 
dead bodies.

“I will never forget what I saw, and I can’t begin to put it into words,” he 
said. But he said he took some comfort from believing the consequences of the 
attack might have been much worse. “There was a gas canister from a bratwurst 
stall, I think, which was punctured or leaking as a result of the impact, the 
owner shouted out that it might explode,” he said, declining to give his 
surname.

“While someone tried to turn off the supply I ran around telling stallholders 
to run, realising the chain reaction which might occur if it exploded, which 
doesn’t bear thinking about,” he said.

Friedrich Hilke, a 60-year-old businessman on an annual visit with his wife to 
Berlin’s Christmas markets from Uslar in Lower Saxony, said he would continue 
to do his Christmas shopping on the market as planned. “We’re still shaking 
inside,” he said. “But having spent two days shut up in our hotel watching the 
news footage of this, we’re glad to be able to come and demonstrate our 
solidarity.”

The victims of the Berlin Christmas market attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-the-victims>
He was angry, Hilke said, at those who had tried to put the blame for the 
attack onAngela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> for 
her open-door policy towards refugees and migrants.

“On the contrary, she steered against much of the popular opinion in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to ensure the refugees didn’t 
end up left stranded in the mud of Hungary, where lots of people wanted to 
leave them. We should be grateful we have a leader with such warm-heartedness, 
and be wary of the cheap right-wing slogans we hear these days,” he added.

Around the perimeter of the market, a team of workmen, firefighters and police 
had erected 60 large concrete barriers ahead of the opening. Each was four 
metres long, 60cm wide and a metre high; they were needed to make people feel 
safe, said Michael Roden, head of Berlin’s stallholder and fairground 
association.

“We need to get back to a state of normality as soon as possible and need at 
the same time to reassure people that what happened can’t be repeated,” he 
said. “We spoke for years about the possibility of something like this 
happening – I’ve been working here for 30 years – but never in my wildest 
dreams could I have imagined something like this.”

At the place where the Scania truck had come off the road, cutting through the 
stalls and careering down the lane of wooden huts, the barriers were placed two 
or three deep.

A black-and-white canvas picture of the square resting on an easel marked the 
now-empty space where wooden huts destroyed in the impact had stood. Some of 
the debris from the crash was still visible behind red plastic sheeting – 
broken beer bottles and Christmas decor, a ripped alpine backdrop and a 
shattered wooden canopy swing.
 