
Tony Pulis hopes his only transfer business before the close of play at 11pm 
on Monday is incoming rather than outgoing atWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> but the manager has warned 
against unrealistic expectations if Saido Berahino remains after the striker 
marked his return with two goals.

West Bromwich Albion sign Sandro on loan from QPR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/west-bromwich-albion-sign-sandro-loan-qpr>
Newcastle submitted a bid of around £21m on Sunday to sign the 22-year-old but 
that remains below the estimation of the West Brom chairman, Jeremy Peace, who 
values the striker at more than £25m. Berahino looked sharp in his first start 
since October, only for defensive errors to giftPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> a draw and ensure a replay 
on 9 February.

Pulis said: “The great thing is Saido played and got a couple of goals and 
looked dangerous, but he is not fit. People are going to have to be a little 
bit careful with the expectations. He will score but we have to get him up to a 
level of match fitness. That is very important for us.”

Berahino, who threatened to go on strike when he was not allowed a move to 
Tottenham last summer, has been reduced to substitute appearances in recent 
months with Peace playing hardball over his future. He had a dead leg during 
the first half but said he wanted to play on, which Pulis said is testament to 
the player’s attitude.

“He has been like that all the time The problem with Saido is there has been 
so much surrounding him. He is a young kid and he is a footballer first and 
foremost. I think sometimes people forget that and he needs to play. But in the 
game he gets two opportunities and puts them in the back of the net and that’s 
why everybody wants him.”

West Brom have confirmed Serge Gnabry’s loan has been terminated and the 
midfielder has returned to Arsenal.

Graham Westley, whose pre-match rallying call referred to Buster Douglas 
knocking out Mike Tyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/11/mike-tyson-underdog-buster-douglas-boxing-from-the-vault>
 and The Revenant, hopes the result gives his young Peterborough squad the 
confidence to climb back into the League One play-off places. Shaquile 
Coulthirst, a recent signing from Tottenham, scored his first goal for the club 
to make it 1-1 and Jon Taylor, who said he was expecting the blame for allowing 
Berahino to put West Brom back in front, struck the second equaliser.

Westley said: “I know it’s a cliche but our primary objective is to get out of 
League One. We’ve come a long way. We were 18th when I came in. We’ve pushed 
our way up into the top six. We’ve been scoring a lot of goals, playing a good 
brand of football. It’s really important for us that we don’t let it get in the 
way of three points next weekend.”

Man of the match Saido Berahino (WBA)
 