
Man of the week

Blackpool owner Karl Oyston - banned last year for calling a fan “a massive 
retard, thick twat, special needs fuctard” - stilllooking to sue 10 of 150 fans 
<http://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/sport/football/blackpool-fc/fan-groups-speak-out-as-blackpool-sue-supporters-1-8178293>
 who invaded the pitch to protest against him in 2015. Oyston says the rest 
will stay banned “until they sign an acceptable behaviour order”.

• Oyston’s message on dissent in July 2015: “In over 27 years the Oystons have 
always defended the right of the fans to express their views and to criticise 
the Oystons and the club. The Oystons have always admired the passion of the 
fans.”

Gianni Infantino unveils plans to increase World Cup to 40 or 48 teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/gianni-infantino-world-cup-fifa-president>
Reformer of the week

Fifa 2.0 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2016/m=10/news=fifa-president-infantino-unveils-fifa-2-0-the-vision-for-the-future-2843428.html>
 president Gianni Infantino – drawing a line under a tough run of disputed 
headlines over ethics and the Panama Papers: “I go my way. We have embraced 
reforms. We have embraced transparency. We have embraced good governance. We 
have turned a page.”

• Helping define the new era: secretary general Fatma Samoura, revealing how 
Fifa saved £99,500 last week <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37656700> by 
using a cheaper five-star hotel for executives - “money that will be invested 
in football”. It comes five months after a leak detailed Infantino’s expenses – 
including £1,100 for a tuxedo and £660 on flowers – on top of £1.15m basic plus 
bonuses, car, house and £1,542 monthly allowance. Fifa’s ethics committee: “The 
benefits enjoyed by Mr Infantino were not considered improper.”

Also feeling got at

Zimbabwe’s FA head Philip Chiyangwa – multimillionaire YouTuber 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pRvMGD_W9g> AKA “Captain Fiasco” – denying 
his landslide election win last year was rigged via “blatant” vote-buying and 
threats of beatings. Chiyangwa says the new claims from rival Trevor 
Carelse-Juul are“sore loser” talk 
<https://www.thestandard.co.zw/2016/10/09/chiyangwa-bought-votes-2/>: “He’s 
been saying this since time immemorial, without giving any impeccable evidence.”

• Chiyangwa’s best explanation for the rush of allegations against him, as set 
out last summer: “It is clear ... people tend to see my looks and the fact that 
I am rich, then they reach certain conclusions. A combination of looks and 
riches always attracts problems, so I am a victim of my good looks and riches. 
Everybody who has money attracts problems.” His first act when he won the vote: 
taking a three-week holiday. “I am going on leave. I’ll be back towards the end 
of December.”

Plus: best Fifa story arc

2012: Costa Rica’s FA president Eduardo Li says hosting the 2014 Under-17s 
Women’s World Cup 
<http://www.fifa.com/tournaments/archive/u17womensworldcup/costarica2014/index.html>
 will be of “huge benefit, especially to all the young girls out there. Women’s 
football, like a caterpillar, just needed time to become a butterfly. Now it 
spreads its wings.”

2013: Unveils the tournament’s butterfly mascot 
<http://www.fifa.com/tournaments/archive/u17womensworldcup/costarica2014/news/newsid=2204306/index.html>
 and predicts a year of “great pride for the country, especially for its 
children”.

2014: Job done, looks ahead to the legacy having secured new grassroots 
funding. “It gives me great pride and satisfaction. We have crossed frontiers, 
dispelled old misconceptions – this is a triumph for the people.”

2016: Admits he embezzled $90,000 of that funding, pleads guilty 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/08/sports/soccer/eduardo-li-fifa-corruption-case-costa-rica.html>
 to additional racketeering conspiracy, wire fraud, and wire fraud conspiracy 
charges, forfeits $668,000, and faces up to 20 years in prison for each his 
three charges.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsaid-and-done-karl-oyston-gianni-infantino-football-diary-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25e7f09d833b0c7ccc7cdbd8b9514c3ddadee14%2F193_90_1251_750%2F1251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Karl%20Oyston%2C%20Fifa%202.0%2C%20and%20the%20Golden%20Bin%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsaid-and-done-karl-oyston-gianni-infantino-football-diary-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Karl%20Oyston%2C%20Fifa%202.0%2C%20and%20the%20Golden%20Bin%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fsaid-and-done-karl-oyston-gianni-infantino-football-diary-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25e7f09d833b0c7ccc7cdbd8b9514c3ddadee14%2F193_90_1251_750%2F1251.jpg>
 ‘A triumph for the people’ Photograph: BPI/REX Shutterstock 
Other news: best analysis

West Ham co-owner David Sullivan, revealing 
<http://www.whufc.com/News/Don-t-Miss/From-the-Boardroom-David-Sullivan-(2)> 
why fans are upset with ticketing, atmosphere, violence and stewards at their 
new ground. “I’m increasingly fed up with negative campaigning against the 
stadium by some sections of the media.”

Swings and roundabouts

£4m: Amount invested by the FA in grassroots coaching 
<http://www.thefa.com/news/2015/oct/countdown-to-parklife-begins-011015> over 
12 months.£1m: Amount given to Sam Allardyce as a payoff for lasting 67 days of 
his £6m contract.

Other manager news

• Romania, 12 Sept: CSM Poli Iaşi chairman Florin Prunea defends coach Nicolò 
Napoli: “Fans are shouting but it’s way too much to ask me to sack him. It’s 
the players’ attitude that bothers me. I won’t even think about sacking him.”5 
Oct:Thinks about it. 6 Oct: Sacks him.

• Most creative solution: York City, sacking manager Jackie McNamara with 
immediate effect “in the best interests of York City Football Club”, and 
unveiling Jackie McNamara as caretaker to see them safely through “the 
transition”.

• Most considerate: Egypt’s Zamalek SC coach Momen Soliman: “If we lose the 
game I’ll resign. And I’ll do it by phone in order not to embarrass anyone.”

• And most democratic: Ghana’s former Asante Kotoko coach David Duncan on 
winningWorst Coach of the Year <http://allafrica.com/stories/201610140894.html> 
in Happy FM’s Golden Bin Awards. “It’s the right of the callers to vote me the 
worst. I will not contest the verdict.”

Pigs fly at the Valley as Charlton and Coventry fans stage joint protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
Rebuttal of the week

Villa owner @Dr_TonyXia 
<https://twitter.com/Dr_TonyXia/status/785525104411152385>: “Being listed as 
10crazy owners by an Italian!!!paper. I wasn’t that crazy2spend millions2change 
a right one but’ll do whatever good2the club.”

Plus: still got it

Diego Maradona: marking the pope’s 2016 Match for Peace with an on-pitch row 
<https://youtu.be/gHpnlCGhh5E?t=24s> and pre-game attack on Mauro Icardi as a 
“traitor” over the Inter striker’s affair with ex-team-mate Maxi López’s wife. 
Icardi: “He’s tasteless. His words are not compatible with peace.”

• 2014’s inaugural Match for Peace highlight: Maradona attacking organisers 
for involving Icardi – who should be “punched in the face”. He pledged to keep 
speaking out on all football’s moral issues. “In me, the pope has a soldier, an 
ally. I will fight by his side.”
 