
Quote of the week

Blackpool, distancing themselves from an official club Twitter account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/17/blackpool-twitter-account-abuse-supporter>
 which called fans “typical arsehole wankers”. The club – with Karl Oyston back 
from hissix-week ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/19/karl-oyston-abusive-text-messages-fa-report>
 for calling a fan “a massive retard” “thick twat” “special needs” “fuctard” – 
said: “We do not condone the views expressed.”

Deal of the week

Uefa - still fighting European football’s culture of “greed, reckless spending 
and financial insanity 
<http://www.uefa.org/protecting-the-game/club-licensing-and-financial-fair-play/news/newsid=2067210.html>
” – signing Hublot as itsofficial luxury watch partner 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/football-marketing/sponsorship/17691-hublot-decide-timing-is-right-for-entry-into-uefa-club-competitions>
. Uefa: “The brand is a perfect fit … We look forward to developing new bespoke 
timepieces together.”

• Last week’s other neatest corporate fits: Newcastle pairing their official 
payday loan shirt sponsor with a newOfficial Betting and Gaming Partner 
<http://www.nufc.co.uk/articles/20150820/coral-new-online-betting-gaming-partner_2281670_4946159>
; andManchester United adding their first “Official Casino Resort Partner in 
Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar and South Korea” to aroster 
<http://www.manutd.com/en/Partners/Regional-Partners.aspx> including United’s 
first “Official Personal Care and Laundry Partner in South-East Asia”.

Zurich latest

New from Fifa’s transparency-first agenda: a press briefing 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/08/20/soccer-fifa-sponsors-idUSL3N10V5GC20150820>
 on the result of its meeting with unhappy sponsors. “In the meeting, Fifa 
reaffirmed its commitment to transparency, reform, and collaboration with its 
valued partners. No further comment will be made on the internal discussions.”

Meanwhile: best clarification

Sepp, talking to Dutch paper De Volkskrant 
<http://www.volkskrant.nl/sport/-the-game-is-my-passion-and-i-cannot-abandon-football~a4121172/>
 about his lot: “I have two flats in Venthône, between Sierre and 
Crans-Montana, and I have the Fifa presidential residence at my disposal. I 
also use my daughter’s apartment in my home town Visp. But I do not own any 
palaces.”

Proudest legacy

Italy: Catania president Antonino Pulvirenti – banned from all grounds and 
fined £213,000 for match-fixing five games – calling time on his era after the 
club wasdemoted to the third tier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/20/catania-demoted-italian-football-third-tier-match-fixing-antonio-pulvirenti>
, docked 12 points and fined. “I’m done. I’ve told my lawyer to sell up.”

• The summer’s top commentator on Pulvirenti’s legal trouble: Sampdoria 
president Massimo Ferrero,1 July: “He must die... How dare he do these things, 
and sully football? Some people disgust me, trying to smear the greatest thing 
in the world: football. It makes me sick, disgusted. Don’t just throw away the 
key, he should die.”2 July: “I didn’t mean he should die. It was allegorical.”

Also making it clear

Italy: Lazio director Igli Tare 
<http://www.rp-online.de/sport/fussball/champions-league/bayer-04-leverkusen-rassistische-geraeusche-lazio-manager-relativiert-aid-1.5324206>
, on why a section of their fans abused Bayer Leverkusen’s black players. 
“‘Uuuh’ is different to ‘Buuuh.’ ‘Buuuh’ is racist, while you chant ‘Uuuh’ when 
you want to frighten and insult, but not in a racist kind of way. I want to 
make that clear.”

PR setback of the week

Romania: CSMS Iasi’s board handing executive chairman Florin Prunea a written 
warning after he told local people to value their club more. “People from Iasi 
need to wise up… This team brings excitement to their lives. Apart from rapes, 
nothing much happens round here.” Iasi’s board said “any future defamations” 
would bring “a more stringent response”; Prunea apologised for “any offence”.

Leader of the week

Brazil, 31 July: Vasco president Eurico Miranda denies he’ll be goaded by the 
press into sacking coach Celso Roth. “Who decides? I decide. Me. Whatever 
happens is my call so there’s no point in all this press talk. There’ll be no 
sackings here.”15 Aug: Sacks him 
<http://www.espnfc.com/cr-vasco-da-gama/story/2569168/jorginho-presented-as-new-coach-of-vasco-da-gama>
.

Heart news

Move of the week: Gokhan Inler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/19/leicester-napoli-gokhan-inler-three-year-deal>
 on what drew him to a lucrative contract in England. “In the end I decided 
with my heart, and I came to Leicester City.”

• Also feeling it: Sergio Ramos, on what made him end protracted contract 
talks bysigning a £36m-after-tax five-year deal 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/08/17/uk-soccer-spain-real-ramos-idUKKCN0QM0SP20150817>
 at Real Madrid. “It’s never about money. My heart and my head have always been 
here. Being here is my dream.”

Best role reversal

Ecuador: Four players and a coach from the Esmeraldas women’s youth team 
facing year-long bans after a mass brawlended with players throwing bottles at 
fans <https://youtu.be/8-9ZO1ndmjA?t=1m18s> in the grandstand. Referee Segundo 
Paredes: “Such acts cannot be ignored.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8-9ZO1ndmjA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8-9ZO1ndmjA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8-9ZO1ndmjA&media=>
Crowd of the week

2: Number of paying fans at Colombian top-flight match Atlético Huila v 
Alianza Petrolera. Local media saidthe match 
<http://www.diariodelhuila.com/deportes/huila-y-petrolera-el-partido-con-menos-hinchas-del-futbol-colombiano-cdgint20150819074427169>
, played 100 miles away from the usual ground due to renovations, left Huila 
CEO Carlos Barrero “visibly distressed”. Barrero: “Our gate receipts were £8 
and it costs £5,300 to rent the place. Two fans. That’s it.”

Rethink of the week

Mexican club Chivas, removing midfielder Angel Reyna from their squad for “new 
acts of indiscipline”, 12 months after they defended him over an alleged 
“obscene gesture”. Then-director Francisco Palencia told local media last year: 
“It’s rough justice. Angel tells me, and I believe him – he’s my player, so I 
believe him – he was simply adjusting his shorts. It happens. It’s all about 
misconceptions.”

Plus: Back on form

Brazil, April: FA head Marco Polo Del Nero, 74, pledges to refocus after 
photos of him dating four young modelstested his credibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/26/said-and-done-blatter-putin-david-cameron>
;August: Faces domestic 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/08/20/soccer-fifa-brazil-idINKCN0QP2D220150820>
 and FBI corruption inquiries, with senator Romario alleging “vast 
shenanigans”. Del Nero denies wrongdoing.
 