
The Sale director of rugby Steve Diamond has insisted that his club have done 
nothing wrong overthe signing of the rugby league player Denny Solomona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/denny-solomona-registered-sale-european-champions-cup-squad>
, after the Castleford Tigers winger was officially revealed as a Sharks player 
on a three-year deal on Tuesday.

Related: Denny Solomona registered in Sale European Champions Cup squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/denny-solomona-registered-sale-european-champions-cup-squad>

The Samoan, who was Super League’s top try-scorer last season after crossing 
for a record-breaking 42 tries informed Castleford he had retired from rugby 
league in order to facilitate a cross-code move to Sale against the Tigers’ 
wishes.Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> have indicated 
they are ready to take the matter to the high court for a case that could have 
major ramifications for the league code of the game

Castleford had rejected bids from three clubs – including Sale – for the wing 
before he failed to return for pre-season training last month, and despite the 
Tigers never officially accepting a bid for the 23-year-old, Diamond has 
stressed that as far as he is concerned,Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> are guilty of nothing.

“I don’t think we’ve done anything wrong at all to be honest,” he said. 
“Players have agents and they put the players up on the marketplace. Let’s get 
it straight: there were other clubs in for Denny and there were at least two 
rugby union clubs I know of that were in the market to sign him.

“I think the situation has been blown out of proportion. These things happen 
in sport almost every week where players move around and yes, we’re at a point 
now where we’re at an impasse - but I’m sure that’ll be ironed out before too 
long. It’s in the hands of the owners of the clubs, it’s nothing to do with me 
really.”

Castleford and their legal team - with the support of the Rugby Football 
League - are now expected to issue a statement in response to the completion of 
the transfer, but Diamond cooled talk that transfers like these - with 
potential legal implications - could now become commonplace between the two 
sports.

He said: “I don’t think it could. There’s very few people who can switch 
between the sports anyway. If I had a player here who said they wanted to leave 
Sale, I’d let him go. There’s no real difference here: I think that’s what has 
happened. We’ve just got to get on with it - we’ve nothing to hide.”

Solomona has been training with Sale before Tuesday’s announcement, and 
Diamond admitted that he will likely make his debut in Sunday’s Champions Cup 
clash against Saracens. “There’s no point trying to play him in A team games,” 
Diamond said. “I think he’ll be involved on Sunday - he’s been training with us 
for about a week or so now.”
 