
Forget the Million Pound Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/terry-campese-hull-kr-salford-million-pound-game>
, this was more Million Pound Point. The most astonishing finish to the most 
important game of the season was scarcely believable: Salford, behind by eight 
points with around 100 seconds left on the clock, were dead and buried and were 
on course for the Championship. Hull KR were safe and Super League survival 
seemed a certainty.

At that point, Salford’s players appeared to have accepted their fate: hands 
on their hips, on the verge of giving up. Yet five minutes later they were 
running around the field celebrating victory in the most incredible culmination 
to a rugby league game.

Niall Evalds’ try in the corner to make it 18-14 with two minutes remaining 
seemed nothing more than a consolation. Salford had no chance of scoring again, 
surely? Fifty-three seconds remained when they got the ball again and after 
Josh Griffin – who put Evalds away for his try – broke in midfield; Salford 
kept their cool, shifted the ball the width of the field and Greg Johnson 
touched down on the right wing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8f95e66df45bea10bcef104f8e3ba6e988b786e%2F0_42_4557_2734%2F4557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Salford%20win%20Million%20Pound%20Game%20to%20relegate%20Hull%20KR%20after%20stunning%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Salford%20win%20Million%20Pound%20Game%20to%20relegate%20Hull%20KR%20after%20stunning%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8f95e66df45bea10bcef104f8e3ba6e988b786e%2F0_42_4557_2734%2F4557.jpg>
 Salford Red Devils owner Marwan Koukash during an interview after the match. 
Photograph: Ed Sykes/Reuters 
The only time KR touched the ball again was when they kicked off in extra 
time. Salford forced their way forward in the opening set before O’Brien 
launched an audacious drop goal from the halfway line which, as soon as he 
kicked it, was never not going to go over.

Cue delirium, pandemonium and, regrettably, some ugly scenes from both sets of 
fans as the magnitude of what had just happened began to sink in. Unpleasant 
crowd troubled marred the end of what was a superb spectacle for the sport 
before that; the RFL later confirmed it will launch an investigation into the 
matter.

A statement said: “Games with so much at stake often mean emotions run high, 
but that does not excuse the minority of fans who behaved unacceptably 
following the final whistle. The RFL will conduct a full investigation into 
these incidents and will work with the police and club involved to ensure 
anyone found to have acted violently is dealt with appropriately and also 
banned with immediate effect.”

For Hull KR, there will be no Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> for them next year – and no 
Hull derby: a blow for the competition as a whole. “There’s a debate for 
another day about whether that’s correct but this club has 50 people walking 
out of this ground not knowing if they’ve got a job,” said the Hull KR coach, 
James Webster. “The boys put every single thing they had into it, and it was 
one of the better games you’ll see. I just can’t fathom this whole situation, 
to be honest.”

KR were magnificent in the opening quarter and they led 10-0 courtesy of tries 
from Adam Walker and Josh Mantellato. Playing with more energy and enthusiasm 
than the Red Devils, the home side appeared in complete control but their 
failure to score a third try afforded Salford the chance to respond before 
half-time.

Tries from Evalds and Ben Murdoch-Masila made it 10-10 and, although 
Mantellato kicked a penalty on the half-time hooter, the game was still firmly 
in the balance.

When Mantellato converted Thomas Minns’ try to open up an eight-point lead, 
Rovers appeared in control and seemed destined to see the game out untroubled. 
Then, from nowhere, Evalds touched down after Griffin’s imperious offload and 
the late drama truly began.

“I’ve never seen anything like it,” said the Salford coach, Ian Watson. “We 
sent a call out with five minutes to go; we were under the pump defending our 
line but we told them to believe. Thankfully, it worked – and we survived.”
 