
No one would describe Bernard Guasch or Dr Marwan Koukash as shrinking violets 
but Super League's most colourful chairmen may have preferred to stay in the 
background on Tuesday.

Instead Guasch, the meat magnate from Perpignan who has been the single 
biggest influence in establishingCatalan Dragons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/catalans> in the competition, gave his 
coaching team of Laurent Frayssinous and David Waite an implicit vote of 
confidence by swinging his cleaver at a couple of underperforming players in 
response to Sunday's heavy defeat at Wakefield.

Koukash tweeted unconvincing incredulity after being fined Â£1,000 for a 
scathing attack on the Rugby Football League at the pre-season relaunch of his
Salford Red Devils <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salford-red-devils> last 
month.

Koukash can hardly have expected to avoid punishment for an entertaining and 
occasionally explicit diatribe in which he jokingly compared Nigel Wood, the 
RFL's chief executive, to Hitler. TheRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl>
 also cited a tweet in fining the racehorse owner for "conduct prejudicial to 
the interests of the game".

A greater concern for Koukash will be the form and fitness of his Salford 
squad as they go into Friday's home game against Warrington on the back of 
consecutive defeats.

It is not inconceivable that Salford could yet be dragged into the battle to 
avoid relegation, and the Catalans are already in the thick of it after failing 
to take a point from their first four matches.

That had inevitably led to conjecture about the future of Frayssinous, the 
club's first French coach. But after calling the team home from a planned stay 
in England to prepare for Friday's game at St Helens, the famously volcanic 
Guasch has singled out two players for punishment.

Jamal Fakir, the France forward who played in the Dragons' first Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> match against Wigan in 2005, 
has been dropped to the French competition until further notice. Brent Webb, 
the former New Zealand full-back who joined the club last season after a mostly 
successful spell with Leeds, will be "subjected to a series of tests" on a back 
injury "to determine the rest of his season".
 