
As the world asked what was next for Sam Burgess after England’s miserable exit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/04/england-crash-out-of-rugby-world-cup>
 from last year’s Rugby World Cup, the wheels were already turning behind the 
scenes. Within weeks he was shuttling through Sydney airport.Returning to rugby 
league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/sam-burgess-bath-rugby-union-league>
 felt like the only logical answer to the question.

To describe Burgess’s time in rugby union as a whirlwind is an understatement. 
He made his debut as a substitute centrefor Bath against Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/28/bath-harlequins-premiership-match-report>
 on 28 November 2014. By 30 January he was playing for England Saxons against 
the Irish Wolfhounds; on 10 April he was shifted by Bath to flanker; he made 
his Test debut on 15 August in a World Cup warm-up win against France. England 
hosted the World Cup butlost at Twickenham to Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 (when his selection was questioned, though his team were ahead when he was 
replaced)and Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, to be knocked out in the group stages. On 5 November – 11 months and eight 
days after coming on against Harlequins – he left Bath and flew south for the 
winter.

Sam Burgess returns to England rugby league squad for Four Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/jonny-lomax-wayne-bennett-england-rugby-league-squad>
Ask 100 people for their opinion on Burgess’s spell in union and you would 
probably get 100 different answers. Some would see him as a scapegoat, others 
would say varying degrees of failure, and there would be all points in between. 
That in itself made a return to league all the more plausible, a sport where he 
was – and still is – widely acclaimed as one of the true masters of the code.

Last Monday, Wayne Bennett named Burgess in the 24-man England squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/jonny-lomax-wayne-bennett-england-rugby-league-squad>
 for the Four Nations although he will miss next Saturday’s warm-up against 
France due to suspension. As the 27-year-old prepares to return to 
international rugby for the first time since his fifth and final appearance for 
Stuart Lancaster’s union side, in the defeat to Australia – this time, as the 
poster boy – it is almost beyond belief that it is not yet a year since his 
short‑lived stay in union ended.

Shane Richardson, the Rabbitohs head of football, initially convinced Burgess 
to fly halfway around the world and leave Bradford to join South Sydney as a 
20-year-old in 2010 and he did the same again last year to deliver him back to 
South Sydney from Bath as the NRL’s highest-paid player. Richardson says that 
irrespective of how badly it ended, the player’s move to union was a key part 
of his career. “I wouldn’t say I’m glad he went, but he had to go,” he says. 
“We felt he was really wanting to go and test himself in another sport, which 
he admitted to us. If we hadn’t have let him go it would have been detrimental 
to both Sam and the club.”

Burgess had never been far from the headlines but his time in union prompted a 
level of adversity he had not known before. That, Richardson believes, has 
brought a different character back to the beaches of Maroubra after a testing 
first 12 months back in league.

“He’s come back with a level of maturity that’s a bit tighter than it was 
before,” Richardson says. “He’s calmer, much more of a leader off the field and 
there’s a real presence about the bloke when it comes to leadership. I think it 
will rub off on many of our players moving forward. We feel we’ve got a better 
player and a better man back from union.”

While Richardson’s job is getting the best out of Burgess on the field, a club 
such as South Sydney – competing in a city where there are eight otherNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clubs – rely on a man with his profile 
to promote the club off it, too. Coming back from the heavily publicised stint 
in England, there may have been pressure from some quarters that Burgess had to 
start afresh and rebuild both his career and reputation; but not in the eyes of 
those who know him best. “No way, he’s not had to rebuild anything in rugby 
league,” says the Souths CEO, Blake Solly, who was Super League’s general 
manager until May. “Most Australians would say he was very unfairly treated by 
rugby union in England and that it certainly wasn’t his fault that England 
bombed out so badly in the World Cup.

“He makes my job easier and whenever he’s been with members and sponsors he 
commands respect because of the presence he has. He’s such a good club man and 
rugby union’s loss is our gain: on and off the field.”

Solly explains how, in June, Burgess sought out a young girl in the dressing 
room to not only donate $100 to her motor neurone disease charity,but ask her 
for a photo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ORsPCHgSxYE>, as opposed to the 
other way round. Then, later in the year, after Souths had won in Newcastle, 
Burgess made a beeline for a disabled teenager in the stands, whipped his shirt 
off, signed it and posed for photos with her. “That’s a measure of Sam. Aussies 
don’t care about what happened in rugby union, they love him for who he is and 
what he does for people,” Solly says.

On the field, Burgess has put the disappointment of his time in union behind 
him – but 2016 was not without its hiccups. He suffered a worrying neck injury 
in the opening weeks of the NRL season after a lack of a pre-season and at 
times the transition back into the rugby league star he once was looked beyond 
him, but he finished the year very much like the Burgess of old.

“He hadn’t played our sport for so long so his body wasn’t accustomed to the 
demands of a different game,” Richardson says. “He didn’t come back into 
pre-season training until February, even though we got the deal done at the end 
of the previous year.

“It was difficult and disjointed for him at the start but as the year went on, 
boy he picked up. He finished winning our players’ player of the year and our 
“best and fairest” award; I’d say that’s a fair reflection of how well he’s 
come back.”

Solly adds: “He admitted it was a tough season yet he finished in the top 10 
of the Dally M standings [the NRL’s player of the year award]. He’s in the same 
league as megastars like Johnathan Thurston and the sport as a whole – be that 
the NRL, England or South Sydney – are just glad he’s back where he belongs.”
 