
Dame Sarah Storey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sarah-storey> will not be 
letting her slim chances of success at Sunday’sBBC Sports Personality of the 
Year spoil her fun. “It’s an opportunity for the para-cycling team to get back 
together and party,” says Britain’s most decorated female Paralympian, with a 
laugh. Storey is a rank outsider to win what she describes as the annual 
“personality contest”, as are just about all 16 of the nominated athletes bar 
Andy Murray, but at the end of her historic year she is determined to enjoy the 
show.

Spoty history is certainly against the 39-year-old, who surpassed Tanni 
Grey-Thompson’s haul of 11 gold medals in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/kadeen-cox-sarah-storey-symbols-paralympicsgb-rio>
 and created one of the lasting images of the Games as she celebrated with her 
three-year-old daughter. Storey is well aware that a Paralympic athlete has 
never won the award and feels the responsibility for more than only para-sport. 
“The last time a mum won was Liz McColgan in 1991, the last time a female won 
was 10 years ago [Zara Phillips] and the last time a Paralympian was on the 
stage was Tanni Grey-Thompson in 2000.

“A lot of parents with youngsters who have a limb deficiency say: ‘It’s 
fantastic to see someone like yourself up there because my young girl or boy is 
very shy and hides his arm away, and he wishes he could do more things and your 
example shows he is able to.’ It would be amazing to see a Paralympian on that 
stage with the trophy as a starting point to say: ‘It’s going to be the norm 
that our events are covered equally.’ I haven’t been hiding away. I’ve won nine 
world titles since London 2012 but that’s been very rarely covered.”

Dame Sarah Storey's roadmap for women's cycling and para-cycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/100-tours-100-tales/2016/dec/02/dame-sarah-storey-roadmap-womens-cycling-paralympics>
This, however, has been no ordinary year. Storey, who was born without a fully 
formed left hand, switched to cycling in 2004 having already won five 
Paralympic golds as a swimmer, and in Rio added three more to take her tally to 
14. Her third gold produced one of the most memorable images of the Paralympic 
Games, as she hugged her smiling daughter, Louisa, after winning the C4/5 road 
race. “She wanted to come to doping control with me, she just didn’t want to 
leave my side,” says Storey. “It’s almost like she knew the Games were over and 
she had me back. There are some great photographs of that moment, us together 
with my medal and the Tom [the soft toy mascot] – and she was obviously most 
delighted with the Tom.”

The staggering ease with which Storey appears to win race after race masks the 
difficulties behind para-sport. Currently her plans for 2017 are up in the air 
because, less than 11 weeks before the proposed start date, the UCI – the 
sport’s governing body – is yet to announce whether the women’s world 
championships will go ahead. “It is just a ridiculous position to be in. I 
don’t know any other sport where it would be accepted that you could do this to 
a group of athletes.”

The Paralympic Games has been facing its own problems, most notably the 
Russian doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/russia-banned-paralympics-doping-ban>
 and disability sport’s unique issue: the classification system. “We’ve always 
felt as athletes that the classification system is open to abuse by people who 
want to cheat, and misrepresent themselves within the classification room,” 
says Storey. “There’s still a few issues that need to be tackled, for example 
classifiers will always let the athlete know exactly when they are going to be 
watching them in competition. I think everybody in para-sport has had 
suspicions of [other athletes].

Nicola Adams: ‘I’d love to see a woman headlining a boxing show’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/nicola-adams-boxing-sports-personality-of-the-year>
“I have a challenge with the trolls of Twitter and comments on newspaper 
articles. They talk about why should I be celebrated as a Paralympian because 
there’s nothing wrong with me and it won’t affect my ability to pedal a bike. 
People don’t understand the nature of impairment. There still remains an 
element of subjectivity which I don’t know if you’ll ever entirely remove. With 
an amputee you can measure their limb, but there are many conditions which are 
far more complicated.

“I’d be a fan of creating a database that allows people to publicise enough 
information,” she adds. “Most athletes will talk about the challenges of their 
condition to the press quite openly but, when it comes to anything more public, 
we talk about not releasing medical information because it should be 
confidential. We need to find a happy medium.”

Storey may be nearing 40 but she is not finished yet and has her eyes set on 
an eighth Paralympic Games in Tokyo, having started in Barcelona in 1992. Win 
or lose at Sunday’s award ceremony, Storey will be taking a holiday with her 
family before returning to training in the new year. For now she just hopes the 
scale of her achievements finally registers.

“We are going on holiday on Monday, landing back on Christmas morning, and I’m 
hoping that while I’m sat on a beach by a pool playing with Louisa on the water 
slide, it will finally start to sink in.”

Dame Sarah Storey is one of the 16 contenders for BBC Sports Personality of 
the Year <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> 
2016, live on BBC1 at 6.40pm on Sunday
 