
In the months leading up to the EU referendum in June, George Osborne had two 
people he could always rely on to back the argument that Brexit would have 
immediate, dire consequences for the UK economy. One wasChristine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund. The other wasÁngel 
Gurría 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/brexit-cost-uk-households-2200-by-2020-eu-oecd>
, the secretary general of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.

Osborne’s belief that voters would be swayed by fears of recession meant 
Lagarde and Gurría popped up regularly during the campaign. In the event, the 
plan did not work. Those who voted to leave the EU appeared sceptical about the 
forecasts produced by the IMF and theOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> – and those from the Treasury and 
the Bank of England, for that matter.

That scepticism has looked increasingly justified in the months since the 
referendum. The first prediction to go awry was that the economy would plunge 
into instant recession. It didn’t.

When the economy showed signs of resilience, there was a second prediction: 
the unexpected strength was driven by consumer spending and a different picture 
would be painted when figures for investment came in.Figures for investment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/gdp-growth-brexit-vote-ons-business-investment>
were published last week. It was up in the third quarter.

The IFS was not wrong to describe shrinking UK pay packets as dreadful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/the-ifs-was-not-wrong-to-describe-shrinking-uk-pay-packets-as-dreadful>
There has been another retreat to a new fallback position. Yes, the IMF and 
the OECD admit, we were taken by surprise by the strength of the economy in the 
months after the Brexit vote and we have been forced to revise up our growth 
forecasts for 2016. But, take it from us, the outlook for the UK is still grim. 
The downturn is coming – it is simply a matter of time.

As such, the OECD expects the UK economy to slow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/protectionism-trade-wars-world-growth-oecd-donald-trump>
 from 2% this year to 1.2% in 2017 and 1% in 2018 – a markedly gloomier 
forecast than that produced by the Office for Budget Responsibility for last 
week’s autumn statement (1.4% and 1.7% respectively for the same time periods).

Despite the recent announcements from Google, Facebook, Apple, Jaguar Land 
Rover and Tata, the OECD is particularly concerned about the outlook for 
foreign direct investment into the UK.

Who knows, the Paris-based thinktank could be right. The Brexit divorce 
negotiations have yet to begin, after all. For the time being, however, the 
OECD should not be surprised if it is the target for the old joke: there are 
three sorts of economists – the ones who can count and the ones who can’t.
 