
The numbers spoke of another humiliation. They were outpassed (231 to 712), 
outfought (44% to 56% one-v-ones won), outplayed (28% to 72% possession) in 
front of their home fans. ButSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> 04 had friends in low places on 
Sunday night; the most important ally of all, in fact, down there, where it 
really mattered: on the pitch. “The ball was Schalke’s buddy tonight,” winced 
Borussia Mönchengladbach’s sporting director, Max Eberl.

Borussia Dortmund slip to defeat at Bayer Leverkusen in Bundesliga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/borussia-dortmund-bayer-leverkusen-bundesliga-match-report>
For the vanquished visitors, a supernatural conspiracy between the spherical 
object of desire and the hitherto pointless Royal Blues appeared to be the only 
logical explanation for a 4-0 final score that bore little relation to events 
on the pitch. “We won by one or two goals too many,” admitted a relieved S04 
sporting director, Christian Heidel. But he didn’t care, of course. “All that 
matters are the points. The team gave their all today, from the very first 
minute. And even though everything didn’t quite work out football-wise, I felt 
that we played men’s football throughout [as opposed to junior level, he 
meant].”

For Süddeutsche Zeitung, Schalke had pulled off “a miracle recovery”. “An act 
of liberation,” WAZ put it. The first win of the league season after five 
defeats in a row under the new manager, Markus Weinzierl, was celebrated long 
after the final whistle by euphoric supporters in Gelsenkirchen. They know 
better than others, from painful experience, that you don’t always get what you 
deserve in this game. But sometimes you get what you need. As a largely dull 
match without meaningless chances suddenly sprung into life in the second half, 
Schalke stumbled upon their good fortune like a late-80s, new-school hip-hop 
producer getting hold of theJames Brown’s Funky People compilation 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/reviews/dwzb/>: suddenly, they had all the breaks.

The BMG substitute Lars Stindl lost the ball, Ibrahima Traoré clumsily 
challenged Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting in the box, a soft penalty, 1-0 
(Choupo-Moting, 52’). Six minutes later, the home side had added two more. The 
record signing Breel Embolo scored his first goal for Schalke (56’) and Leon 
Goretzka made it 3-0 (58’). Embolo, 19, added a fourth seven minutes from time. 
“We didn’t want to listen to the negativity surrounding us,” the Swiss 
international explained. He had celebrated his first goal by covering his ears.

Eberl harrumphed: “Football isn’t always fair and explicable. We played well 
but Schalke scored three goals in the right moment, having a bit of momentum 
going for them today.” But it wasn’t only bad luck. The Gladbach midfielder 
Christoph Kramer felt his team had become “too hectic” after the first Schalke 
goal, hinting at a troubling psychological frailty. For some reason, one of the 
league’s best counterattacking sides have stopped performing away from home. 
Only one win in 14Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> games is a record not 
worthy of a Champions League team – and also explains why André Schubert is yet 
to wholly convince all internal doubters.

Schalke, too, are aware that questions remain. “I’m not sure all problems have 
gone away,” Heidel said. While their attitude and work-rate looked much 
improved on Sunday, Weinzierl will need more time to adapt his reactive 
midfield-pressing system from Augsburg to a much more technically gifted 04 
team. They won’t be able to win too many games with that amount of possession, 
to be sure, and there are only so many times Heidel can address the team with 
an urgent “wake-up, we’re in a relegation” lecture in midweek. “It was not very 
loud and I didn’t use PowerPoint, as some had reported,” the 53-year-old smiled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fschalke-prove-don-t-always-get-what-you-deserve-but-need-borussia-monchengladbach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F147d1ed6c396f3783698edcae9ab2c9fa2d70d63%2F0_0_4850_3298%2F4850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Schalke%20prove%20you%20don't%20always%20get%20what%20you%20deserve%20but%20what%20you%20need&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fschalke-prove-don-t-always-get-what-you-deserve-but-need-borussia-monchengladbach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Schalke%20prove%20you%20don%27t%20always%20get%20what%20you%20deserve%20but%20what%20you%20need&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fschalke-prove-don-t-always-get-what-you-deserve-but-need-borussia-monchengladbach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F147d1ed6c396f3783698edcae9ab2c9fa2d70d63%2F0_0_4850_3298%2F4850.jpg>
 Schalke’s supporters enjoying what they are seeing in Gelsenkirchen. 
Photograph: Martin Meissner/AP 
In an effort to make the league’s most capricious big club into a more serious 
outfit, he’s clamped down on leaks to local tabloids and persuaded talkative 
boss Clemens Tönnies to stay away from the microphones. These two remarkable 
achievements in a relatively short space of time – Heidel took over from Horst 
Heldt in the summer –created a valuable breathing space during the 
disappointing opening weeks. It will take longer to build up much-needed 
facilities, such as a fully functioning scouting network, for example. Schalke 
had relied on friendly agents doing their legwork for them in the past.

Sunday’s 4-0 win, the phoniest score since friends of this column came home 
with a bagful of liquorice from Camden market one night 20 years ago, might not 
quite be a turning point for Weinzierl’s men. But at least they’re off the 
bottom of the table now, ready to embark on progress so uncharacteristically 
steady and quiet in Schalke 04 terms that it could eventually amount to a 
full-blown revolution.

Talking points

• Joint post-match conferences by both coaches have been a feature since 
Bundesliga times eternal but they have rarely been as entertaining as Saturday 
night’s “third half” after Leverkusen v Dortmund at the BayArena. Thomas 
Tuchel’s mood was bad enough after his slightly tired looking team had gone 
down 2-0 to a Bayer side that had frustrated them by compressing space and 
being rather robust in the tackle. When the Leverkusen coach, Roger Schmidt, 
claimed that it had been a “a fair game without bad fouls” Tuchel could barely 
contain his ire. “A fair game - so says the manager of the team who committed 
21 fouls to the manager of the team with seven fouls,” he shook his head. “If 
21 fouls are fair, I understand things differently.” Tuchel went on to state 
that his team had dominated the game, “Bayer only had 35% of the ball,” he read 
from the stats sheet in front of him. “Possession doesn’t always equal 
dominance,” Schmidt shot back, unperturbed by his colleague’s anger. Things 
didn’t quite get personal but you could sense that the difference of opinion is 
underpinned by some heartfelt rivalry, stemming from the fact that they are two 
best German coaches in the league.

• The best Italian coach in the Bundesliga, meanwhile, had his worst week in 
Munich yet, some Oktoberfest fun on Sunday afternoon notwithstanding. Bayern’s 
performance in the 1-1 draw against 1. FC Köln – the first two points dropped 
domestically after the 1-0 defeat v Atletico Madrid on Wednesday – was again 
unconvincing; a ponderous, disjointed affair in which individual star quality 
for once couldn’t mask collective toiling. “We got 16 out 18 points, we are far 
away from having a problem,” the executive chairman, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, 
said, to counter the criticism but “the lack of pace” Manuel Neuer bemoaned was 
telling. Three months into the “dolce vita regime” (Frankfurter Rundschau) of 
Ancelotti, Bayern remain worryingly far away from the machine-like precision of 
Pep Guardiola. The much vaunted freedom ushered in by his successor has 
translated into a distinct lack of order. Privately, the senior board members 
are far more concerned than they let on.

Results Leipzig 2-1 Augsburg, Darmstadt 2-2 Bremen, Bayern 1-1 Köln, Freiburg 
1-0 Frankfurt, Hertha 2-0 HSV, Leverkusen 2-0 Dortmund, Ingolstadt 1-2 
Hoffenheim, Wolfsburg 0-0 Mainz, Schalke 04 4-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach.
 