
The Partick Thistle full-back Stephen O’Donnell scored one goal and set up 
another as a 3-1 victory overMotherwell sent the visitors into second-bottom 
spot in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

The Jags were largely comfortable after Stuart Bannigan gave them a 
16th-minute lead, although the game might have been different had Henrik 
Ojamaa’s early header been inches lower rather than hitting the underside of 
the crossbar.

O’Donnell played in Kris Doolan for the second after the break and took 
advantage of an ineptMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> defence to score a late 
clinching goal on the counterattack. The visitors briefly threatened a comeback 
following a sensational 40-yard strike from substitute Lionel Ainsworth, but 
they were again lacking in confidence as an attacking side, despite signs that 
Ojamaa is regaining his sharpness.

Tommy Wright accused his St Johnstone players of “criminal” defending and the 
match officials of making two important errors in their 2-1 Premiership defeat 
bySt Mirren at McDiarmid Park.

The Buddies defender Jason Naismith opened the scoring in the 28th minute with 
a superb strike but only after Michael O’Halloran had given up possession in 
his own half.

Five minutes from the interval St Johnstone’s midfielder David Wotherspoon had 
the ball in the net but Brian Graham was ruled to have fouled keeper Marian 
Kello by the referee, Don Robertson.

Steve Anderson did draw the home side level with a header in the 67th minute 
and Graham appeared to put them ahead when he converted a cross from Simon 
Lappin but the offside flag went up.

St Mirren’s Adam Drury, on loan from Manchester City and on as substitute for 
James Marwood, struck a winner on the counterattack.

Wright said: “We dominated the second-half and at worst we should have come 
away with a point but we didn’t because we commit too many men forward and 
don’t react quick enough.”

Hearts, the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> leaders, 
maintained their momentum with a comfortable 3-0 victory atQueen of the South. 
Osman Sow opened the scoring in the 39th minute, the Swedish frontman taking 
the ball down on his chest and rattling in a volley off the underside of the 
bar from 25 yards out. Prince Buaben made it 2-0 three minutes later with 
another wonderful solo effort, slaloming down the centre of the pitch and 
slotting the ball past Queens’ goalkeeper Alexander Clark.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> were in cruise control in 
the second period and Jordan McGhee added the third on the hour, converting 
Billy King’s pinpoint cross from the left. Sow, who was excellent all 
afternoon, had chances to add to the rout but he was denied a stunning second 
after Clark saved his curling effort expertly.

Lewis MacLeod’s incredible overhead kick handed off-form Rangers some pride 
back as they beatLivingston 1-0 at the Energy Assets Arena. The Ibrox men were 
dreadful as they conceded three first-half goals toHibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> last Monday but showed a 
measure of improvement as they kept themselves within six points of the top of 
the Scottish Championship.

Macleod, who was returning after ankle problems that led him to miss two weeks 
of action, scored his stunner after eight minutes. It was a carbon-copy of the 
wonder goal he scored against Ayr United last term butRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> blew a host of second-half 
chances to add to their score.

East Fife beat Threave Rovers 7-0 and Bo’ness United beat Culter 7-1 in the 
Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> second round.
 