
A second-half penalty from St Johnstone’s Brian Graham denied Dundee their 
fourth straight Premiership win in a hard-fought Tayside derby at Dens Park. 
The on-loanDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> United forward 
struck after 53 minutes to give Tommy Wright’s side a 1-1 draw after David 
Clarkson had put the hosts ahead after 41 minutes .

A Christie Elliot strike 15 minutes from time was enough to give Partick three 
crucial points againstSt Mirren and lift them seven clear of the bottom of the 
Premiership table. After a poor first half the Firhill side had a better second 
half and did just enough for the points. On a miserable afternoon for football, 
though, it was another dismal home performance fromSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> which leaves the Paisley side 
joint bottom with Ross County.

A stunning first-half performance by Ross County secured their first away win 
of the Premiership season, atKilmarnock, meaning they are now only bottom of 
the league table on goal difference. The Staggies move level on points with St 
Mirren, whileKilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> drop 
out of the top six despite conceding three goals at home for the second game in 
a row. Goals by Graham Carey – via a rebound off the goalkeeper, Craig Samson – 
Michael Gardyne and Paul Quinn gave the Staggies a 3-0 lead at the break and 
Killie could find no way back into the game.

Alim Ozturk was the hero for Hearts again as the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> leaders maintained 
their four-point lead with a 1-0 home win againstRaith Rovers. Ozturk’s 
long-range effort rescued a point against rivals Hibernian in their last 
outing, and this time the defender found the net from 30 yards after striding 
forward unchallenged and unleashing a fierce drive past David McGurn. The 
fifth-minute goal lit up an otherwise dull affair but the Jambos did what they 
needed to maintain the four-point gap over Rangers.

Lewis Macleod celebrated his Scotland call-up with a goal and an assist as 
Rangers beat Falkirk 4-0 in the Scottish Championship. The 20-year-old headed 
Rangers two ahead in the 69th minute at Ibrox days after being named in Gordon 
Strachan’s squad for the first time ahead of the European Championship 
qualifier against Republic of Ireland and the friendly against England. The 
goal was the midfielder’s eighth of the season and he soon set up Kenny Miller 
to put Rangers three up. Nicky Law had fired the opener in the 25th minute 
after some slack defending from Falkirk, who put on a decent show until being 
caught on the break for Macleod’s goal. Substitute Nicky Clark rounded off the 
scoring asRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> remained four 
points behind leaders Hearts following their eighth consecutive victory in all 
competitions.Hibs beat Cowdenbeath 2-1 with goals from Paul Hanlon and Jason 
Cummings.
 