
Theresa May will offer the leaders of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> a “direct line” to the Brexit 
secretary, David Davis, to allow them to help shape the UK’s strategy for 
leaving the EU.


The prime minister is hosting talks on Monday at the joint ministerial 
committee (JMC) with the leaders of the UK’s devolved administrations for the 
first time since theBrexit vote on 23 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/how-did-uk-end-up-voting-leave-european-union>
.

May will on Monday make the offer of a new official forum – which would be 
chaired by Davis and meet at least twice before the end of the year – to 
Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, the Welsh first minister, Carwyn 
Jones, Northern Ireland’s first minister, Arlene Foster, and her deputy,Martin 
McGuinness <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>, and insist 
“it is imperative that the devolved administrations play their part in making 
[Brexit negotiations] work”.

By placing future discussions on a formal footing, May will say she is giving 
the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish leaders “the chance for them all to put 
forward their proposals on how to seize the opportunities presented by Brexit 
and deliver the democratic decision expressed by the people of the UK”.

But a thinktank has issued a stark warning to May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-constitutional-crisis-brexit-deal-institute-for-government>
 ahead of the JMC, predicting that a “full-blown constitutional crisis” is 
imminent unless agreement on the key terms of Brexit can be reached between the 
government and the UK’s devolved administrations.

In a report published on Monday, the Institute for Government said unless all 
four leaders agree on the key elements of the UK’s negotiating position before 
theprime minister triggers article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, formally starting the Brexit process, the result could be “a serious 
breakdown in relations between the four governments and nations of the UK”.

May is also expected to discuss the government’s position on the EU exit 
strategy at the JMC and insist that contrary to some speculation, no final 
decisions have been taken and how the UK leaves the EU will not boil down to a 
binary choice.


A Downing Street source said while the JMC had existed since devolution, the 
discussions over Brexit had provided a new impetus for its work.

“It will be the formal forum in which the devolved administrations feed in 
their ideas and make their case on what is important around Brexit,” the source 
said.

While the relevant secretaries of state for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, Wales and Northern Ireland would 
continue to speak for the devolved administrations in parliament, JMC meetings 
are “a chance for the devolved administration leaders as well,” the source 
said. “They do have a voice that needs to be heard and a role to play. And as 
the prime minister has repeatedly made clear, we’re leaving the EU as the UK.”
 