
If you had just arrived in the UK you might be fooled into thinking rugby 
league is our national game. On Thursday Radio 5 Live led their sports 
bulletins with rugby league all morning, first with the news thatEngland had 
won the right to host the 2021 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/england-rugby-league-world-cup-2021-hosts>
 over the USA/Canada bid, thenWayne Bennett’s team news 
<http://www.rugby-league.com/england/article/38809/england-squad-confirmed-for-four-nations-opener>
 for the clash with New Zealand on Saturday.

There are more column inches previewing the Four Nations than any other 
matches get all season.Scotland v Australia is live 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/rugby-league/37739936> on BBC national radio on 
Friday night andEngland v New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/england-four-nations-sam-burgess-wayne-bennett>
 is on BBC1 on Saturday afternoon. The tournament hasn’t even started yet and 
it is blindingly obvious thatinternationals sell the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/mal-meninga-and-wayne-bennett-best-of-enemies-set-for-four-nations-showdown>
 more than any Magic Weekend, Million Pound Game or other marketing mechanism 
can.

Rugby league Four Nations: team-by-team guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/rugby-league-four-nations-team-by-team-guide>
It gives low-profile players the chance to shine and spring out of the 
confined space that is English club rugby league. That applies more to the 
Scotland team than most. It’s little more than six months sinceRyan Brierley 
<https://twitter.com/RyanBrierley> was a Championship player with Leigh 
Centurions. The Huddersfield Giants half-back is now set to make his 
international debut against Australia.

“This is the highlight of my career,” said Brierley, who is expected to 
partner club team-mate and Scotland captain Danny Brough in the halves. “To be 
an international player at 24 years old is something I never dreamt of. It’s 
the biggest tournament of our lives and I’m just proud to be a part of it. 
Playing alongside these players is a massive achievement on my behalf. It’s 
been an amazing season. Going from the Championship to being an international 
is a huge step.”

Whether Brierley and his team-mates make that leap remains to be seen. 
Scotland face the biggest task of their 22-year existence. None of the previous 
fourth seeds won aFour Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> 
game: France, Papua New Guinea, Wales and Samoa all lost their three games, 
although New Zealand and England only just scraped past Samoa two years ago, 
and France were leading England at half-time of the opening game in 2009.

Kiwis can improve before Four Nations – but so too can favourites Australia | 
Matt Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/kiwis-can-improve-before-four-nations-but-so-too-can-favourites-australia>
World Cup holders Australia have not lost to anyone other than New Zealand for 
10 years, and it is a generation since they last lost to a team outside the top 
three in the world.Australia prepared for the tournament by beating New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/kiwis-can-improve-before-four-nations-but-so-too-can-favourites-australia>
 comfortably in Perth. Scotland saw off a Liam Harrison Select XIII in Barrow. 
But Scotland coach Steve McCormack will field the strongest ever team in his 12 
years in charge.

“The squad we’ve got is unbelievable and to be among the likes of Danny Brough 
and Lachlan Coote is very special,” says the wiry Brierley, who qualifies for 
Scotland because his grandfather hails from Kilwinning in Ayrshire. “I’m a 
rugby league fan so I love every minute of being out there. When you’re playing 
the best team in the world it automatically brings pressure upon yourself, but 
you’ve just got to do what you’ve been doing all year as that’s what’s got you 
in the team. If you don’t enjoy that pressure then you’re in the wrong sport. I 
think I’ve got the best job in the world: playing rugby league for a living.”

Clubcall: Barrow Raiders

During a week holidaying in Furness, No Helmets made its first visit to 
Barrow’s Craven Park ground last Friday to see Scotland help celebrate Liam 
Harrison’s testimonial. It was the former Irish international’s 306th and final 
career appearance. Such longevity and loyalty was not the only throwback to the 
1980s. The town desperately needs a new stadium for the football and rugby 
clubs to share as both have relics from the post-war era. However, those of us 
who grew up watching professional sport in the 1980s could feel nostalgic for 
our youth as soon as we entered the ground. A similar sensation applies at the 
likes of Batley, Featherstone and a few other survivors.

It was also a delight to be in an area where rugby league matters: rugby 
league took up eight pages of the local North Western Evening News one night, 
and a chance conversation led to our host’s 11-year-old son, who plays for 
Askam ARLFC, being Scotland’s mascot. Their fans may dream of a return to the 
1980s, when they were in the top flight, rather than facing another division in 
the third tier, but we should be grateful for Barrow and supporting that rugby 
league heartland.

Foreign quota

The new RLIF eligibility rules that kicked in this month have had an immediate 
impact. The decision that players can play for a tier-one country (Australia, 
New Zealand or England) and a second-tier nation (anyone else) without having 
to wait for the next World Cup cycle or a two-year clearing period means 
everyone not selected for the big boys is up for grabs.

Paul Cooke on Hull KR's last-minute relegation: 'I was devastated for them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/oct/06/paul-cooke-hull-kr-hull-fc-rugby-league>
It has many drawbacks but will enable the Pacific Islands and the European 
nations to considerably strengthen for the World Cup. So Lachlan Coote, who 
should make his Scotland debut against Australia on Friday night, is still 
eligible for Australia next year! Likewise, Tyson Frizzell could go back to 
Wales at the World Cup – they will qualify if they beat Italy (Mirco Bergamasco 
et al) in Monza on Saturday – despite playing for the Kangaroos this weekend.

The 2016 Leigh squad already seem to play to those rules: Harrison Hansen 
played once for New Zealand as a kid before earning six Samoa caps, Fuifui 
Moimoi started and finished with Tonga either side of 12 appearances for the 
Kiwis, while Rene Maitua played once for the Kangaroos and three times for 
Samoa!

Goal-line drop-out

It’s been 10 years now since a British team beat the Kangaroos. So it was no 
surprise when a group of Great Britain and England players from that era 
smashed a rugby union team 42-5 in a half of rugby league the other day. Sean 
Long scored a hat-trick as Salford Red Devils Legends, featuring a fearsome 
pack of Adrian Morley, Denis Betts, Chev Walker, Ewan Dowes and Danny Ward, 
plus international backs Keith Senior, Martin Gleeson and Lee Greenwood, won 
the Mitsubishi Motors Hybrid Cup at Gloucester RFC’s infamous Kingsholm ground. 
That was a slight misnomer as it was not a hybrid game but a half-and-half 
affair. Gloucester won the first half 36-7 under union rules, then Salford 
turned the screw, winning 49-41 overall and raising a few grand for Rugby For 
Heroes.

Ireland were represented by my favourite 1990s half-back, the mercurial Tommy 
Martyn; Wales by current Red Devils boss Ian Watson; and Scotland by current 
international Joe McClean, who plays under Greenwood at Gloucestershire All 
Golds. Among the Gloucester old boys was minor royalty-by-marriage Mike Tindall 
and rugby league royalty in Lesley Vainikolo. To continue the retro feel, the 
league team even wore a shirt almost identical to an old Harlequins RL number. 
Shame there was not more coverage in the league press.

Fifth and last

So the new figurehead of rugby league is a man who had his head almost knocked 
off in his one and only senior league appearance! Roger Draper – for it is he – 
is the newly crowned RFL chief commercial officer and Super League executive 
director, after a very successful couple of years running Warrington. The 
former tennis chief made one appearance for London Broncos at Leigh’s long-lost 
Hilton Park and tells an entertaining story about almost being garrotted by the 
legendary Tim Street. His next trip to Leigh should be rather more enjoyable. 
The Centurions open the Super League era at Castleford on Sky before hosting St 
Helens at Leigh Sports Village.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 