
Dundee United returned to the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> table with a 
convincing 3-0 win over a subduedSt Mirren side at Tannadice.

Jackie McNamara’s team beat Tommy Craig’s men with goals from Paul Paton, 
Nadir Ciftci and Charlie Telfer. It ensured the Tayside club leapfroggedHamilton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> to round off a successful 
week, having earlier confirmed their place in the semi-finals of the League Cup.

Tony Andreu was the hero for Hamilton, with an equaliser late into stoppage 
time in a 3-3 draw withPartick Thistle. Two goals in the space of two minutes, 
from Darian MacKinnon and Danny Redmond, had put the home side in front but 
Thistle managed to restore parity thanks to Jordan McMillan and James Craigen.

Christie Elliott then thought he had claimed the winner for the visitors, 
until Andreu salvaged a point for the hosts with the last kick of the game.

Dundee moved into the top six of the Scottish Premiership as they eventually 
beatKilmarnock 3-1 at Rugby Park.

Greg Stewart gave them the lead just before the break, and the in-form David 
Clarkson doubled their advantage soon after the restart. Alexei Eremenko gave
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> hope with a great 
turn and finish, but despite their late rally Dundee sealed the win late on 
with Stewart’s second of the game.

In the third round of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>, Kris Boyd’s third goal in 
five games handedRangers a 1-0 win over Dumbarton and secured them a place in 
the fourth round.

The Lowland League side Spartans defeated Barry Ferguson’s Clyde team 2-0 
thanks to two penalties from Kevin Motion. Two goals from Peter Weatherspoon 
allowed League Two sideAnnan Athletic to claim a place in the fourth round with 
a 2-0 win over Championship side Livingston at Galabank.

Celtic and Rangers will resume their rivalry after being paired together in 
the Scottish League Cup semi-finals. The game – which will take place on 31 
January or 1 February – will be the first meeting between the clubs since the 
financial collapse of Rangers in 2012. The holders, Aberdeen, will faceDundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> in the other 
semi‑final.
 