
Even after defeat they chanted Mo Farah’s name like a mantra, the cries of 
“Mo! Mo!” growing more urgent as the chances of a selfie with him faded. The 
reaction is similar whenever he runs in Britain. For all the negative headlines 
aroundthe United States Anti-Doping Agency investigation into his coach, 
Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/mo-farah-alberto-salazar-usada>, 
and the questioning of his relationship with Jama Aden, the Somali coach who is 
under investigation by Spanish police, Farah remains this island’s most popular 
athlete by a mile.

Laura Muir targets European and world medals in 2017 after relay victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/laura-muir-edinburgh-cross-country-athletics>
However, at the Great Edinburgh International XCountry on Saturday there were 
the first signs of a changing of the guard; a primitive sketch of the post-Mo 
era. It could be heard in the enormous reaction for the young Scottish athlete 
Laura Muir, who on Wednesday had shattered Liz McColgan’s UK indoor 5,000m 
record by 14 seconds and showed no ill-effects as sheanchored Britain to 
victory in a 4x1km race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/laura-muir-edinburgh-cross-country-athletics>
.

And in the spirited response to her fellow Scot Callum Hawkins, who surged 
ahead at the start of the 8km men’s race and was caught only metres from the 
line. Farah, meanwhile,was 43 seconds back in seventh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/mo-farah-seventh-edinburgh-xcountry-cross-country>
.

It would be foolish to overly analyse Farah’s defeat. He is a track animal not 
a mudlark and he had been unwell over Christmas. Barring injury, he will be a 
prohibitive favourite to win 5,000m and 10,000m golds at the world 
championships in London. Yet as he heads towards the marathon in 2018 and 
retirement probably after 2020, it is increasingly clear that Muir’s 
performances could soon mark her out as a mainstream star.

True, the 23-year-old veterinary student has been climbing the path to world 
class for some time, having been fifth in the world championships over 1500m in 
2015 andseventh in the Olympics in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/rio-2016-olympic-1500m-final> – 
when she put everything into trying to stay with Genzebe Dibaba’s 57-second 
third lap and saw her dreams of gold end in a crushing flood of lactic acid.

Rather than drown her sorrows, though, Muir instead did something 
extraordinary: she went to Paris and smashed her own British 1500m record by 
more than two seconds.

It was barely remarked upon at the time. The Olympics were over, the football 
season was back to dominating the sporting news and Muir – having left Brazil 
without a medal – was not a name on people’s lips. Yet hers was a performance 
for the ages.

Officially her time of 3.55.22 is the 16th fastest 1500m time in history 
<http://www.alltime-athletics.com/w_1500ok.htm> but it is not much of a stretch 
to suggest she could be even higher in the rankings. After all, four times 
above her were set by Eastern bloc athletes during the cold war, when 
state-sponsored doping was the norm.

Nine Chinese athletes are also in the top 15 – having set quicker times during 
the 1990s when the notorious coach Ma Junren ruled the roost. Last year the 
IAAF said it was investigating a letter from Wang Junxia, who is fourth on the 
list, saying that she and her team-mateswere forced to take illegal drugs 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/athletics/we-took-drugs-chinese-athletes-confess-to-doping-in-secret-letter-20160205-gmn8jk.html>
. Two other Chinese athletes above Muirwere also withdrawn from the 2000 
Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/jul/24/athletics.duncanmackay1>
 after blood tests indicated they may have taken EPO.

Then there is Dibaba, the reigning world 1500m record holder, who was on site 
when her coach, Aden, was arrested last year by Spanish police on suspicion of 
doping after EPO was found in the hotel they andother athletes were staying in, 
after a three-year operation by the IAAF 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3651196/Drug-cops-swoop-coach-Jama-Aden-EPO-banned-substances-hotel-room.html>
.

Aden has not been charged and denies wrongdoing and Dibaba has never tested 
positive for banned drugs. Yet, rightly or wrongly, she is under suspicion by 
association.

Muir’s coach, Andy Young, meanwhile, believes that more is to come, given that 
she only runs between 40 to 50 miles a week, around 10-20 fewer than most of 
her 1500m rivals. “The mix of fast- and slow-twitch fibres that she has gives 
her the ability to sprint and also run a marathon,” he says.

“I’ve never seen someone with that sort of capability. Many years ago I used 
to train with Paula Radcliffe when I was at Loughborough and she obviously had 
a huge engine but she didn’t have a turn of speed. If you look at Kelly Holmes 
she had that huge turn of speed but she didn’t have that engine – but Laura 
has both.”

Psychologically he also believes that Muir is a very different athlete now to 
when she first trained with him in 2011. “She didn’t like to hurt herself in 
training,” he says. “She wouldn’t go into the red zone – it took her a good 18 
months to get used to that. But when she broke the indoor 5,000m record she ran 
16 laps on her own out in front, which is mind-blowing.”

Muir is yet to win a medal at a major championships but her time is 
approaching fast. Expect the European Indoors in Belgrade, where she hopes to 
tackle both the 1500m and the 3,000m, to be the moment she catapults into 
the mainstream.
 