
Adam Rooney took his Aberdeen goal count to six goals in eight matches to help 
Derek McInnes's side closer to a second cup final of the season, as the Dons 
beatDumbarton 1-0 in their Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> quarter-final.

The home side scored what proved the deciding goal after 53 minutes at 
Pittodrie when Barry Robson swung a corner to the near post and Adam Rooney got 
in front of his marker to head past Stephen Grindlay. Last week's goalscorer 
Ryan Jack hit the post with a shot from the edge of the area shortly after
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> took the lead but the 
home side held on for a place in the semi-finals.

The St Johnstone manager, Tommy Wright, wants his side to banish the 
semi-final ghosts of Tynecastle after reaching the last four of the Scottish 
Cup with a 3-1 victory overRaith Rovers at Stark's Park. The Perth side were 
knocked out of Scottish League Cup 4-0 by Aberdeen in Edinburgh at the start of 
February but gave themselves another chance of cup glory with victory in 
Kirkcaldy.

Windy conditions made life very difficult for both sides at times but the 
Saints midfielder Gary McDonald opened the scoring in the third minute only for 
the Rovers midfielder Joe Cardle to level in the 21st minute with a fierce 
30-yard drive.

The Saints forward Nigel Hasselbaink restored the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> side's advantage in 
the 49th minute with a prodded shot before the defender Steven Anderson made 
sure of their place in 's draw in the 78th minute with a third goal.

In the Scottish Premiership Kilmarnock gave their hopes of avoiding the 
relegation play-off spot a welcome boost with a 4-2 win over the bottom placed 
side,Hearts, at Rugby Park.

A bizarre own-goal by the Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> 
captain, Danny Wilson, set Killie on their way and two goals by Kris Boyd after 
Dale Carrick had levelled for the struggling visitors seemed to put the home 
side out of sight.

A goal by Sam Nicholson briefly revived the contest for Hearts before Michael 
Gardyne sealed three valuable points forKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>.
 