
Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> had 
milk on the mind.

Ever mindful of retail politics, the newly minted treasurer took a liberal 
approach to relevance when asked about topics as diverse as banks increasing 
interest rates, possible plans for a new levy to fund the second Sydney 
airport, and the need to foster economic confidence.

Morrison seized on every opportunity to deploy the dairy prop he 
enthusiastically brandished when he fronted the media after a tour of the a2 
Milk Company in western Sydney on Friday. Not since Tony Abbott held up the 
grocery code of conductas a safeguard against Greek-style economic chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/07/for-tony-abbott-financial-stability-starts-in-the-fruit-and-veg-aisle>
 had a politician shown such a dogged determination to stay on message.

This milk going to China means growth and jobs for our economy
Scott Morrison 
Ostensibly, Morrison was at the plant to spruik the opportunities available to 
dairy exporters under the China-Australia free trade agreement. This would be 
the agreement that had been at the centre of an intense political dispute until 
Wednesday, when Labor and the Coalitionagreed to firm up requirements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/labor-and-coalition-reach-agreement-on-china-australia-free-trade-deal>
 for Australians to be offered the first job opportunities for major 
development project work.

“It’s tremendously exciting to be here,” Morrison declared, “because this milk 
is going intoChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> at an increasing 
rate as the tariff walls come down, which we’ve been able to negotiate, and 
that is simply going to mean more jobs, not just here in Campbelltown in 
south-western Sydney ... it means jobs well beyond here.”

Morrison wasn’t done yet. “This bottle of milk, one litre, going up into China 
and the technology that sits behind it, the technology that sits behind what 
I’ve described inside as smart milk, clever milk, is what is creating the 
difference, the price premium that they can achieve in China,” he gushed.

For Tony Abbott, financial stability starts in the fruit and veg aisle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/07/for-tony-abbott-financial-stability-starts-in-the-fruit-and-veg-aisle>
The treasurer seemed confident the legislation to implement the trade deal 
would clear the parliamentary hurdles in Canberra soon. Problem solved.

So the focus soon shifted to other issues of the day, including a Daily 
Telegraph report 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/badgerys-creek-government-considering-a-kingsford-smith-tax-to-fund-construction/story-fni0cx12-1227579208404>
 that the government was considering a $5 levy per passenger on each domestic 
flight in and out of Kingsford Smith airport to fund construction of the second 
Sydney airport. The impost could rise to $10 for international flights. Basic 
retail politics.

Morrison batted away the tax query, alluding to “very premature” talks with 
the airport corporation, before making a deft segue. “This milk is going to fly 
out of western Sydney airport when it’s operational,” he predicted.

What about his reaction to the National Australia Bank becoming the latest 
home loan provider toincrease interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/23/nab-becomes-third-of-big-four-banks-to-raise-standard-variable-home-loan-rate>
? Morrison said banks would make commercial decisions in response to the 
government-endorsednew capital rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/20/turnbulls-financial-system-changes-how-they-affect-you>
 “and at the end of the day customers can choose where they want to bank and 
shop and buy their milk”.

Finally, Morrison had a message for voters about general economic conditions. 
There may well be international volatility, but people could have confidence in 
the government’s ability to steer the country through any such challenges. 
“This milk going to China means growth and jobs for our economy,” he added.

Growth, jobs and milk.
 