
Matilda
 Illustration: Quentin Blake 
At 14, I was technically too old for this book when it came out in 1988, but I 
still swallowed it whole. I loved the set pieces (Miss Trunchbull 
hammer-throwing children by their plaits through windows) and Matilda’s 
thrilling combination of intelligence, coolness under pressure and flair for 
the dramatic. So much power concentrated in one tiny mind.

It was the last full-length children’s book Dahl wrote and he seems to have 
given himself permission to put a little bit more heart in it than he had done 
in anything since The BFG – and for that alone it has mine.

The Enormous Crocodile

The enormous crocodile has but one thought on its mind: to eat as many 
children as he can via the adoption of various, not-quite-impenetrable 
disguises. One for the very youngest readers, and I can say no more without 
creating infant spoilers, a low to which I will not stoop.

Fantastic Mr Fox

When kids are a very little bit older, they can move on to this immensely 
satisfying story of Boggis, Bunce, Bean, a host of fat chickens and a display 
of reynardian trickery as old as time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa927c556783262971d5c3dd50c685a8739bcc5ac%2F0_123_2282_3266%2F2282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scrumdiddlyumptious!%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scrumdiddlyumptious%21%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa927c556783262971d5c3dd50c685a8739bcc5ac%2F0_123_2282_3266%2F2282.jpg>
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory

Born of Dahl’s famous and enduring love of chocolate, this is an unfairytale 
for our times. Its elemental simplicity – a poor but honest hero and four 
ambulant essences of the greatest juvenile vices who are justly rewarded and 
punished during their chocolate factory odyssey – made it a bestseller from the 
moment it was published, over 50 years ago.

 The BFG’s “scrumdiddlyumptious” may just have made it into the OED, but a 
Golden Ticket has long been a byword for any access-all-areas pass, while Willy 
Wonka is shorthand for any mercurial, mesmeric figure or creator of some barely 
believable breakthrough.

Charlie is many children’s first introduction to Dahl. He takes you by the 
hand and leads you – as firmly as Willy Wonka does Charlie – into an edifice of 
delights.

What do Roald Dahl and his stories mean to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/13/what-do-roald-dahl-and-his-stories-mean-to-you>
Danny, the Champion of the World

Often overlooked, perhaps because it is the book set most firmly in the real 
world with less explosively Dahlesque moments. The plot to poach the local 
landowner’s pheasants is pleasingly intricate and painstakingly worked out, but 
without magic potions, bottom burps or anyone being sent for slicing in the 
fudge room. Still, this is a lovely book about the relationship between a boy 
and his father – and about how really, really stupid pheasants are.

James and the Giant Peach

Dahl’s first book for children. He had already made a name as a writer of 
macabre short stories for adults but his astute agent Sheila St Lawrence felt 
there was something shifting around in there for children and kept encouraging 
him to find it. She was right. James’s parents are eaten by an escaped 
rhinoceros (“in full daylight, mind you, and on a crowded street”) on the 
second page and we’re away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caad617c14b05e2f54f1b35adae7331f5b12670%2F320_396_7871_4724%2F7871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scrumdiddlyumptious!%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scrumdiddlyumptious%21%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caad617c14b05e2f54f1b35adae7331f5b12670%2F320_396_7871_4724%2F7871.jpg>
 Another edifice of delights … Dahl outside the shed where he wrote. 
Photograph: Ian Cook/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
The Witches

A favourite with Dahl’s critics because it offers the most fertile ground in 
which to plant the charges of misogyny that periodically came his way. (We’ll 
argue about their legitimacy some non-centenary celebrating day. For what it’s 
worth, I think of him as an alpha-male misanthrope and love him for it.)

This is a favourite with children because it’s the perfect story of right in 
the form of a hero (turned into a mouse by bald, blue-spittled witches) and his 
beloved grandmother winning out over might. It also contains the quintessential 
Dahl happy ending. The hero realises that as a mouse he has a much shorter 
lifespan than he would as a boy and thus his grandmother and he are likely to 
die together. An altogether bracing read.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba872a860d5e2d12946c814e4b1cc2609bc185f%2F0_0_1901_2560%2F1901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scrumdiddlyumptious!%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scrumdiddlyumptious%21%20My%20Roald%20Dahl%20top%2010&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fscrumdiddlyumptious-my-roald-dahl-top-10%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba872a860d5e2d12946c814e4b1cc2609bc185f%2F0_0_1901_2560%2F1901.jpg>
The BFG

It’s fast, funny and furiously charming. If Willy Wonka was Dahl’s younger, 
harder secret self, the BFG is his older, more avuncular avatar. He is a maker 
of dreams who spirits the heroine Sophie (named after his granddaughter - the 
book is dedicated to her, too) away when she spies him at his nightly work and 
together they save the world’s children from “human bean”-eating giants.

When Quentin Blake came to illustrate the book, he couldn’t work out what the 
BFG should wear on his feet. He consulted Dahl. Through the post a few days 
later came one of Dahl’s own huge, battered Norwegian leather sandals. And 
those are what the BFG wears.

The Twits

Like all writers, Dahl had an ideas notebook. One of the scribbled lines in it 
ran: “Beer stealing. An old boy dropped his glass eye into the tankard. He then 
saw it looking up at him.”

From such tiny acorns do fabulously diseased oak trees grow. This time, it 
gave us the glorious grotesquerie that is The Twits. I remember vividly the 
story being read to us in primary school. The spaghetti worms! The Hugtight 
glue on the Big Dead Tree! And – consequently – bird pie every week and one 
quartet of boys slipping out of their arbour-adhering trousers and running away 
“with their naked bottoms winking at the sun”! The penny-sized pieces of wood 
being added to Mrs Twit’s walking stick to make her think she’d got the shrinks!

You think I had to look any of this up to refresh my memory? You underestimate 
the power of Dahl. The glass eye, of course, is Mrs Twit’s and turns up at the 
bottom of her unbeloved husband’s beer mug. Nice.

It’s a pure shot of happiness/disgust for younger readers who don’t yet feel 
the need for a little light and shade in their stories - and indeed for older 
readers who occasionally feel life and literature is altogether too full of 
grey areas and would like to drill back down to basics.

The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar

A collection of short stories for what would now be called a YA audience, and 
a fine bridge between Dahl’s children’s books and his adult work. The Swan 
still hurts my heart, The Mildenhall Treasure still has me writhing in 
exquisite agony, and The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar itself still has me 
sighing in complete satisfaction.

It also contains Dahl’s first ever published story, about crashlanding in 
Libya during the war, and an essay – Lucky Break - about how he came to write 
it. CS Forester (Dahl was moving in quite glamorous circles during and after 
the war) had been commissioned to write a story for the Saturday Evening Post 
about Dahl’s experience and Dahl offered to send him some notes, which turned 
out to be publishable in their own right. A lucky break for us all.

 * Buy Lucy Mangan’s book Inside Charlie’s Chocolate Factory 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inside-charlie-s-chocolate-factory.html> at 
the Guardian Bookshop.  