
Newly-promoted Scunthorpe responded excellently to their opening-day drubbing 
at Cardiff with a 3-2 win overDerby at Glanford Park. The 4-0 defeat in Wales 
last week might have prompted anxieties that Nigel Adkins's team were destined 
to repeat their travails in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> two years ago, when they 
were relegated after only a season. But the way they rallied to see off Nigel 
Clough's fancied Derby side will have generated optimism that they can survive 
this time.

Key to their success, as it was for much of last season, was the forward 
pairing of Gary Hooper and Paul Hayes. Hooper scored twice, either side of Paul 
Green's first equaliser. Kris Commons's penalty restored parity before Martyn 
Woolford scored the winner after 81 minutes.

Adkins admitted that his strikers' performance could make it hard to keep them 
while the transfer window is open. "I must admit, you look at Hayes and Hooper 
there today, there is bound to be people banging on the door after that 
performance," he said.

Clough bemoaned his side's naivety, saying: "We've come back from 1-0 down and 
2-1 down, then we should be protecting the point that we've got."

Middlesbrough ended a winless away run stretching back nine months with an 
impressive 3-0 win atSwansea, but their manager Gareth Southgate believes they 
can improve on their performance at the Liberty Stadium.

Boro cruised to victory after Adam Johnson's first-half goal was added to by 
Marvin Emnes and Tuncay after the break. Southgate said: "It's only one win, 
but we have to be more ruthless and take our chances. It appeared easy, but we 
weren't comfortable until the third goal.

Another relegated side, West Bromwich Albion, also recorded their first league 
win of the season, atNottingham Forest, though they needed a flukish own goal 
to do so.

The promotion favourites took the points after Luke Moore mis-timed his header 
and the ball went beyond him, striking Wes Morgan on the leg and rolling beyond 
the goalkeeper Lee Camp.

West Brom were on the back foot for most of the game, with Dele Adebola having 
a goal disallowed and Robert Earnshaw missing a 75th-minute penalty.

Ipswich are still without a win, after their 0-0 draw at home to Leicester, 
though their manager Roy Keane was upbeat. "The positives are that we got a 
point and kept a clean sheet," he said. "The players hung in there when they 
weren't quite at the races."

Ched Evans scored on his home league debut as Sheffield United comfortably beat
Watford 2-0. Evans, a Â£3m summer signing from Manchester City, marked his first 
full appearance for the Blades with a neat second-half finish after Jamie Ward 
had put United ahead.

Coventry made it two league wins out of two when goals from Leon Best, with a 
thunderous free-kick, and Clinton Morrison secured a 2-0 win atBarnsley.

In League One Norwich, chastened by the hammering by Colchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> last week that prompted the 
dismissal of Bryan Gunn as manager, are still looking for their first league 
win after they could manage only a 1-1 draw atExeter. Jens Berthel Askou headed 
Norwich in front seven minutes into the second half, but Richard Logan 
equalised within n ine minutes.

Southampton are struggling to make inroads into the 10-point deduction they 
incurred for going into administration at the end of last season. Their 3-1 
defeat atHuddersfield offered another reminder of the challenge ahead. Rickie 
Lambert, their new signing from Bristol Rovers, scored on his debut, equalising 
after Jordan Rhodes had knocked in the rebound from his own penalty to open the 
scoring. Rhodes restored the home team's lead after 68 minutes, though, and 
Antony Kay added a third late on.

Colchester are top after a 2-1 win over Yeovil, goals from David Fox and 
Ashley Vincent in the first 20 minutes proving decisive.

Notts County's magnificent start to their League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> campaign continued 
with a second consecutive 4-0 win, atMacclesfield, while Burton Albion enjoyed 
an emphatic first ever Football League victory, beatingMorecambe 5-2.
 