
We have beachcombed this tideline on scores of summer days but have only gone 
home with painted top shells (Calliostoma zyzyphinum) on a handful of occasions.

Of all the shells washed ashore here, this is the most desirable: a pointed 
yellow cone decorated with purple streaks. Stand it on its tip and it resembles 
a 1in tall replica of an old-fashioned spinning top.

The mystery is that on rare occasions when weâ€™ve found one it has always been 
on the same narrow stretch of beach, in the middle of the broad sweep of the 
sandy bay. This mollusc prefers to live on rocky substrates well below the low 
water mark. Somewhere, beyond the waves that lapped at our feet this morning, 
there must be weed-covered ledges where this gastropod grazes.

Today, my wife found one in the predicted spot, washed ashore by the vagaries 
of currents that swirl where the river Coquet meets the sea.

The mollusc shell was half buried in sand, a badly damaged specimen with the 
outer covering of the shell partially worn away, revealing an iridescent pink 
and blue mother-of-pearl layer below.

Disappointing, until we turned the shell over. By a remarkable accident of 
natural lapidary; abrasion by wave-agitated sand had ground one side of the 
shell away to reveal its hidden internal structure. Inside that simple conical 
outline lay a helter-skelter spiral chamber rising on three levels around the 
central pillar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsea-shell-painted-top-masterpiece-animal-architecture-beach-northumberland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc452197f262c492ede610e8ff34415ed142555d2%2F0_0_1569_1386%2F1569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea%20shell%2C%20a%20masterpiece%20of%20animal%20architecture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsea-shell-painted-top-masterpiece-animal-architecture-beach-northumberland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea%20shell%2C%20a%20masterpiece%20of%20animal%20architecture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsea-shell-painted-top-masterpiece-animal-architecture-beach-northumberland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc452197f262c492ede610e8ff34415ed142555d2%2F0_0_1569_1386%2F1569.jpg>
 The worn tip of the painted top shell reveals a mother-of-pearl layer. 
Photograph: Phil Gates 
The wonder is that this geometrical masterpiece of animal architecture was 
produced from a narrow mantle of calcium-secreting cells embedded in the soft 
body of a snail.

Its composite construction confers enormous strength. The marine gastropod] 
shell has several layers: an inner zone of interlocking prismatic calcite 
crystals in a matrix of proteins, a nacreous layer of aragonite plates that 
produce those rainbow colours when sunlight strikes their worn surface, and, 
finally, the outer pigmented, chalky coating that camouflages the animal amid 
swaying purple seaweeds.


Now, after the joy of finding this beautiful object delivered to us by the 
waves, came the struggle to imagine the natural algorithm that programmed the 
formation of such a complex structure. I understood why nature inspires 
mathematicians. What must that equation look like?

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 