
At the far north-eastern corner of the British mainland the land rises up from 
the sea 
<http://www.undiscoveredscotland.co.uk/johnogroats/duncansbyhead/index.html> 
like cake from a tin: edges are clean and sharp, layers of sediment cut through 
the red sandstone like jam.

The sun is out, the air is still, and the residents are busy making their 
preparations for winter in this rare break in the weather.

Starlings reel through the air in their murmurations; like fish in a shoal, 
they shape and reform 
<http://www.mnn.com/earth-matters/animals/stories/the-incredible-science-behind-starling-murmurations>
, darting one way then the next in tight formation. They are lately arrived 
from Russia, fleeing the deep freeze. Three dainty blackbirds hop around us – 
revealed too as tourists by their modest black beaks.

Lost to the ferocious ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/29/shetland-ocean-sea-cave-raven-fulmar-skua>
Even now, at noon, the sun sits low in the sky and casts long shadows. Patches 
that are never touched by light have grown a thick fur ofhoar frost 
<http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/wxfacts/Hoar-Frost.htm>. Tiny fingers 
of ice crowd for space upon every surface behind fenceposts and hummocks in the 
earth. Spiders’ gossamer, threaded through the long grass, glints in the golden 
light.

As we round the headland the Duncansby Stacks 
<https://foursquare.com/v/stacks-of-duncansby-head/4e30152552b111a1e389bce5?openPhotoId=4fd0ba47e4b0714372771c4f>
 swing into view. They are two dragon’s fangs, 200ft of rock whittled to cruel 
points, and colonised byfulmars 
<http://www.orkney.com/about/nature/birds/fulmars> that chunter and grouse, 
filling the air with the swearing of seabirds.

And then a haunting, melancholy sound rises from over the edge. A siren song. 
But who is singing it? As the wind rises the timbre alters, and I struggle to 
place it. It sounds like the howling of wolves, the wailing of infants. Or 
dissonant chords, played on a pipe organ, the mouths of bottles, blown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fseals-sing-siren-song-beyond-lands-edge-scotland-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18c3e2a37e9b83245a06ec204198871b5165e603%2F0_331_4960_2975%2F4960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seals%20sing%20a%20siren%20song%20beyond%20the%20land's%20edge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fseals-sing-siren-song-beyond-lands-edge-scotland-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seals%20sing%20a%20siren%20song%20beyond%20the%20land%27s%20edge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fseals-sing-siren-song-beyond-lands-edge-scotland-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18c3e2a37e9b83245a06ec204198871b5165e603%2F0_331_4960_2975%2F4960.jpg>
 A grey seal at Duncansby Head. Photograph: FLPA/Andrew Mason/Getty 
I hop the wire and crawl to the cliff edge to find the shingle strand beneath 
packed with mottled bodies –grey seals <http://www.seals-world.com/gray-seal/>. 
They have emerged from the sea and beached themselves to breed.

Already a few white pups can be seen, liquid-eyed and fluffy and apparently 
helpless. Their mothers scooch in ungainly fashion between offspring and wave. 
Further out, the glossy heads of their relatives rise and dive, smooth humps 
sliding between breakers.

I feel eyes fix on me, and retreat from their glare. Best leave them to it. 
The seals like their privacy.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 