
The Church of England is considering candidates for its third most senior 
position, the bishop ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, amid 
speculation that a woman may be appointed.

Richard Chartres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/16/richard-chartres-bishop-lady-thatcher>
, who has held the post since 1996, is obliged to retire this year when he 
turns 70. He will step down at the end of February.


The C of E’s Crown Nominations Commission (CNC) will make a recommendation 
later this year to the prime minister, Theresa May. She in turn will advise the 
Queen, who formally nominates the new bishop. Recent custom has been that the 
prime minister rubber-stamps the first choice of the CNC.


In the past two years, after divisive debate within the C of E, 10 women have 
been consecrated as bishops. However, only two –Rachel Treweek of Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/rachel-treweek-becomes-bishop-of-gloucester-dont-feel-like-a-pioneer>
 andChristine Hardman of Newcastle 
<http://www.newcastle.anglican.org/people-and-places/bishop-christine-hardman.aspx>
 – are senior (diocesan) bishops appointed to seats in the House of Lords.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb71acf40e72ca94ef40e03ecbbfb35e7c40cc7a7%2F0_37_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Search%20for%20next%20bishop%20of%20London%20raises%20prospect%20of%20female%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Search%20for%20next%20bishop%20of%20London%20raises%20prospect%20of%20female%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb71acf40e72ca94ef40e03ecbbfb35e7c40cc7a7%2F0_37_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
 Rachel Treweek, the bishop of Gloucester. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
The bishop of London, who comes after the archbishop of Canterbury and the 
archbishop of York in the C of E hierarchy, has a seat in the Lords by right. 
The post holder also acts as dean of Chapel Royal, essentially chaplain to the 
royal family.

Since being appointed, Chartres has declined to ordain women, in a concession 
to traditionalists in his deeply divided diocese. He has also abstained from 
ordaining men in order not to be accused of discrimination. Buthe has stated 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/breakfast_with_frost/2437895.stm> that 
he personally is “very much pro women priests”.


His immediate predecessors, David Hope and Graham Leonard, were both opponents 
of female priests. The diocese of London, which covers the city north of the 
Thames, has strong factions for and against the ordination of women.

“Many people are now looking for a bishop who, if not a woman, at least would 
be comfortable ordaining women. That would be a positive signal for the church 
to send out,” said a church source.

Among the possible female candidates is Rose Hudson-Wilkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/27/commons-chaplain-warns-mps>, 
currently chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons and chaplain to the 
Queen. Hudson-Wilkin, who has been tipped as a future bishop for several years, 
is also one of the most senior black clergy in the church.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a7a008628418bf0ebb591b9d8c3803bf08ed5b0%2F0_1261_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Search%20for%20next%20bishop%20of%20London%20raises%20prospect%20of%20female%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Search%20for%20next%20bishop%20of%20London%20raises%20prospect%20of%20female%20appointment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchurch-of-england-next-bishop-of-london-prospect-of-female-appointment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a7a008628418bf0ebb591b9d8c3803bf08ed5b0%2F0_1261_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
 Rose Hudson-Wilkin, chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons and 
chaplain to the Queen. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
“She is head and shoulders above most other candidates, absolutely brilliant, 
is immersed in London and can do all the ceremonial state stuff that comes with 
the job,” said one supporter.


Treweek, who was consecrated bishop of Gloucester in July 2015, is another 
strong candidate. She hascriticised the church’s lack of diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/24/bishop-rachel-treweek-gods-not-a-he-or-a-she>
 andhighlighted the issue of body image among children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/bishop-gloucester-rachel-treweek-campaign-children-body-image>
 since taking up her post, saying the church needs to engage with people’s 
everyday lives.


Also thought to be in the frame are Vivienne Faull, the highly respected dean 
of York also long tipped to be a bishop, and Jo Wells, bishop of Dorking and 
former chaplain toJustin Welby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/justin-welby>, 
the archbishop of Canterbury.


Hardman is thought to be an unlikely candidate, as she would only be able to 
serve for just over four years before reaching the compulsory retirement age.


'I don't feel like a pioneer!': Rachel Treweek becomes bishop of Gloucester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/rachel-treweek-becomes-bishop-of-gloucester-dont-feel-like-a-pioneer>
Another consideration for the CNC is which wing of the church the next bishop 
of London would represent. Recent incumbents have come from an Anglo-Catholic 
background, but the CNC may choose an evangelical to take over from Chartres.


The past 20 years, since Chartres’s appointment, have seen the extraordinary 
rise of Holy Trinity Brompton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/nov/10/justin-welby-archbishop-canterbury-holy-trinity-brompton>
, the west London evangelical church that pioneered the Alpha course. HTB, as 
it is known within the C of E, has become enormously influential, with strong 
links to senior figures in the church establishment, including Welby. Alpha 
courses are now run across the UK and around the world.

Graham Tomlin, the bishop of Kensington and president of St Mellitus College, 
which trains ordinands in the HTB missional approach, could be a contender from 
the evangelical wing.


The CNC consists of 14 voting members: Welby; the archbishop of York, John 
Sentamu <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/john-sentamu>; three elected clergy 
members of the synod; three elected lay members of the synod; and six elected 
members of the diocese in which there is a vacancy. Each has an equal vote.


After deliberations, the CNC forwards two names to the prime minister in order 
of preference. The prime minister is entitled to ask for additional names.

Church of England appoints first black bishop in 20 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/church-of-england-appoints-first-black-bishop-20-years-woyin-karowei-dorgu>
The last time the CNC’s preference was not accepted was in 1987, when Margaret 
Thatcher rejected the recommendation 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/1441924/The-Rt-Rev-Jim-Thompson.html>
 of the liberal Jim Thompson as bishop of Birmingham.


However, May, a vicar’s daughter and regular churchgoer, is expected to pass 
on the church’s top recommendation to the Queen.


Chartres led Thatcher’s funeral service, was executor of the will of Diana, 
Princess of Wales, confirmed Prince William and later delivered the sermon at 
the prince’s wedding to Kate Middleton. Welby is the third archbishop of 
Canterbury in the time Chartres has held the office of bishop of London.

 * This article was amended on 6 January 2017. An earlier version said the 
Crown Nominations Commission would make a recommendation to the prime minister 
“in the coming weeks”.
 