
British seaweeds are among our most underrated resources and hugely important 
for the ecology of the seas, but they get nothing like the recognition that, 
say, a wild meadow or ancient woodland gets.

Seaweed biofuels: a green alternative that might just save the planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/01/seaweed-biofuel-alternative-energy-kelp-scotland>
There are more than 700 species of seaweed <http://www.seaweed.ie/> growing in 
British waters and some have long been harvested for food. Probably the best 
known is the seaweedUlva <http://www.seaweed.ie/algae/ulva.php> that is made 
into laverbread. British seaweeds are still harvested in Scotland, Wales and 
Cornwall, and the potential for cultivating seaweed in British waters is vast.

Even though seaweeds for food fell out of fashion until recently they are now 
enjoying a renaissance in restaurants and supermarkets, though many of these 
are imports.

Apart from food, the demand for seaweed – for biofuels, pharmaceuticals, 
toothpaste, fertiliser and industrial gels – is booming. The industry is worth 
more than £5bn worldwide. There is interest in finding new drugs from seaweed. 
In the food industryalginates <http://www.seaweed.ie/uses_general/alginates.php>
 are used in ice cream, they also improve the foaming head on beer and allow 
fast setting in puddings. They are used too in cosmetics, medicines, paints, 
and lots more besides.

Sea spaghetti in the supermarket: the unstoppable rise of seaweed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/20/seaweed-supermarket-rise-guide-types>
There is particular interest in seaweed farming for biogas and that could 
become a significant renewable energy for the west coast ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> in particular. Seaweed would be 
harvested and broken down in digesters to release methane gas for heating and 
electricity – all without using fresh water, chemical fertilisers or valuable 
farmland.

The cultivation of seaweed fights climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change>, soaking up carbon 
dioxide and locking carbon away. And for added benefit, seaweed grows far 
faster than land plants, making it even more efficient at getting rid of carbon 
dioxide.
 