
In 2015 I left the UK to provide humanitarian medical care to a refugee camp 
stuck in the midst of a civil war. The camp’s population quadrupled in the 
space of four months while I was there and the onset of the rainy season led to 
a demand for care that exceeded all expectations.

Related: Secret aid worker: what should doctors do when we witness human 
rights abuses? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/12/secret-aid-worker-what-should-doctors-do-when-we-witness-human-rights-abuses>

 Hundreds queued to the door of the hospital with an official capacity of 90. 
Patients shared mattresses and sat in corridors. Where else could they go? They 
were sick and needed treatment and sending them home without medical care would 
often have been a death sentence – there were no other hospitals within 
hundreds of miles.

 As the death toll rose in our camp, an emergency was declared. Last week the 
British Red Cross declared that the NHS is facing a “humanitarian crisis” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
 too. Dr Mark Holland, president of the Society for Acute Medicine, admitted 
that this was strong wording but“not a million miles away from the truth” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-38541462>. We may not have thousands of 
people suffering on shared mattresses, but we do have thousands of our sick and 
our elderly and our children needlessly suffering in corridors around the 
country.

 We have intensive care units that have to ship patients to distant hospitals 
in search of capacity. One month agowe ran out of intensive care beds for 
children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/03/children-moved-intensive-care-units-run-out-of-beds>
 throughout Leicester and the whole of London.

 It may not be a civil war, epidemic or earthquake causing this crisis, but a 
hurricane of political ineptitude, denial and poor funding. There is an 
over-reliance on the compassion,blood, sweat and tears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
of NHS staff around the country. Staff that are already working 24/7, despite 
the suggestions we need a seven day NHS.

The symptoms are already visible, NHS workers are stretched. In a humanitarian 
crisis, people work to breaking point, burning themselves out in their 
endeavour to save people, often in the knowledge that they will go home to 
recuperate and resume their “normal” job. In the UK,NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff don’t have that luxury. This is 
their life and they are at breaking point.

 The mantra we repeat to drivers that “tiredness kills” seems to be easily 
forgotten. Mistakes will happen. In Worcestershire, two poor souls died waiting 
for beds in a corridor, forgotten and lost amid the tsunami of other people 
waiting to be admitted.

 I challenge any nurse or doctor to maintain that in the current environment 
the same could not happen in their own A&E department. From our 
state-of-the-art trauma centres to our small district general hospitals, we are 
overwhelmed. Suggestions by the health secretary that30% of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/10/more-than-2m-people-wait-over-four-hours-in-a-and-e-nhs-figures-show>
 attending A&E do not need to be seen in A&E does not solve the fact that18,000 
people in one week required A&E 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/remember-jeremy-hunt-took-children-9599249>
and waited over four hours to be admitted to a ward.

Related: Secret aid worker: Surely NGOs should embrace trade unions, not block 
them? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/22/secret-aid-worker-surely-ngos-should-embrace-trade-unions-not-block-them>

 When the death toll in our refugee camp exploded, my organisation responded 
by providing more resources and staff. The levels of death and suffering began 
to drop. We know the costs of not responding quickly to a medical crisis. In 
2014 the initial alarms raised by health professionals in response to the 
number of reported cases of Ebola in west Africa went largely ignored. They 
were further downplayed for months. This delay ultimately led to the 
unwarranted death of thousands of people and a panic on a global scale.

 The problems faced by the NHS are complex and there is no easy solution, but 
perhaps the British Red Cross’s recent declaration is not wholly inappropriate. 
A humanitarian crisis is defined as a singular event, or a series of events 
that are threatening in terms of the health, safety or wellbeing of a 
community. This isn’t some faraway country seeing a civil war, epidemic or 
flood. But a slow-burning, manmade disaster of our own governing. The death 
toll I pray will not go in the thousands, but thousands are already suffering.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 