
After finishing my medical training as a doctor, I was excited to start 
working for a healthcare NGO in an African country that was making a lot of 
progress, despite only recently coming out of a civil war. However, while I was 
proud of the healthcare advancements during my stay, I came to struggle with 
the government’s egregious human rights abuses, and the sense that in some ways 
by simply being there I was complicit.

Secret aid worker: development work broke a piece of me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/04/secret-aid-worker-development-work-broke-a-piece-of-me>
The government in my host country has received a lot of international support, 
partially because of its success in the healthcare arena. Yet, I personally 
witnessed several instances of manipulating health statistics, from maternal 
and infant deaths going unreported in my own hospital (so as not to hurt the 
country’s mortality rates data) right up to the health ministry bragging to 
international papers that their new national health insurance scheme covered 
almost twice as many people as it actually did. Looking back, I wondered what 
my obligation was to report the falsified data I came across. By not reporting 
each incident was I protecting the current government? But at the same time, 
when I invited policymakers to investigate the apparent discrepancies when they 
visited our hospital, they weren’t interested.





 As a doctor, I also struggled with the notion that the international 
community sat on their hands while the government in my host country supported 
paramilitary groups in a neighbouring country, who had already been linked to 
crimes against humanity. The government was given a pass, in part at least, 
because of the drastic improvements in healthcare since the end of the civil 
war. I lay awake each night, contemplating if we saved a few dozen lives 
through an innovative new programme but the militias killed a few thousand, was 
it a net loss or net gain for me to work here?

My host country is certainly not unique in attracting expatriate doctors while 
committing human rights violations. It’s not uncommon for medical NGOs to deal 
with corrupt and authoritarian regimes the world over, working in the countries 
but rarely partnering with those governments. However, the mantra of global 
health for the last 20 years has been to work with national governments to 
support their initiatives and build the local infrastructure to enhance 
sustainability – even if that means working with partners we disagree with 
politically on important issues, or worse, governments that violate human 
rights.


Secret aid worker: We are just cleaning up the mess politicians make
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/08/secret-aid-worker-we-are-just-cleaning-up-the-mess-politicians-make>
Doctors in global health must therefore walk the tightrope of bearing witness 
to human rights abuses to advocate for our patients, but must also not be so 
outspoken that the relationship with their host government sours, possibly 
preventing them from providing care for the most vulnerable. Doctors without 
Borders, for example, has previously been both criticised for not doing enough 
to stop the genocides inBosnia 
<http://www.msf.org/article/srebrenica-five-years> and Rwanda 
<http://speakingout.msf.org/en/the-violence-of-the-new-rwandan-regime> but then 
laterkicked out of Darfur in Sudan 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/sudan/4940315/Sudan-expels-Oxfam-and-Mdecins-Sans-Frontires-from-Darfur-over-war-crimes-threat-to-Omar-al-Bashir.html>
 for speaking out too strongly against government-sponsored violence. Yet 
colleagues with whom I discussed my dilemma frequently said “Don’t let perfect 
be the enemy of good”.


However, as doctors or humanitarians, if we do not utilise the pulpit given to 
us by society, we could be judged by history as collaborators, complicit in the 
crimes committed by an authoritarian regime.

The discussion of the physician’s role in politics is nothing new, and if we 
follow Dr Rudolf Virchow, the father of social medicine, who suggested politics 
is a larger form of social medicine, then physicians have the responsibility to 
work towards good governance and a duty to publicly bear witness to governments 
gone awry.


The true cynic might argue that some authoritarian regimes use the political 
cover provided by humanitarians to maintain favoured status in the halls of 
power. Even worse would be the suggestion that NGOs allow themselves to be used 
as tools of propaganda in order to maintain favoured status in that country.


Interestingly, when the UN condemned my host country’s most recent 
humanitarian abuses, the US government didn’t follow suit for another nine 
months, suggesting the large presence of American NGOs, including those 
connected to a former US president, staved off the public criticism.

Secret aid worker: 'Has anyone worked out if celebrities are worth the effort?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/30/secret-aid-worker-celebrities-angelina-jolie>
At the end of the day, I couldn’t justify working with a government that 
wilfully flaunted human rights without feeling like an accomplice. I was fed up 
of the government trying to discredit me when I did raise uncomfortable 
questions. I packed my bags and moved to a country with serially-weak and 
allegedly corrupt governments, presenting a new set of challenges. Although I 
don’t agree with all the politics, I’m content to work with the country’s 
current government towards an improved public health system. I also recognise 
that when their next election comes, I may have to start over with the next 
administration, but that is the price that you pay for working in a democracy.







Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here’sinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 