
Many newspapers have carried fulminating editorials and opinion columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/10/section-40-david-camerons-ticking-time-bomb-under-the-press>
 recently about section 40, and how it spells the end of press freedom in this 
country. Do readers believe this stuff? Do people even read it? Is press 
regulation too much of a yawn?

Here's what section 40 would do to the British press – and it's not good | 
David Pegg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/section-40-british-press-regulation-investigative-journalism>
I don’t know the answers to those questions, but I do believe that one 
newspaper should perhaps publish the other side of the argument. Or what I 
would humbly call the facts. And I’m very grateful to the Guardian for giving 
me the space.

So here they are, in the clearest English I can muster, and in plain vanilla 
with no jokes and (I hope) minimal or no ranting.

At his inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, Lord 
Justice Leveson found he could apply the same answer to two of the most 
important issues he identified. In other words, he killed two birds with one 
stone.

Issue one was that people without substantial means who are libelled or have 
their privacy illegally invaded by newspapers find it impossibly expensive to 
launch civil actions against those papers. They are effectively deprived of 
access to justice. (A typical court fee is £10,000 up front, even before you 
add in lawyers’ fees.)

Section 40 - David Cameron's ticking time-bomb under the press
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/10/section-40-david-camerons-ticking-time-bomb-under-the-press>
Issue two is that over the past 60 years there have been several public 
inquiries and commissions into press misconduct. On each occasion, it was 
clearly demonstrated that the press had failed to enforce even its own codes of 
ethical practice. Recommendations were made for improvements, or for a new 
regulator that was independent both of press control and government influence.

On every occasion, the corporate mass of the commercial press, owned by a 
handful of wealthy men, refused to comply. Instead they made cosmetic changes, 
falsely claiming that their new arrangements were a vast improvement, and then 
carried on exactly as before.

This is what those same papers have done now – rebranding the discredited PCC 
as “Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>” – which is largely the same 
people working to the same model.

Just as on every previous occasion, the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> stopped short of 
recommending that papers should be compelled by law to join a “good” new 
regulator. Instead, it gave the press a final chance to put its own house in 
order.

But how to persuade newspapers to do something they have never done before: to 
create a fair, effective and independent new regulator? What incentives could 
be offered?

The solution Leveson came up with to deal with both these issues was a new 
regulator, which could be set up by the press themselves, which would offer a 
cheap arbitration service to settle legal claims.

This is the part that is seldom or never mentioned when newspapers talk about 
section 40. Through this arbitration service a person could have their case 
against a newspaper dealt with very quickly (in less than a day) and at very 
low cost (less than £200) without either side having to suffer the vast expense 
and stress of going to court.

If a newspaper chose not to join this “good” new regulator, and so deprived 
claimants of this low-cost system of arbitration – forcing them instead into 
the expensive courts – then that newspaper should have to pay ALL the costs of 
the court case, even if they won the case. The idea was that recalcitrant 
newspapers would be incentivised to create a “good” regulator.

But – crucially – there was a further incentive, a carrot as well as a stick. 
You will not read about this carrot in newspaper reports or editorials on 
section 40.

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> that join this new 
regulator would enjoy much greater freedom to publish important investigative 
journalism. Hitherto, if a paper had an important story about a wealthy and 
powerful person, they might reluctantly decide not to publish because the 
threat of being dragged through expensive court actions was too great. A 
wealthy oligarch would only need to win once to bust the paper.

But under the new system, our litigious oligarch would first be offered the 
new cheap arbitration system. If he took this option, the matter would be 
settled at a tiny fraction of the time and cost for the newspaper. But if he 
insisted on going to court (as is his right) he would have to pay his own costs 
even if he won. This is why investigative journalists such asNick Davies 
<http://hackinginquiry.org/declaration/> (who of course broke the phone hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking> story in the Guardian in the 
first place) are so keen on the Leveson recommendations, in full.

This solution was voted into law (as section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act) 
by big majorities in parliament in March 2013. But a law that has been enacted 
by parliament still requires the subsequent pressing of a green button by the 
secretary of state. This is known as “commencement” and is a formality in 99% 
of cases. This government, under intense lobbying from the corporate press, has 
so far not commenced the law.

And here is the gentlest of nudges to the esteemed editor of the Guardian and 
to the Scott Trust. A recentYouGov poll commissioned by Hacked Off  
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/hacked-off-yougov-poll-most-favour-tougher-regulation-40-per-cent-say-press-behaviour-worse-since-leveson/>
found that 93% of Guardian readers with an opinion on the matter (which is, of 
course, most) agree with the Leveson system or something stronger. That seems 
like a mandate to me.

In the face of all this, and in the face of an astonishing volume of dis and 
misinformation on this issue, it’s vital that people who care about the 
standards and practices of the national press make the case for full Leveson. 
For those people,here  <http://hackinginquiry.org/declaration/> is something to 
click.
 