
Surely David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will 
be remembered as one of the most ham-fisted prime ministers in British history.

For party political (ie, personal) reasons he staged the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> referendum. After making a hash of the 
remain campaign, he watched more than half the population defy him by opting 
for Brexit. Then, with the nation divided, he walked away.

Way before that - and, again, for personal reasons - he set in train a process 
about the regulation of Britain’s press that has also created deep and lasting 
divisions.

When the News of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> 
phone-hacking scandal broke, Cameron found himself embroiled in the 
controversy. Why? Because he had unwisely hired one of the men at the centre of 
that scandal: the paper’s former editor, Andy Coulson.

Cameron was therefore unable to take a dispassionate view of the affair and 
instituted a wide-ranging judicial inquiry into “the culture, practices and 
ethics of the British press” under Lord Justice Leveson.

Inquiries are political devices designed to delay difficult decisions. Many 
result in little more than a bit of tinkering with the status quo. But this one 
was different. Cameron had unknowingly set the stage for root-and-branch reform.

Sir Brian Leveson’s report called for a radical change to the method of press 
regulation. Suddenly, the hapless Cameron was a rabbit in the headlights, 
seemingly unable to decide what to do.

Here was a moment demanding genuine political leadership. Instead, he flunked 
it. Rather than taking charge of the crucial discussions in the aftermath of the
Leveson report <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-report> on what 
should be done, he handed the job to an aide.

He kept himself informed, of course. But the stakes were high and required the 
political clout of a prime minister. At issue, after all, was the principle of 
press freedom and the practice of press regulation.

Finding a compromise between the advocates of what we might now cast as hard 
Leveson and soft Leveson would have been difficult and, I concede, may have 
been impossible.

But there would have been a virtue in doing so in public. The discussions 
about how to preserve a long-held principle while instituting a new practice 
surely necessitated transparency. Cameron allowed them to be settled instead at 
some hole-in-the-corner meeting.

In so doing, he alienated the owners, controllers and editors of the British 
press. The chances of constructing a compromise were over. The split between 
the two sides became a chasm.*

While the overwhelming bulk of owners set up a soft Leveson form of regulation 
through the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), the hard 
Levesonians relied on politicians to pass legislation, the 2013 crime and 
courts act, that enabled a separate form of regulation.

That duly arrived with the creation of the Press Recognition Panel (PRP), the 
setting up of a separate regulator,Impress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>, and its recruitment of a bunch of 
online start-ups to regulate.

But section 40 of the act was, thankfully, not triggered. It is an essential 
element of the hard Leveson scheme to punish publishers outside the 
PRP-recognised Impress by requiring them to pay for the costs of libel and 
privacy claimants regardless of whether they win or lose.

This provision, subject to a public consultation which ends today, has aroused 
the ire of both British publishers and press freedom organisations across the 
world. It is clearly inimical to justice.

I accept that publishers have launched a propaganda campaign that may well 
misrepresent the threat to investigative journalism (because we cannot be 
certain about the effects of section 40) but you can hardly blame them for 
seeing no virtue in the section’s provisions.

Note also the antagonism towards section 40 by both non-Ipso publishers and 
organisations devoted to freedom of expression, such as Index on Censorship (
here 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/12/section-40-jeopardises-press-freedom/>
), the Committee to Protect Journalists (here 
<https://www.cpj.org/blog/2017/01/uks-section-40-press-law-would-curb-independent-in.php>
) and Reporters Without Borders (here 
<https://rsf.org/en/news/rsf-urges-uk-parliament-reject-menacing-snoopers-charter>
).


Section 40 is the ticking time-bomb left by Cameron. I cannot imagine this 
government putting it into effect (the consultation process is a blatant 
political sham), but it will remain on the statute book.

In the future, a different government could dare to throw caution to the wind. 
Thank you so much David Cameron, for all you have done.

*Arguably, there was a three-way split because some owners/editors - notably 
at the Guardian,Financial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>, Independent and Private Eye 
- maintained neutrality.
 