
Senate Democrats have launched their first major offensive against Donald 
Trump’s proposed cabinet, demanding an investigation into whetherhis nominee 
for health secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
 broke laws regarding insider trading.

Russia hacking: US intelligence chief hits back at Trump's 'disparagement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
The senators cited a Wall Street Journal report 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trumps-pick-for-health-secretary-traded-medical-stocks-while-in-house-1482451061>
 that said over the past four years the Georgia congressman Tom Price had 
traded more than $300,000 in shares in about 40 healthcare companies while 
pushing legislation in Congress that could influence the stock prices of those 
companies.

Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader, cited the Stop Trading on 
Congressional Knowledge Act 
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/2038> of 2012, which 
prohibits members of Congress and their employees from using inside information 
trading for personal benefit.

“There’s enough evidence here that cries out for an investigation,” Schumer 
told reporters on Capitol Hill. 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?421183-1/senate-democrats-call-ethics-investigation-hhs-nominee-tom-price&start=1>

“Whether the law was actually broken, whether there was quid pro quos, or 
inside information is a better way to put it, we don’t know. But there’s enough 
information here that it should be investigated before Congressman Price comes 
up for a hearing.”

Schumer added: “If there would ever be an example of the swamp that 
President-elect Trump promised to clear out, it would be congressmen [and] 
senators using the inside information they had to benefit themselves personally 
by buying stock.

We’re going to hold people accountable, and this is a glaring example of the 
need for accountability and oversight
Chuck Schumer, Senate minority leader 
“We’re an accountability Congress, we’re going to hold people accountable, and 
this is a glaring example of the need for accountability and oversight.”

Price, who has long advocated repealing Barack Obama’s signature healthcare 
law, the Affordable Care Act, is among eight choices for Trump’s administration 
whom Democratsaim to scrutinise closely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/democrats-prepare-for-confirmation-battle-over-troublesome-trump-cabinet-nominees>
. Schumer’s announcement came a day after thebattle over the future of Obamacare
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/mike-pence-repeal-obama-healthcare-law-first>
 began in earnest.

In the last Congress, the Wall Street Journal reported, Price sponsored nine 
health-related bills and co-sponsored 35. “Congressman Price didn’t simply vote 
on healthcare bills when they came to the House floor,” Schumer said. “He 
championed them.”

In August 2016, the Journal reported, Price made his single largest stock buy, 
purchasing between $50,000 and $100,000 of shares in an Australian biomedical 
firm, Innate Immunotherapeutics. According to the company’s annual report, the 
largest shareholder in the company is the New York Republican congressmanChris 
Collins 
<https://www.statnews.com/2015/12/01/congress-pharmaceutical-investment/>, a 
member of the Trump transition team.

Since August, Innate Immunotherapeutics stock has more than doubled. During 
this time, Price has continued serving as chair of the House budget committee, 
which plays an important role in shaping health legislation.

“He’s likely to have made tens of thousands of dollars on one of these trades 
alone,” Schumer said. “Every American should be shocked by this.”

A letter released on Thursday 
<http://www.citizen.org/pressroom/pressroomredirect.cfm?ID=10110> by the 
government watchdog Public Citizen called for an investigation by the 
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Office of Congressional Ethics 
(OCE). This week, House Republicanstried to gut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/house-republicans-drop-ethics-watchdog-trump>
 the latter body before climbing down under public pressure.

Schumer said the OCE should conduct an investigation before Senate 
confirmation hearings begin. “If it takes a while, then Congressman Price’s 
nomination should wait a while,” he said.

Such an investigation would not have been possible, Schumer added, if 
Republicans had gone ahead with their plan to gut the OCE.


The confirmation hearing for Price has not yet been scheduled.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pence%3A%20Repealing%20Obamacare%20is%20'first%20order%20of%20business'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pence%3A%20Repealing%20Obamacare%20is%20%27first%20order%20of%20business%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video&media=>
Pence: Repealing Obamacare is ‘first order of business’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/04/pence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video>
Senator Patty Murray of Washington told the same press conference: “We want to 
know who he met with and when, whether the transactions in question were 
initiated by a broker or by Congressman Price himself, what, if any, non-public 
information Congressman Price had when those transactions were made and exactly 
how much profit he made from each transaction.”


Mike Pence promises Obamacare repeal but shares few details on alternative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/mike-pence-repeal-obama-healthcare-law-first>
Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon said: “There’s enough here that if you’re serious 
about oversight, you can’t simply say it’s a coincidence and move on. It’s 
paramount that these questions are answered and the American public is assured 
that no one has abused their official position for personal profit.

“We’re making it clear the Senate is out of the rubber-stamping business. Not 
going to happen any more.”

In response to the Wall Street Journal report, Trump transition spokesman Phil 
Blando said Price “complied fully with all applicable laws and ethics rules 
governing his personal finances” and would comply with the law if confirmed.

Regarding the move by Senate Democrats, Blando said in a statement 
<http://staging.hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/U/US_CONGRESS?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT&CTIME=2017-01-05-11-07-10>
 to the Associated Press on Thursday the politicians’ demands were a “stunt” to 
distract attention from the failures of Obamacare.

Price, a surgeon and conservative, was “uniquely qualified” to head the 
Department of Health and Human Services, Blando said.


Blando added that the Democratic senators Tom Carper of Delaware, Mark Warner 
of Virginia and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island had also traded valuable 
health-related stocks.

“Hypocrisy is apparently alive and well this morning in Washington,” he said.

 