
Britain’s top GP has said surgeries will have to stop seeing patients during 
the week unless ministers abandon their drive to guarantee access to family 
doctors at weekends.

Dr Helen Stokes-Lampard condemned the policy, a key Conservative pledge, as 
unrealistic and said it was ignoring the lack of demand among patients to seeGPs
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> at weekends and a serious shortage 
of family doctors.

The government has promised to ensure that people in every part of England 
will be able to see a GP from 8am to 8pm every day of the week by 2020 as a key 
element of its push to create a “truly seven-day NHS” by the end of the current 
parliament.


Lengthy waits to see GPs may pose serious risk to patients, says top doctor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/long-waits-to-see-gp-may-pose-serious-risk-patients-non-urgent-conditions>
“It’s unrealistic in the current climate. We haven’t got the people, we 
haven’t got the resources. If you give people access on a Sunday afternoon 
they’re not going to have access on a Tuesday morning. They can’t have it all”, 
the chair of the Royal College of GPs said in an interview.


Calling for surgeries weekend opening to be restricted to Saturday mornings, 
Stokes-Lampard said: “We should be responding to what is needed in an area, and 
balance that realistically by what can be provided safely. Because quite 
frankly if you open on a Sunday afternoon but you’re closed on a Tuesday 
morning, who’s going to benefit?.


There is so little demand from patients to see a GP on Sundays that plans to 
compel at least one surgery in each area to open on that day by 2020 should be 
dropped, she said. Nor do many people want to attend a surgery on a Saturday 
afternoon, she added.


David Cameron pledged access to GPs from 8am to 8pm seven days a week at the 
Conservative party conference in 2014, and established a £50m “challenge fund” 
to deliver it. Some surgeries that have begun opening at weekends, however, 
have scrapped their experiment because of the small numbers of patients seeking 
appointments on Saturdays and Sundays.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fseven-day-nhs-plan-puts-weekday-surgeries-at-risk-warns-top-gp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9bfa8e4a656da32d24890610b31c709b0378e3%2F201_0_4880_2928%2F4880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven-day%20NHS%20plan%20puts%20weekday%20surgeries%20at%20risk%2C%20warns%20top%20GP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fseven-day-nhs-plan-puts-weekday-surgeries-at-risk-warns-top-gp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven-day%20NHS%20plan%20puts%20weekday%20surgeries%20at%20risk%2C%20warns%20top%20GP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fseven-day-nhs-plan-puts-weekday-surgeries-at-risk-warns-top-gp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9bfa8e4a656da32d24890610b31c709b0378e3%2F201_0_4880_2928%2F4880.jpg>
 The chair of the Royal College of GPs, Dr Helen Stokes-Lampard. Photograph: 
Andy Hall for the Observer 
A relentless rise in the need for care is prompting more GPs to retire early 
or move abroad, leaving the profession facing a growing workforce crisis and 
patients facing long waits for appointments, Stokes-Lampard said. As a result 
“we’re layered too thin at the moment, we’re spread too thin. We can’t sustain 
a good five-day service at the moment, a seven-day service is unrealistic. If 
we can’t provide eight to six Monday to Friday because we’re stretched to 
breaking point, we’re certainly not going to be able to provide seven days a 
week.”


She said general practice was “closer to the edge than it has ever been in 
living memory”, and cast serious doubt on ministers being able to fulfil 
another keyNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> pledge – to increase 
the number of GPs in England by 5,000 by 2020 compared with 2015. It will be 
very hard to deliver that number without many GPs coming from overseas or 
former doctors being persuaded back into work, she said.


The Liberal Democrat MP Norman Lamb, who was a coalition health minister until 
May 2015, denounced the pledge of access to GPs all day and every day as a 
“superficially attractive gimmick”.


Seven-day working for GPs costs more and doesn’t get results | Zara Aziz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/19/seven-day-working-gps-costs-results>
“This target is driven by seductive headlines, not sound policy. It will 
distort priorities and resources away from action which could make a real 
difference to people’s lives, such as ensuring that people have both their 
physical and mental health needs effectively met in primary care,” he said.

“No one believes that there will be sufficient resources to deliver this plan. 
The risk is that it will leave dangerous gaps in provision during the week.


“Pursuing superficially attractive gimmicks like this amounts to a smokescreen 
for the dire threat the NHS and care system now faces as it is starved of the 
resources it needs to provide effective, prompt and safe care.”


The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said: “These serious doubts 
about a flagship government pledge will raise widespread concerns. It’s yet 
another warning about the scale of the underfunding and understaffing now 
impacting our NHS.


“In her six months as prime minister Theresa May has shown no regard for the 
state of the NHS, so it’s no surprise it now looks like her own manifesto 
commitments will be broken.

“But in 2017 the government simply must not carry on ignoring the warnings. 
Instead they need to come forward with a genuine plan to give the NHS and 
social care the resources they need to deliver the very best care every patient 
deserves.”


The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> insisted 
the government would achieve its ambition of seven-day opening, and that the 
policy was popular. “This is a common sense reform with wide public support, 
and one we will deliver”, a spokeswoman said.


“People don’t just get ill Monday to Friday, nine to five, and 18 million 
patients now have weekend and extended access to a GP, which has already shown 
evidence of relieving pressure on other parts of the NHS.


“To deliver our pledge, we are putting an extra £2.4bn into GP services, which 
will help expand the workforce.”

 