
North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> is not a regime 
whose choices one is generally eager to endorse. Yet my sympathies were with 
that country at the start of the year, when itsNew Year’s Eve firework display 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/north-korea-disappointing-new-years-9543789>
 was universally pooh-poohed. What’s with all the flickering, cackled other 
nations. You call that a spectacle, scoffed Sydney, merrily lighting the fuse on
£4m-worth 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/sydney-new-years-eve-celebrations-start-with-a-bang-with-citys-biggest-fireworks-display-ever-20161231-gtkarn.html>
 of sparklers.

Fireworks can, obviously, be spectacular. Their cultural origins in 
seventh-century China <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fireworks>, where they 
were intended to scare off evil spirits, are to be respected. And yet an 
understated display – Pyongyang went for sporadic bangs with synth soundtrack – 
is not something to dismiss. Rather, one goggles at the hubris elsewhere, where 
millions in public funds are sent up in smoke; this at a time of spiralling 
homelessness, massive spending cuts and instructions that we all mug up onfirst 
aid <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-38495234> lest we fall victim to rather 
more malevolent blasts.

Everyone already knows that fireworks are fantastically dangerous (this 31 
December there was a fatality inHawaii 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/woman-killed-years-day-fireworks-explosion-hawaii-44511380>
, there were mass casualties inMalaysia 
<http://www.dailystar.co.uk/news/latest-news/574530/new-years-fireworks-accident-malaysia-port-klang-pandamaran>
, and rocket assaults in Hamburg and Malmö); that they are enormously polluting 
(inMunich <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-38495564>, revellers bathed 
in an atmosphere that had 26 times more sooty particulates than the EU’s 
recommended safe limit); and that they frighten animals, children, the frail 
and indeed anyone who isn’t lucky enough to be able to sit unblinking through 
an endless load of explosions.

Much of the publicity around Martin Scorsese’s latest movie boils down to 
extreme weight loss and torture

But fireworks are also, I’d argue – shock value aside – quite boring. At least 
if they don’t carry special spiritual import for you, or if you’re over the age 
of two, or after the first 10 seconds or so. Rather, they seem to be a 
throwback to a time when lights in the sky were a significant distraction. When 
a night of bonfire stories was the nearest you could get to bingeing on a box 
set. Before entertainment had, for better or worse, evolved. That’s why I’ve 
never been especially desperate to see a display through to its climax. There’s 
only so many “oohs” you can manage before you start thinking about your 
shopping.

We live in an age uncertain about its level of primitivism. Liberals bemoan a 
resurfacing of basic bigotry. The world is going backwards, they fret. Kneejerk 
fears have quashed reasoned debate. Yet liberals are people too and, as such, 
just as susceptible to the primal pulls. They too embrace fireworks – one thing 
going for them is their egalitarianism.

And when it comes to more contemporary forms of entertainment, they too are 
animals at heart. The likes ofThe Girl on the Train 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/10/why-girl-train-tabloid-cinema> 
and the novels of Katie Price are disparaged as trash, but in fact this 
season’s most acclaimed arthouse films also rely on some pretty tabloid drives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fsex-suicide-torture-arthouse-films-movies-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae277d34f880a300cc4e81f974fcdc95729c8be%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20suicide%2C%20torture%3A%20are%20arthouse%20films%20really%20so%20sophisticated%3F%20%7C%20Catherine%20Shoard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fsex-suicide-torture-arthouse-films-movies-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C%20suicide%2C%20torture%3A%20are%20arthouse%20films%20really%20so%20sophisticated%3F%20%7C%20Catherine%20Shoard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fsex-suicide-torture-arthouse-films-movies-fireworks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae277d34f880a300cc4e81f974fcdc95729c8be%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Natalie Portman in Jackie, ‘a movie whose chief sell has a lot to do with 
watching someone wash famous brains off their frock’. Photograph: Twentieth 
Century Fox 
Take Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, Pablo Larraín’s biopic of the first lady in the aftermath of JFK’s 
assassination. It is a brilliant, moving examination of grief and national 
fairytales, with a central performance by Natalie Portman that will win her the 
Oscar. It is also a movie whose chief sell has a lot to do with watching 
someone wash famous brains off their frock.

Likewise, Sundance sensation Christine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/christine-review-rebecca-hall-astonishes-in-real-life-horror-story>
 offers an intriguing look at the machinations of a regional news outfit in 
1974, with an intense central turn by Rebecca Hall as a woman battling mental 
illness. Its hook, though – likewise that of a documentary released on the same 
subject last year – is that it’s about a real-life newsreader who committed 
suicide live on air.

Much of the publicity, as well as buzz, around Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
, Martin Scorsese’s latest movie, boils down to the extreme weight loss of its 
stars and really yucky forms of torture suffered by their characters. Even
Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
, Barry Jenkins’ drama about a bullied gay man at three stages of his life – 
which has been universally championed by right-thinking cineastes – can’t fully 
duck accusations of titillation. It is beautifully played and shot, highly 
sensitive, politically and emotionally incisive; but its success does also come 
down to the audience’s investment in the sexual activity, or lack thereof, 
enjoyed by its protagonist.

Silence review: the last temptation of Liam Neeson in Scorsese's shattering 
epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
Brutality is as key an ingredient of high culture as low. More, even. Rogue 
One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/04/rogue-one-fantastic-beasts-2016-uk-box-office>
 might have been the biggest movie of last year, but not a drop of actual blood 
is seen, much less a snog. Being preoccupied by sex or death does not make art 
any lesser, nor the person watching it any baser. What does degrade though are 
those claiming sophistication while still lapping up big bangs and soaps about 
the sexual hangups of a really ripped fella with a rackety mum.

North Korea did not completely opt out of giving the crowd some kneejerk 
thrills, of course. It just indulged this desire in a much more modest way – 
and, in doing so, exposed the ravening appetite across the rest of the world, 
as well as some strange double standards about what constitutes entertainment 
or worthwhile use of the public purse.

So, hooray for those low-key explosions a few nights back. Unless of course 
North Korea is just saving its big guns for later in the year.
 