
Pauline Hanson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> has 
disendorsed another candidate from her Queensland party less than a month after 
announcing the team she would take to the 2018 state election.

Shan Ju Lin, One Nation’s candidate for Bundamba, was dumped on Saturday 
evening after she posted on Facebook that “gays should be treated as patients”.

Ju Lin posted the comment on Friday along with an old story about a same-sex 
couple in the USwho faced charges in 2011 over raping one of their foster 
children 
<http://www.nbcconnecticut.com/news/local/Glastonbury-Foster-Adoptive-Couple-Lawsuit-Harasz-Wirth-DCF-Sexual-Abuse-328719091.html>
. She wrote above the story: “Abnormal sex behaviour leads to abnormal crime. 
Gays should be treated as patients, they need to receive treatments.”

But the story she posted did not indicate that both men were later cleared of 
all charges in 2014, and in 2015filed a $100m lawsuit 
<http://media.nbcbayarea.com/documents/Harasz+and+Wirth+Complaint.pdf> in 
connection with the case.

One Nation candidate quits after two days over 'inappropriate' tweet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/one-nation-candidate-quits-two-days-inappropriate-tweet>
Hanson says that after she became aware of Ju Lin’s post on Friday, she warned 
that party officials were not happy with the comments and she asked for Ju 
Lin’s “social media page” to be suspended and for the review committee to 
reconsider her endorsement.

Hanson says Ju Lin then made further disparaging remarks on Saturday, telling 
executive members on Facebook: “Once the gays realise they can put pressure on 
a candidate, they will start to target other One Nation candidates also.”

Hanson’s political adviser, James Ashby, then dumped Ju Lin on Saturday 
evening, via Facebook Messenger.

Ashby says this was because Ju Lin was in Taiwan and could not be contacted by 
phone. He said Ju Lin responded: “If Pauline has decided it, than [sic] I best 
follow her decision.”

Ju Lin later thanked her supporters on Facebook, saying: “No matter what 
happened, I will continue to hold the values that we are holding.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fa-pain-in-my-backside-pauline-hanson-on-culletons-resignation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20pain%20in%20my%20backside'%3A%20Pauline%20Hanson%20on%20Rod%20Culleton's%20resignation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fa-pain-in-my-backside-pauline-hanson-on-culletons-resignation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20pain%20in%20my%20backside%27%3A%20Pauline%20Hanson%20on%20Rod%20Culleton%27s%20resignation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fa-pain-in-my-backside-pauline-hanson-on-culletons-resignation-video&media=>
‘A pain in my backside’: Pauline Hanson on Rod Culleton’s resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/dec/19/a-pain-in-my-backside-pauline-hanson-on-culletons-resignation-video>
Hanson said in a statement on Sunday: “I will not stand by & allow people to 
trash the Party or my name so I make no apologies for being tough on 
candidates. These are not the views shared by Pauline Hanson’s One Nation, nor 
the views of your fellow candidates and the general public.”

Ju Lin said being dropped from the party came as a “complete surprise” and 
nominated Ashby as the reason for her disendorsement. Ju Lin she had been given 
no opportunity to speak directly to Hanson, who can only be contacted through 
Ashby.

“I would suggest that the alleged issue was far more important to Mr Ashby 
than the membership or executive of One Nation,” Ju Lin said on Sunday.

The Taiwanese-born candidate threw her support behind Hanson last month, 
claiming “good Asians” would vote for One Nation at the state election. She is 
now the second candidate to leave since Hanson unveiled the first batch of 36 
people she would take to the polls.

The Currumbin candidate Andy Semple withdrew from the party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/one-nation-candidate-quits-two-days-inappropriate-tweet>
 just two days after the 18 December announcement after he was reportedly asked 
to delete a tweet from his personal account.


“It seems #PHON (Pauline Hanson’s One Nation) only likes certain types of 
Freedom of Expression,” Semple tweeted.


Semple’s Twitter feed included comments about burqas being banned, describes 
vegans as “miserable people” and says women with unshaved armpits are “not cool 
at all”.

with AAP
 