
 Shaun Wane declared Wigan’s Grand Final victory against Warrington the 
biggest triumph in the club’s history after they became Super League champions 
for the first time in three yearswith a 12-6 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/warrington-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
.

Wigan battled back from a four-point half-time deficit to see off the Wolves 
and win at Old Trafford for the fourth time inSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> – with this their first triumph 
since the 2013 success, also against Warrington.

Wane had publicly stated in the buildup to the game that with their extensive 
injury problems this year, victory would immediately rank as Wigan’s greatest – 
and the coach refused to change his opinion post-match after a thrilling Grand 
Final. “I don’t tell lies,” Wane said. “I’ve been here for 30 years as a player 
and a coach I can’t remember a better win than that. People don’t know the half 
of it; the lads know what has gone on with injuries and without a doubt it’s 
the best win we’ve ever had.

“I could go into loads of detail about people not training on a daily basis. 
People have been running for the first time on game day on occasions. We had no 
right to win that game.”

Warrington 6-12 Wigan: Super League Grand Final – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/08/super-league-grand-final-warrington-wigan-live>
Wane made a late gamble on the fitness of the Wigan captain, Sean O’Loughlin, 
in the hours before the game – but he insisted that he was never going to leave 
out the influential forward despite a calf problem. “I was always going to pick 
him,” he said. “He’s my captain, my mate and my leader.”

Liam Farrell was the recipient of the Harry Sunderland Trophy after being 
named man of the match and the forward echoed Wane’s comments about the 
magnitude of success. “To do what we’ve done is unbelievable,” Farrell said.

“It’s been a strange year with injuries but I can’t put this into words, it’s 
surreal. Things have been so bad with injuries but to not only win and get the 
man of the match is something I never gave any thought about. It’s something 
I’ll remember for the rest of my career and the rest of my life.”
 