
If the Championship, football, life, were fair, Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> and Hull City would 
probably not be in the play-off final. Certainly the play-offs make a mockery 
of the idea of football as a meritocracy, simply because they don’t necessarily 
reward the best team, but really there is no more appropriate way of deciding 
who goes up from such a terrifying and chaotic division than with such a 
terrifying and chaotic match.

Brighton are the latest victims of this lack of fairness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
, having finished six and 15 pointsahead of the Tigers and the Owls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship/table>, but they will be 
watching on TV as half of south and east Yorkshire decamps to Wembley on 
Saturday.

These two have enjoyed, or endured, depending on your view, similar paths to 
the final. Both faced teams upon whom there was much more pressure in the 
semi-finals; both took commanding leads to the second leg only to sufferall 
sorts of skittish moments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/johnny-russell-derby-county-hull-city-championship-play-off-wembley-match-report>
 in the return; both hung on and probably feel quite grateful to be through.

Sheffield Wednesday rock Brighton to reach Championship play-off final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
The big difference is that one team expected to be here, while for another 
this represents a vaguely unlikely bonus. For Wednesday, to be on the verge of 
the top flight after the start of the season they had is rather remarkable.

Last summer their new owner Dejphon Chansiri, perhaps harshly, sacked Stuart 
Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/11/sheffield-wednesday-stuart-gray-leaves-post>
, but as the end of June approached and most other teams in the division were 
well under way with their preparations for the season, they did not have a 
manager and had not signed any players. For a while it looked fairly certain 
that Mark Cooper would be their new head coach, with Carlos Carvalhal acting as 
director of football.

In the end Carvalhal, who had not coached for three years and had averaged 
slightly more than a brisk club-a-year for the previous 14, took the top job, 
and now has them 90 minutes from the Premier League. Cooper, if you’re 
wondering,was sacked by Swindon in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/swindon-manager-mark-cooper-part-company-departure>
 (temporarily replaced by their chairman), left Notts County in May and joined 
Forest Green Rovers a few days later. What could’ve been.

Few really knew what to make of Carvalhal when he arrived, fewer still when it 
emerged the Portuguese had written a book calledSoccer: Developing A Know-How 
which threw around ideas such as “tactical periodisation” and a “conceptual 
matrix”, while also referencing René Descartes. Not exactly the sort of thing 
you expect from a division that Neil Warnock recentlydescribed as being full of 
“blood and guts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/neil-warnock-rotherham-championship-manager>
.

Carvalhal’s arrival came with a late summer barrage of recruits: 14 players 
were signed permanently and on loan before the end of the transfer window, the 
most important probably being Fernando Forestieri from Watford.

Forestieri, who thought he had won the player of the year award last week, 
only for that to be revealed as a miscalculation of the votes, has nevertheless 
been perhaps the most influential player in the division, scoring 15 goals and 
chipping in with another eight assists. There is always a vague sense that the 
Italian is on the verge of a volcanic tantrum, but that just makes him all the 
more fun to watch.

Wednesday are clearly underdogs, something that Carvalhal has been doing his 
best to play up. “I grew up in my country seeing the games on a black and white 
TV and it used to be the final of the [FA] Cup in England. I never thought I 
would go to Wembley one day and now this is something that we have achieved. It 
is fantastic,” he said last week, sounding a little more like a tourist than a 
manager about to take his team there. “We know we have made history, it’s been 
a long time for Sheffield Wednesday and it’s very important for the club. Now 
we can wake up the giant.”

For his opposite number’s part, this game could decide his future as well as a 
place in the Premier League. Steve Bruce has looked more and more exasperated 
every time he has been asked whether his job is safe in recent weeks, something 
that will be decided after the game but potentially complicated by owner Assem 
Allam’s attempts to sell the club.

“You are asking the question constantly because it’s been lingering around for 
six months,” he said after Hull just held off Derby intheir semi-final second 
leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/johnny-russell-derby-county-hull-city-championship-play-off-wembley-match-report>
last week. Whoever wins, it is unlikely to feel fair.
 