
The week in which the self-taught education expert Michael Gove announced that 
“the people of this country have had enough of experts 
<https://next.ft.com/content/3be49734-29cb-11e6-83e4-abc22d5d108c>” is clearly 
not the best one for his cabinet colleague, the former miner Patrick 
McLoughlin, toadmit that the experts got it wrong over diesel cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/price-of-diesel-fuel-could-rise-government-considers-reversing-tax-cuts>
.

By cutting the duty on low-sulphur diesel back in 2001, the then chancellor, 
Gordon Brown, correctly thought he was helping meet carbon-reducing climate 
change targets in Britain. Unfortunately no one explained that the harmful 
pollutants such cars emit – nitrogen oxides – can quickly build to lethal 
levels.

Or, as the fellow ex-minister and motor sports enthusiast Lord Drayson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/30/lord-drayson-launches-pollution-sensor-powered-by-radio-waves>
 cheerfully put it during theVW rigged-tests scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
 still engulfing the world’s carmakers, they’re “literally killing people”. For 
once the hyperbolic cliche was right. On some (expert?) estimates, 9,500 people 
suffer avoidable deaths each year in the capital alone.

Blair attacks Corbyn for doing nothing to stop Syria being barrel-bombed - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/08/eu-referendum-live-voter-registration-site-crashes-cameron-farage-debate>
That’s true of many of our lifestyle choices, of course, though it’s been a 
while since a chancellor cut the duty on cigarettes to encourage smoking. 
McLoughlin signalled that he may have to ask George Osborne – or Nigel Farage 
if he is Boris’s chancellor – to reverse the tax break.

Meanwhile, a lot of well-meaning types, including me, went out and bought 
diesel cars as a small way of helping saveAustralia’s coral reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/11/mass-coral-bleaching-now-affecting-half-of-australias-great-barrier-reef>
 and other species threatened by climate change, also including you and me. It 
may not all be caused by human activity, but the experts – there we go again – 
are overwhelmingly of the view that most of it is and we must act together to 
offset its consequences.

And there in a nutshell is the problem Gove so casually addressed. Experts are 
divided over the causes of the climatic changes we see all around us in every 
country, aren’t they? Well, no, actually.About 97% 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus-intermediate.htm>
 of those who are supposed to know what they’re talking about support the 
consensus.



It’s not hard to see why the populist in Gove knows he can get easy applause 
for denouncing experts and their expertise. In advanced secular societies like 
ours voters have been encouraged to look to highly educated technocrats, not to 
priests or princes, to provide the guidelines on how best to live.

But, just like priests and princes, they sometimes get it wrong. Only this 
week, theGuardian’s intrepid Sarah Boseley reported another retreat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/06/high-fat-mediterranean-diet-does-not-cause-weight-gain-study-finds>
 from the fats-are-bad campaign of recent decades. Good fats are good in 
sensible quantities and not as bad as Killer Sugar which food makers used as a 
comforting substitute.



So the problem is twofold. Experts get it wrong and are sometimes forced to 
change their minds. “When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, 
Sir?” asJohn Maynard Keynes 
<https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Talk:John_Maynard_Keynes> famously remarked. If 
some experts don’t like admitting fallibility how much harder is it for lay men 
and women who have embraced advice they are now told to discard?

There’s much to be said for “common sense”, for learning from experience what 
may be right for you – or for your children or career – as it may not be for 
others. Expertise should be on tap, not on top, as we used to say. Passing the 
buck when things go wrong is a bad side-effect too, along with routinely trying 
to sue people who have done their best, doctors for example.

Of course, there are issues and circumstances where the experts’ advice should 
be taken more seriously than on others.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> decisions or brain 
surgery matter more than Michael Billington’s advice on theatre or nice Jamie 
Oliver’s idea of a good pesto.

It’s still no guarantee they’ll be right. Which takes us back to Europe – an 
issue on which the advice of most experts across most fields is that we should 
Remain. But the direct experience of many ordinary citizens points the other 
way, most notably in their varying encounters with immigration on its current 
scale, and the effects, good and bad, that it has.

There’s no point in “experts” telling them that immigration is good for the 
British economy as a whole, when they don’t live and work or send their kids to 
school in a whole; they do so in a specific place. It doesn’t make them racists 
or bigots to express concern, though some may be.

So mouthy Nigel Farage was surely correct in ITV’s election debate exchanges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-our-panel-nigel-farage-david-cameron-tv-debate>
 with David Cameron on Tuesday when he spoke of falling GDPper capita, ie per 
head, mattering more than rising overall GDP whose benefits may not be fairly 
shared (they aren’t). Cameron was wrong.

Is he mostly wrong and opportunist, as Brexiteers suggest? In my judgment, no. 
Reading the experts with a pinch of salt – here’sInFacts <http://infacts.org/> 
– I tend to find their version of events more trustworthy than Vote Leave’s. 
Knowing Boris Johnson tolerably well over many years my jaw hits the floor 
whenever I read that the rascal is trusted on Europe – a man who was sacked by 
the Times for making up quotes and later sacked by the then Tory leader, 
Michael Howard, for being less than truthful about an affair.

But there you are. Leave campaigners say that remain camp’s experts were wrong 
in urging Britain to join sterling to the eurozone. That’s not true either. 
Many experts – the Observer’s veteran economics punditBill Keegan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/williamkeegan> is one – were vocal critics 
of the euro project (and of Schengen) but do not support Brexit.

The success of the Brexiteers is to have a better ear for discontent on the 
street, in the factory or supermarket and to pander better to popular 
resentments and prejudice.It is what Donald Trump is doing so well in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/blog/2016/may/18/politicians-making-peace-donald-trump>
. That success rests on perceived failures by elites and by decades of 
overconfidence built on postwar economic success that has now turned sour.

The populists offer glib, popular answers. “It can’t be any worse, so let’s 
take a punt,” they say. “Yes, it can,” is the correct answer, but hardly an 
inspiring one. Surely it is no coincidence that both Brexit and Trump’s 
campaigns are full of climate change sceptics too. “Let’s take a punt, it’ll be 
fine.”

 That’s quite a punt. Funny weather we’re having, eh?
 