
Seriously sick children are having to be transported long distances to receive 
intensive care this weekend because of a lack of beds in major cities.

In England, 85% of beds available in paediatric intensive care units were full 
on Friday night. But some units in cities including London and Leicester have 
been forced to declare themselves as “at capacity”. Planned operations are, in 
some cases, being delayed to prepare for any possible emergencies, as the 
system shows signs of serious strain as winter starts to bite.

The director of communications at NHS England, Simon Enright, tweeted: “It is 
true that the NHS is very busy at the moment –record demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/outpatient-cancellations-at-record-high-of-768m>
.”

It has long been feared that this winter would expose the frailties of the 
health service. Last month, the cross-party health select committee, chaired by 
Tory MP Sarah Wollaston reportedwidespread concerns 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-11-03/debates/DC222156-2FB5-4F89-A6E0-7228FEE9B386/AAndEDepartmentsWinterPressure>
 among medics at the beginning of December because they had already been 
struggling to deal with the level of demand.

As part of the NHS’s contingency preparations, every hospital trust was 
ordered to draw up plans to cope, with new “A&E delivery boards” to be set up. 
Thousands of non-emergency operations and appointments in the run-up to 
Christmas have been cancelled to enable doctors to concentrate on discharging 
patients who can safely be sent home, in an effort to free up beds. Official 
figures show 6,000 more A&E attendances daily compared with six years ago.

Yet last week it emerged that ambulance response times were declining in 
England, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and last night senior doctors said the 
problems in paediatrics were a sign of systemic problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchildren-moved-intensive-care-units-run-out-of-beds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06095a8a2575f4c42e1078e67dc10eba817ea3c%2F89_0_2429_1458%2F2429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sick%20children%20moved%20as%20NHS%20intensive%20care%20units%20run%20out%20of%20beds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchildren-moved-intensive-care-units-run-out-of-beds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sick%20children%20moved%20as%20NHS%20intensive%20care%20units%20run%20out%20of%20beds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchildren-moved-intensive-care-units-run-out-of-beds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06095a8a2575f4c42e1078e67dc10eba817ea3c%2F89_0_2429_1458%2F2429.jpg>
 Ambulance response times are declining. Photograph: Dinendra 
Haria/Rex/Shutterstock 
Dr Damian Roland, a consultant in paediatrics at University Hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> of Leicester NHS trust, said 
that his unit was full on Saturday morning, and expressed his frustration at 
the lack of resources, although he appealed to parents not to panic. Roland, 
speaking as a senior member of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, said: “The hospital is at capacity but we are always able to make 
provision for the patients that need care.

“We know that at this time of the year children will develop viral or other 
serious illnesses that cause them to need intensive care. There is some 
frustration though that the system as a whole doesn’t always have the ability 
to deal with these predictable issues. This is another symptom of the challenge 
we are facing in operating a sustainable health system that continues to 
provide the care that patients expect. All of us in paediatrics and child 
health would like an honest discussion about how the system is funded,” Dr 
Roland added.

In London, all 90 of the beds available in the seven hospitals that provide 
paediatric intensive care are occupied. Three children had to be taken out of 
the capital for treatment because there were no beds available.

An email to units from Will Huxter, NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> regional director of specialised 
commissioning (London), said: “The demand for emergency beds over the last week 
has been increasing ... There have been periods where there have been no beds 
available ... I am therefore asking you to review the requirement to proceed 
with non-urgent elective operating lists.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fchildren-nhs-paediatric-intensive-care-unit-evalina-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F29%2F1454065734950%2FKP_1546467_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20doctors%20who%20save%20the%20sickest%20babies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fchildren-nhs-paediatric-intensive-care-unit-evalina-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20doctors%20who%20save%20the%20sickest%20babies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fchildren-nhs-paediatric-intensive-care-unit-evalina-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F29%2F1454065734950%2FKP_1546467_crop_640x480.jpg>
The doctors who save the sickest babies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/jan/29/children-nhs-paediatric-intensive-care-unit-evalina-video>
An NHS England spokesman said: “Record numbers of patients are successfully 
being looked after by the NHS. On any objective measure, despite these 
pressures, the quality of care is better than it has ever been – whether that’s 
cancer services, stroke survival, heart attack care or any other major 
condition.” A national review of paediatric intensive care is currently under 
way.
 