
Sienna Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sienna-miller> has said 
criticism she received for not wearing a poppy in a recent TV interview was “a 
little extreme” – adding she was worried about an upcoming pre-recorded 
programme in which she would likely be seen without one again.

The actor was condemned for not wearing the flower on the Graham Norton Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/graham-norton>. She said she “meant 
no disrespect” but added “you can’t please everyone”.

Speaking about her appearance on the BBC1 chatshow, Miller told ITV’s Good 
Morning Britain on Friday: “I had a poppy on, funnily enough, and I was wearing 
a dress that was like crepe paper, basically, and as I was going on I looked 
down – it was tearing at the dress and they’d said my name ... so I whipped it 
off.”

She added: “It’s really snowballed apparently and of course I don’t think 
there is anyone in this country that isn’t grateful and respectful and never 
would want to cause offence and wear a poppy all the time, but people kind of 
focus on things enough to pick at the negative. It seems a little extreme.

It will soon be time to drop our oppressive remembrance rituals | Martin Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/23/agincourt-remembrance-day-national-ritual>
“Also, there’s another show I’m worried about coming up because we 
pre-recorded it, where we’re probably not wearing poppies but some of these 
things are filmed weeks before they air. But you can’t please everyone and I 
meant no disrespect. Of course I didn’t.”

Annually, there is controversy surrounding the wearing of Remembrance Day 
poppies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/29/remembrance-day-do-you-wear-a-poppy>
, with high-profile names speaking out about why they choose not to wear one.

The ITV News anchor Charlene White wrote a blogpost about her decision not to 
wear a poppy on screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/14/charlene-white-poppy-black-women>
 last year. In the post, to which she tweeted a link again this year, White 
wrote: “I support and am patron of a number of charities, and due to 
impartiality rules, I am not allowed to visually support them all whilst 
presenting news programmes.

“That includes things like a red ribbon for World Aids Day, or a purple band 
for Bowel Cancer Awareness Month. Both these and many more charities do great 
things in the UK, but I’m not allowed to give them exposure on screen.

“So I feel uncomfortable supporting just one charity above all others, namely 
The Royal British Legion, but I fully support my colleagues who do choose to 
wear the poppy on screen.”

She said she wears one on Armistice Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/11/armistice-day-marks-100-years-end-first-world-war-two-minutes-silence>
, and added that her father served in the RAF and her uncle served in the army. 
The Channel 4 newsreader Jon Snow has said in the past that there is an “
unpleasant breed of poppy fascism out there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/nov/10/channel4.broadcasting>”.
 