
Sienna Miller will play no part in the real-life mob drama Black Mass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/26/johnny-depp-gets-violent-in-face-stomping-new-black-mass-trailer>
 after scenes she filmed as the girlfriend of Johnny Depp’s Irish gangland boss 
Whitey Bulger were cut from the movie.

Johnny Depp gets violent in face-stomping new Black Mass trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/26/johnny-depp-gets-violent-in-face-stomping-new-black-mass-trailer>
Director Scott Cooper told the Boston Globe 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/lifestyle/names/2015/09/01/director-confirms-sienna-miller-cut-from-black-mass/G2YBTKji6BoCctAPlKbazK/story.html>
 the British actor had been “fantastic” as Catherine Greig, who has been 
described in the media as Bulger’s long-term partner. But he said a decision 
was made at the last minute to focus on the mobster’s earlier life in the 
Massachusetts capital. “It came down to narrative choices,” he said, adding 
that the gangster’s later years as a fugitive with Greig were “less dramatic”.

Greig is currently serving an eight-year prison sentence for helping Bulger 
evade capture for more than 16 years. The former dental hygienist is thought to 
have begun dating the mobster and erstwhile FBI informer in the mid-1970s, but 
joined him on the run in early 1995 and was arrested with him in Santa Monica 
in 2011.

Black Mass, which will have its world premiere at the Venice film festival on 
4 September, follows Bulger as he teams up with the FBI to bring down a rival 
Italian mafia clan in the 70s and 80s, during which period the gangster was 
solidifying his position as head of the Irish-AmericanWinter Hill mob (pdf) 
<http://www.michaelstowe.net/rue/documents/winter_hill_gang.pdf>. As well as 
Depp in the lead role, the cast includes Benedict Cumberbatch, Joel Edgerton, 
Dakota Johnson, Juno Temple, Kevin Bacon and Corey Stoll.

Captured at last: how James 'Whitey' Bulger was undone by a TV ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/23/james-whitey-bulger-capture-fbi> 
Miller had described her turn in Black Mass as a “cameo” in interviews 
<http://www.boston.com/entertainment/celebrity/2014/12/04/exclusive-sienna-miller-talks-american-sniper-shows-off-her-boston-accent-for-black-mass/cT2lQEHp2ZIXUnLIJWEvUO/story.html>
 but said she learned to speak in a south Boston accent for the two-week shoot. 
“She was quite a character from south Boston,” she said of Greig. “The accent 
was something I really focused on because playing someone from Southie, you 
don’t want to mess that up. Hopefully I’ve managed to pull that off.”

Cooper’s film is also due to screen at the Toronto film festival, on 14 
September, four days prior to its release in US cinemas. It will arrive in UK 
cinemas on 27 November. If well-received, it is expected to be part of the 
2015-16 awards season conversation.

It’s not the first time Miller, currently experiencing a career revival in 
Hollywood following her turn in the blockbuster Iraq war dramaAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/clint-eastwood-heartfelt-tribute-us-muscle-iraq>
, has found herself cast adrift from a major production.In 2009 she was culled 
from Ridley Scott’s Robin Hood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/13/russell-crowe-sienna-miller-ridley-scott>
, then titled Nottingham, amid rumours her slenderness and youth showed up 
leading man Russell Crowe. The role of Maid Marion in the production eventually 
went to Cate Blanchett.

 