
Sigourney Weaver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver> has four 
films coming out between now and 2022 – threeAvatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar>s and an Alien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> sequel – most of which have yet to be 
filmed, and which the 67-year-old has prepared for by cramming in as many small 
films as she can in advance. This is a psychological as well as an acting 
necessity, a way for Weaver to fine-tune before the onslaught – and which, in 
the case ofA Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
, has resulted in an almost unbearably poignant movie. The film, adapted from
the Patrick Ness novel about a child who loses his mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/07/monster-calls-patrick-ness-review>
, is so finely wrought that when Weaver first read the script, she thought, “I 
don’t think I can be part of this, it’s too painful. And then you realise this 
is your job, to tell the story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf0c790f3035f18ed9580dbc0634f8a5fa7389e4%2F0_204_1990_2802%2F1990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf0c790f3035f18ed9580dbc0634f8a5fa7389e4%2F0_204_1990_2802%2F1990.jpg>
 In the original Alien in 1979. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
Weaver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver> is bright today, in 
a studio just outside New York, with that friendly but slightly patrician air 
she puts to good use in the roles she does best: the ostensible villain who 
isn’t all that she seems. For someone as open as Weaver, she plays repressed 
very well, most notably Janey inAng Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee>’s The Ice Storm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-3-jh3kbwAM>, but going back as far as 
Katharine inWorking Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/27/why-working-girl-offers-the-real-deal-mike-nichols-melanie-griffith>
, and even toRipley in Alien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/13/ridley-scott-alien-ripley>, the 
film that established her as an actor able to convey large internal movement 
via the smallest surface ripple. These roles are often characterised as “cold”, 
which feels to Weaver like a gendered term designed to debase their humanity. 
“The male perspective may be that it’s a cold person. But in fact, like in Ice 
Storm, Janey was disconnected: she couldn’t focus on the present and her 
family. Bored and lost. But I would never have gone to ‘cold’.”

If she is optimistic about human nature, it is not only a requirement of her 
job – to inhabit another psychology requires deep levels of empathy – but of 
what appears to be her generous disposition. A small example: I am 30 minutes 
late after a train debacle, something that, with an actor of Weaver’s standing, 
would customarily cause upset on a par with the sky falling in, but is instead 
met with concern. Standing up from the lunch table to her full 6ft, and in a 
tweed jacket that speaks to an idea she has of England, she projects an amused 
frankness that she later describes, with some embarrassment that it should need 
to be clarified, as “normal”. One can be the sort of actor who shouts and 
screams and throws tantrums, but “honestly,” Weaver says, “life is too short”.

In the new movie, directed by JA Bayona <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1291105/> 
and co-starringFelicity Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/film/felicity-jones> 
andLiam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson>, Weaver plays a 
woman whose adult daughter is dying of cancer; an unsympathetic figure, at 
least as she is seen through the eyes of her grandson. It is a fairytale of 
sorts, what Weaver calls “a unique blend of allegory and harsh, harsh reality”, 
and one that, in the context of her career in sci-fi and dystopian drama, is in 
some ways the most frightening landscape of all. A Monster Calls covers the 
triptych of worst nightmares: of a child losing a parent; of dying oneself and 
orphaning one’s children; and, the worst of all, suffered by Weaver’s character 
(and the thing that makes her tight-lipped demeanour so interesting), that of 
losing one’s child. “It’s not that she’s cold – it’s that she’s not sharing, 
because she can’t,” she says.

The film is set in England, and for reference Weaver drew on her own mother 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0408876/bio>, born and raised in Essex, a graduate 
of Rada and the West End stage before she emigrated to New York and met 
Weaver’s television producer father. “She had the most beautiful speaking 
voice,” she says. “When I began shooting, I sometimes sounded like her. I 
really was uncomfortable. And I really needed to find the grandmother’s accent. 
It’s not a Manchester accent, but we didn’t want to be posh.” (The class 
setting is one of the few aspects of the film that doesn’t quite add up, though 
the film’s dream-like texture largely forgives it.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3ce6345688724dee75fef2bafd0aaebf78ce6a%2F0_0_3121_2122%2F3121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3ce6345688724dee75fef2bafd0aaebf78ce6a%2F0_0_3121_2122%2F3121.jpg>
 In new film A Monster Calls. Photograph: Quim Vives 
She is sentimental about England. To her regret, her mother appeared to lose 
all interest in her origins after emigrating. “She became, in her own strange 
way, very American – she was always very athletic and independent. I look back 
and think, ‘Why didn’t Mummy and I go on some wonderful tour of England?’ But 
she wasn’t interested. And she felt that, after the war, everything had 
changed. I think she didn’t want to be torn. It was easier for her to become an 
American citizen and have horrible American children.” She laughs. “We never 
did go on that tour. Too bad.”

Her mother was also unenthusiastic about her daughter’s desire to become an 
actor, mainly because she thought Weaver too sensitive to criticism (and then, 
of course, there was her height). Looking back, Weaver is inclined to be 
generous. “Do any parents want their daughters to be actors?” she says. “They 
were probably sceptical, but not unsupportive.” In any case, she believes that 
having curtailed expectations turned out to be a good thing; it allowed her to 
look beyond the obvious career plan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c4be4d8e61a8a795fad81e2c9dcd88d568c473b%2F1005_383_1600_1426%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c4be4d8e61a8a795fad81e2c9dcd88d568c473b%2F1005_383_1600_1426%2F1600.jpg>
 In The Ice Storm in 1997. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/20th Century Fox 
After graduating from Yale School of Drama, where she studied acting alongside 
Meryl Streep <https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep>, Weaver only hoped 
she’d find work. “I was not a confident person, but I knew what I didn’t want 
to do. I didn’t want security, I didn’t want continuity. I had been discouraged 
at drama school from a career, so I thought, fine, I don’t care. I will just 
try in my own way. I really wanted to be a repertory theatre actor, because rep 
was still in existence in America, but only in a few places, likethe Guthrie in 
Minneapolis <http://www.guthrietheater.org>. I thought, I’ll play big parts and 
small parts, and comedies and dramas, and I’ll mix it up myself.”

She had no model for this, and in fact thinks “models are probably dangerous 
for any woman starting a career”. Money, beyond necessity, was of no interest 
and fame was so distant a possibility as to be laughable. She smiles. “My only 
goal, frankly, was to be someone people wanted to work with again.”

The night before our interview, Weaver had dinner in New York with James 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamescameron>, an early prep meeting 
for the three Avatar sequels he is writing and directing, and in whichshe will 
play a different character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/10/sigourney-weaver-back-for-three-avatar-sequels>
 from the original. (Grace, the exobiologist she played in the first Avatar, 
died at the end of the movie.) Two of the three films will be shot at once, a 
stunning workload at a point in Weaver’s career when she might least have 
expected it. “I feel like knocking on wood,” she says. “I think things must be 
getting better. I think, finally, there’s a perception that the world is 
populated with both sexes, and there are all these lopsided projects in script 
form that need more oestrogen.”

This may be true. But the appetite for seeing older women on screen, 
particularly those who don’t take steps to disguise their age, isn’t one studio 
executives appear to have in abundance. “The thing is, I was never… I played a 
few pretty people, but that wasn’t what I was about,” Weaver says. “So I feel 
it’s a more interesting canvas now. If you think ofLucian Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/freud>’s paintings, for example, the 
reason you look at those subjects is because they’re so revealed. And if this 
is my instrument, then in a way this gives me a more interesting canvas. As I 
watch movies or TV shows, I’m not sitting there going, ‘Oh, she looks like 
shit.’ Because that’s not the point. When I see wonderful older actors likeJohn 
Hurt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-hurt>, I love how they look, and 
they haven’t tried to change any of that.”

She recoils from the idea that every actress has a “bad decade”, one when she 
skips, overnight, from playing the love interest to the mother. “Only if you 
believe the publicity, if you believe there’s going to be a period of time when 
you’re not going to get work. Of course, there’s this perspective that when you 
turn 40, you won’t get as much work. But I think television has changed that, 
because it has such strong female roles. And I’m a weird duck, because I was 
never a ‘girlfriend’. I was always too tall to be the girlfriend. So I didn’t 
have to say goodbye to my sexual self and hello to my executive self. There 
aren’t as many women’s roles as men’s, but I’ve never envied men their roles. 
Women’s are more interesting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fd6e28fe53dcbbd4513e996ed40e61229b47089%2F0_0_1548_1166%2F1548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fd6e28fe53dcbbd4513e996ed40e61229b47089%2F0_0_1548_1166%2F1548.jpg>
 In Alien 3 in 1992. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
This was the attitude she carried, at the age of 28, into what sounded like a 
dingy sci-fi movie calledAlien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien>, 
shooting in England. Although the script was good, on paper the role of Ripley 
didn’t look like a breakthrough part, nor Weaver a breakthrough player. Her 
parents certainly didn’t think so. “They both thought that I might be eaten 
alive. I was tall and galumphing around, and I don’t think they looked at me 
and thought, ‘A star in the making.’”

It was 1978 and Weaver had been living in New York, sharing a flat with a 
friend and earning a pittance through small film and TV parts. When she reached 
England, things didn’t look up. “I ended up renting, by mistake, an apartment 
on a square with a pub on each corner, so they were all yelling goodnight to 
each other all night.” She did what people under 30 from nice families do: she 
called her parents. “And I said, ‘I’m already shooting and I don’t know what to 
do, I can’t live here.’ And they flew over and found me a very quiet apartment 
off Sloane Square. I was so grateful. They were kind of British parents, you 
know? Go have a bash.” Not fussy Americans? “No,” even if in this particular 
instance they leapt to her aid like a thousand helicopter parents to follow. “I 
wasn’t a kid, but I was grateful. Sometimes you need your parents.”

Almost 40 years and three, nearly four sequels later, it is hard to imagine 
Weaver the ingenue, left to fend for herself by the studio. They didn’t look 
after her at all? “Oh, God, no! I was grateful I even got a car to Shepperton, 
which I shared withHarry Dean Stanton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/23/harry-dean-stanton-interview> 
[who played Brett]. He was toking up every morning. I’d say, can we open a 
window? I don’t really do well with marijuana.”

When the film became a hit, the response of her parents, everyone she knew, 
and Weaver herself, was one of “utter shock and surprise” – and that has been 
her attitude to the fame side of things ever since. More iconic roles followed, 
inGhostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters>, Aliens, Working 
Girl, a film in which Weaver plays a bent-out-of-shape female executive, all 
hard edges toMelanie Griffith <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000429/>’s curves 
and whispery voice, in a script that now looks pretty reactionary. Weaver won’t 
allow this: “I didn’t ever feel I was playing those things. I was playing a 
very specific person, who I knew, and who was impressive and someone who liked 
herself.” Although, she adds, “Playing Katharine was the only time I remember 
feeling that people might not want to have lunch with me.”

Wow.

“Isn’t it weird? They weren’t sure whether I was like Katharine or not.”

And they were afraid she was too much of a ballbreaker?

“She’s a very strong character. I also had a lot of women coming up to me at 
airports and saying ‘She [Griffith’s character] borrowed your clothes and took 
your boyfriend!’ They were very pro-Katharine.” Yet Katharine gets crucified at 
the end of the movie, dumped, fired and defeated in a way that Weaver admits 
she finds vaguely shocking. “I remember that last scene when Katharine loses 
and I think, until I played it, I hadn’t dealt with the idea she could lose. 
Aren’t I going to get the guy?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1207c94933493b45369257c48228abead9bb094a%2F133_0_2105_1568%2F2105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1207c94933493b45369257c48228abead9bb094a%2F133_0_2105_1568%2F2105.jpg>
 With Melanie Griffith and Harrison Ford in 1988’s Working Girl. Photograph: 
20th Century Fox/Everett/Rex 
Weaver’s 26-year-old daughter Charlotte, who is at graduate school in 
California and wants to be a writer, only very recently saw Working Girl: “She 
just loved it. ‘Cool character, Mom.’” As a rule, the public aspect of Weaver’s 
career is something she has worked hard to keep out of the home. For a long 
time, her husbandJim Simpson <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0801050/> ran a 
low-budget theatre (he is now a theatre and film director), which allowed him 
to be home for their daughter, while Weaver travelled and brought in the cash. 
A key to her success, she says, is “to have a very bourgeois life”, a stable 
home with one parent always in it – although she did suffer a crisis of 
confidence when it came to filming Avatar in New Zealand, when her daughter was 
in her teens. “I have only the one child, so I’m probably too clingy. I always 
have to discipline myself. Because you’ve got to let them go.”

Her own mother, she says, was not like this. “But I’m kind of a gooey… I don’t 
know why I don’t drive my daughter absolutely crazy, but she couldn’t be 
sweeter. She seems very nice about the fact that I’m very attached to her. We 
never went through that period of not getting along. I kept expecting it. Maybe 
she thought I was so attached that I’d become too pathetic.”

Weaver’s husband, meanwhile, has been understanding of her higher profile, 
unusually for a man of his generation, perhaps. But she says he was raised by a 
strong mother and was only ever grateful “that one of us could make a living. 
And in terms of what he’s given me, it’s priceless. If I didn’t have such a 
supportive husband, I couldn’t have done it. As it was, I did about one project 
a year. But I wouldn’t have been able to do that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93026c7c8295832d7bb6bb5cbfc3878bc141593%2F0_0_3448_5041%2F3448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93026c7c8295832d7bb6bb5cbfc3878bc141593%2F0_0_3448_5041%2F3448.jpg>
 In Alien: Resurrection in 1997. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
She is good at downtime. She loves living in New York and although she can’t 
take the subway – “the selfies and everything” – on the street, “I can just 
whizz along like Harry Potter in his invisibility cloak.” She loves “being part 
of the fabric of the city” so much that it can be a wrench to leave. “I still 
find it very difficult to be taken out of my little pond and go off and play 
someone else.”

One project that Weaver recently said yes to, rather surprisingly, was a cameo 
in the long-running ITV comedy drama Doc Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/oct/25/is-sigourney-weaver-in-doc-martin-weirdest-cameo-ever>
.Selena Cadell <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0128135/>, who plays Mrs Tishell in 
the show, is an old friend and would often tell her how fun the filming was. “I 
thought it was some sort of detective series. And then I was onJonathan Ross 
with Martin Clunes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c1bsGqQMNl4> – he’s so 
funny, such a lovely guy – and I had a drink with him and gushed away, and out 
of the blue they wrote this obnoxious part for me. I was thrilled.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710d078a9a1af4b8890defab538d7327359999d5%2F0_0_3880_3533%2F3880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710d078a9a1af4b8890defab538d7327359999d5%2F0_0_3880_3533%2F3880.jpg>
 With Martin Clunes in the TV series Doc Martin. Photograph: ITV 
Wasn’t she tempted to play the movie star card and say, “I’m sorry, I’m just 
too big for this”?

She looks horrified. “I can’t think of anything more awful. I don’t even know 
what that means. I don’t mind playing a person like that – I’m asked to play 
awful people all the time. But, to me, I’m still about eight years old. I’m a 
kid in a candy store. And to be part of the Doc Martin family for a week was a 
joy. I’m so jealous of British people. To hear about Martin’s life, with his 
livestock, spending the day with all these beautiful cows and sheep and horses. 
That’s the life.

“And to drive to Cornwall? So beautiful. Dorset and Devon. I’m just agog when 
I see the British countryside. Considering how many people there are and what 
an old country you are, you’ve managed to maintain such beauty and you’ve 
contained your sprawl. You’re all on the same page about the environment. And 
you all appreciate beauty and gardens and all these things. We have not been as 
successful.”

It’s a more optimistic view of Britain than is held by anyone who currently 
lives there, I say. Weaver laughs and suggests, “Prime minister May? All this 
stuff had to come out, but what’s so interesting is that there was so much 
passion against the EU. I don’t think anyone picked up on that. No one made any 
kind of argument about what the EU was giving you, only what it had taken away. 
Those arguments weren’t made.”

Our interview takes place before the US election, when it still seems likely 
thatHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> will 
win, something Weaver feels passionate about. “It’s shameful that we haven’t 
had a woman president,” she says, and the talk turns to the ugly mood on social 
media, not least surrounding the release of theall-female Ghostbusters reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters--2016->, a peculiar lightning 
rod for misogyny. “I was shocked,” Weaver says. “I still am. I read recently 
that the film hadn’t done well, and I wondered if the backlash online had been 
distracting for people. I enjoyed it very much.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F660d0f918e9edd338340b39ed8040bf0c5a797e0%2F0_0_2604_1736%2F2604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F660d0f918e9edd338340b39ed8040bf0c5a797e0%2F0_0_2604_1736%2F2604.jpg>
 In Ghostbusters in 1984. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
“I love those women and I was sorry that happened. But I think there’s so much 
misogyny in the political atmosphere this year. I can’t remember anything like 
it. It’s like this last gasp of get-back-in-the-kitchen. I don’t know what it’s 
about, but I know it’s the end of it, the dying groan of the species going 
extinct.” This optimism, in hindsight, now looks tragically premature.

Weaver had her own brief brush with targeted online campaigning earlier this 
year, when the synopsis for Tomboy,a forthcoming movie that was later renamed 
[re]Assignment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/reassignment-review-toronto-film-festival-sigourney-weaver>
, was criticised by some as transphobic. The movie co-starsMichelle Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/michelle-rodriguez-defends-transphobic-reassignment-toronto-film-festival-tiff>
 and tells the story of a surgeon who performs a gender reassignment operation 
against the will of the patient, a form of mutilation that was taken as a 
critique of the surgery in general.

Weaver says: “I can understand that. I can see that you could think we’re just 
trying to exploit this and make a movie about it. I play a very unsavoury woman 
who kidnaps Michelle Rodriguez, who is a guy, and turns her into a woman. And 
we certainly approached it with great sensitivity, about this kind of 
transformation.Walter Hill <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001353/> [the 
writer-director] was one of the original writers and producers of Alien, and I 
have always wanted to work with him again – he’s a master of the cinema. It’s a 
film noir. All I hope is people have an open mind about it.” In advance of 
shooting, Weaver says she met a “woman who was a transsexual and had some long 
talks with her about it, because she was worried. I very much tried to bring 
that energy in with me.” But again, the bottom line is, “You have to be able to 
tell a story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3169b6a4881fde4cf6e650a7739bc8ef682ebb11%2F386_143_2678_4057%2F2678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sigourney%20Weaver%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20asked%20to%20play%20awful%20people%20all%20the%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsigourney-weaver-alien-monster-emma-brockes-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3169b6a4881fde4cf6e650a7739bc8ef682ebb11%2F386_143_2678_4057%2F2678.jpg>
 Photograph: Jody Rogac for the Guardian. Stylist: Emily Barnes. Hair: Rebekah 
Forecast, both at the Wall Group. Makeup: Sally Harlor. Clothes: Halston 
Heritage. Earrings: Robert Lee Morris 
Never more so than now. Weaver tries to avoid spending too much time online. 
“I don’t go looking for trouble, don’t Google myself looking for horrible 
pictures. I admire people who can make all that part of their careers, and I 
know there are people at my agency who feel that’s very important. But I have 
enough to do.”

The prospect of spending many hours with James Cameron on Avatar may strike 
some as less than ideal, but Weaver says that, in spite of his tyrannical 
reputation, they have always had a good relationship. “He is a toughie when it 
comes to shooting. I was reading somewhere that he’s called Mij. Jim is 
charming, he’s a good guy. And very caring. And then, on set, he can become Mij 
– which is Jim spelled backwards – who is a different person, making terrible 
caustic remarks about everybody. Thefocus puller 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/02/28/283461599/keen-eyes-uncanny-instincts-keep-films-in-sharp-focus>
, or whatever. Never about actors. He’s very kind to us. It may be the one 
skill he doesn’t feel he has. Everything else, he can do.”

What does she do in the face of caustic remarks towards others? Weaver puts on 
her best head girl smile. “Not to sound like a Pollyanna, but I’d say, ‘You 
know what? When you say that to one person, you say that to all of us. We all 
feel like shit. I would encourage you to remember creativity thrives in an 
atmosphere of love, and don’t do that.’”

Weaver is so disarmingly sane, it is hard to imagine where her actor’s 
insecurity lies. But it is there, she says, in the way she worries and frets 
before the start of every film. You might imagine, with the new Alien, as with 
theAvatar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar> sequels, that she could 
rock up on day one, safe in the knowledge that she did all the prep years ago. 
No, she says. “I wish I felt that way. That’s such a secure person who does 
that. I think there’s a mechanism in the actor that doesn’t allow you to feel 
that way, because you have to approach each one from a completely fresh 
perspective. That’s sort of the fun of it. Otherwise, why bother?”

• A Monster Calls goes on general release on 1 January.
 