
The last time Sir Mo Farah had tasted defeat to a British athlete was in 
November 2012 – when the world heavyweight champion Anthony Joshua beat him in 
the 100m and javelin in a special edition ofSuperstars. Meanwhile, the last 
time he had lost a distance race to his domestic rivals was in January 2010, 
whenhe was third here in Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/10/mo-farah-edinburgh-international>
 to Ricky Stevenson and Steve Vernon.

But that proud record came to an end as a struggling Farah finished just 
seventh in the Great Edinburgh XCountry – five places back from Scotland’s 
Callum Hawkins, who led from the first kick of the 8km race to the last 15 
metres, when what appeared to be a winning lead rapidly evaporated as he was 
pipped on the line by the American Leonard Korir.

Sir Mo Farah: it was weird not to make Sports Personality of the Year podium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/sir-mo-farah-sports-personality-of-the-year-podium>
Afterwards Farah played down the loss, saying he had been tempted to pull out 
through illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/sir-mo-farah-sports-personality-of-the-year-podium>
. “I’m disappointed but you have to be honest with yourself,” he said. “During 
the last couple of weeks training hasn’t gone well, so I could have pulled out 
and stayed at home. But I was running for my country so I decided to come. 
Seventh is not where I want to be, but at least I can go back now and focus and 
get it right.”

Last year Farah was second behind Garrett Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/10/mo-farah-cross-country-defeat-barry-fudge>
 after getting bogged down in the heavy rain, which caused him to stumble on 
several occasions. This time round the conditions were much more placid but his 
rivals were not so obliging. As Hawkins set a fierce pace, Farah was 13th after 
the first lap, five seconds behind and, while on the track he has become adept 
at making such gaps up, this time the leading runners only increased it.

As Farah explained afterwards, he had a valid excuse for such a tepid showing. 
“I just got a little bit ill,” he said. “I’m not making excuses but it just 
hasn’t gone as smoothly as I wanted and it showed. But it’s not like I gave up. 
I was still fighting, I was still in pain at the end but fair credit to Callum 
– he’s a great athlete and showed what a great performer he is. I was hoping he 
would win the race and at the end it was pretty close.”

Hawkins, a 24-year-old from Kilbarchan in Scotland, first advertised his 
talent by finishingeighth in last year’s London Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/24/london-marathon-tsegay-tewelde-callum-hawkins-british-olympic-team>
 and followed it at the Rio Olympics, where he led at halfway before coming a 
hugely respectable ninth. A bronze medal at last month’s European Cross-country 
Championships showed Hawkins could also handle the mucky stuff too, and it was 
clear he wanted more in front of his home crowd. Initially he was followed by 
Korir and Heath, who had won the last three editions of this race, but with two 
kilometres remaining it had developed into a straight shootout between Hawkins 
and Korir, who had come 14th in the 10,000m at the Rio Olympics. With 400 
metres remaining, Hawkins kicked and appeared to establish a 10-metre lead but 
in the last 100 metres Korir closed the gap with his superior finish before 
thrusting past the Scot shortly before the line.

Said Hawkins: “It’s disappointing to get beaten but I gave it my all. I just 
think over the last year I’ve developed a mentality where I just go out, and if 
I die, then I die. I don’t really mind. I go for the win, and if I fall short, 
so be it.”

But Hawkins admitted he thought the race was his just before the line. “I 
noticed there was a bit of gap,” he added. “I slipped at the last burn but I 
don’t know if that would have made a difference. He’s a quality athlete. I’m 
just happy I even pushed him like that.”

Farah, meanwhile, insists there is no reason to be concerned given there are 
still eight months until he defends his 5,000m and 10,000m titles at the World
Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Championships in 
London. “I should be able to get it right,” he said. “I just have to go back 
and refocus again. These guys have been training, want to beat me and are in 
top, top shape. I’m not but I wanted to show up and see what I could do.”
 