
Between 30 and 40 members of the Welsh Language Society 
<https://www.llgc.org.uk/ymgyrchu/Iaith/TyngedIaith/index-e.htm> last night 
staged a sit-in at the newsroom department and the news and television studio 
of the BBC at Broadway, Cardiff.

In Bangor, about 50 people walked into the foyer of the B.B.C. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-19098180> studio there, sat on the floor, 
and said they would stay all night. Posters were stuck on the walls calling for 
more Welsh language programmes.


A B.B.C. spokesman at Cardiff said the society’s members, including young 
girls, had barricaded themselves inside. Four uniformed police officers and six 
detectives were on duty at the building. A police spokesman said: “We are 
waiting to see what will happen.”


The Cardiff demonstrators stuck up posters in Welsh inside the studio and the 
newsrooms which stated: “Hours of the BBC: English, 480 hours; Arabic, 80 
hours; Welsh, 18 hours.”


The door into the newsroom was eventually opened to allow BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> officials, press, and police to mix 
freely with the demonstrators, who included 14 girls. Society officials who 
took part in the demonstration claimed that 70 were in the newsroom at the 
beginning of the sit-in but many of them went home just before midnight. Most 
were said to be teachers.


Start of campaign
The Bangor demonstrators were unable to get in the newsroom. After they had 
been in the building for about an hour and a quarter, the police were called, 
but the demonstrators refused to leave. One of them said: “A petition and 
protests in the streets to draw attention to the unwillingness of the BBC to do 
anything to help the Welsh language have all been ignored. This is the start of 
a symbolic, nonviolent campaign against the BBC inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.”

The acting news editor at Cardiff, Mr Tudur Phillips, said the demonstrators 
were quite amenable. “There was no rough stuff. Their presence did not 
interfere with the news broadcasts.”

 