
Super League's latest and arguably most radical restructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/17/rugby-league-super-league-12-team-competition-2015>
 began to make much more sense when Sky announced a television deal to cover 
the sport until 2021.

The terms have not been announced but the Rugby Football League referred to 
its "transformational impact", which can be interpreted as a major increase on 
the existing deal running until 2016. Crucially, that will provide enough money 
to offer a significant increase in central funding toSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> clubs while also narrowing the 
gulf that has opened up with those outside the elite, which is essential if the 
reintroduction of promotion and relegation is going to work.

There is also likely to be a parachute payment to the two clubs who are 
relegated from the Super League this season to produce two tiers of 12 from 
2015, although that is one of many details still to be hammered out.

In addition to the deal, Sky have agreed to resume their coverage of the 
Championship competition from 2015, which will be a third major boost to the 
clubs outside the Super League in addition to the increase in funds and the 
reintroduction of promotion and relegation. It means the broadcasters will show 
more than 100 live matches next year, and the number of games they will screen 
this season will also go beyond 80 as they are to take French coverage of 
Catalan Dragons home games, mostly on Saturday nights.

The deal represents the latest in a series of triumphs for Nigel Wood, the 
long-serving chief executive of theRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> 
who has been criticised by a group of Super League clubs led by Wigan for the 
governing body's failure to capitalise on the game's commercial potential.

Wood did not receive much credit for the success of last autumn's World Cup 
despite his position as the tournament director, but this television deal has 
helped him drive through the restructuring of Super League. The competition's 
commercial portfolio is also set for further expansion before the start of the 
2014 season next weekwith two more partners to be added to First Utility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/20/super-league-new-sponsor>, who 
were recently confirmed as title sponsors.

For Sky, it is a timely reminder of their long-term commitment to league, 
having played such a key role in the switch in season involved in the launch of 
the Super League in 1996.That commitment had seemed in doubt in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/21/super-league-shake-up-tv-love-affair-rugby>
 as they allowed Premier Sports to take over coverage of the Championship and 
Australia's National Rugby League.

There had also been talk, never confirmed, of BT Sport expressing an interest 
in Super League coverage. That can only have strengthened Wood's hand, and may 
even have provided additional urgency, in a deal which goes a long way towards 
providing the financial stability craved by all rugby league clubs.
 