
Slang has always fascinated me. My father, who grew up in the council estates 
of Slough during the second world war, knew slang words for most situations, 
good and bad, which I would hear regularly around the house as a child.

Somewhere in my early 20s, I stumbled across a cheap secondhand reprint of a 
book by an 18th-century Londoner named Francis Grose, which recorded the 
everyday speech of the people he encountered in the low drinking dens, bagnios 
and rookeries around Covent Garden and St Giles. First published in 1785,A 
Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue remains for me the single most 
important slang collection of them all. Bawdy, mocking, occasionally brutal, 
superbly inventive and yet somehow overwhelmingly good-hearted, it helped fuel 
my interest these past 30-odd years in the language of everyday people – not as 
heard in drawing rooms or public orations, but late at night three sheets to 
the wind, or dodging shells in the trenches, when circumstances call for choice 
expressions that sum things up or cut them down.

Having spent the past four years writing a history of English slang, it 
gradually became clear to me that the digital age is altering slang: both the 
way it evolves and is spread, and attitudes towards it. Many of the historical 
sayings documented in my book – such as referring to a modern-day sex worker by 
the 13th century term, soiled dove, or employing a 200-year-old name for a gay 
man, backgammon player – would now be unacceptable to someone or other online, 
busily taking offence on behalf of everyone else. It is all right to publish 
these terms in a book – or deploy a magnificent variety of them in an 
award-winning series such asThe Sopranos – but try uttering any of them on 
social media and see how far that gets you. Is this form of speech under threat?

Of course, slang has always had its detractors. Ramsay MacDonald, Britain’s 
first Labour prime minister, declared 
<file:/Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/CN1926-01-16.pdf> in 1925 that 
using slang in conversation was the mark of “decadent minds”, and that such 
talk “murders truth itself”. The American lexicographer Noah Webster dismissed 
it in his original1828 dictionary <http://webstersdictionary1828.com/> as “low 
vulgar unmeaning language”. The poetCarl Sandburg 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/carl-sandburg> defined slang rather more 
poetically as “language that takes off its coat, spits on its hands and goes to 
work”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c273441efcf261711621d8f5c20423796470c4%2F88_56_1898_3094%2F1898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c273441efcf261711621d8f5c20423796470c4%2F88_56_1898_3094%2F1898.jpg>
 18th century slang-collector Francis Grose. 
Whether it goes to work or not, people have often determined that slang should 
be kept out of school. In October 2013, aLondon academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/15/london-school-bans-pupils-slang-innit>
 attempted to outlaw the use of certain slang words and phrases among its 
pupils, to help them perform well at interviews for universities and jobs. To 
that end, the school put up signs that read:

BANNED WORDS:
COZ
AINT
LIKE
BARE
EXTRA
INNIT
YOU WOZ and WE WOZ

Beginning sentences with BASICALLY
Ending sentences with YEAH

Much slang starts out as a kind of low-level guerrilla warfare directed at 
straight society, designed to keep out the squares, or annoy them, and is then 
abandoned by the originators once the words have become common currency. Groovy 
was the hip new jazz word of the early 1940s, batted around by bebop musicians 
and pulp novelists. Twenty years later, it was as mainstream as they come, 
co-opted by every branch of the media – so that today it is routinely taken for 
a 60s term. Ageing jazzers were probably choking on their berets listening to 
Simon and Garfunkel inThe 59th Street Bridge Song 
<http://www.paulsimon.com/song/59th-street-bridge-song-feelin-groovy/> (1966) 
singing about “feeling groovy”, as a once exclusive in-word suddenly flooded 
the airwaves.

One obvious drawback for the slang user is that often the hip word of today 
turns unexpectedly into the embarrassingly square word of tomorrow. Indeed, the 
word “hip” itself only became hip after its predecessor, “hep”, fell out of 
favour, as noted byBlossom Dearie 
<http://blogssomdearie.blogspot.co.uk/p/discography.html> in the song I’m Hip 
(1966): “When it was hip to be hep, I was hep”. One example of this kind of 
change has a personal resonance for me. In 2000, I published a book of words 
and phrases drawn from a lifetime’s obsession with the language of vintage 
crime fiction, film noir, jazz, blues, hillbilly, rockabilly and rock’n’roll 
music. I called the bookStraight From the Fridge, Dad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/14/guide-guidelines-50s-hipster-slang>
, an adaptation of a slang phrase meaning “cool” that I’d heard in that jewel 
among teenage exploitation films,Beat Girl 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beat_Girl> (1960). The book was a compendium of 
phrases associated with the more outre fringes of society – musicians, 
mobsters, beatniks, con artists – of the first half of the 20th century, the 
language of outsiders. In the book’s subtitle, I used a term that most jazz 
musicians of the late 1940s bebop era would have been proud to bear – hipster – 
meaning someone who was one of the sharpest, the most in the know, and I had no 
problem calling my bookA Dictionary of Hipster Slang.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRhr-zPTP250&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRhr-zPTP250>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRhr-zPTP250&media=>
Watch the trailer for Beat Girl, repository of choice slang such as ‘straight 
from the fridge, dad’. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rhr-zPTP250> 
Two years after it was published in the UK and the US, an American book 
appeared calledThe Hipster Handbook 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/97775/the-hipster-handbook-by-robert-lanham/9781400032013/>
 by Robert Lanham, full of nerdy lifestyle material seemingly aimed more at ivy 
league squares, and somehow this has become the default modern meaning of the 
term: geek chic. It describes people who, according to Lanham, enjoy “strutting 
in platform shoes with a biography of Che Guevara sticking out of their bags”, 
which shows how far the word has travelled since the days of alto sax giant 
Charlie Parker or boogie pianist Harry “the Hipster” Gibson. In Britain these 
days, the word hipster is frequently used as an insult, in much the same way 
that in the punk days of the late 1970s, one of the most damning labels you 
could hang on anyone was to call them a poser.

By the same token, the slang greeting “Yo!” has taken a long, strange path 
over the years. When rappers Public Enemy named their 1987 debut LPYo! Bum Rush 
the Show, this was very much the language of the street. Yet, fast-forward two 
decades to anoff-air private conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/apr/08/tonyblair.labour11> between 
two politicians at the G8 summit in Switzerland, as jive-talking George W Bush 
greets the then British prime minister Tony Blair:

GWB: Yo! Blair, how are you doing?

TB: I’m just …

GWB: You’re leaving?

TB: No, no, no, not yet. On this trade thingy …

This kind of language is a long way from the formal, statesmanlike way in 
which Hollywood or the BBC have traditionally portrayed dialogues between world 
leaders. A little later in the conversation, Bush talks about the need “to get 
Hezbollah to stop doing this shit”. Mind you, this is a man who warned a 
Washington audience in 2004 about “these hateful few who have no conscience, 
who kill at the whim of a hat”, and assured a New Hampshire chamber of commerce 
in 2000 that “I know how hard it is for you to put food on your family”, so he 
clearly enjoys a special relationship, not so much with England, but with the 
English language in general.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6e80a266b65239cf08b1ccff1311e287c2daa5%2F0_193_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6e80a266b65239cf08b1ccff1311e287c2daa5%2F0_193_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 ‘Yo, Blair!’: George W Bush lays some slang on Tony Blair at the 2006 G8 
summit, unaware of a nearby microphone. Photograph: Reuters 
At first glance, this might look like a straightforward example of a 
politician making a lamentable attempt to be “down with the kids”. Yet the 
conversation between Bush and Blair was recorded without their knowledge, and 
there was no thought of trying to impress the younger members of the electorate 
with this language. This was not the case in 2016 when theBritain Stronger in 
Europe campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/24/ravin-chattin-roamin-eu-remain-campaign-appeals-to-young-voters>
 group – headed by Conservative peer Lord Rose and partly bankrolled by a 
number of prominent hedge-fund managers – attempted to persuade young people to 
vote in favour of remaining in the European Union by means of a much-derided, 
supposedly streetwise advert, complete with obligatory hashtag:

WORKIN, LEARNIN, EARNIN, SHOPPIN, RAVIN, CHATTIN, ROAMIN, MAKIN, MEETIN, 
SHARIN, GOIN, LIVIN … Make sure you’re #VOTIN

Newspapers have generally been keen to give their readership an insight into 
the ways of slang. TheObserver, only a year after it was first published in 
1791, informed the public that “the slang technical term for persons in the 
pillory is babes in the wood”. These days, most papers run “new words of the 
year” articles, in which we are told, for example, that twerking had been 
brought in from the wilderness. This word for a type of dancing had been around 
in rap circles for roughly two decades – first surfacing in a 1992 New Orleans 
bounce track by DJ Jubilee called Do the Jubilee All – though the term would 
have meant little to anyone outside of Louisiana. A friend of mine from Texas 
tells me that her young son picked up the word in 2005 because so many children 
evacuated from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina arrived at his school, 
bringing local slang with them.

Twerking came to worldwide prominence after a performance by Miley Cyrus and 
Robin Thicke on 25 August 2013 atMTV’s annual video music awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2013/aug/26/mtv-vma-miley-cyrus-criticism-video>
 in New York. Within days, riding the subsequent media storm, Miley had 
appeared alongside Justin Bieber, singing on asingle by rapper Lil Twist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/29/miley-cyrus-justin-bieber-twerk>
. The song was called, with the deathless logic of a corporation at full cry in 
search of a dollar, Twerk. As bloggerPerez Hilton 
<http://perezhilton.com/2013-08-28-miley-cyrus-justin-bieber-twerk-song-listen-lil-twist#.WAd6fDYrLAw>
 put it: “On the heels of Miley Cyrus’ twerktastic evening at the VMAs comes 
the single that is going to BLOW YOUR TWEEN MIND!” Or not, as the case may be. 
Among the comments left by fans below this news item were “puke”, “gross”, 
“this song sucks”, and the considerably more eloquent “I think this song 
signals there is no hope for us, it’s over, we had a good run, society, 
however, has failed.”

Owing to the internet and 24-hour global media, the word twerk went from cool 
to embarrassing in record time, its recognition factor spreading so far outside 
its original core group thatPrivate Eye 
<http://privateeyenews.tumblr.com/post/60443648629/from-eye-1348-by-robert-thompson>
 was able to print a cartoon just weeks afterwards, showing a group of elderly 
gents in cloth caps gyrating arthritically in a building labelled “Twerking 
Men’s Club”, confident that readers of all ages would understand the meaning of 
the word.

Slang used to come from the street, from the working stiffs, the grafters, the 
taxi-dancers, the jack-rollers, the winchester geese, the hep-cats, the old 
lags, the mollies, the lobsters and the jug-bitten. Much of the time, it still 
does, but it is now fighting against a tidal wave of fake language deployed by 
committees of marketing executives or focus groups, all desperately seeking to 
look cool.

In March 1984, the Guardian’s Washington correspondent, Alex Brummer, reported 
that the word yuppie was one of “America’s hottest new status descriptions”. 
(The other he mentioned, yummie – “young upwardly mobile moderate” – seems to 
have died an early death.) The same year also saw the publication of Marissa 
Piesman and Marilee Hartley’s tongue-in-cheek workThe Yuppie Handbook: The 
State-of-the-Art Manual for Young Urban Professionals 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Yuppie-Handbook-State-Manual-Professionals/dp/067147684X>
, with its cover showing a power-suited couple proudly sporting must-have items 
such as a Rolex watch, a Gucci briefcase and a Sony Walkman.Newsweek rounded 
off December with acover feature 
<http://2407asg14.blogspot.co.uk/2014/01/newsweek-year-of-yuppie.html> 
declaring 1984 “the year of the yuppie”.

Yet no one from the streets would have come up with a term based on the words 
“young urban professional” – it smacked of advertising speak. Far more 
authentic, and of similar vintage, was the mocking English acronym “lombard” – 
loads of money but a right dickhead.

In today’s online information blizzard, billions of words are sent out into 
the fray in the hope of causing a Twitter storm, trending on Facebook or 
gaining countless plays on YouTube, alongside tap-dancing kittens and the 
latest celebrity wardrobe malfunction. In recent years, the move towards new 
slang being invented simply in order sell something or identify a target 
audience has greatly accelerated. Professional trend forecastersK-Hole  
<http://khole.net/>– whose name is street slang for an after-effect of ketamine 
use – coined the term “normcore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/feb/27/normcore-the-next-big-fashion-movement>
” in 2013, in which being “normal” is a supposedly radical lifestyle choice. At 
this year’sSocial Media Week <https://socialmediaweek.org/london/> gathering in 
London, the ad for one event urged delegates to “put on your marketing seatbelt 
and get ready for a content marketing riff-a-palooza of actionable takeaways” – 
which sounds vaguely as if it might involve suing your local fast-food outlet – 
while another claimed to have identified a new target audience, the “mipster”, 
or Muslim hipster.

Nerds v hipsters: what sells for brands?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/21/nerds-v-hipsters-what-sells-for-brands>
In the non-online world, people have been telling slang-heavy stories to their 
friends in bars around the world for centuries, but now if they come home drunk 
and do it on Twitter or Facebook, using words that are judged to be 
“inappropriate”, they might find themselves hung out to dry by modern-day 
vigilantes who can instantly mobilise thousands of signatories. Spend your 
teenage years plastering social media accounts with the latest slang and your 
own half-formed opinions, and in 10 years or sooner they will come back to 
haunt you as prospective employers trawl old sites looking into your 
background. This is the point at which a self-posted photo of yourself 
collapsed on a party floor with a toilet seat around your neck, surrounded by 
zombie-eyed classmates – lovingly annotated with 15 contemporary euphemisms for 
excessive chemical overindulgence – starts to look like a potential barrier to 
a career as a future archbishop of Canterbury.

Since the 1980s, a new wave of puritanism has emerged that increasingly seeks 
to ban anything it holds to be suspect. Witch-hunts are conducted against 
words, thoughts and modes of behaviour. Judgments are made, sentences passed, 
and appeals are futile. Ultimately, slang will have no place in this world, 
because the best of it is guaranteed to offend someone somewhere.

We live in an age in which pretty much every sexual activity known to the 
human race has been filmed and is available online – something many people in 
the 60s would perhaps have considered a liberated and long-overdue state of 
affairs. Yet numerous slang words for describing these activities would now be 
deemed unsayable in most public forums. That same technological advance has 
also made it possible to view footage of real-life atrocities, and brutality 
can be routinely filmed by the perpetrators using a cheap device carried in 
almost everyone’s pocket. You can watch all of this at the click of a button, 
but mind your language when you talk about it.

Sounds modern? This slang has previous…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8231bb7474339aeb373f89107860c1bd0f54b858%2F0_0_1669_2804%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8231bb7474339aeb373f89107860c1bd0f54b858%2F0_0_1669_2804%2F1669.jpg>
Fly
Now associated with the hip-hop fraternity, fly – a term of approval meaning 
smart, aware, capable – was in use in London 200 years ago, recorded in the 
third edition ofFrancis Grose <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Grose>’s 
Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1811): ‘FLY. Knowing. Acquainted 
with another’s meaning or proceeding.’

Groovy
Groovy in its modern sense comes from 1940s jazz, when a band played in the 
groove. Earlier, it was British slang for someone stuck in a rut, defined in 
Farmer and Henley’s Slang and Its Analogues (1890): ‘GROOVY, Adj. – Settled in 
habit; limited in mind.’

Punk
Forever associated with the music revolution of 1976, it began as a slang name 
for a prostitute, first recorded when Shakespeare was a boy. At the 1722 murder
trial of Mary Bolton 
<https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/browse.jsp?div=t17221010-24>, a witness called 
her a ‘nasty draggle tail’d toad, ugly Puss, and stinking Punk’.

Rap
Dr Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language 
<http://www.bl.uk/learning/langlit/dic/johnson/1755johnsonsdictionary.html> 
(1755) listed ‘To RAP out. To utter with hasty violence.’Wit, Character, 
Folklore & Customs of the North Riding of Yorkshire 
<https://archive.org/details/witcharacterfol00unkngoog> (1898), had ‘Rap, n. A 
friendly chat’ and ‘Rap-off, v. To speak on the spur of the moment.’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfae2e832bfafb1f89be1be19b1ef25089755412%2F36_0_2044_2874%2F2044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slang%3A%20the%20changing%20face%20of%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fslang-changing-face-of-cool-vulgar-tongues-max-decharne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfae2e832bfafb1f89be1be19b1ef25089755412%2F36_0_2044_2874%2F2044.jpg>
Like
Prefacing every other word with like sounds modern, but the beatniks were 
there first. In a Popeye comic of 1960, the sailor closes down a beat club his 
father opened in his cellar, prompting the latter to object ‘Popeye Don’t Dig 
It’ and ‘He’s Like Wasted’.

Crib
Calling a dwelling your crib, was not unknown in 17th-century England. 
Eventually it became English criminal slang for a home.Pierce Egan’s 1823 update
 <https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/008675066> of Francis Grose’s 
dictionary lists it as burglar’s terminology: ‘CRIB. A house. To crack a crib: 
to break open a house.’

Vulgar Tongues: An Alternative History of English Slang by Max Décharné is 
published by Serpent’s Tail (£14.99). To buy it for £12.29 go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/vulgar-tongues.html> 
or call 0330 333 6846
 