
Seventh in the Premier League and still buzzing from the exhilarating high 
inspired by the Angelo Ogbonna header that looped beyond Simon Mignolet in the 
last minute oftheir replay against Liverpool, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/09/west-ham-liverpool-fa-cup-fourth-round-replay-match-report>
 West Ham United are heavy favourites to reach the last eight of the FA Cup at 
the expense of Blackburn Rovers, who are 18th in the Championship and sold 
their most prize asset, Jordan Rhodes, to Middlesbrough last month.

As a former West Ham player, however, Slaven Bilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slaven-bilic> is taking nothing for 
granted. Nineteen years ago, he was part of the side that lost in the fourth 
round of the League Cup to Stockport County, Iain Dowie ending a grim 
eight-game run without a goal by crashing a calamitous header into his own net, 
before they followed it up with a third-round exit from the FA Cup at the hands 
of Wrexham a month later.

West Ham’s Slaven Bilic ‘gutted’ after latest Andy Carroll injury setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/19/slaven-bilic-andy-carroll-west-ham>
Bilic was able to recall the fury that spilled from the Upton Park terraces 
after Kevin Russell’s 25-yarder in the 90th minute won the replay for Wrexham. 
“The first game we played it was 1-1 at Wrexham and I didn’t play because my 
son Leo was born on that day,” West Ham’s manager said. “It was 4 January 1997. 
I was in hospital and Hugo Porfírio scored exactly in the minute when my son 
was born. The replay here, it was one of the really bad memories. There were 
police on horses and all that, because the fans wanted the chairman to sign a 
striker.

“We were struggling. We weren’t conceding a lot of goals but we couldn’t score 
and then Wrexham came and they scored at the end of the game, a great goal from 
25 yards. After that we signed Johnny Hartson and Paul Kitson and we stayed up.”

These are different times. West Ham are pushing for a European place and they 
recently convinced their best player,Dimitri Payet, to extend his contract  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/dimitri-payet-west-ham-china>
until 2021.

However, while Bilic would not go as far as comparing the Stockport and 
Wrexham defeats with Saturday’s game against Blackburn, West Ham travel to 
Ewood Park depleted by injuries. With Andy Carroll ruled out for two weeks with 
a groin strain, Enner Valencia struggling with an ankle problem and Diafra 
Sakho not due to return to training until Monday, Emmanuel Emenike is set to 
start up front for the first time since his loan move from Fenerbahce, while 
Michail Antonio is likely to fill in at right-back because Joey O’Brien and 
James Tomkins are injured and Sam Byram is cup-tied.

Bilic was full of praise for Blackburn and noted that 61% of their goals have 
been scored from set-pieces. West Ham could switch to a back three at a ground 
where Stoke City and Swansea City met a grisly end in the Cup last season.

“Make no mistake, I am expecting a very tough game and it wouldn’t be a big 
surprise if a club like Blackburn, at home, beats a Premier League side in the
FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>,” Bilic said. “It’s 
happened many, many times before.”

A year ago, West Ham’s season unravelled after losing 4-0 to West Bromwich 
Albion in the fifth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/14/west-bromwich-albion-west-ham-united-fa-cup-match-report>
. That was the beginning of the end for Sam Allardyce and while Bilic has far 
more credit in the bank than his predecessor, the Croat knows better than most 
that West Ham rarely like to do things the easy way.
 