
Slovenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/slovenia> has amended its 
constitution to make access to drinkable water a fundamental right for all 
citizens and stop it being commercialised.


With 64 votes in favour and none against, the 90-seat parliament added an 
article to the EU country’s constitution saying “everyone has the right to 
drinkable water”.

The centre-right opposition Slovenian Democratic party (SDS) abstained from 
the vote saying the amendment was not necessary and only aimed at increasing 
public support.

Slovenia is a mountainous, water-rich country with more than half its 
territory covered by forest.

“Water resources represent a public good that is managed by the state. Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> resources are primary and 
durably used to supply citizens with potable water and households with water 
and, in this sense, are not a market commodity,” the article reads.

The centre-left prime minister, Miro Cerar, had urged lawmakers to pass the 
bill saying the country of two million people should “protect water – the 21st 
century’s liquid gold – at the highest legal level”.

The greenest city mayors take home the fight against climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/30/green-city-mayors-climate-change-paris-cop21>
“Slovenian water has very good quality and, because of its value, in the 
future it will certainly be the target of foreign countries and international 
corporations’ appetites.

“As it will gradually become a more valuable commodity in the future, pressure 
over it will increase and we must not give in,” Cerar said.

Slovenia is the first European Union country to include the right to water in 
its constitution, although according to Rampedre (the online Permanent World 
Report on the Right to Water) 15 other countries across the world had already 
done so.

Earlier this year Slovenia also declared the world’s first green destination 
country by the Netherlands-based organisation Green Destinations, while its 
capital, Ljubljana, wasmade the 2016 European Green Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/30/green-city-mayors-climate-change-paris-cop21>
.

Amnesty International said Slovenia must ensure the new law would be also 
applied to the 10,000-12,000 Roma people living in the country.

“Many Roma are … denied even minimum levels of access to water and 
sanitation,” Amnesty said in a statement.

The European Union agreed in 2014 to exclude water supply and water resources 
management from the rules governing the European internal market, following the 
first successful European Citizens’ Initiative that managed to raise more than 
one million signatures.
 