
At first, Yury Scherbakov thought the cracks appearing in a wall he had 
installed in his two-room flat were caused by shoddy workmanship. But then 
other walls started cracking, and then the floor started to incline. “We sat on 
the couch and could feel it tilt,” says his wife, Nadezhda, as they carry 
furniture out of the flat.


Yury wasn’t a poor craftsman, and Nadezhda wasn’t crazy: one corner of their 
five-storey building at 59 Talnakhskaya Street in the northern Russian city of 
Norilsk was sinking as the permafrost underneath it thawed and the foundation 
slowly disintegrated. In March 2015, local authorities posted notices in the 
stairwells that the building was condemned.

Cracking and collapsing structures are a growing problem in cities like 
Norilsk – a nickel-producing centre of 177,000 people located 180 miles above 
the Arctic Circle – as climate change thaws the perennially frozen soil and 
increases precipitation. Valery Tereshkov, deputy head of the emergencies 
ministry in the Krasnoyarsk region,wrote in an article 
<http://www.aif.ru/society/safety/nastuplenie_na_vechnuyu_merzlotu_mchs_sozdayot_arkticheskie_spasatelnye_centry>
 this year that almost 60% of all buildings in Norilsk have been deformed as a 
result of climate change shrinking the permafrost zone. Local engineers said 
more than 100 residential buildings, or one-tenth of the housing fund, have 
been vacated here due to damage from thawing permafrost.

In most cases, these are slow-motion wrecks that can be patched up or 
prevented by engineering solutions. But if a foundation shifts suddenly it can 
put lives at risk: cement slabsbroke a doctor’s legs 
<http://bloknot-krasnoyarsk.ru/news/pri-obrushenii-kryltsa-v-zdanii-norilskoy-stantsii-602947>
 when the front steps and overhanging roof of a Norilsk blood bank collapsed in 
June 2015. Building and maintenance costs will have to be ramped up to keep 
cities in Russia’s resource-rich north running.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe11cac685ecbe475d37fe3c93bcb01b3d37231c4%2F0_152_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe11cac685ecbe475d37fe3c93bcb01b3d37231c4%2F0_152_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Nadezhda Scherbakova moves furniture out of her flat after thawing permafrost 
caused the structure to crack. Photograph: Alec Luhn 
Engineers and geologists are careful to note that “technogenic factors” like 
sewer and building heat and chemical pollution are also warming the permafrost 
in places like Norilsk, themost polluted city in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/15/norilsk-red-river-russias-most-polluted-city-clean>
. But climate change is deepening the thaw and speeding up the destruction, at 
the very same time that Russia is establishing new military bases and
oil-drilling infrastructure 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timdaiss/2016/08/22/a-deal-with-the-devil-russia-kicks-up-arctic-oil-drilling/3/#72d6559e3038>
 across the Arctic. Greenpeacehas warned 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/russia/Global/russia/report/2010/4/copy-of-7.pdf> 
that permafrost thawing has caused thousands of oil and gas pipeline breaks.

“There were problems there before, but climate change exacerbates them,” says 
Ali Kerimov, an engineer at Foundation Research and Production in Norilsk. “We 
need to study each case separately to understand what awaits us with climate 
change.”

Global warming has been tied to more frequent forest fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/russia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show>
 and flooding across Russia, but its impact on permafrost, which covers 
two-thirds of the country’s territory, is also beginning to be felt. At least
seven giant craters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/12/siberia-russia-craters-climate-change>
 have been discovered in Siberia – reportedly caused by thawing permafrost 
allowing methane to explode out of the ground – and a 12-year-old boy in 
Salekhard died from anthrax in August afterthawing released bacteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia>
.

Arctic islands and the northern coastline – and scientific outposts there – are
disappearing into the sea 
<http://siberiantimes.com/other/others/news/n0753-vanishing-arctic-how-warming-climate-leaves-remote-permafrost-islands-on-the-precipice/>
 as permafrost thaws, sea ice melts and wave action increases. Valery Grebenets 
of Moscow State University’s department of cryolithology and glaciology teaches 
his students 13 “horror stories” about thawing permafrost, including buckling 
roads and railways, soil runoff killing fish and the release of toxic and 
radioactive pollutants contained by frozen dams.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc49398b814c509a220c9c0b1154f51cbfb1fac%2F0_648_2144_1285%2F2144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc49398b814c509a220c9c0b1154f51cbfb1fac%2F0_648_2144_1285%2F2144.jpg>
 Norilsk, home to many heavy industry factories, is the most polluted city in 
Russia. Photograph: Denis Sinyakov/Reuters 
Flying into Norilsk at the end of August, when the vegetation of the treeless 
tundra was already turning orange and spots of snow were on the ground from an 
early storm, it’s hard to picture this warming. Built by gulag prisoners 
starting in 1935, the city gets more than six weeks of polar night and up to 2m 
tonnes of snow each winter, when the temperature can drop below -51C (-60F).

But average annual temperatures in the Arctic are rising faster than anywhere 
else –more than 2C since 1900, 
<http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/reportcard/exec_summary.html> and a 2015 study 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125005/meta;jsessionid=988198CE07A3443E077F281ED3228354.c2.iopscience.cld.iop.org>
 found increases in soil temperatures across Russia’s permafrost regions over 
the last 50 years. Soil temperatures in Norilsk increased by almost 1C between 
1999 and 2013.

The term permafrost is somewhat a misnomer: while deeper soil remains frozen 
year-round, the “active layer” of soil extending several feet below the surface 
thaws each summer. It thaws unevenly, contorting and warping buildings. To 
avoid this, in the 1960s builders of apartment blocks in Norilsk began drilling 
holes up to 100-ft deep and pouring reinforced concrete piles that stuck into 
the permanently frozen soil below. The piles also lifted each building off the 
ground, allowing air circulation to cool the soil and preventing further 
thawing.

More than 100,000 people are living in buildings in “critical condition” 
across Russia’s far north

Engineers didn’t think the soil could start warming so much, however. Data 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125005/meta;jsessionid=988198CE07A3443E077F281ED3228354.c2.iopscience.cld.iop.org#erl521538f4>
 from a Norilsk monitoring station showed the active layer has been thawing 
earlier and its thickness has increased from three feet to five feet. In 
addition, climate change has increased precipitation, adding more moisture to 
the soil that freezes and expands, gradually crumbling the concrete piles. More 
snow covers the ground and further warms the permafrost.

“In most cases the effect of climate change was not accounted for properly or 
at all, so the story is not about one building falling, even though there are 
examples of that, but about thousands of people living in buildings which have 
the potential to fall,” says Dmitry Streletskiy, an assistant professor of 
geography at George Washington University.

The problem also threatens Alaska, Canada and other northern territories, but 
onlyRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has cities so far north. 
Forty percent of buildings in the coal mining city Vorkuta have been damaged, 
the emergencies ministry’s Tereshkov says. Salekhard, Nadym and Dudinka, the 
port on the Yenisei River through which Norilsk Nickel ships its products, have 
also seen deformations, among others. More than 100,000 people are living in 
buildings in “critical condition” across Russia’s far north, Streletskiy 
estimates.

At 59 Talnakhskaya Street, an 80-apartment building dating to the 1960s, the 
sinking corner became visible when a giant crack appeared on the side. Workers 
cemented it over and propped up the corner with logs, but the deformation 
continued.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa28b3c261034ed7a42c70fede48240a35d6a2573%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa28b3c261034ed7a42c70fede48240a35d6a2573%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The site of a nine-storey block of flats in Norilsk that was torn down after 
the foundations became deformed and cracks became visible. Photograph: Alec Luhn
Tatiana, a fire protection engineer who lives in the building with her son and 
husband, says she found out it was condemned from the TV news, although they 
had seen cracks and tears in the wallpaper.

“When I saw the television report, I thought they were talking about the 
building next door. You don’t think that you could be relocated,” she says. 
“We’ve lived in the building for 15 years, and nothing suggested this would 
happen.”

The city has been offering residents replacement homes elsewhere. Even the 
front doors have been removed from many vacated flats, leaving only the 
occasional ratty chair, empty vodka bottle or Iron Maiden poster. The slight 
tilt to the worst-hit stairwell creates the same disorienting sensation as the 
shifting floors of a carnival funhouse. But a handful of flats are still 
occupied; Tatiana is waiting for an appraisal so her family can receive 
compensation.

I think the problem [of climate change] is exaggerated. Our icebreakers won’t 
be out of work for the next 100 years
Alexei Novakov 
It’s a story that has repeated itself again and again in Norilsk; buildings 
have been partially or fully torn down, leaving only drooping foundations. 
Demolitions often have to be done by hand and cost 15 to 20 million roubles 
(£195,000-260,000) each, Kerimov says.

Norilsk city hall referred requests for commentary to the construction company 
NorilskStroiRekonstruktsiya, which says it has done work to strengthen the 
foundations of “almost all the buildings in Norilsk”. At least nine 
unsalvageable buildings have been torn down in the past decade, according to 
manager Vladislav Petrovsky.

If temperature monitoring or visible deformations tip maintenance workers off 
in time, structures can be saved.Thermosyphons 
<http://www.pbslearningmedia.org/resource/nvmms.sci.phys.permafrost/preserving-permafrost/>
 were installed to cool the soil under the apartment block at 36 Nansen Street 
when temperature probes showed warming there, for instance.

But sometimes changes come too suddenly. A brick office building on 
Komsomolskaya street cracked like an egg one September morning in 2009 and 
stands empty to this day. A top corner of the building pitched forward 70cm, 
sending jagged fissures up the middle of its facade and squashing windows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e8693509c43fd1eb43948317745159a4c96054e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slow-motion%20wrecks%3A%20how%20thawing%20permafrost%20is%20destroying%20Arctic%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fthawing-permafrost-destroying-arctic-cities-norilsk-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e8693509c43fd1eb43948317745159a4c96054e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Workers tried to plaster over the cracks of 59 Talknakhskaya Street, but the 
building soon sank too low and had to be condemned. Photograph: Alec Luhn 
Zoya Yanchenko, a botanist at the Institute of Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> Agriculture and Environment, went 
into the building the next day to retrieve her equipment. “When we saw what had 
happened, it was terrifying,” she said. “It made my head spin, because the 
floor was at an angle. It wasn’t for the weak-nerved.”

“Happily there weren’t any human casualties in 2009 because it was 3am and the 
building was empty,” Kerimov said. But things could have been very different 
had it been daytime.

Norilsk mayor Oleg Kurilov created a “permafrost council 
<http://www.ttelegraf.ru/?newsline_read=33213>” of Kerimov and other experts in 
2014 to try to preserve building foundations. Kerimov has been campaigning for 
stricter building codes to be drafted for the far north and has presented ideas 
to deputy prime minister Dmitry Rogozin. But it’s questionable whether the 
political will is there to address the challenge, since many local officials 
and residents like those at 59 Talnakhskaya have doubts about climate change.

“I think the problem is exaggerated. Our icebreakers won’t be out of work for 
the next 100 years,” says Alexei Novakov, director of the port in Dudinka, when 
asked about climate change, which he argues is part of a “natural cycle”. 
Although Grebenets warns that as permafrost retreats from the river bank, piers 
and other structures there could be compromised, Novakov says he didn’t “see 
any trend that piers have suddenly started to be destroyed”.

This skepticism goes all the way to the top: president Vladimir Putin has in 
the pastvoiced doubt 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-climatechange-summit-russia-media-idUSKCN0SN1GI20151029>
 that human activity is behind climate change and suggested warmer temperatures 
will benefit the country. Russian media rarely mentions the issue.

Dirty, isolated and freezing: life in Arctic circle city – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/oct/14/day-of-night-nights-of-day-elena-chernyshova-exhibition>
Adapting northern cities to climate change is also a difficult sell due to the 
price tag: costs typically increase by 30 to 40% to build a structure able to 
withstand more volatile permafrost conditions, Kerimov says. Residents of 59 
Talnakhskaya have already called for the city to spend more money on keeping up 
buildings and monitoring soil conditions – but recession and sanctions make 
funds hard to find.

“Many climate change problems are solved by investment, spending on 
engineering. Where will we get this investment? Will local budgets find this 
money?” asks Oleg Anisimov, head of the climatology department at the State 
Hydrological Institute in St Petersburg. “With the dollar at 70 roubles, the 
budget in the north won’t be enough.”

“The peasant won’t cross himself until the thunder crashes,” Kerimov says, 
using a Russian folk saying. “As long as there’s no catastrophe with human 
casualties, nobody will do anything.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 