
The Western Australian museum is running a public competition to name a new 
species of “flamboyant sea-slug”, part of an order named nudibranch.

The blue and orange creature is up to 8cm long and looks like a cross between 
a slug and a Pokémon.

It was discovered by WA scientist Dr Nerida Wilson during a diving expedition 
off the coast of Dampier, about 1,500km north of Perth, in 2000.

Wilson said the nudibranch was “very memorable” and “has an impressive display 
to scare off predators”, which consists of puffing up its cerata, the 
orange-tipped blue sausages that line its body, and waggling them at suspected 
attackers.

Octopus dubbed Casper the friendly ghost could be new species
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/05/octopus-dubbed-casper-the-friendly-ghost-could-be-new-species>
The purpose of the cerata is to increase the slug’s surface area and allow it 
to take in more oxygen. They’re brightly coloured to reflect the toxins in the 
nudibranch’s diet, which it in turn extrudes through its skin.


Wilson said it had taken 16 years to determine it was a new species of 
nudibranch, due to the sheer abundance of nudibranchs in Australian waters.

She has handed the task of naming the creature over to the public, running a 
competition in conjunction withRadio National’s Off Track program 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/offtrack/features/name-this-creature/>
 to determine the second part of the scientific name, which will begin with the 
genusMoridilla. 

Program host Ann Jones said this nudibranch was “one of the weirdest creatures 
I’ve ever come across — it has ice blue sausages all over its back, it’s a 
hermaphrodite, it does an amazing dance when it’s threatened where it waves its 
sausages around and it goes through a metamorphoses sort of like a butterfly.”
Ann Jones (@jones_ann) 
Going to enter the comp to Name the new Nudibranch species? Read this 'how-to' 
firsthttps://t.co/rK1dWwxeIV <https://t.co/rK1dWwxeIV> 
pic.twitter.com/P29tW3i8t9 <https://t.co/P29tW3i8t9>
 <https://twitter.com/jones_ann/status/762774172217081856> August 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jones_ann/status/762774172217081856> 
There are about 3,000 recognised species globally, and discovery is apparently 
so common that a website dubbed “Gary and Dave’s world of nudibranchs” based 
out of the Sunshine Coast in Queensland, includes ahow-to guide on naming 
<http://www.nudibranch.com.au/naming.html> the gastropods.

Those searching for inspiration can try the Nudibranch Central facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/1488080524784020/>, which warns prospective 
nudibranch enthusiasts not to misinterpret the name. (“There are NO NUDISTS 
here only sea slugs,” it says.)

The name “nudibranch” means naked gills and is a reference to those cerata, or 
feathery gills.

It’s also pronounced NEW-dih-bronk, according to the National Geographic 
<http://animals.nationalgeographic.com.au/animals/invertebrates/nudibranch/ 
http://animals.nationalgeographic.com.au/animals/invertebrates/nudibranch/>, so 
be sure to adjust your pronunciation of the inevitableMoridilla Nudi 
McNudibranch accordingly.

Names must be submitted by Monday  
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/offtrack/features/name-this-creature/>
.
 