
Mark Selby wants to join Leicester City’s open-top bus parade after missing 
the greatest moment in the club’s history while hewrapped up the World Snooker 
Championship title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/02/mark-selby-world-championshp-ding-junhui>
.

Mark Selby clinches second world title with 18-14 win over Ding Junhui
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/02/mark-selby-world-championshp-ding-junhui>
Within 15 minutes of Leicester being confirmed as Premier League champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 on Monday night, Selbyclinched an 18-14 victory over Ding Junhui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/02/world-snooker-championship-final-selby-ding-live>
 in the final at the Crucible in Sheffield.

Leicester’s staggering sporting achievements will be followed by days and weeks
of celebrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/03/leicester-city-fans-residents-celebrate-premier-league-title-win>
, and Selby has earned his right to be a part of that. The Foxes fan missed the 
club’s bigpromotion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/05/leicester-city-promoted-premier-league>
 party in 2014 because he was busybeating Ronnie O’Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/05/mark-selby-ronnie-osullivan-world-snooker-final>
 in the final in Sheffield.

Selby has time on his hands at the end of the snooker season and is already 
making plans to head to Leicester’smatch against Everton on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-premier-league-winners-celebrate>
. He said: “When they won the Championship two years ago they had the open-top 
bus tour on the day of the Crucible final but hopefully they can hold it back 
for me this time and I can be on there with them.”

Selby has revealed the part Leicester’s Jamie Vardy played in his potting 
success, encouraging him toovercome Marco Fu in the semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/mark-selby-marco-fu-snooker-world-championship>
.

“He was texting me through the semi-final, saying ‘good luck’ and hopefully 
I’ll get a few more messages from the boys,” Selby said. “It would be nice to 
go down and see them in the next home game and cheer them on, and not sit there 
in the crowd being under pressure thinking they still need to win when they’re 
already champions.”

If Leicester let him, Selby will bring along his trophy. “I paraded it on the 
first home game at the start of the season when I won my first world title,” he 
said.

That was also a match against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/16/leicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
, whose fans were cheekily told by a former world champion to jeer Selby.

Leicester City win the Premier League title after a fairytale season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
“John Parrott was giving me some stick because he said he’d told the Everton 
fans to boo me when I went around the ground but, thankfully, they managed to 
stand up and clap me,” Selby said.

“Who knows, they might not let me parade it but I’ll definitely go down to the 
game and hopefully I don’t have to pay for a ticket. The boys have done 
absolutely unbelievably. If someone had said they’dget into Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/five-premier-league-clubs-champions-league>
 having finished top six you’d have been pinching yourself.

“But they’ve been there, top of the league, for probably three quarters of the 
season and everyone kept saying for weeks that the wheels were going to fall 
off at some stage but they proved everyone wrong, and fair play to them.”
 