
Can the might of the Chinese government overcome complex needs and investor 
disinterest to deliver an ambitious programme to save China’s 450 million urban 
inhabitants from floods?


Flooding causes more economic, social and humanitarian damage than any other 
natural disaster and has affected 2.3 billion people over the past 20 years, 
according toresearch from the Global Resilience Partnership 
<http://www.globalresiliencepartnership.org/water/>. China has been 
particularly affected. This year saw the worst floods in the country since 
1998. In July150 people were killed 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-36873902> in central and northern 
China after intense rainfall.

“In China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> the climate is bringing 
more rain in summer. From June to September there will be high density rainfall 
which is bringing up urban planning problems,” says Michael Zhao, an associate 
and expert in water management in the Shanghai office of global urban designers 
Arup.

“There’s already been very serious flooding for four or five years each 
summer. You will see flooding in more and more cities. As urbanisation brings 
more people to those cities the problem becomes worse and worse.”

How tweeting about floods became a civic duty in Jakarta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/25/floods-jakarta-indonesia-twitter-petajakarta-org>
An unprecedented scale

In December 2013 President Xi Jiping announced a national plan to combat 
flooding in China’s cities–inhabited by 450 million people 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/278566/urban-and-rural-population-of-china/>
. “He said that during the upgrade of urban drainage infrastructure they should 
make it a priority to retain valuable water resources and to utilise the 
natural system to achieve drainage, to establish natural retention, natural 
infiltration and natural purification – like a sponge city,” says Zhao.

Initially 16 cities were selected as pilots for China’s “sponge cities” 
programme, but eventually it will be rolled out nationally. Designers will 
concede to the wisdom of nature to ensure water is absorbed when there’s an 
excess: instead of water-resistant concrete, permeable materials and green 
spaces will be used to soak up rainfall, and rivers and streams will be 
interconnected so that water can flow away from flooded areas.

The ambitious project is being funded by central government (15-20%), local 
government and the private sector. The central government is givingeach city 
400m yuan (£46m) a year 
<http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2016-08/04/content_26345067.htm> for the 
first three years. In return, 20% of the chosen cities must be constructed to a 
sponge city standard by 2020, and 80% by 2030. All of the pilot cities need to 
have completed the pilot area construction by 2017.

One of the biggest takeaways for urban planners ... [is how to] integrate a 
climate resilient system into urban planning
WenMei Ha 
The sponge city programme takes inspiration from low impact development in the 
US, water sensitive urban design in Australia and sustainable drainage systems 
in the UK.

But nothing at this scale has ever been attempted before. “The sponge city 
programme is more comprehensive and ambitious,” says WenMei Ha, head of the 
China water management team at Arcadis, an international urban consultancy 
which was appointed to this plan by the government.

Arcadis is working on a sponge city project in Wuhan, a city of 10 million 
people in Hubei province in central China. The city is in dire need of efforts 
to counter the risk of flooding – in July,metro stations, roads 
<http://shanghaiist.com/2016/07/07/wuhan_flooded.php> and the football stadium 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-36732306> were all under water. 

“Generally, this programme involves water governance, financing structures and 
technical measures,” Ha says. “With regard to the technical aspects, an 
integrated urban water system would be built, which incorporateslow impact 
development 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-impact_development_(U.S._and_Canada)> 
measures, upgrades the traditional urban drainage system and provides solutions 
for excessive run-off discharge. These three measures together make up a sponge 
city storm-water system.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fchina-government-solve-urban-planning-flooding-sponge-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c975be733d4171e25f6b4a8b2d38e65e0e75de%2F0_159_3902_2341%2F3902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soak%20it%20up%3A%20China%E2%80%99s%20ambitious%20plan%20to%20solve%20urban%20flooding%20with%20%E2%80%98sponge%20cities%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fchina-government-solve-urban-planning-flooding-sponge-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soak%20it%20up%3A%20China%E2%80%99s%20ambitious%20plan%20to%20solve%20urban%20flooding%20with%20%E2%80%98sponge%20cities%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fchina-government-solve-urban-planning-flooding-sponge-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c975be733d4171e25f6b4a8b2d38e65e0e75de%2F0_159_3902_2341%2F3902.jpg>
 While China’s investors are reportedly not interested in the sponge cities 
programme, persistent flooding will have far-reaching consequences for the 
country’s residents and economy. Photograph: VCG/Getty Images 
The sponge cities programme isn’t just designed to tackle flooding but also to 
offer a solution to water shortages. China hasmuch less freshwater per capita 
than most countries 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/04/china-has-a-water-crisis-how-can-it-be-solved/>
, many sources of what are polluted. Arup is working on a sponge city 
masterplan in Baotou in inner Mongolia.

“Water shortage is seriously heightened there,” says Zhao. “Urbanisation is 
quite limited by the shortage of water.” The plan looks at how to retain 
rainwater and keep it inside the catchment. Although flooding is not a problem 
in Baotou now, urbanisation is happening rapidly and “we can foresee [that] if 
it continues in the conventional way, urban flooding will heighten in the next 
five years,” he adds.

Measuring progress

It’s two years since the sponge cities programme began but Ha says it’s still 
too early to tell if it will be successful. The programme is facing great 
challenges due to “the ever increasing urban population,” he says. “One of the 
biggest take aways for urban planners and policymakers in other countries would 
be how to overcome those challenges and integrate a climate resilient system 
into urban planning.”

Flooding in China leaves more than 100 people dead or missing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/flooding-china-leaves-more-than-100-people-dead-or-missing-yangtze-river-typhoon>
Zhao agrees that the programme is “very challenging”. He says, “from our 
experience working with pilot cities governments and local design institutes, 
there are both technical and management issues, depending on how the local 
pilot cities manage those challenges; some cities move faster, some comparably 
slow.” The technical challenges are making sure that the masterplans accurately 
consider the local hydrology and climate, Zhao adds.

And there are challenges around financing the project by public private 
partnership (PPP) investment, due to the need to identify the returns for all 
parties. “Because it is difficult to measure the service, it is difficult to 
set up a healthy financial model,” says Zhao. “The rainwater treatment 
facilities owners [for example] don’t normally benefit [financially].” But he 
says that once a successful PPP agreement is decided upon, that can be used in 
other cities.

The Economist recently reported that investors are “not interested 
<http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21707192-chinas-private-investors-keep-their-hands-their-pockets-sponge-wrung-dry>
” in the sponge city programme, indicating a slowdown of the Chinese economy in 
general. But if the majority of China’s densely populated cities are submerged 
every summer, the economy and the residents will suffer even more.

Still, Zhao sees the sponge cities programme as “a very positive change. 
Previously in the past 30 years people just followed conventional national 
standards … We are shifting to a sustainable way to manage water issues in 
cities. It’s a good sign.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 