
The failure of employers in elite professions such as law and the media to 
stop using unpaid interns in the face of warnings must be met with aban on the 
“unfair” practice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/28/unpaid-internships-privilege-ruin-journalism>
, the government’s social mobility commission will recommend this week.

The most sought-after professions have become even less representative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/top-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish>
 than the most selective universities, with jobs in effect closed off to those 
without a network of contacts and significant financial support. Only 4% of 
doctors, 6% of barristers, 11% of journalists and 12% of solicitors have 
working-class origins, according to recent research by the London School of 
Economics using Labour Force Survey data. In its end-of-year report to 
parliament, the commission warns that Britain remains “a deeply elitist nation 
where the chance of getting a well-paid job in a top profession is still 
strongly correlated with social background”.

It adds: “It is time to treat internships as part of the formal, not informal, 
labour market. In our 2014 state of the nation report we said that unless we 
found evidence that the employers were taking action to end the unfair activity 
of unpaid internships, the government shouldbring forward legislation to ban 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/government-refuses-to-ban-unpaid-internships>
.

“Unfortunately, we have been able to find little such evidence. As a result, 
the commission believes it is high time that internships are defined in law and 
unpaid internships banned.

“Any work placements that last more than four weeks should be classified as 
internships and those doing them should receive at least the minimum wage.”

Internships ranging from a few weeks to a year or more have become a 
prerequisite for access to the professions, the commission will claim.

The vast majority of internships are said to be in London, where the cost of 
living is highest. With the average cost of renting a room in London £743 a 
month and a monthly travel card more than £100, an internship can cost more 
than £1,000 a month to fund.

“The damaging impact of unpaid internships on social mobility cannot be 
overstated,” the commission’s report will say. “Young people without financial 
support from their parents are effectively excluded due to means not merit and 
potentially locked out from sought-after careers entirely.”

The commission, chaired by the former Labour cabinet minister Alan Milburn, 
finds that people from working-class backgrounds – even high attainers – are 
less likely to secure such jobs because they have “less access to networks and 
knowledge to navigate the system than their more affluent peers”.

The proportion of those in elite occupations coming from non-professional or 
managerial backgrounds was only four percentage points greater (50%) in 2014 
than it was in 2005.

Just over three years after graduating in 2010-11, those from the most 
disadvantaged backgrounds were 11% less likely to be in professional employment 
than those from the most advantaged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Funpaid-interns-elitist-uk-social-mobility-alan-milburn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95ca8c558488ea84cb33c5bf4c1e21e3074c670c%2F0_1453_1908_1144%2F1908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20mobility%20tsar%20calls%20for%20an%20end%20to%20unpaid%20internships%20and%20hits%20at%20%E2%80%98elitist%E2%80%99%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Funpaid-interns-elitist-uk-social-mobility-alan-milburn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20mobility%20tsar%20calls%20for%20an%20end%20to%20unpaid%20internships%20and%20hits%20at%20%E2%80%98elitist%E2%80%99%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Funpaid-interns-elitist-uk-social-mobility-alan-milburn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95ca8c558488ea84cb33c5bf4c1e21e3074c670c%2F0_1453_1908_1144%2F1908.jpg>
 Only 6% of barristers have working class origins. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
People whose parents worked in higher managerial and professional occupations 
make up only 14.7% of the population, but 27.2% of them end up in those 
occupations. Conversely, those with parents who worked in routine or 
semi-routine employment form 31.7% of the population, but only 17% of those who 
end up in top jobs.

The commission, whose deputy chair is former Tory cabinet minister Baroness 
(Gillian) Shephard, welcomes new recruitment processes brought in by some 
employers, such as looking beyond high academic results, lowering or removing 
Ucas points for graduate entry andintroducing “CV blind” interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/06/private-school-background-no-longer-necessary-law-career-diversity-scholarships-mentoring>
.

But it finds that the medical profession has “found it much harder to open up 
… to those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Others, like the Bar, risk becoming 
even more socially exclusive”. The report adds: “In the arts and media, the 
dramatic rise in unpaid internships and practice of securing work experience 
through contacts is closing off these careers to all but those from privileged 
backgrounds.”

If you’re at a state school, you’re less likely to reach the top professions 
than if you are educated privately
Theresa May 
Nearly half of the recruiters who took part in the High Fliers 2016 graduate 
labour market survey stated that graduates with no previous work experience 
would have little or no chance of receiving a job offer from their organisation.

According to the same research, 32% of new entrants are recruited by top 
graduate recruiters from internship programmes; in banking, it is as high as 
nearly 80% of the graduate intake.

Theresa May has claimed that tackling social inequalities is a priority and 
has criticised the current situation where: “If you’re at a state school, 
you’re less likely to reach the top professions than if you are educated 
privately.”

The new prime minister’s cabinet has the lowest proportion of ministers who 
went to private school in more than 70 years, with 70% state-educated.

However, the report says that evidence from some firms lays bare that real 
progress will only be made if leading employers radically reform recruitment 
practices.

The commission in partnership with the Social Mobility Foundation has launched 
aSocial Mobility Employer Index 
<http://www.socialmobility.org.uk/social-mobility-employer-index/> which will 
benchmark firms’ efforts in areas such as recruitment, selection and 
progression.

The report says that the index will be run with the aim of “encouraging 
employers to compete to recruit, and to keep, the best and brightest candidates 
from lower socioeconomic backgrounds”, but denies that it is seeking to name 
and shame the worst performers. The final rankings will be announced in the 
spring.
 