
There is a ferocious battle going on among individuals who have dedicated 
their professional lives to protecting children. On one side are 
well-performing children’s services departments, which believe the law can be 
an impediment to more effective and efficient ways of working. On the other are 
children’s rights campaigners, some social workers, family lawyers and senior 
social work academics, who view with horror the prospect of hard-fought-for 
laws upholding children’s rights being being made to disappear by the secretary 
of state.

At the centre of this struggle is the government’s children and social work 
bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2016-2017/0057/lbill_2016-20170057_en_4.htm#pt1-ch2-pb6-l1g29>
, which proposes allowing councils to request specific exemptions from 
legislation and statutory guidance so that they can “innovate” to improve 
children’s experience of being looked after or, and with perhaps somewhat less 
lofty ambition, achieve “the same outcomes more efficiently”. Opponents fear 
the bill is a way of skirting difficult problems caused by funding cuts and 
social worker recruitment and could even lead to children’s social care being 
outsourced and privatised.

Kneejerk restructures of children’s services are a recipe for disaster | 
Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/restructure-childrens-services-disaster-cornwall>
The bill being debated in the Lords on Tuesday proposes that a director of 
children’s services could ask the secretary of state to suspend part of a 
statute or guidance so social workers in that area could, for up to six years, 
try out an idea they believe would benefit children but that would, at present, 
be against the law.

Examples floated by ministers and other supporters of the bill include: 
removing the statutory requirement for an independent reviewing officer to 
carry out six-monthly care plan reviews; asking children in care whether they 
want to continue to have a social worker; removing the demand for foster carers 
of children in settled placements to write a daily log of what has happened in 
a child’s life; and removing the “looked-after” status of children who end up 
in custody, which would also mean they lose the rights that status confers. The 
last is a suggestion that Lord David Ramsbotham, former chief inspector of 
prisons and one of the peers opposing the bill, says he deplores.

“I would abor removing the care status of all children in custody,” he says.

Some social work leaders are frustrated with aspects of the child protection 
system, which they feel stifles innovation and can lead to a high turnover of 
staff. So they are irked and baffled by children’s rights campaigners’ 
opposition to the bill.

Carolyne Willow, director of the Article 39 charity, which fights for the 
rights of children living in institutional settings, is leadingTogether for 
Children <https://togetherforchildren.wordpress.com/latest/>, a group of some 
40 organisations – including the Care Leavers’ Association, Liberty and the 
Howard League for Penal Reform – campaigning against the bill.

“It is a breathtaking outrage,” she says. “It’s no good being swayed by kindly 
sounding voices and people who say they want to do right by children. These are 
the laws that protect children who have been through horrific experiences and 
who are in dire need. Without [statutory] duties, my experience is that local 
authorities do not have the capacity, funding or mindset to provide for 
children or vulnerable care leavers.”

As a social worker of 30 years standing, Willow says that when a council has 
failed to provide good care, the one thing she has been able to offer a child 
is recourse to the protections of the law. “Without legal obligations, she 
says, “we are back to before the second world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2005/may/18/childrensservices2>, where we 
were relying on individual goodwill or professional discretion and where 
families had no call [as of right] on the state.”

Without [statutory] duties, local authorities do not have the capacity, 
funding or mindset to provide for children
Carolyne Willow 
At the Association of Lawyers for Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, Martha Cover, a barrister and 
children’s rights specialist, warns: “More than ever before they [councils] are 
driven by the need to protect their resources and their reputations. This is 
unsurprising given the 40% reduction in their budgets over the last few years, 
and the public willingness to blame social workers whenever a child is killed.”

Unusually, there was no consultation (such as a green paper) before the bill 
waspresented in the Lords in May 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2016-05-19/debates/16051963000242/ChildrenAndSocialWorkBill%28HL%29>
. Its main cheerleader, Isabelle Trowler, chief social worker for children and 
families, hastabled a government amendment to the bill this week, at the report 
stage, 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/10/14/government-amend-social-work-bill-rule-profit-making-childrens-services/>
 to quell fears that it is a Trojan horse designed to open up children’s 
services to privatisation. Her action suggests the government is worried about 
the scale of opposition. Shadow children’s ministerEmma Lewell-Buck has vowed 
Labour will fight against the bill’s “exemption” clauses allowing councils to 
opt out 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/vow-fight-threat-child-protection-12015407#ICID=sharebar_twitter>
of sections of the1989 Children Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/joepublic/2009/nov/11/legislation-children>
.

Trowler has made it clear the government wants social workers to be able to 
exercise their professional judgment without too many rules getting in their 
way. “[Now, ]what the bill will hopefully enable us to do is where authorities 
request that [exemptions], they can innovate and do things differently,” she 
said earlier this year.

Three local authorities have publicly embraced the bill: Leeds, Hampshire and 
Lincolnshire. All have children’s services designated by Ofsted as at least 
“good” and elements rated “outstanding”, which is presumably why they feel they 
have earned the right to be trusted when they judge that parts of the 
legislation are not working for children and want to try alternatives.

“I’m seeing some of the best social work in Lincolnshire I’ve seen in my 
career. And we’ve shoehorned that into current legislation. With the 
opportunity to innovate, we could achieve something fantastic,” says Stuart 
Carlton, assistant director of children’s services at Lincolnshire county 
council.

“Under the current legislation and guidance, where things aren’t working well, 
children’s rights are being let down anyway,” he says. “So why are we so 
opposed to allowing good local authorities try something out? I understand the 
concerns: there need to be really good safeguards, but this could be a once in 
a lifetime opportunity to put the child right at the centre of everything we 
do.”

Outsourcing children's services is not a quick fix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/07/outsourcing-childrens-services-sandwell-council>
In Hampshire, director of children’s services Steve Crocker says it is vital 
the social work profession is not limited by an imperative to practise in a way 
that is “frozen in time” by laws passed more than a decade ago. “If you only 
build up more legislation and regulation, why are we surprised that social 
workers are leaving the profession at the rate that they do?” he asks. 
“Nobody’s saying, take away all the regulation. It would only be very specific 
parts. It’s about suggesting tweaks to what highly skilled people do.”

Crocker insists a way has to be found “to safely experiment that will help us 
all in the sector in future”. Underlying at least part of the enthusiasm for 
the potential freedoms contained in the bill seems to be immense frustration 
that child protection social work is minutely scrutinised by Ofsted and then 
savagely blamed in public when something goes wrong. The latter scenario 
typically leads to more legislation, and tighter prescription of what a social 
worker should do, how it should be done, and by when.

“I do think there’s a debate to be had about whether we aren’t massively 
over-regulated and over-checked in terms of our practice,” says Dave Hill, 
president of the Association of Directors of Children’s Services. “There’s an 
underlying issue of trusting professionals to do the best thing for children. 
[These clauses] would give us space to work. I can’t see millions of downsides.”

Yet lessons from Cornwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/restructure-childrens-services-disaster-cornwall>
 suggest that attributing poor practices to stifling over-regulation could be a 
red herring. The council has turned around a poorly performing children’s 
service over the past six years by rebuilding confidence and stability in the 
system through listening to families and children, reducing caseloads and 
better engaging with social workers.

How the London tri-borough has made its children’s services outstanding | 
Andrew Christie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/05/tri-borough-childrens-services-outstanding-kensington-chelsea-westminster-hammersmith-and-fulham>
Kathy Evans, chief executive of charity Children England, says she would be up 
for a thorough overhaul of the factors that impede social workers in their 
efforts to care for children and families. “But to do that does not warrant 
putting all child protection and care legislation and guidance up for grabs,” 
she says. If a child in custody with no social worker ends up having their 
rights breached, where are they to seek justice if the very law intended to 
protect them has been locally disapplied

“There is no explanation so far about how a child in an exempted area might be 
able to challenge or complain. I have no lack of respect or sympathy for local 
authorities – but with the best of professional intentions, you can miss what 
an exemption could mean for a child.”

The job of a child protection social worker is so difficult that many last 
only a few years in frontline practice. Those supporting the bill believe the 
attrition rate is precisely because of the overwhelming demands of detailed 
statutory guidance. But opponents of the bill are not convinced.

“Local authorities must be held to account by the law which protects 
children’s rights,” says Cover. “Even with the existing framework in place, 
poorly performing local authorities regularly fail to carry out their duties to 
children. The law reports of care cases demonstrate this with depressing 
regularity.”
 