
Son Heung-min is remembered at Bayer Leverkusen as an authentic global star; a 
player who scored important goals and fired Champions League qualifications and 
one who brought additional clout on the commercial front. Unfortunately for 
Son, who returns to his former club withTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> in the Champions 
League on Tuesday night, the manner of his departure remains fresh in the 
memory, too.

Son began last season as a Leverkusen player, having started in the Bundesliga 
opener at home to Hoffenheim and the first leg of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> play off away against 
Lazio. Then Tottenham ramped up their interest and, on the day before the 
return against Lazio, there was no sign of Son at Bayer’s open training session.

Bayer Leverkusen’s Roger Schmidt: 'I never wanted to be a football manager'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/bayer-leverkusen-roger-schmidt-tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-champions-league>
The South Korea international had been ill the previous weekend and he had 
missed Bayer’s league fixture at Hannover. However, when he failed to make the 
game against Lazio, there was disappointment. Bayer were 1-0 down from the 
first leg and it felt as though they would need all of their attacking weapons.

The Leverkusen sporting director, Rudi Völler, said that Son “would not have 
played anyway because he was sick at the weekend” but in the same interview he 
revealed that the forward had been in London to undergo his Tottenham medical. 
“At this moment, he is our player,” Voller said, at the time. “I saw many 
medicals in this business where there was no deal afterwards.”

It was a tough sell for Völler and, you suspect, he knew it. On the upside, 
Bayer beat Lazio 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/27/champions-league-riundup-bayer-leverkusen>
 to advance into the Champions League group phase but it is fair to say that 
some of the club’s players and members of staff were unimpressed at Son’s 
timing. Thirty-six hours later, Tottenham made the announcement that he had
joined them on a five-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/28/tottenham-sign-son-heung-min-bayer-leverkusen-22m>
.

The incident stands to colour how the 24-year-old is welcomed back to the 
BayArena, with local commentators having predicted that his reception could be 
lukewarm. Son admitted on Monday that he was “not sure how it’s going to be,” 
although he made plain his affection for the club and its supporters. “Nacer 
Chadli didn’t celebrate when he scored against us on Saturday [for West 
Bromwich Albion] and if I score on Tuesday, I will not celebrate,” Son said. “I 
respect Leverkusen too much.”

There is unlikely to be the venom that was directed towards Gonzalo Castro, 
the former Bayer trainee and club symbol, who moved to Borussia Dortmund over 
the summer and returned with his new employer at the beginning of the month. 
The 29-year-old’s every touch duringBayer’s 2-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/borussia-dortmund-bayer-leverkusen-bundesliga-match-report>
 was jeered.

But equally Son is not expected to receive the homecoming hero treatment, 
which is a pity because he did so much to endear himself during his two-year 
stint at the club. Never mind that it had long been clear Son saw the 
Bundesliga as a stepping stone to the Premier League, the way that he left – 
with the elements of friction – jarred with his nice-guy persona.

Son is one of the nice guys. He has been almost bashful in his post-match 
dealings with the media in England and it says much about him that he lives in 
an unprepossessing apartment in Barnet with his parents. His transfer fee to 
Tottenham of £22m made him the most expensive Asian footballer of all time and 
he is surely his continent’s most recognisable, at present. Yet he is well 
known for his down-to-earth nature and one story from his Leverkusen days sums 
it up.

The area has a sizeable Korean community and, when Bayer signed Son from 
Hamburg for a then club record €10m, their interest was piqued. A lot of Korean 
supporters attended Leverkusen matches and they would wait for Son by his car 
afterwards. There would be queues of 60 or 70 metres, with the fans wanting 
photographs or signatures. Son always obliged. His mother and father, who would 
be with him, routinely helped out by taking the pictures or smoothing the 
shirts for him to sign.

Leverkusen previously had Michael Ballack but it was a different era when the 
Germany midfielder was rising to prominence with them at the turn of the 
millennium. Son represents worldwide box-office and the club were not slow to 
cash in on his appeal. Weeks after his arrival, they had signed a three-year 
deal with the South Korean company, LG Electronics, to make them their main 
sponsor and Son was installed as a brand ambassador. LG did not renew with 
Leverkusen over this past summer, largely because Son had left.

Bayer also toured South Korea, at LG’s invitation, in the summer of 2014, when 
they played a friendly against FC Seoul – the club at which Son had started his 
career at youth level. The soundtrack to Son’s every move during the trip was 
provided by thousands of screaming girls.

Son has long hooked the brands. When he was at Hamburg, another South Korean 
company, Kumho Tyre – who had previously sponsored Manchester United during 
Park Ji-sung’s time at Old Trafford – agreed a two-year deal with them. In July 
of this year, Kumho linked up with Tottenham for two years. Tottenham’s main 
sponsor is AIA, the pan-Asian insurance group, although they were in place 
before Son’s arrival, while the club made Fun88 their Asian gaming partner over 
the summer. Fun88 had previously worked with Tottenham between 2012 and 2014.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ftottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022bb7df0ff06b5492cabeff62b14bb23cafdcf0%2F13_159_2979_1787%2F2979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Son%20Heung-min%20became%20a%20global%20brand%20at%20Leverkusen%20but%20still%20faces%20difficult%20return%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ftottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Son%20Heung-min%20became%20a%20global%20brand%20at%20Leverkusen%20but%20still%20faces%20difficult%20return%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ftottenham-son-heung-min-global-brand-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022bb7df0ff06b5492cabeff62b14bb23cafdcf0%2F13_159_2979_1787%2F2979.jpg>
 Son Heung-min scored 29 goals in 87 appearances for Bayer Leverkusen – an 
impressive return for a wide attacker. Photograph: Lars Baron/Bongarts/Getty 
Images 
Son’s association with Germany began when he was 16 and he swapped Seoul for 
the Hamburg academy – a move that advertised his determination to forge a 
successful career in Europe. He did not speak German or English when he arrived 
and the first year was tough.

“I didn’t know anybody and no one came with me,” Son said. “My parents came 
when I moved to England. I felt so alone but so humble, because everyone was 
helping me. Sometimes, I missed Korea. It’s my home and everyone misses their 
home when they are not there. But I wanted to play professional football in 
Europe and this was what I had to do.”

He credits Ruud Van Nistelrooy with helping him to settle. The Holland striker 
moved to Hamburg when Son was 17 while another Dutchman, Rafael Van Der Vaart, 
would be an influence. Van Der Vaart signed for Hamburg in the summer of 2012. 
“Van Nistelrooy helped me a lot,” Son said. “He saw my first training session 
and he talked to me. He told me I was a good player. He gave me confidence and 
I want to thank him for that. Also, Van Der Vaart came and he helped me. He 
told me more about English football and how tough it was. I tried to learn from 
what he was saying.”

Son has always felt like a young man in a hurry. He learned German quickly 
and, at 18, he scored on his debut for Hamburg. At Leverkusen, he scored 29 
goals in 87 appearances – an impressive return for a wide attacker – and there 
were memorable ones, not least the winner against Werder Bremen on the final 
day of the 2013-14 Bundesliga season. Bayer had needed to win in order to 
secure fourth place ahead of Wolfsburg.

In the Champions League play off at the start of the following season, he 
scored vital goals against Copenhagen while he helped Leverkusen to finish 
fourth again in the league. In both of his full seasons at the club, they 
reached the last 16 of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

Son returns to Germany on the crest of a wave, having scored five goals for 
Tottenham so far this season andwowed, as a No9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/02/heung-min-son-tottenham-manchester-city>
, inthe 2-0 home win against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 at the beginning of the month – a game that was attended by the Leverkusen 
manager, Roger Schmidt.

Son has put his disappointments from the summer behind him, chiefly, the 
quarter-final exit from the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/ottenham-son-heung-min-south-korea-olympic-disappointment>
 he endured with South Korea at the hands of Honduras and the uncertainty over 
his club future. His travails last season were well documented. After a lively 
start, he was set back by a foot injury and he flitted in and out of Mauricio 
Pochettino’s starting XI. He was ready to leave in August, with several clubs 
from the Bundesliga interested in him, but Pochettino said no.


The Olympic heartbreak served to fire the storyline about Son’s military 
service which, according to South Korean law, all able-bodied males must begin 
before they turn 28 and which lasts for 21 months. Had South Korea won a medal 
of any colour in Rio, the players would have been excused the mandatory tour.


Dele Alli strikes late to earn Tottenham draw at West Bromwich Albion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/west-bromwich-albion-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
Instead the clock is ticking for Son, although he could yet gain exemption if 
he was to help his country win gold at the 2018 Asian Games. Tottenham have 
shut down questions on the subject and it has been possible to detect a 
nervousness about it from their side. However, it is understood, a solution is 
likely to be found that will not disrupt Son’s football career. It could 
involve his service being postponed.

Son did not go through pre-season at Tottenham last year – which is sometimes 
forgotten – as he joined them at the end of August, and he has benefited from 
working under Pochettino this time out. It was tougher than anything he had 
experienced in Germany; physically, he feels stronger. Moreover, the four 
matches he played at the Olympics helped him in terms of sharpness.

The Leverkusen tie promises to stir the emotions. Son can remind the club of 
his quality.
 