
Robots have already been put to work across a number of industries. They are 
manufacturing cars,taking care of the elderly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/14/robot-carers-for-elderly-people-are-another-way-of-dying-even-more-miserably>
, doing housework,homework 
<http://uk.reuters.com/video/2012/02/13/robot-sings-dances-and-helps-with-homewo?videoId=230043581>
, andeven entering literary awards 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-et-jc-novel-computer-writing-japan-20160322-story.html>
. It is not surprising then that new robots have been developed to conduct job 
interviews.

One such robot, Matlda 
<http://recruitingtimes.org/news/16065/robots-take-job-interview/>, has been 
programmed to conduct 25-minute interviews in which she works through a roster 
of up to 76 questions. She records and analyses the interviewee’s responses, 
monitors facial expressions and compares them to other successful employees 
within the hiring company.

Matlda is not much taller than a wine bottle, but her introduction could set a 
new precedent for recruitment techniques across a range of sectors.

Doing so will affect the performance of interviewees differently. “Some 
candidates might present better in person and will be left worse off, but 
others may be more comfortable with a remote interview,” says Martin Ford, an 
expert on automation technology.

After the robot revolution, what will be left for our children to do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/may/11/robot-jobs-automated-work> 
One particular demographic that might welcome chatting to Matlda is the 
post-millennial generation, also known asdigital natives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/optus-business-smart-future/ng-interactive/2016/nov/29/smart-disruption-a-perspective-on-innovation-for-australian-organisations>
, who grew up swiping the pages of digital books, using self-checkout machines 
and asking Siri for directions. “We find that people often prefer to interact 
with something that’s not real; it’s all about reducing the cognitive load,” 
says Matthew Howard at King’s College London, whose students launchedKinba, a 
robotic receptionist at the university 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4uN-GGqJS7g&t=6s>, earlier this year.

As with all forms of artificial intelligence, efficiency is a clear incentive. 
More important, though, are claims that artificial intelligence will help 
eliminate pre-existing prejudice within employment processes and boost 
transparency.

“Matlda’s mission is to be a service gateway for a more sustainable and humane 
society,” says Prof Rajiv Khosla at Melbourne’s La Trobe University, which 
developed the robot. “It’s a non-judgmental, non-threatening and non-invasive 
means of engaging people in uninhibited interaction.”

A level playing field?

The main advantage of involving computers, “is a consistency in decision 
making and the removal of some human error”, says Benedict O’Donovan, managing 
director at Durham Applied Robotics and Technologies. “While you might get two 
interviewers who interpret recruiting guidelines very differently, you’re never 
going to get a computer that doesn’t follow the rules exactly or allow 
prejudice to bias their decisions.”

Humans are inconsistent where robots are incapable of being anything but 
consistent

Hiring processes, when conducted by humans at least, have always been 
problematic because bias is so often unconscious.Personality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/01/how-algorithms-rule-our-working-lives>
 andpsychometric testing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shortcuts/2014/jan/29/psychometric-tests-job-interviews-what-for>
,blind auditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/oct/14/blind-auditions-orchestras-gender-bias>
,webcam interviews 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-careers-webcam-job-interview-20161017-story.html>
 andnameless CVs 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/silicon-valley-bank-removing-names-cvs-resumes-prevent-unconcious-bias-2016-11?r=US&IR=T>
 are on the rise, but in a face-to-face environment, anything from gender, 
race, clothing, education and accent can provide an unwitting platform for 
discrimination 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0475.2011.00538.x/abstract?deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&userIsAuthenticated=false>
. Humans are inconsistent where robots are incapable of being anything but 
consistent.

The problem is that as well as putting these robots to work, humans are also 
the onesinputting the data 
<http://time.com/4277517/grappling-with-the-right-role-for-robots-at-work/> 
enabling them to do that work. “There is no such thing as a neutral algorithm,” 
says Laurel Riek, associate professor of computer science and engineering at 
University of California, San Diego. “If the system is using some metric for 
decision making regarding employment, who came up with that metric, what data 
is it based on, and how is it being applied?”

This problem was highlighted earlier in 2016 when Microsoft was forced to take 
its AI chatbot Tay off Twitter just hours after its launch. Robots learn from 
the humans they are programmed by, followed by those they interact with; it 
wasn’t long before Tay assimilated the conversations and opinions of those 
around her and posted a series of racist, sexist tweets anddenied the holocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/30/microsoft-racist-sexist-chatbot-twitter-drugs>
.

“Bias can creep in very easily with learning systems, and depends entirely on 
the data they’ve been trained on,” says Prof Noel Sharkey at Sheffield 
University. This means if an organisation is already an old boys’ network of 
employees from similar socio-economic and educational backgrounds, a robot 
instilled with the existing blueprint of that workforce cannot hope to make 
much of a diversifying impact. So despite all good intentions, it seems 
unlikely that robots like Matlda will become commonplace in the interview room. 
We may be more biased, but until a robot is able to adjust its thinking 
regardless of the programming it’s received – itself a contradiction in terms – 
the most important kind of interaction will have to remain human.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 