
Soulja Boy's "pretty boy swag" landed him in jail on Tuesday, after US police 
discovered drugs and weapons in his rented SUV. The rapper was arrested and 
held on a $10,000 bond following a traffic stop that found guns and marijuana, 
as well as a puppy, in his Cadillac Escalade.

The 21-year-old was on his way to Mississippi around 2:30am on Tuesday, 
travelling through the town of Temple, Georgia. Police noticed one of his tail 
lights wasn't working, according to reports. Officers pulled the vehicle over, 
discovering three firearms, five ounces of marijuana and $46,000 in cash, 
according toCBS Atlanta 
<http://www.cbsatlanta.com/story/15720582/rapper-soulja-boy-arrested-on-drug-weapons-charges-in-temple>
.

Soulja Boy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy> – whose real name is 
DeAndre Cortez Way – was arrested along with his three bodyguards and driver. 
All were charged with felony possession of marijuana, possession of marijuana 
with intent to distribute and possession of a firearm during the commission of 
a crime.

Everyone in the SUV was "very cordial", Temple police chief Tim Shaw told the 
Associated Press. Officers may have been softened up by the presence of Soulja 
Boy's puppy; instead of taking the little fellow to the pound, police "called 
around" to find someone to look after it. Thepuppy was eventually collected 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/gossip/2011/10/soulja-boy-arrested-drugs-weapons-deandre-cortez-way-georgia.html>
 by the driver's sister

Until now, Soulja Boy's record has been relatively clean. Since his rise from 
MySpace star to millionaire at the age of 17, Soulja Boy has been arrested once 
previously, forrunning away from police 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1623510/soulja-boy-tellem-arrested-running-from-police.jhtml>
. "I just wanna put this behind me!" hetweeted 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1623510/soulja-boy-tellem-arrested-running-from-police.jhtml>
 at the time. "I'm not going back to jail!!"

Soulja Boy's new documentary, Soulja Boy: The Movie, was released on DVD this 
week.
 