
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>, FC Barcelona 
and five other Spanish football clubs must repay tens of millions of euros in 
illegal state subsidies, after the EU executive found they had received unfair 
financial aid from their government.

Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>, the world’s 
top-earning football club, will have to repay €18.4m (£15.4m), after the 
European commission judged that an overpriced land deal with local authorities 
in the Spanish capital was unfairly tilted in the club’s favour.


Separately, an investigation into five Dutch clubs, including PSV Eindhoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/psveindhoven>, was closed after the 
commission said no EU rules had been broken.

The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
, which is the enforcer of EU law, said football was an economic activity and 
that it had a duty to ensure a level playing field between sports companies.


“Using taxpayers’ money to finance professional football clubs can create 
unfair competition,” the EU competition commissioner,Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/margrethe-vestager-eu-competition-commissioner-google-tax-deal-uk-government>
, said in a statement. “Professional football is a commercial activity with 
significant money involved and public money must comply with fair competition 
rules. The subsidies we investigated in these cases did not.”

Brussels set to give verdict on 'unlawful' aid to Spanish football clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/brussels-verdict-expected-aid-spanish-football-clubs>
The sums involved are small change for the Spanish clubs. Real Madrid and 
Barcelona earned a combined €1.14bn (£960m) in the 2014-15 season,topping 
Deloitte’s football money league 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/sports-business-group/articles/deloitte-football-money-league.html>
.

Real Madrid’s bill is less than one-fifth of the €100m transfer fee it was 
reported to have paid for Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/21/gareth-bale-agent-demands-inquiry-transfer-leaked-real-madrid-tottenham>
, who at Euro 2016 is part of the firstWelsh team to reach the semi-final of a 
major tournament. Real Madrid’s top goalscorer,Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>, who earns $50m in salary and 
bonuses a year from the club, according to Forbes, could easily pick up the tab.

Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia>, currently ranked 
mid-table inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, will 
face the biggest bill: a €20.4m repayment to Spanish government coffers after 
it was found to have benefited from state loans on favourable terms.Hercules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hercules> will repay €6.1m and Elche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/elche-cf> €3.7m for the same reason. 

The three clubs had been in financial difficulties; they were awarded loans 
from the state-ownedValencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> 
Institute of Finance, on favourable terms not available to other clubs. None of 
them had been obliged to take action to trim their costs, which the commission 
said had given them an unfair advantage over rivals.


Real Madrid, Barcelona, Athletic Bilbao and Atlético Osasuna will also have to 
pay sums of up to €5m after they benefited from favourable tax treatment not 
available to other clubs. The precise sums have still to be worked out by 
Spanish authorities.Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> has since 
changed its tax law to phase out this loophole that was incompatible with EU 
rules.


Separately, the commission announced it was closing an investigation into five 
Dutch clubs. FC Den Bosch, MVV Maastricht, NEC Nijmegen and Willem II had 
received state aid from Dutch municipalities after running into financial 
trouble.

The Brussels investigation concluded that state aid was in line with EU rules, 
because the clubs had taken action to reorganise their businesses by cutting 
employees and reducing wages. Similarly a land deal between Dutch 
municipalities and PSV Eindhoven over the club’s Philips stadium and training 
ground was judged to be in line with EU rules because the terms would have been 
acceptable to an investor on the open market.

The decisions announced on Monday follow two and a half years of 
investigations,launched by the then competition commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/18/barcelona-real-madrid-ec-investigation-public-funding>
 – and Athletic Bilbao fan – Joaquín Almunia.

A commission spokesman said no other state aid investigations were ongoing. 
When the commission opened inquiries into Spain it had looked at football clubs 
in other member states. “At that time we didn’t find other state aid issues 
which we should be pursuing,” the spokesman said.

He added that competition investigations were conducted on a case-by-case 
basis. “In this [Spanish] case the facts led to the conclusion that contrary to 
the Dutch measures the Spanish measures were likely to distort competition.”
 