
The business lobby group has urged the chancellor to adopt an £11.5bn shopping 
list of measures in the autumn statement.

The CBI’s call for a “more flexible approach” to Britain’s public finances, 
with significant spending on infrastructure projects and cuts to business 
taxes, follows growing concerns inside the Treasury that tax revenues are 
falling and growth is slowing, limiting Hammond’s room for manoeuvre as he 
plans the next five years of government spending.

A report from the Resolution Foundation on Wednesday forecast an £84bn 
shortfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/hammond-80bn-black-hole-economic-worsens-brexit-treasury>
 in the Treasury’s finances against the projections to 2020-21made by the then 
chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-osbornes-giveaways-mask-56bn-black-hole>
 George Osborne in March.

Hammond said he would “reset” the public finances in response to the Brexit 
vote, and an expected shortfall in tax revenues and lower GDP growth, fuelling 
expectations that spending will be increased in the autumn statement next month.

But he has ruled out a spending “splurge” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-rules-out-splurge-in-public-spending-in-autumn-statement>
 and emphasised the limits on the Treasury’s capacity to increase borrowing 
while Britain’srelationship with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/hard-brexit-treasury-66bn-eu-single-market>
 remains uncertain.

The CBI said the chancellor could spend more than £11bn and remain on track to 
meet his goal of balancing the books over the business cycle, particularly 
because its proposals were designed to increase productivity and growth.

Carolyn Fairbairn, the CBI director general, said: “The chancellor should 
capitalise on the UK’s core strengths, setting out a pro-enterprise agenda that 
instils confidence and kickstarts investment.

“With huge variations in productivity between different parts of the country, 
the top priority must be to set out a programme that will get our regions 
firing on all cylinders and supports businesses to innovate, invest and create 
jobs in the years ahead.”

She said Hammond should reverse, at a cost of £6bn, cuts that took public 
investment below 2% of GDP, and fast-track £425bn of planned infrastructure 
investment,switching the emphasis from London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/aug/07/london-gets-24-times-as-much-infrastructure-north-east-england>
 and the south-east of England to the west, Midlands and north.


The CBI has long campaigned for the Treasury to support road-widening schemes 
and rail upgrades in order to improve the UK’s infrastructure, while backing 
projects such as thethird runway at Heathrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
 and theHS2 high-speed rail line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/17/hs2-go-ahead-transport-secretary-chris-grayling>
.


Hammond was urged to spend £2.1bn on extending maternity leave to encourage 
more women to return to work, An increase in maternity leave from nine months 
to a year would bridge the gap with the earliest date from which parents can 
claim childcare support. Thegovernment’s childcare voucher scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/help-with-childcare-costs/childcare-vouchers>, which 
subsidises a nursery place or childminder, takes effect at 52 weeks.

Rain Newton-Smith, the CBI’s chief economist, said small changes to business 
rates could also encourage investment. Under current rules, spending on solar 
panels and machinery can be counted as improvements to business premises, 
triggering extra business rates.


She said the £200,000 annual investment allowance should be raised to £1m 
until the end of 2018 “to increase the attractiveness of near-term investment”.

Fairbairn said: “With interest rates at rock bottom, now is the time for the 
UK to put serious effort into improving our creaking infrastructure.

“We would like to see £6bn more spent each year on public investment: 
improving our transport and digital network, building more homes and extending 
regional funding.”
 