
At present it’s almost impossible to walk the rides around my patch and not 
snap spiders’ silk. It is everywhere. I notice, as I drive over, that there are 
even webs on both wing mirrors but, with the sun at the right angle, you can 
see that there is barely a twig or leaf not bound with gossamer to its 
neighbours.

 Apparently those threads are, gram for gram, five times stronger than steel. 
Yet what strikes me most is not the strength but the elasticity of spider’s 
web. A female garden cross spider had just snared a honeybee (an unusual prey 
at Blackwater, although wasps are commonplace 
<https://markcocker.wordpress.com/2015/09/29/wasps-and-spiders-a-trial-of-toxins/>
) and while the victim whirred its wings or pulsed its abdomen to break free, 
the web yawed but held true.

It is remarkable to watch spiders at work in these encounters: the extreme 
caution, the delicate octave of their movements and then the certainty with 
which they manipulate their insect prey and inexorably mummify it with silk.

Spider lurks in its perfect wire entanglement: Country diary 100 years ago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/04/country-diary-spiders-web-perfect-entanglement-1916>
I know this scenario reverses the usual moral order humans plonk on top of 
nature but spiders need love too, andgarden cross spiders 
<https://www.buglife.org.uk/bugs-and-habitats/garden-cross-spider> must be 
among September’s most beautiful stars. They are so gloriously varied, from a 
chaste grey studded with the usual white cruciform right through to oiled 
mahogany inlaid with cream.

One indisputable merit to this brief arachnid empire is the way that all those 
shining threads turn even our worst works - and I’m thinking of the many 
lifeless gardens of wall-like leylandii and lawns shorn to look like pool 
tables - into multiple sheets of dewed silver. The desert is made momentarily 
fertile. One estimate of abundance, a million spiders an acre in some habitats, 
implies billions of miles of this crystallised protein. Recall that since flies 
are the main arachnid prey, this whole show of silk and sunshine is powered by 
an often reviled group of insects. But spiders are the key agents and they have 
now clothed our entire landscape in a silk garment: all Britain, perhaps, as 
one single glittering weave.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>





 