
Dundee United moved up to fourth place in the SPL after a 2-0 Tayside derby 
victory over 10-manSt Johnstone at McDiarmid Park.

Scott Robertson scored after 32 minutes and John Rankin sealed the points with 
a second goal in second-half stoppage time. United leapfrog their hosts to move 
within three points of third-placed Motherwell, who meet Celtic on Sunday, with 
Champions League qualifiers at Tannadice next season being a realistic prospect.

Saints hit the post in the second minute through Cillian Sheridan, but their 
cause was hampered after 57 minutes when Francisco Sandaza was sent off after 
kicking out at Sean Dillon. The striker can expect a three-match ban, which 
will hinder the Perth side's quest for European football next season.

Third place should secure a place in the Champions League qualifying stages 
next term, as Rangers are excluded as a result of their administration, and 
United are in contention after victory in this first post-split fixture.

Saints had an off day and were second best before Sandaza was shown a straight 
red card by the referee Euan Norris.

Steve Lomas's side may yet be left to rue their performances in Perth this 
season after losing a ninth home game, the most outside the SPL's bottom two.

Andy Kirk headed a late equaliser as Dunfermline came from two goals behind to 
give their slim SPL survival hopes a lift in a 4-4 draw withSt Mirren.

Steven Thompson struck a hat-trick to leave the Pars staring at another 
defeat, but Liam Buchanan's long-range strike gave them hope and the substitute 
Kirk converted two minutes from time.

Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> had earlier 
fought back well from Nigel Hasselbaink's early opener, with Jordan McMillan 
scoring his first senior goal in style.

The striker Thompson headed home either side of the interval to give Saints 
the first of their two-goal leads but David Graham kept Dunfermline in 
contention before the late drama unfolded.

The draw leaves bottom club Dunfermline six points behind Hibernian, who host 
Kilmarnock on Sunday.

Two own goals were enough to send Aberdeen up to seventh place in the SPL with 
a 2-0 win at Inverness.

After a goalless first half, the Spanish defender Rom√°n Golobart headed into 
his own goal 48 seconds after the restart.

Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> absorbed early 
pressure and hit back when Fraser Fyvie ran to the byline before laying the 
ball off to Gavin Rae, whose shot was blocked by a sprawling Golobart, 
prompting the visiting fans to shout for a penalty, but the referee Steven 
Maclean waved away the claims.

It was a brief interlude as Inverness continued to search for a leveller with 
Aaron Doran putting a 25-yard free-kick just over.

Steve Williams connected with another Doran free-kick moments later but failed 
to direct it on target. The on-loan Bradford defender Williams then found 
Richie Foran, who played in the substitute Shane Sutherland, who blazed over 
with seven minutes to go.

Aberdeen capitalised on the squandered chances by doubling their lead after 89 
minutes when Kenny Gillet scored an own goal.

Josh Magennis ran through on goal and shot low from eight yards straight at 
Jonny Tuffey's feet and the rebound bounced off the defender Gillet into the 
net, compounding Caley Thistle's misery as the home side fell to their ninth 
home defeat of the season.
 