
St Mirren's winless run now stretches to eight games after they were handed a 
crushing 3-0 defeat byHearts at Tynecastle.

The 15-point lead Danny Lennon's men once enjoyed over the Scottish Premier 
League's bottom club, Dundee, has been slashed to just eight, and could be cut 
to five points with two games to play if John Brown's side beat Aberdeen on 
Sunday.

It was a poor display from the St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren>, who conceded Jamie Walker's 
opener just 14 minutes into the game. Kevin McHattie's free-kick 60 seconds 
before half-time was a killer blow and a spirited opening five minutes in the 
second half was quickly quelled when Kenny McLean was sent off after barging 
into the McHattie, leaving Jamie Hamill to wrap up the win from the penalty 
spot. Hearts announced on Friday losses of £1.65m last season, almost entirely 
due to a historic tax liability, but increased their turnover by almost £2m. 
The club face an anxious wait to see how Lithuanian insolvency practitioners 
will act in relation to their debt to the bankrupt Ukio Bankas.

Liam Craig's first-half strike against Dundee United at Tannadice gave St 
Johnstone their first SPL win over the Tangerines in 13 years. The Saints 
midfielder lit up a lifeless opening period in the 38th minute with a fine 
finish from inside the penalty area. There was huffing and puffing from both 
sides in an equally dull second-half but no more scoring with the victory 
leaving the McDiarmid Park club in fourth place, one point behind Inverness as 
the race for the Europa League spots enters its final two games.Rangers ended 
their season in the Third Division by beatingBerwick 1-0 with a goal from 
Fraser Aird.
 