
Motherwell saw off a poor Dundee 3-0 in the Scottish Premier League at Dens 
Park thanks to goals from the striker Michael Higdon and Nicky Law's 
second-half double as they remained on course to secure second place. Higdon 
put Stuart McCall's men on the road to victory with a ninth-minute header 
before midfielder Law struck in the 63rd and 79th minutes to end any hopes the 
Dark Blues had of a comeback.Dundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> remain 13 points adrift at the 
foot of the table with relegation looming but for Well it rounded off the 
perfect week after manager McCall had signed a new contract to extend his stay 
at Fir Park.

Inverness kept up their pursuit of European football with a 2-1 win against 
Hibs at Easter Road. Second-half goals from Ross Draper and Andrew Shinnie, 
either side of Leigh Griffiths' 23rd goal of the season, were enough to earn 
Caley victory, keeping them three points behind Motherwell and extending their 
lead over fourth-placedRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> to five points. For Hibs the 
result dulled the return to the club of the Scotland international Kevin 
Thomson and leaves the club languishing in eighth place, having won only one of 
their past nine league games at Easter Road.

James Fowler's second-minute goal proved enough to seal the points for 
Kilmarnock against Ross County at the Tulloch Caledonian Stadium. Jeroen 
Tesselaar swung a cross in from the left and Rory McKenzie's lay-off was swept 
high into the net by Fowler. It was only County's third SPL defeat of the 
season at home but they should never have lost having dominated most of the 
match. Kille's goalkeeper, Cammy Bell, made a stunning save in the second 
minute of injury time when he denied Steffen Wohlfarth.
 