
Neil Lennon refused to criticise his Celtic players after seeing their winning 
streak end with a 1-1 draw againstAberdeen at Pittodrie.

Anthony Stokes looked to have put the visitors on course for a 21st 
consecutive victory in domestic competitions when he scored after 28 minutes. 
However,Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> equalised when 
Gavin Rae's left-foot shot took a wicked deflection off the Celtic debutant 
Andre Blackman and beat the goalkeeper Fraser Forster a minute before the break.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager felt the 
midday kick-off, coming on the back of a full fixture card of midweek 
international matches, contributed to his team's below-par performance. Lennon 
said: "I don't know who scheduled the game but that has certainly not done us 
any favours. I think that has played as much a part as Aberdeen's performance 
in this run ending. The result is no surprise considering the call-offs and the 
schedules that the players have had this week. It is obvious that they are 
tired, mentally and physically. The draw was totally understandable in the 
circumstances."

A spirited second-half display from Aberdeen helped them continue their own 
unbeaten run, which now stretches to 12 games. The Aberdeen manager, Craig 
Brown, was disappointed with a point. "We only got one point so it is 
moderately pleasing â€“ the better team drew.

"We were desperate to get three points but I suppose when a team comes having 
won 20 games in a row and we get a draw it is satisfactory."

Motherwell beat Dunfermline 2-0 at East End Park to extend the Pars' miserable 
run without a home victory in the Scottish Premier League to 15.

Dunfermline's goalkeeper, Chris Smith, gifted the visitors the opening goal 
when he let Michael Higdon's weak shot slip through his grasp in the 64th 
minute.

Henrik Ojamaa then doubled the visitors' lead when he powered a shot beyond 
the helpless keeper six minutes later.

Victory for Motherwell moves them within three points of Rangers in second 
place whileDunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> are 
now four points adrift at the foot of the league table.

Dean Shiels and Cillian Sheridan were both sent off after being punished for 
simulation asKilmarnock and St Johnstone shared a goalless draw at Rugby Park.

Two minutes from the break Alan Mannus saved a weak penalty from the Kilmarnock
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> midfielder Shiels after the 
Saints left-back Callum Davidson was adjudged by the referee Craig Charleston 
to have pulled down Gary Harkins in the box.

The former Hibs player, who was booked for going in too hard for the rebound, 
compounded his error when he was dismissed in the 75th minute after picking up 
his second yellow card for simulation in the Saints penalty area.

There was more drama to follow two minutes from time as the Saints striker 
Sheridan, booked in the 70th minute for kicking the ball away, was shown his 
second yellow card by Charleston, also for simulation, this time inside the 
Killie penalty area. Neither side did enough to deserve all three points but 
Saints continue their quest for a European spot.

Hibernian eased their relegation worries with a 0-0 draw against St Mirren at 
Easter Road. The Buddies goalkeeper Craig Samson saved a first-half James 
McPake header and second-half shots in quick succession from Leigh Griffiths 
and the substitute David Wotherspoon as 11th-placed Hibs moved four points 
clear of Dunfermline at the foot of the table.
 