
When I ask Tom Flachett, founder of the Brussels Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Academy, how many of his former 
students have travelled to Syria to join Isis, he gets a little exasperated.


“They always ask the number,” he says, referring, I assume, to journalists. He 
picks up a book of pictures of academy alumni and points to someone in a group 
photo. “This guy is there now, he’s very young, you see?”

The main aim of Flachett’s club, set up in 2003, has always been to reach out 
to youngsters in some of Brussels’ poorest neighbourhoods, including Molenbeek, 
a small district in the north of Brussels. Boxing is a popular sport among this 
demographic, and it’s easy to organise and motivating for people with little 
else in their lives. Plus, having built up a relationship over years, many 
students turn to their trainers when they’re in trouble.

Radicalism is a problem that has been thrust upon the boxing club, and it 
doesn’t receive much funding to deal with it

Brussels has been in the spotlight as a hotbed for terrorism since the Paris 
and Brussels attacks in late 2015 and early 2016, which involved terrorists 
from Molenbeek. At least 47 people have left Molenbeek for Syria since 2011. In 
September of this year, theBrussels security services announced 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/belgium-dozens-under-surveillance-in-molenbeek/>
 that it had deemed 57 residents of the district radicalised and put them under 
surveillance.

Healing rifts

Molenbeek is one of 19 municipalities in a city that has 19 mayors and six 
different police forces. These factions have a reputation for failing to 
collaborate. Belgium lacks a national framework for preventing radicalisation, 
so responsibility falls mostly on local authorities to draw up plans. But the 
approach of former Molenbeek mayor Philippe Moureaux, who presided over the 
district for 18 years until 2012, waslaissez-faire, to say the least 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/attack-on-paris-molenbeek-dirty-dozen/>.

 The European Institute of Peace conducted a survey this year in Molenbeek, 
which is home to a large Muslim community of predominantly Moroccan origin, and 
presented the findings to the current mayor, Françoise Schepmans, in September. 
Researchers interviewed more than 400 residents and found their main concerns 
to be a lack of jobs, poor levels of education, drug dealing and crumbling 
infrastructure. There is a growing rift between generations, as young people 
retaliate against the lack of opportunities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecaa3a79be2a167a82cbbbbb87f7011d7417f41e%2F0_146_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sport%20and%20extremism%3A%20'If%20young%20people%20are%20excluded%2C%20they're%20easier%20to%20radicalise'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sport%20and%20extremism%3A%20%27If%20young%20people%20are%20excluded%2C%20they%27re%20easier%20to%20radicalise%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecaa3a79be2a167a82cbbbbb87f7011d7417f41e%2F0_146_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Many boxing students turn to their trainers when they’re in trouble. 
Photograph: Sarah Dheedene 
“It’s part of Brussels but it’s quite separate,” says Flachett. Segregation is 
something that preoccupies Flachett. A lot of sports clubs fail to recognise 
that certain practices – like the prevalence of alcohol, or nudity in changing 
rooms – can put off Muslims, while other clubs are made up of “exclusively 14- 
to 18-year-old Moroccan guys”, he says.

“In Brussels, that’s one of the things that is missing – the possibility to 
meet, to have contact with other people, with other religions, other origins, 
other languages, even girls with boys.”

Mixing young people from different backgrounds, Flachett believes, is a vital 
part of his job. “If you have young people who are completely excluded from 
society, it’s very easy to radicalise them,” he says.


Using sport to prevent ghettoisation

Inclusion is also a method used in Mechelen, a small city just north of 
Brussels that has been praised for its integration policies. About a fifth of 
its population is Muslim, but no-one has left for Syria. Its mayor, Bart Somers,
encourages mixed sports clubs 
<http://www.theparliamentmagazine.eu/articles/interviews/bart-somers-cities-and-local-authorities-best-placed-tackle-forces>
 to prevent ghettoisation. Young members of one of the city’s football clubs 
have their report cards checked every month: if their marks aren’t good enough, 
they get a two-week ban from playing.

Schepmans has also been building links with sports clubs in her district. She 
recently announced that Molenbeek’s football club would be inviting young 
refugees from nearby asylum seeker reception centres to play with local teams a 
few times a week. It’s a model borrowed from Kraainem, a district east of 
Brussels that has been welcoming groups of five to 10 unaccompanied minors to 
play football, learn French and have a meal at its stadium since September 2015.

Kraainem is already very multicultural, the home team has 350 players from 42 
different countries, so welcoming refugees is just the next step. The football 
club president Laurent Thieule explained that, on the pitch, wearing the same 
kit, the footballers are already integrated. “Football is a universal and easy 
language,” he said. “You put all these kids on a pitch and with 10 words they 
can communicate and they can play - with two legs and 10 words.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4195443e4508798173520a10b5fb781bc8b6bb%2F14_0_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sport%20and%20extremism%3A%20'If%20young%20people%20are%20excluded%2C%20they're%20easier%20to%20radicalise'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sport%20and%20extremism%3A%20%27If%20young%20people%20are%20excluded%2C%20they%27re%20easier%20to%20radicalise%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffootball-boxing-extremism-young-people-excluded-radicalise-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4195443e4508798173520a10b5fb781bc8b6bb%2F14_0_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Kraainem, a district east of Brussels has been welcoming young refugees to 
play football, learn French and have a meal at its stadium. 
He invited me to watch a game, where I spoke to 16-year-old Nerion, who had 
been in Belgium about 10 days and was staying at the Woluwe Saint-Pierre 
reception centre. He left Albania because of family issues, and to escape a 
future of drugs and limited opportunities, and he said he wants to stay in
Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> for the rest of his life.

I asked him if he thinks he’ll be able to make friends playing football. “Of 
course,” he replied, “because you are not alone. It’s a sport you play with a 
team.”

Benjamin Renauld, a player in Kraainem’s first team who is also a volunteer 
coordinator the refugee initiative, says it is important for kids in the local 
community to meet refugees, and see them as real people. “When we started last 
year, it was really during the migration crisis,” he says. “There were many 
negative reactions, and we can make a positive story out of it.”


Tackling radicalism 

Back in Molenbeek, Flachett says it’s identity that young people struggle 
with. They come to the gym with all sorts of questions, about where their 
parents come from, what they should be doing with their lives and what religion 
means to them. Flachett tries to get them thinking about their place in society 
in a positive way. Sometimes that means organising activities with local 
museums, theatre companies or even the police. Sometimes the trainers take 
groups of disaffected youngsters out of Brussels altogether, on walking trips 
to the Pyrenees, for example.

But radicalism is a problem that has been thrust upon the boxing club, and it 
doesn’t receive much funding to deal with it. Flachett and his colleagues study 
the subject in their own time. He has applied for funding to hire a trained 
social worker at the club, but he doesn’t think he’ll get it. The Brussels 
authorities, he thinks, prefer to invest in extra police and security cameras. 
Some5,000 searches of homes and mosques 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/belgium-dozens-under-surveillance-in-molenbeek/>
 have been conducted in the past six months.

 Flachett’s work took on more poignancy when a former student who had 
struggled to find work in Brussels was found dead in Syria. “He was really a 
nice guy,” says Flachett. “We couldn’t explain it. The only thing that I know, 
he was really trying to do his best to be somebody in society.”

He shows me a picture of another of his former students, Ahmed Dahmani, who 
grew up in Molenbeek. In 2010, Dahmani had his boxing licence taken off him 
after he was caught smoking cannabis, and he stopped coming to the gym. In 
2015, he wasarrested in Turkey 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3328350/Turkish-police-arrest-Belgian-man-Moroccan-descent-allegations-scouted-Paris-terror-attack-sites.html>
on suspicion of helping to orchestrate the Paris attacks.

“It’s not only the licence they took -– they took his life. Boxing was his way 
to be somebody,” says Flachett. “And then, five years later, you hear something 
like that.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 