
Bill Beaumont: 1980

English rugby union was not a raging success during the first 25 years of the 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Sports Review of the Year. By the 
start of the 1980 Five Nations, England had not won the championship since 
1963, the Triple Crown since 1960 and the grand slam since 1957. England 
expects? Not very much when it came to the rugby union team in this period.

So it was a pleasant surprise when England, led superbly by lock Bill 
Beaumont, beat Ireland 24-9,narrowly defeated France 17-13 (their first win in 
Paris in 16 years) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jan/27/england-france-grand-slam-1980-five-nations-paris>
, scraped past Wales at Twickenham and then clinched the Grand Slam in 
resounding style in Edinburgh. But come the final reckoning at Sports 
Personality, Beaumont was nowhere to be seen when Robin Cousins was named as 
the winner of the main event.

Jonny Wilkinson remains the only rugby union player to have won the award – 
after his heroics at the World Cup in 2003 – but for the popular Beaumont to 
not make it into the top three is a little surprising. England did take the 
Team of the Year accolade – spare a thought for the great Welsh teams of the 
1970s who didn’t win this award – and it was an Olympic year, but, as the 
leader of a side that had made history that season, Beaumont surely deserved at 
least a place on the podium.

Alex Higgins: 1982
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c6bb6ca7ad1dad87177ea7c79017aa70e5dfc31%2F0_8_2864_1719%2F2864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spoty's%20unlucky%20losers%3A%20from%20Dennis%20Taylor%20to%20Gary%20Lineker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spoty%27s%20unlucky%20losers%3A%20from%20Dennis%20Taylor%20to%20Gary%20Lineker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c6bb6ca7ad1dad87177ea7c79017aa70e5dfc31%2F0_8_2864_1719%2F2864.jpg>
 Alex Higgins celebrates his victory in the World Snooker Championship with his 
wife and baby girl. Photograph: David Muscroft/Rex Features 
On to a case that is a lot stronger than the previous example. When Alex 
Higgins claimed the 1982 World Snooker Championship, the combination of his 
stunning personality, ability on the table, as witnessed in hisbreathtaking 
do-or-die break of 69 in the semi-final against Jimmy White 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAO48WSZnRU>, and his emotional celebrations 
with daughter Lauren <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5H2mYfgkwtY&t=2m27s>, was 
surely enough to see the Hurricane win the BBC’s iconic trophy come the end of 
the year.

Alas, the People’s Champion turned out to be the People’s Runner-up, as he was 
pipped at the post by another hero of the decade; Daley Thompson. The world 
record holder, and Olympic, European, and Commonwealth champion may have 
promptly informed everyone that he “felt like shit”, but any lovers of Higgins 
and snooker, must have been gutted.

At the time the popularity of the sport was growing, and with Higgins’ 
Sheffield story gripping the nation, it is slightly surprising to think that he 
didn’t win the Spoty award. If a much-loved character that had won the biggest 
prize in his sport could not win the Spoty prize in this year, then what hope 
was there for any future snooker stars? Which brings us neatly on to the next 
entry.

Dennis Taylor: 1985

A popular man from Northern Ireland who won the World Snooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> Championship, but still didn’t go 
on to win the award. Sounds familiar, doesn’t it? But when you consider that 
Dennis Taylor won his world title in one of the most stunning sporting moments 
of the decade, then maybe his omission from the list of winners is even more 
staggering.

Taylor had not only beaten Steve Davis to win his first World Championship, he 
had done so in an extraordinary manner. Trailing 8-0 after a disastrous start, 
Taylor edged his way back into contention, but at 17-15 down and with Davis 
requiring just one more frame to win, Taylor won the next two to take the final 
into a deciding frame. As the clock passed midnight, 18.5 million people 
watched on, as Taylor dramatically clinched the title on the final black. It 
was the first time he had led in the final.

There can’t be too many complaints regarding Barry McGuigan winning in 1985, 
yet for Taylor to not even make the top three was baffling. Ian Botham had 
enjoyed a fine Ashes summer, and hadrecently walked from John O’Groats to 
Land’s End for Leukaemia Research 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.com/2016/11/ian-botham-john-ogroats-to-lands-end.html>
. Steve Cram was only defeated three times in the whole of 1985. But did they 
really merit finishing above a man who had come back off the floor against a 
legend of snooker, to win the ultimate prize in front of a record post-midnight 
audience? Well, according to the UK public, yes they did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec3c454511f1eea55fc8baaf7d0c764eef6f44e%2F0_988_2475_1645%2F2475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spoty's%20unlucky%20losers%3A%20from%20Dennis%20Taylor%20to%20Gary%20Lineker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spoty%27s%20unlucky%20losers%3A%20from%20Dennis%20Taylor%20to%20Gary%20Lineker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec3c454511f1eea55fc8baaf7d0c764eef6f44e%2F0_988_2475_1645%2F2475.jpg>
 Dennis Taylor celebrates after winning the World Snooker Championship in 1985. 
Photograph: Adrian Murrell/Allsport 
David Gower: 1985

Another man who had a strong argument for inclusion in the medal places was 
David Gower. Leading theEngland cricket team to a 2-1 win in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/nov/07/england-india-1984-disarray-triumph-cricket>
 at the start of the year was a fine accomplishment, but it would be Gower’s
role in regaining the Ashes 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.com/2015/06/1985-ashes-memories.html> that 
proved to be the cherry on top of the cake.

Perhaps the voting public recognised that the Australian visitors were not the 
strongest team ever to reach our shores but Gower’s glorious summer of 732 runs 
at an average of 81.33 might have earned him a top-three finish in most other 
years. The thought of any England player scoring that many runs against 
Australia would be a dream in the next 20 years and we would have to wait until 
that famous summer of 2005 to see an Englishman lift the urn on home soil once 
more.

For two decades, from boy to man, I watched my Ashes Regained video and 
marvelled at Gower’s excellence. Like Marty McFly, I would have given anything 
to get back to 1985. As would Gower just a few months after his glorious year 
had ended.

Sandy Lyle: 1985 and 1988

A man who features twice on my list, Sandy Lyle can count himself unlucky to 
have not won the prize, especially in 1988. On the one hand, you could argue 
that 1985 had other major contenders, and Barry McGuigan, Ian Botham, Steve 
Cram, Dennis Taylor and David Gower, were always going to be major obstacles in 
the way of Lyle winning the public vote.

On the other hand, though, Lyle had become Britain’s first Open champion for 
16 years, the first Scot to win the Claret Jug since 1920, and he had played a 
part in winning the Ryder Cup back for the first time in 28 years. Not a bad 
application for the trophy, but not quite enough in 1985, sadly.

There surely cannot be any excuses for 1988, however. Lyle enjoyed a fantastic 
season,becoming the first Brit to win the US Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2013/apr/04/sandy-lyle-victory-1988-masters>
, as well as claiming the British Masters andWorld Matchplay Championship 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/1988-suntory-world-matchplay.html>
.

Yet, Lyle unbelievably lost out to Steve Davis, not the first or last odd 
decision taken by British voters. Davis had won a fifth World Championship, but 
with snooker not quite as popular as it had been earlier in the decade, Lyle 
not winning Spoty is a hard one to explain.

Gary Lineker: 1986

Going into England’s final World Cup finals group game against Poland in 
Monterrey, the prospect ofGary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-lineker> winning Spoty seemed about 
as likely as the Everton forward signing for Barcelona. Without an 
international goal in six matches, Lineker was under pressure, playing in a 
team that had stunk out the World Cup in their previous two matches. It was the 
point of no return.

What a difference a game makes; Lineker’s hat-trick propelled England into the 
last sixteen, and when the same man scored a brace against Paraguay, a 
mouth-watering quarter-final against Diego Maradona and Argentina loomed on the 
horizon. Maradona would not be denied – by foul means or fair – but another 
goal from Lineker was enough to secure him win the golden boot at Mexico 86 – 
and a dream move to Barcelona followed.

Sports Personality of the Year 2016: who should win the award? – poll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/bbc-sports-personality-year-andy-murray-spoty-who-win-award>
To achieve something that only one Englishman has ever managed is a proud 
boast, but apparently this didn’t impress the public much back in 1986. Nigel 
Mansell won the 1986 award for his efforts in almost winning the F1 World 
Championship. Fatima Whitbread came second, and double winning player-manager 
Kenny Dalglish was third, so there really was a strong argument for England’s 
new golden boot boy to feature heavily in the final reckoning.

It’s hard to envisage an England golden boot winner not winning the main prize 
in the age of wall-to-wall football. After all, Michael Owen won it for scoring 
two goals at France 98. Even in an era when football wasn’t particularly 
fashionable, Dalglish earned a spot in the top three, so you would have thought 
Lineker’s goals in Mexico might have earned him a bit of recognition.

• This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 