
Native American activists at the Standing Rock “water protector” camps vowed 
to remain in place the morning after the US Army Corps of Engineers denied a 
key permit for theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline>, with many 
expressing concerns that the incoming Trump administration and potential legal 
action from the pipeline company could reverse their victory.

Dakota Access pipeline: US denies key permit, a win for Standing Rock 
protesters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
The Army Corps of Engineers announced Sunday that it would not grant the 
permit for theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> to drill under the 
Missouri river, handing a major victory to the Standing Rock Sioux tribe after 
a months-long campaign against the pipeline.


However, the companies behind the pipeline, who have the backing of the 
incoming Trump administration, have insisted the project would still go ahead. 
“Nothing indicates for us to pack up and go home,” said Tom Goldtooth, 
executive director of the Indigenous Environmental Network. “Our native people 
have reason to be distrustful.”

Tara Houska, a member of the Couchiching First Nation, was similarly 
circumspect.

“I celebrate with caution,” the national campaigns director for Honor the 
Earth said. “We know that Trump is coming and with that, we know our fight will 
continue.”

Nothing indicates for us to pack up and go home. Our native people have reason 
to be distrustful
Tom Goldtooth, Indigenous Environmental Network 
Energy Transfer Partners and Sunoco Logistics, the companies behind the 
project, called the ruling a “purely political action”, accused the Obama 
administration of abandoning the rule of law “in favor of currying favor with a 
narrow and extreme political constituency”, and said the pipeline project would 
go ahead.

“As stated all along, ETP and SXL are fully committed to ensuring that this 
vital project is brought to completion and fully expect to complete 
construction of the pipeline without any additional rerouting in and around 
Lake Oahe,” the companies said in a statement. “Nothing this administration has 
done today changes that in any way.”

Monday was supposed to have been a day of resistance and prayer at the 
sprawling encampment where opponents to the project have gathered. Hundreds of 
supporters, including a large contingent of Native American and non-Native 
American US veterans, have travelled to the banks of the Missouri river to defy 
the army corps’ stated deadline for people to vacate the camp by 5 December.

Some feared a confrontation. Frank Archambault, a member of the Standing Rock 
Sioux Tribe who has lived at the main camp on army corps land with his five 
children since August, moved his children to a hotel in Bismarck in 
anticipation of a repeat of violent clashes with law enforcement.

But the announcement of the permit’s denial on Sunday afternoon turned that 
tension into jubilation and awe, as activists who have braved the freezingNorth 
Dakota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota> winter and aggressive 
tactics from law enforcement realized that their efforts had been recognized at 
the highest levels of government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e0e93aeb1fe5e86b2740cc2f56877d60e50ef8%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20Rock%20activists%20stay%20in%20place%2C%20fearing%20pipeline%20victory%20was%20a%20'trick'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20Rock%20activists%20stay%20in%20place%2C%20fearing%20pipeline%20victory%20was%20a%20%27trick%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e0e93aeb1fe5e86b2740cc2f56877d60e50ef8%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 As snow began to fall, activists said that they wanted people to remain at the 
camp and called for more to arrive. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images 
“It’s solid. They say that Trump can come in and change it but he can’t,” said 
Jumping Buffalo, a member of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe whose English name 
is Troy Fairbanks.

Still, as snow began to fall, Jumping Buffalo said that he wanted people to 
remain at the camp and called for more to arrive. “This becomes a healing camp 
now,” he said. “Now is the beginning of the healing camp for people to heal 
from all the historical traumas.”

Few shared Jumping Buffalo’s faith that the fight was over.

“Do not take anything for granted,” said Elouise Brown, a member of the Navajo 
Nation and an army veteran. “Do not trust anything they say. I think what 
happened yesterday was their move to get us to back up and leave. We’re not 
that stupid.”

I think what happened yesterday was their move to get us to back up and leave. 
We’re not that stupid
Elouise Brown 
But the sense of wariness could not entirely dampen the enthusiasm for a major 
breakthrough in the months-long fight to halt the pipeline from crossing the 
Missouri river just north of the Standing Rock Sioux reservation. The tribe 
fears that the pipeline would contaminate their water source and destroy sacred 
sites.

“We don’t ever win,” Houska said. “Indigenous people never win, but we did.” 

“A new nation of water protectors has been created here at Standing Rock,” 
said Cheryl Angel, a member of the Sicangu Lakota tribe. “This newly formed 
alliance will not decrease and will double then triple until the numbers of the 
masses increase to the point where safety measures to protect water in every 
nation becomes a reality.”

The Army Corps of Engineers announced Sunday that it would explore 
“alternative routes” for the pipeline by undertaking an environmental impact 
statement – a process that can take years.

While the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe has been pressuring the Obama 
administration to deny the easement, the election of Donald Trump complicates 
the future.

Trump said Friday that he supports the 1,720-mile pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment>
, which would carry crude oil from the Bakken oil fields in North Dakota to a 
refinery in Illinois.

Trump supports Dakota pipeline – but claims it's not due to his investment in 
it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment>
The president-elect is an investor in Energy Transfer Partners, the company 
behind the project, but he denied his investment was a factor in his position. 
Kelcey Warren, the CEO of Energy Transfer Partners, donated more than $100,000 
to help elect Trump.

Several protesters voiced suspicion that Sunday’s announcement was a “trick” 
to encourage the thousands of Native American and environmental activists 
gathered in encampments near the drill site to go home.

Others expressed concern that Trump would simply reverse the army corps’ 
decision when he takes office, and Heidi Heitkamp, a US senator from North 
Dakota, appeared to concur.

“The pipeline still remains in limbo,” she said in a statement. “The incoming 
administration already stated its support for the project and the courts have 
already stated twice that it appeared the corps followed the required process 
in considering the permit. For the next month and a half, nothing about this 
project will change.”

Jan Hasselman, a lawyer for the tribe, said that a Trump reversal would not be 
automatic, however.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&media=>
Dakota Access pipeline protesters celebrate after permit denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
“That the new president is in favor of fossil fuels is not a basis on which to 
reverse an agency decision,” Hasselman said.

The corps would instead have to show a court that reversing itself six weeks 
after making a decision was a “rational decision based on appropriate factors”.

“I’m not saying that they can’t get away with it,” he said. “All I’m saying is 
that it will be reviewed by a court.”

The pipeline company could also bring some kind of legal action against the 
army corps. On 15 November – one day after the corps announced that it was 
delaying its decision over the easement for “additional discussion and 
analysis” – the company filed court papers asking a judge to intervene on its 
behalf.

In court filings, the company has claimed that the delay at the Missouri river 
crossing has cost it “hundreds of millions of dollars”.

“Dakota Access has fought every step of the way,” Houska said. “This is the 
company that unleashed dogs on Native American men, women, and children 
protecting sacred sites. I would not trust that they’re done with this.”

Goldtooth said that his organization was asking the thousands of activists – 
who call themselves “water protectors” – to remain in place at the encampments 
until they receive guidance from the tribe, traditional leaders, and Native 
youth.

“If DAPL completely dismantled their drilling pad and took out their pipes and 
asked North Dakota law enforcement to take down the barricades,” he said, “Then 
I might reconsider our decision to stay here.”
 