
North Dakota authorities have said they will move away from a key bridge near 
the mainDakota Access pipeline protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/dakota-access-pipeline-justice-department-mediators-standing-rock>
 camp by Sunday afternoon if demonstrators agree to certain conditions.

Justice department to deploy mediators to Standing Rock to 'maintain the peace'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/dakota-access-pipeline-justice-department-mediators-standing-rock>
A Morton County sheriff’s office news release detailed the conditions as 
outlined on Saturday by the Cass County sheriff, Paul Laney.

“The question was asked if we would consider pulling back from the Backwater 
Bridge,” Laney said of a conversation between law enforcement and the 
organizers of Veterans Stand for Standing Rock, a group that will arrive on the 
reservation Sunday.

“And the answer is yes! We want this to de-escalate.”

Authorities will move from the north end of the Backwater Bridge by 4pm on 
Sunday, they said, if protesters stay south of the bridge in the Oceti Sakowin 
camp, where thousands are camped out in protest against the four-state, $3.8bn 
pipeline, and come to the bridge only if there is a prearranged meeting with 
law enforcement.

Authorities also asked protesters not to remove barriers on the bridge, which 
they have said was damaged in a late October confrontation that led to several 
people being hurt, including one serious arm injury. Protesters also are not 
supposed to walk, ride or fly drones north of the bridge, Laney said.

Standing Rock Sioux tribal chairman Dave Archambault has been asking for the 
bridge blockade to be removed,the Bismarck Tribune reported 
<http://bismarcktribune.com/news/state-and-regional/tribal-chairman-governor-agree-to-dapl-meeting/article_2ce87d7d-db0d-5db4-9567-d5e6ef598cd3.html>
, saying he would to talk to Governor Jack Dalrymple in person. A date for that 
meeting has not been set.

The government has ordered people to leave the main encampment on federal land 
in southernNorth Dakota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota> by 
Monday. But demonstrators say they are prepared to stay – and federal, state 
and local authorities say they will not forcibly remove the protesters.

Trump supports Dakota pipeline – but claims it's not due to his investment in 
it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment>
The Standing Rock Sioux and others say the pipeline north of the reservation 
could pollute drinking water and threatens sacred sites, and they want changes 
made to its route.

The pipeline is largely complete except for a short segment that is planned to 
pass beneath a Missouri river reservoir. Dallas-based Energy Transfer Partners 
says it is unwilling to reroute the project.

Hundreds of veterans were due to gather on Sunday on the Standing Rock Sioux 
reservation near the encampment, and then go to the main camp for a few days.

A Veterans Stand for Standing Rock spokeswoman, Ashleigh Jennifer Parker, told 
the Associated Press on Thursday that the group’s mission was “to go and ask 
and offer if we can help and support the tribes that are already there”.
 