
These standard terms form part of the Terms and Conditions for the Supply of 
Contributions to Guardian News & Media Ltd (aka the Freelance Charter), which 
can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter>. 
Unless otherwise noted, all capitalised terms used in these standard terms 
shall have the meaning given to them in theDefinitions section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Definitions>
 of the Terms and Conditions for the Supply of Contributions to Guardian News & 
Media Ltd.

Commissioned Contributions

You agree to assign to GNM absolutely the entire copyright (including without 
limitation any rental and lending rights and re-transmission and Syndication 
and Spot Sale rights on a royalty-free basis) in your Commissioned Contribution 
throughout the universe for the full period of copyright and all renewals, 
revivals, reversions and extensions thereof together with the right to secure, 
renew or extend the same in our name.

Subject to our standard policy on bylines and credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian/article/0,,409883,00.html#by-lines%20and%20credits>
, you recognise that we shall have the unlimited right to edit, alter, add to, 
take from, adapt and/or arrange and distribute to third-parties free of 
royalties to you your Commissioned Contribution and hereby irrevocably and 
unconditionally waive the benefits of any provision of law known as "moral 
rights" (including without limitation any rights of yours under Sections 77 to 
85 inclusive of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988) or any similar 
laws of any jurisdiction.

For the avoidance of doubt, all rights of whatever nature (without limitation, 
copyright) throughout the world in the column titles and names used in 
conjunction with your Commissioned Contribution shall reside with us.

Pre-existing material

You grant to GNM irrevocably and unconditionally the following rights to use, 
publish and transmit your Contribution throughout the world for the full period 
of copyright in your Contribution including all renewals, reversions, 
extensions and revivals of such period ("Licence").

1. Non-exclusive right to record, copy, reproduce, broadcast, transmit, 
incorporate into GNM programming (for the avoidance of doubt GNM shall be 
entitled to syndicate and distribute to third parties such programming 
throughout the world on a royalty-free basis to you), synchronise, dub and 
perform all or part of your Contribution for and/or in connection with the 
production, exploitation, promotion and/or advertising of the specified 
audiovisual product throughout the world by all means and in all media whether 
now known or hereafter discovered or developed.
2. Non-exclusive right to use, store, publish or transmit your Contribution in 
internal archives and databases.

For the avoidance of doubt, all rights of whatever nature (without limitation, 
copyright) throughout the world which you have in your Contribution other than 
those you expressly grant to us under this Licence are retained by you. All 
rights of whatever nature (without limitation, copyright) throughout the world 
in the column titles and names used in conjunction with your Contribution shall 
reside with us.

Subject to our standard policy on bylines and credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian/article/0,,409883,00.html#by-lines%20and%20credits>
, you recognise that we shall have the unlimited right to edit, alter, add to, 
take from, adapt and/or arrange and distribute your Contribution and hereby 
irrevocably and unconditionally waive the benefits of any provision of law 
known as "moral rights" (including without limitation any rights of yours under 
Sections 77 to 85 inclusive of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988) or 
any similar laws of any jurisdiction.

Action for Infringement and Further Assurance

In the period preceding GNM's first publication of your Contribution and 
during any period of exclusivity, GNM shall have all the rights and remedies in 
relation to your Contribution that are specified inSection 101 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101> of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988, including the right to bring an action for 
infringement of copyright in your Contribution.

For the duration of the Term that follows the end of any period of exclusivity 
GNM may bring an action for infringement of copyright in your Contribution 
pursuant toSection 101A 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101A> of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.

You shall, and shall procure that any necessary third party shall, at your own 
expense promptly execute and deliver such documents and perform such acts as 
may be required for the purpose of giving full effect to this Licence.
 