
In 1986 the journalist and critic Stanley Reynolds, who has died aged 82, 
interviewedJP Donleavy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/26/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
, “the literary dandy and noted public house fist-fighter”. He backed up the 
two epithets with an account of a brawl on the Isle of Man, in which Donleavy 
took on six Irishmen and a Roman Catholic bishop, all of whom had come to 
rescue the youngEdna O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/10/edna-obrien-ireland-outcast-to-literary-darling>
 from an older lover,Ernest Gebler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/sep/24/biography.stephaniemerritt>, 
“and bring the runaway Edna back to the bosom of her family, and a sin-free 
life back in Erin, green gem of the silver sea”. In the end, Edna stayed with 
her lover (they married in 1954), the assailants limped off, and Donleavy 
“counted six teeth on the sun-baked terrace overlooking the sea, counted his 
own incisors, canines, molars and gnashers and saw that none of the six were 
his”.

It was reportage, but Stan might have been writing about himself: an American 
abroad, a hard drinker, an occasional fighter and womaniser, and of course a 
literary dandy. Almost every column by Stan was an event: so too were his rare 
appearances at the Guardian’s London offices. He would occasionally appear 
dressed in denim, as if channelling the lateJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>; mostly he seemed an unlikely 
Lord Peter Wimsey figure, in the tweeds of the English gentry. In the 
hard-drinking world of bygone daily journalism he seemed to drink harder than 
most, and for a man who remained resolutely an American expatriate, he talked a 
lot about cricket.

He wrote, with perception and feeling, about literature, American, British and 
Russian; he wrote about theatre, television and sport; he argued with a 
charming mixture of aggression and diffidence; and he could be relied upon to 
deliver the unexpected.

In 1974, at the height of the cold war, as the Soviet Union exiled the Nobel 
laureate and dissident authorAleksandr Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia2> – then a 
hero in the west – Stan was the first to point out that wishy-washy western 
liberals were going to find him uncomfortable: “Solzhenitsyn, I am afraid, is 
not one of us. That is to say he is not a liberal. I don’t know what exactly he 
is, but whatever it is, it is most peculiar.”

He also that same year, in a lurid account of a cricket tour of the south of 
England by the Liverpool cricket club, happily subverted the myth of the north. 
The southerner “sees us coming from tin shacks in our whitewashed pit boots, 
bellies full of thick-seamed tripe.

“Nothing could be further from the truth. Our cricket clubs are like our 
working men’s clubs, our Labour and Conservative clubs, all wall-to-wall and 
chrome, decor-ed up to the elbows and practically neon-lit. Old Trafford is a 
giant of a place, 20 bars, restaurants, fruit machines … Sometimes the cricket 
looks like an afterthought.”

Stan was born in Holyoke, Massachusetts, which boasts, after New York, the 
largest St Patrick’s Day parade in the US. His father was Ambrose Harrington 
Reynolds, a sales manager for RJ Reynolds Tobacco, the firm that made Camel 
cigarettes, and his mother Irene Ducharme, a French Canadian. His military 
service was with the US army’s First Infantry Division, nicknamed the “Big Red 
One”, and he ended as Acting Sergeant Reynolds, a qualified marksman who once 
inadvertently invaded Canada – a mistake over grid references – but who never 
served overseas. He remained a US citizen all his life, and a Democrat.

His home town remained important to him. He became a reporter for the Holyoke 
Transcript-Telegram 
<http://commonwealthmagazine.org/arts-and-culture/003-what-happens-when-a-community-loses-its-newspaper/>
 and then theProvidence Journal <http://www.providencejournal.com/> in Rhode 
Island, but while still in Holyoke he met the Liverpudlian Gillian Morton, a 
student from St Anne’s College, Oxford, who was completing a year at Mount 
Holyoke College.

They married in 1958 and moved to Britain: she became the Guardian’s radio 
critic beforejoining the Daily Telegraph and staying for 40 years 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/12030521/Gillian-Reynolds-How-radio-has-changed-in-my-40-years-as-the-Telegraphs-critic.html>
. He worked among other outlets for Reuters news agency and then in the 1960s 
joined the Guardian, as critic, columnist and feature writer. His first novel, 
the satire Better Dead than Red, was published in 1964 in the UK and North 
America, and translated into German and Italian. Anthony Burgess called it 
“savagely funny” andMalcolm Bradbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/nov/28/guardianobituaries.education> 
described it as “up there withDr Strangelove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/26/dr-strangelove-peter-sellers-stanley-kubrick-masterpiece-video>
”.

He and Gillian settled in Liverpool. He wrote the lyrics for a Liverpool 
Everyman production of George Bernard Shaw’s Androcles and the Lion as a 
musical, and the book and lyrics for Desolation Angel, a musical tribute to 
Kerouac, performed at the Everyman and at the King’s Head in London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4F_Dm4Anj0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4F_Dm4Anj0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4F_Dm4Anj0&media=>
 The Good and the Quick, the documentary that Stanley Reynolds made for the BBC 
series Great Little Railways, first shown in 1983 
After turning freelance, he continued to write for the Guardian as well as the 
Times. In 1982 he made a BBC documentary for a series calledGreat Little 
Railways, an account of a trip through the Andes in Ecuador 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4F_Dm4Anj0>. He had written for the humorous 
magazine Punch, and in 1980 became its literary editor. He wrote an arts diary 
for the newspaper the European and contributed to a short-lived cricket 
magazine backed by the then giant of the pitch, Imran Khan. And, when he could, 
he played – for a while he was a fast bowler for a local Pakistani side called 
Pak Mersey.

His marriage to Gillian came to an end in 1975, and for some years Stan 
continued to care for his young sons, to live riotously, and to write memorably 
about doing both. His son Alexander remembers the parties at their Liverpool 
home and “routinely stepping over drunk, passed-out corpses on the way to 
school in the morning”. He also remembers the time the actor Bill Nighy “left 
the house with dad’s prized Moss Bros overcoat”.

Gillian later gained custody of their sons. Stan gave up drinking in 1984, and 
smoking in 2003. He and Jane McLoughlin, a former editor of the Guardian 
women’s page, moved to west Somerset, near the Quantock Hills, in 1991, and 
married in 2004.

Death Dyed Blonde (2008) was followed by more crime novels, set in a New 
England town very like Holyoke: “I wanted to create a world which was a bit of 
Eden except for the odd corpse showing up,” he wrote. He also wrote:“I 
supported three sons and several bartenders 
<https://stanleyreynolds.wordpress.com/> writing this sort of stuff I now give 
away free in these blogs.”

In 2003, he had a heart attack, with 127 cardiac arrests in one episode. “Not 
a record, the doctor said, but in the top 10,” Jane reported. Though more or 
less immobilised,he continued to write for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stanley-reynolds>, with obituaries of the 
comic novelistTom Sharpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/06/tom-sharpe-dies>, the crime 
writersRuth Rendell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/02/ruth-rendell-obituary-crime-writer>
 andPD James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/27/pd-james>, and 
George MacDonald Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/04/pressandpublishing.georgemacdonaldfraser>
, begetter of the Flashman novels.

Stan is survived by Jane and his sons, Ambrose, Alexander and Abel, from his 
marriage to Gillian.

• Stanley Ambrose Reynolds, journalist and author, born 27 November 1934; died 
28 November 2016
 