
The sun came out over the Standing Rock encampments on Wednesday, after two 
days of blizzard dumped a fresh blanket of snow on the tipis, army tents and 
shelters still standing here. But inNorth Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota>, the snow does not fall just 
once.

Fierce winds whipped through the prairie landscape, creating shifting snow 
drifts and momentary whiteouts. A steady stream of snow blew across the roads 
like rushing fog, and the flags that line the main thoroughfare through Oceti 
Sakowin, the main encampment, snapped and cracked like a lash.

The light from Standing Rock: beautiful struggle shows the power of protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/06/standing-rock-protest-success-demonstrations>
Despite temperatures that hovered just above 0F and windchills at -20F – and 
despite the fact that Standing Rock Sioux tribal chairman Dave Archambaultasked 
campers to go home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/06/standing-rock-protesters-asked-to-go-home-by-sioux-leader>
 after Sunday’s announcement that the Army Corps of Engineerswould not grant a 
permit for the Dakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
 to drill under the Missouri river – people were still out and about at Oceti 
Sakowin.

The sacred fire that stands in the center of camp was still being tended, and 
singers lifted their voices against the wind.

The television trucks were gone, the lightweight summer tents were gone, and 
most of the hundreds of US veterans who traveled here to support the “water 
protector” movement were gone. But inside the canvas tent of the “California 
Kitchen”, stew was still being dished out, with frozen strawberries on the side.

Campers huddled around the wood stove for warmth, discussing how much longer 
they thought they could survive in this cold.

Outside, Semar Prom, a teacher at the College of Environmental Design at the 
University of California, Berkeley, worked with a small crew constructing a 
wooden building with a pitched roof. Once the structure is complete, the 
builders will be able to continue crafting wooden hogans away from the 
elements. The team had continued working throughout the blizzard, though Prom 
lost some of his tools in the snow.

This was Prom’s second trip to Standing Rock, after staying for a week over 
Thanksgiving.

“I didn’t want to come unless I was needed,” he said. “They need builders.” 

Though some people were leaving, Prom said that the shelters were for those 
who were determined to stay.

“Despite the news, people still need to stay here,” he said. “Everyone’s still 
working, twice as hard now.”

Despite the news, people still need to stay here. Everyone’s still working, 
twice as hard now
Semar Prom 
The healer’s yurt in the medic and wellness area might be one of the warmest 
places at Oceti Sakowin. The round Mongolian structure has a gaily painted red 
door and sheafs of herbs hanging from the ceiling. Light snuck through a small 
window at the apex of the round roof, but most of the healers inside wore 
headlamps as they offered hot tea and herbal remedies to the steady stream of 
visitors ducking through the door.

The wood stove may warm up visitors’ fingers and noses, but the proffered 
shots of “fire cider” – apple cider vinegar suffused with ginger, garlic, 
cayenne pepper and other spices – warm you up from the inside out. It burns 
going down, leaves a trail of heat through your chest, and is supposed to help 
boost your immune system.

“You never forget your first shot of fire cider,” Linda Black Elk said. The 
Standing Rock Healer & Medic Council has an entire building full of jars of the 
stuff, she said.

Black Elk is a member of the Catawba nation, but she’s lived on Standing Rock 
Sioux reservation for much of her life. An ethnobotanist and healer, she has 
helped coordinate the Healer & Medic Council, responsible for everything from 
everyday aches and pains to the “mass casualty event” the night of 20 November, 
when hundreds of protesters were doused with water cannons and hit with tear 
gas and rubber bullets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstanding-rock-dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-remain-snow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6676a2a70667e58cbced4076b244f976a1dda55%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20Rock%20activists%20wait%20out%20heavy%20snows%20with%20'fire%20cider'%20and%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstanding-rock-dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-remain-snow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20Rock%20activists%20wait%20out%20heavy%20snows%20with%20%27fire%20cider%27%20and%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstanding-rock-dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-remain-snow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6676a2a70667e58cbced4076b244f976a1dda55%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 Linda Black Elk helped coordinate the Healer & Medic Council, responsible for 
everything from everyday aches and pains to the ‘mass casualty event’ when 
hundreds of protesters were doused with water cannons and hit with tear gas and 
rubber bullets. Photograph: Julia Carrie Wong for the Guardian 
Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> cannons may have been 
unexpected, but Black Elk and her team have been preparing for blizzard 
conditions. As the storm howled on Monday and Tuesday, medics went tent to tent 
checking on people.

There were a few cases of hypothermia, Black Elk said, but most were resolved 
by moving people to warmer spaces. One person was taken to Bismarck but did not 
require hospitalization.

As she sat on a low bench in the toasty yurt, Black Elk expressed her pride in 
the volunteer medics who kept people safe during the storm.

“If you think of the lack of infrastructure and the situation we’re in, the 
fact that no one died and there were very few issues – I would say we were as 
prepared as any local clinic or hospital,” she said.

Like many of the water protectors here, Black Elk disagreed with Archambault’s 
request for people to leave, and she is prepared to continue her work helping 
them make it through.

“We always say storms like this separate the women from the girls,” she said. 
“A lot of the girls have left, and that’s not a bad thing. But I do not think 
the warriors should leave.”
 