
The next big thing in American boxing descended the narrow staircase of the 
MendezBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Gym on Wednesday 
afternoon clad smartly in a black sweatsuit, blue Creighton knit cap and pair 
of white Kobe Xs. He fielded boilerplate queries from the modest gaggle of 
media, orbited by the dozen or so family members who trail him everywhere, 
before climbing into the ring and skipping rope absent-mindedly, a wrinkled 
glob of Doublemint dangling from his gap-toothed smile. Just another day at the 
office.

Terence Crawford, the almost famous junior welterweight champion of the world, 
was typically cool ahead of Saturday’s title fight at Madison Square Garden, 
breezing through a light workout amid the blur of activity in the subterranean 
Flatiron gym. The easy tenor was a stark contrast from only minutes earlier 
when the challenger, a South Philadelphia boxer-puncher named Hank Lundy, had 
filled the room with blustery promises of Crawford’s demise –“He’s all nervous 
energy! I’ve got him right where I want him!” – before vanishing into the gray 
downpour outside.

In his assessment Lundy is practically alone. He wasn’t the first or third or 
even fifth choice for Crawford, who is unbeaten in 27 professional bouts and 
widely regarded as presumptive successor toFloyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> as America’s next 
pay-per-view star. An entire platoon of the 140lb division’s uppermost names 
passed on the invitation to face him, among them WBC titleholder Viktor Postol, 
Ruslan Provodnikov, Lucas Matthysse, Mauricio Herrera and even Manny Pacquiao, 
who opted for known quantity Timothy Bradley over the young lion from his own 
promotional stable. Oddsmakers have priced Lundy as a 10-1 longshot, lending 
the occasion of the champion’s New York City debut the subdued feel of a 
stay-busy fight. Not that it concerns the Omaha native.

“I’m a fighter,” he said. “I’m not a promoter and I’m not a manager so I leave 
that up to my manager and my promoter and I just fight.”

And how. The slight, sinewy Crawford is a highly intelligent and complete 
operator, dependent on no one attribute. The tactical aptitude and mental 
dexterity that sets him apart – a preternatural sense of timing and distance, 
an uncanny ability to adjust to an opponent throughout a fight and create or 
change his game plan as needed – might not evoke the primal fear of a Gennady 
Golovkin or a Sergey Kovalev, other popular claimants to Mayweather’s vacancy 
atop boxing’s pound-for-pound pecking order. But a scalpel can finish you just 
as decisively as a hammer.

Crawford’s adaptability includes the capacity to change between southpaw and 
orthodox stances during his fights. He delivers with equally formidable power 
and precision from either side, a skill he developed when he fractured his 
right hand in a school fight as an 11th-grader and persisted at the gym despite 
the cast. That switch-hitting ability – extraordinarily rare in elite 
prizefighters – was the difference-maker in Crawford’s signature knockout of 
the gifted Cuban defector Yuriorkis Gamboa, where he floored the Olympic gold 
medalist immediately after switching stances in the fifth round and thrice more 
before ending it in nine. The wildly entertaining scrap was the second of three 
wins during Crawford’s breakthrough 2014, when he burst from obscurity to 
capture fighter of the year honors, shortlisting himself among the world’s best 
regardless of weight class.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALbs5nyxI40&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALbs5nyxI40>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALbs5nyxI40&media=>
 A crowd-pleasing stoppage of Yuriorkis Gamboa showed Crawford at his tactical 
best 
The 32-year-old Lundy, more of a gatekeeper than bona fide contender after 
losses in four of his last eight, has flashed his Philly credentials to cast 
the champion as a farm boy out of his depth, but Crawford’s formative 
experiences defy the cornfed stereotypes of flyover country. He survived a 
gunshot to the head while sitting in his car after a dice game in September 
2008. The slug connected behind his right ear, his life spared only because the 
closed rear window altered the bullet’s trajectory. The sangfroid that’s served 
him so well between the ropes immediately kicked in: he drove himself to the 
emergency room while calling his family along the way to let them know what 
happened.

The near miss, which cost him a fight that would have been his television 
debut, inspired his withdrawal from the Omaha streets and a wholesale 
recommitment to his craft that’s paid off handsomely. Now one of HBO’s most 
prized assets, he will earn a career-high purse of $1.21m for Saturday’s bout. 
(Lundy will collect $150,000.)

Crawford’s growth has prompted largesse both at home and abroad, only 
broadening his scope as his profile has risen. He opened the B&B Boxing Academy 
in his hometown to help keep at-risk children off the street and has embarked 
on charitable missions to Uganda and Rwanda with a former elementary-school 
teacher. He’s also brought championship boxing back to his hometown, drawing 
near-capacity crowds in three title fights at Omaha’s 18,320-seat CenturyLink 
Center, wherenative son Warren Buffett 
<https://twitter.com/BryanAGraham/status/538924381645578240> has become a 
gallery regular.

The tempered degree of difficulty underpinning Saturday’s fight might not move 
Crawford any closer to the crossover stardom he seems bound for, but it could 
be the last chance to watch one of the sport’s very best without plunking down 
$60 for the privilege.

“I’m looking forward to putting on a great performance,” he said. “It’s always 
special to fight.”
 