
If you notice Imperial Stormtroopers, Jedi knights and bounty hunters 
congregating around toy shops, don’t worry. It’s not a rip in space-time 
linking us to a galaxy far, far away … it’s just Force Friday.

The first tie-in products from Star Wars: the Force Awakens, the latest 
instalment of the sci-fi saga, went on sale in stores around the world from 
just before midnight BST on Thursday.

Fans of the film series could watch from the comfort of their homes as the 
whole global event was being live-streamed from Sydney to San Francisco in an 
18-hour toy-unboxing marathon.

The rollout is part of a huge merchandising effort by Disney, which now owns 
theStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> franchise, and its 
toymaker partners, ahead of the December release of The Force Awakens.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbb-8-star-wars-droid-you-can-take-home-as-a-toy-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441284667715%2FKP_446247_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20BB-8%2C%20the%20Star%20Wars%20droid%20you%20can%20take%20home%20as%20a%20toy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbb-8-star-wars-droid-you-can-take-home-as-a-toy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20BB-8%2C%20the%20Star%20Wars%20droid%20you%20can%20take%20home%20as%20a%20toy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbb-8-star-wars-droid-you-can-take-home-as-a-toy-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441284667715%2FKP_446247_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Star Wars droid BB-8 is real and you can take him home. 
The seventh Star Wars film brings back original 1977 cast members Harrison 
Ford, Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher.

New lightsabers, Lego models, action figures and spaceships are going on sale, 
but the biggest demand is expected to be forthe tennis ball-sized BB-8 rolling 
robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/star-wars-droid-bb-8-is-real-you-can-take-him-home-sphero-disney>
, the new film’s R2-D2 equivalent, which can move independently or be 
controlled via Bluetooth from an iPhone or Android smartphone.

The app has an augmented reality function that shows BB-8 projecting holograms 
on to your living room floor. You can even make a recording with the smartphone 
camera. It was already trending on Twitter on Thursday, hours before toy shops 
opened in Europe or the US.

In further evidence of how far toy technology has come since the first 
plastic, static and now highly collectible Star Wars toys came out in the late 
1970s, the Millennium Falcon and X-Wing toys both now actually fly – having 
been re-imagined as remote-controlled, toughened polystyrene drones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstar-wars-toys-the-sales-force-awakens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8cc693e208d211a38bc20f2e33d86364a72486%2F0_126_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20toys%3A%20the%20sales%20force%20awakens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstar-wars-toys-the-sales-force-awakens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20toys%3A%20the%20sales%20force%20awakens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstar-wars-toys-the-sales-force-awakens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8cc693e208d211a38bc20f2e33d86364a72486%2F0_126_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Preparing for launch at the Disney store in London. Photograph: Jonathan 
Brady/PA 
The live stream, which taps into the popularity of online toy unboxing videos, 
began in Sydney at 7.45am local time on Thursday (10.45pm on Wednesday BST).


Hosted on the official Star Wars YouTube  
<https://www.youtube.com/user/starwars>channel, it gradually switched location 
westwards as the sun rose across the globe before a grand finale in San 
Francisco.

'The secrecy has been ludicrous': Star Wars actor Anthony Daniels on the new 
film and his life as C-3PO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/the-secrecy-has-been-ludicrous-star-wars-actor-anthony-daniels-on-the-new-film-and-his-life-as-c-3po>
As the minutes ticked down to the start of the sale of the toys, fans eager to 
be the first to get their hands on them thronged early-opening stores in 
Australia and Japan.

Matthew Jones, who was at a Target store in Sydney, told Reuters: “We’re the 
first ones actually in the world to get our hands on it, so what can be better 
than that?


“They’re new Star Wars toys, they’re the first ones on the world – you just 
can’t beat it.”
 