
The star of Oscar-winning documentary The Cove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-cove>, about the killing of dolphins in a 
village in Japan, has been detained by immigration authorities at Tokyo’s 
Narita international airport.

Ric O’Barry – an American known for training the dolphins used in the TV 
series Flipper – said immigration officials told him he could not enterJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> on a tourist visa because he was not 
a tourist, according to his lawyer, Takashi Takano.

Takano said officials accused O’Barry of having close ties with the 
anti-whaling group Sea Shepherd, which O’Barry denies. Immigration officials 
said it was their policy not to comment on individual cases.

Takano said he was appealing against the detention, and that the Japanese 
government would decide on whether to allow O’Barry into the country or deport 
him. It was not clear when a decision would be made.

Japanese aquariums vote to stop buying Taiji dolphins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/japanese-aquariums-vote-to-stop-buying-taiji-dolphins-hunt>
The Cove, which won the 2009 Academy Award for best documentary, shows the 
slaughter of dolphins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/03/japanese-towns-annual-dolphin-hunt-starts-taiji>
 herded into a cove in the fishing village of Taiji and bludgeoned to death.

“The Japanese government is cracking down on those who oppose their war on 
dolphins,” O’Barry said in a statement sent to the Associated Press through his 
son, Lincoln O’Barry.

Officials in Taiji, a small fishing village in central Japan, and fishermen 
have defended the hunt as a tradition, saying that eating dolphin meat is no 
different to eating beef or chicken.

Most Japanese have never eaten dolphin meat. Many say they are horrified by 
the dolphin killing and there is a campaign against the Taiji hunt. Animal 
welfare activists say the hunt is driven mostly by the lucrative sale of 
dolphins to aquariums, with the income from the sale of meat simply an added 
extra.

O’Barry has been stopped and questioned by Japanese immigration before. He has 
also been taken into custody by local police on the suspicion of not having 
proper travel documents before being released. But this is the first time he 
has been detained in this way. He has the support of high-profile celebrities, 
including Sting, the US ambassador to Japan, Caroline Kennedy, and the former 
Guns N’ Roses drummer, Matt Sorum.
 