
A leading US animal rights activist is to be deported from Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> after being accused of trying to 
enter on a tourist visa to support a campaign against the slaughter of dolphins.


Ric O’Barry, who starred in The Cove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-cove>, the 2009 Oscar-winning documentary 
about theannual dolphin cull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/14/dolphin-slaughter-hunting-japan-taiji>
 in the town of Taiji, has been detained at Narita airport near Tokyo since 
Monday.

His son, Lincoln O’Barry, said immigration authorities had turned down his 
father’s request to visit Japan using a tourist visa. They reportedly accused 
him of lying during questioning and of having links to the marine conservation 
groupSea Shepherd <http://www.seashepherd.org.uk/>, whose members have a 
constant presence in Taiji.

The 76-year-old, who trained dolphins for the 1960s TV series Flipper before 
devoting himself to conservation, reportedly denied the charges, saying he was 
going to observe dolphins as a tourist.

Taiji, on Japan’s Pacific coast, gained international notoriety as a result of 
The Cove, which followed O’Barry and other activists as they attempted to 
document the killing of dolphins by local fishermen. The film, directed byLouie 
Psihoyos <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/19/the-cove-interview>, won 
the Academy Award for best documentary.

 The method used to kill the animals has been widely condemned by 
environmentalists. The US ambassador to Japan, Caroline Kennedy, has also voiced
deep concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/19/us-ambassador-japan-caroline-kennedy-dolphin-drive-hunting>
 about the “drive-hunt” method.

Fishermen pursue pods of dolphins and bang metal poles together beneath the 
water to confuse their hypersensitive sonar. The dolphins are then driven into 
a large cove sealed off by nets, and taken to a secluded inlet to be killed 
with knives and spears.

Half the dolphins caught in Japan hunt exported despite global outcry: report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/07/half-the-dolphins-caught-in-japan-hunt-exported-despite-global-outcry-report>
Last year, aquariums in Japan voted to stop buying live dolphins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/japanese-aquariums-vote-to-stop-buying-taiji-dolphins-hunt>
 from Taiji after they were threatened with expulsion from the world’s leading 
zoo organisation. Taiji’s mayor, Kazutaka Sangen, later said the town would set 
up a new body that wouldcontinue to sell dolphins 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/07/08/national/despite-zaza-ban-taiji-wants-aquariums-keep-buying-dolphins-plans-association-nhk/#.VqHpBlN96CU>
 to aquariums.

O’Barry, who heads the Dolphin Project <https://dolphinproject.net/> campaign 
group, is a regular visitor to Taiji, where fishermen catch hundreds of 
dolphins during the six-month season, which starts in September. The most 
attractive specimens, usually bottlenoses, are sold to aquariums and sea parks, 
while others are killed and their meat sold in local restaurants and 
supermarkets.

In an email to his son seen by the Associated Press, O’Barry said: “I’m 
incarcerated, on trumped-up charges. In a world where so much that is wild and 
free has already been lost to us, we must leave these beautiful dolphins free 
to swim as they will and must.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fstar-dolphin-hunting-film-cove-ric-obarry-deported-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90631378585499df2dd27d51962bcdaa055703f%2F0_131_3568_2143%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20of%20dolphin-hunting%20film%20The%20Cove%20to%20be%20deported%20from%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fstar-dolphin-hunting-film-cove-ric-obarry-deported-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20of%20dolphin-hunting%20film%20The%20Cove%20to%20be%20deported%20from%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fstar-dolphin-hunting-film-cove-ric-obarry-deported-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90631378585499df2dd27d51962bcdaa055703f%2F0_131_3568_2143%2F3568.jpg>
 Fishermen drive bottlenose dolphins into a net during the annual hunt off 
Taiji, Japan. Photograph: AP 
Media reports said O’Barry was resisting deportation and had been transferred 
to another detention facility near Narita airport. His lawyer Takashi Takano 
visited him on Friday and said O’Barry was being held alone but was “in good 
spirits”.

The Japanese government was expected to issue a formal warrant and physically 
deport him, Takano added.

The deportation order marks a hardening of attitudes among Japanese 
authorities towards environmental activists in Taiji. Police have increased 
their presence in the town in case of clashes between Sea Shepherd members and 
locals, who claim they are being unfairly vilified for maintaining a coastal 
whaling and dolphin-hunting tradition stretching back centuries.

O’Barry was arrested near the town last September for allegedly failing to 
carry his passport, but was released the following day.

Takano said immigration officials refused to believe O’Barry’s claim that he 
was not planning to participate in any campaigns. They cited his presence last 
August atJapan Dolphins Day <https://www.facebook.com/events/684089528357263/> 
in Tokyo, despite having told them he would not attend the event.

Immigration officials said they were unable to comment on individual cases.
 