
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> playmaker 
Mitchell Moses has a blunt message for NSW coach Laurie Daley – if you don’t 
pick James Tedesco then you’re kidding yourself. The Tigers fullback provided 
Daley and his Blues selectors with food for thought in his side’s 30-14 NRL 
thumping of South Sydney at ANZ Stadium on Friday night.

Boyd earns Darren Lockyer comparisons from Wayne Bennett after Broncos win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/10/boyd-earns-darren-lockyer-comparisons-from-wayne-bennett-after-broncos-win>
After being arguably the form player of the opening rounds of the competition, 
Tedesco suffered a shoulder injury, missing theState of Origin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/state-of-origin> opener earlier this month. 
Matt Moylan was given the Blues custodian role instead and it’s hard to see 
Daley dropping the Penrith skipper for game two at Suncorp Stadium on 22 June.

One option in front of the Blues, who must win in Queensland to keep the 
series alive, is to pick Tedesco at the back and move Moylan into the bench 
utility role for Dylan Walker, who was given little chance to impress in his 
debut.

“If they don’t pick him, they’re kidding themselves,” Moses said. “If they 
want points, you give him the ball and he’ll put points on the board for you. 
He’s got 10 tries and the try assists as well, you give the ball to him out the 
back and he just creates things. NSW are looking for points – that’s your man.”

As well as crossing the stripe 10 times in 11 appearances this year, Tedesco 
has set up eight tries, come up with 10 linebreak assists, busted the line nine 
times and broken 54 tackles.

The Blues far from disgraced themselves in the series opener, narrowly going 
down to the Maroons 6-4. The game could have been very different had NSW 
capitalised on a mountain of possession.

However it remains to be seen where they will find big points, with the dry 
track at Suncorp Stadium expected to be conducive to free-flowing rugby league.

“If I was in the opposition team, I wouldn’t want [Tedesco] coming at me,” 
Moses said.
 