
The British army’s Welsh regiments should all be based in Wales rather than 
across the border in England when not on active service, the nationalist party
Plaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru> has said.

Plaid’s call for all Welsh troops to come home follows the British 
government’s announcement it is to sell off almost a 10th of its defence sites, 
including the historic Brecon barracks in southWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

The party’s leader in Westminster, Hywel Williams 
<http://www.hywelwilliams.org/>, said: “Our hard-working servicemen and women 
should be allowed to be as close as possible to their friends, family and wider 
support networks when not on active service.”

The three Welsh regiments of the British army are all based in England: the 
Welsh Guards <http://www.army.mod.uk/infantry/regiments/23991.aspx> are at 
Pirbright, near Guildford in Surrey,1st The Queen’s Dragoon Guards 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/armoured/regiments/26870.aspx> in Norfolk and the  1st 
Battalion The Royal Welsh <http://www.army.mod.uk/infantry/regiments/23999.aspx>
 at Lucknow barracks in Tidworth, Wiltshire.

Williams said: “Recent assessments of the makeup of the Royal Welsh regiment, 
for instance, show that 98% of recruits are from Wales, but they are forced to 
move to Wiltshire, Norfolk or Surrey to serve their country.

“Despite there being several locations in Wales that are suitable for 
stationing regiments, the three Welsh regiments are stationed in England. 
Facilities in Wales are excellent.

“There is also a strong economic case to be made in favour of bringing our 
troops home. Data available up until 2008 showed that theMinistry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> spends less per head in 
Wales than in any other UK nation or region. That means Wales is losing out on 
the benefits to the Welsh economy of local procurement as a result of not 
having those regiments stationed in Wales.

“The government in Westminster must look again at arrangements for stationing 
Welsh regiments so that the welfare of serving individuals are made an utmost 
priority and our economy benefits as a result.”

There has been growing anger in Brecon, where there has been a barracks since 
1805, at theannouncement that the army’s Welsh headquarters will be shut in 2027
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-politics-37902151>. A storage depot nearby 
in Sennybridge is also to go, as is Cawdor barracks further west in 
Pembrokeshire.

The defence secretary, Michael Fallon, has said the government hoped to raise 
£1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/07/mod-to-sell-tenth-of-uk-defence-sites-by-2040>
from the sale of MoD land across the UK and save £140m a year in maintenance 
costs.

An MoD source pointed out problems in Plaid’s call, including the issue that 
the Welsh Guards provide security for the Queen and so it makes sense for them 
to be based near London.

The source emphasised that Wales – including the Sennybridge training area - 
was used by many hundreds of soldiers, from across the UK, each year.

An army spokesperson said: “The basing of army units is deliberately designed 
to maximise military capability and flexibility that allows us to respond to 
the security challenges of these uncertain times.


 “With over 2,000 military personnel based in the region, and soon to be the 
future home of theF-35 Lightning II aircraft repair hub 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-chosen-as-a-global-f-35-repair-hub>, 
Wales continues to make a vital contrition to our defence capability.”
 