
Theresa May did not raise concerns about Chinese overproduction of steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/20/british-steel-tata-china-cheap-competition-caparo-ssi-teesside>
, which has been blamed for crippling the Britishsteel industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/steel-industry>, in her first meeting 
with China’s president, Xi Jinping.

During a half-hour bilateral on Monday, immediately after the G20 summit in 
the country, the prime minister avoided the controversial subject that 
overshadowedXi’s visit to the UK last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/21/uk-china-cybersecurity-pact-xi-jinping-david-cameron>
 at a time when the industry was in crisis. Thousands of workers atPort Talbot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2016/mar/30/port-talbot-a-community-forged-in-steel-in-pictures>
 and other plants are still facing an uncertain future.

“It wasn’t an issue that came up,” said an official UK source, referring to 
the steel issue. “We addressed that sort of area in theG20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> in broader discussions and this was an 
opportunity to talk more about bilateral economic and trading relationships,” 
the source added. There was, however, immediate criticism of May from Labour 
and the Lib Dems for her decision not to raise it with Xi.

British steel has been left weak by cheap Chinese competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/20/british-steel-tata-china-cheap-competition-caparo-ssi-teesside>
The source said it was a good meeting between May and Xi, who did not protest 
about her decision toreview Chinese investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/may-urged-to-pull-plug-immediately-on-hinkley-c-over-spying-allegations>
 in a UK nuclear energy project. There was only an oblique reference toHinkley 
Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>, the 
Chinese-backed nuclear project under review, according to UK sources, as Xi 
told May he was willing to be patient about the government’s decisions in major 
projects.

The source said the UK was pleased that China had brought up the prospect of 
exploring a bilateral trade agreement after Brexit. “We are pleased it was a 
warm bilateral that Xi wrapped up by saying it was a very good beginning and 
they specifically saidChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> would be 
open to a bilateral trade arrangement. That is interesting to us as we leave 
the European Union,” the source said.

China is one of six countries at the G20 that have expressed interest in 
bilateral trade talks, although theUS <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news> and 
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> are among those that raised 
concerns about the consequences of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/g20-theresa-may-warns-of-tough-times-for-uk-economy-after-brexit>
 on trade and investment. However, following the session with Xi, May is likely 
to face criticism from thosefighting to save UK steelmaking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/24/redcar-finds-its-fighting-spirit-as-steelworks-future-hangs-in-the-balance>
 for her decision not to mention concerns about Chinese dumping of cheap steel 
on the world market.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-meets-president-xi-jinping-g20-uk-china-relations-golden-era-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20meets%20president%20Xi%20Jinping%20at%20G20%3A%20UK-China%20relations%20in%20a%20'golden%20era'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-meets-president-xi-jinping-g20-uk-china-relations-golden-era-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20meets%20president%20Xi%20Jinping%20at%20G20%3A%20UK-China%20relations%20in%20a%20%27golden%20era%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-meets-president-xi-jinping-g20-uk-china-relations-golden-era-video&media=>
Theresa May meets Xi Jinping: UK-China relations in a ‘golden era’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/05/theresa-may-meets-president-xi-jinping-g20-uk-china-relations-golden-era-video>
Stephen Doughty, a Labour MP who has campaigned for the government to do more 
to support the steel sector, said: “It is deeply disappointing that the PM did 
not secure clear commitments at theG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> 
on dealing with China’s distortion of global steel markets that is causing so 
many difficulties for producers in my own constituency, Wales, and the UK 
overall. We need to see tough action from the new PM to defend steel jobs.”


The steel industry lobby also voiced concern the issue was not raised. Gareth 
Stace, director of the trade body for UK steel makers, UK Steel, said: “I would 
have presumed that the prime minister would talk to the Chinese about it. Not 
tackling the issue of overcapacity in the steel sector directly with President
Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> was certainly a lost 
opportunity to find a global solution to this global crisis facing our vital 
sector.”

In contrast, Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, the European 
commission president, used the G20 summit to call for tougher monitoring 
measures in China to deal with steel overcapacity. “This is a global problem, 
but with a specific Chinese dimension we have to address,” Juncker said at a 
press conference. “We are really insisting on the need to take this seriously.”

At the G20 summit in Hangzhou, the world leaders pledged to create a global 
steel forum to address excess capacity. China has promised to cut production 
but is behind on its target and there is still a long way to go to reduce more 
of the 700m tonnes of excess capacity.

The omission does not appear to have been an accident, as a UK official said 
before the meeting that it was not certain to be be brought up, as May believed 
there had already been some progress in cutting overproduction at the G20 level.

David Cameron was criticised last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/19/uk-steel-david-cameron-xi-jinping-dumping>
 for failing to raise the issue strongly enough during Xi’s state visit and for 
not responding quickly enough to the threat to jobs in the UK steel industry.

However, the subject did not appear to be a top priority for May despite her 
commitment to a more active industrial policy.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-xi-jinping-meeting-steel-dumping-g20-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cf97bd9e8b3feacf9f0644d12ba548a36fe7c4%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steel%20dumping%20not%20on%20agenda%20as%20Theresa%20May%20meets%20Xi%20Jinping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-xi-jinping-meeting-steel-dumping-g20-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steel%20dumping%20not%20on%20agenda%20as%20Theresa%20May%20meets%20Xi%20Jinping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-xi-jinping-meeting-steel-dumping-g20-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cf97bd9e8b3feacf9f0644d12ba548a36fe7c4%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Theresa May and the UK delegation meet Xi Jinping and Chinese officials. 
Photograph: Etienne Oliveau/AP 
The official source said it was being dealt with at G20 level and progress was 
being made. “The reason why every country has signed up to this approach is 
that there are countries, including China, which have excess production that 
they are dealing with,” the source said.

“If you look at the measures the Chinese have taken to reduce their capacity, 
they are dealing with hundreds of thousands of job losses in China because of 
their own excess capacity. It is a factor that flows out of the downturn in the 
global economy post the crash, which now means it is an issue the G20 is having 
to deal with. We have already made progress in a wider forum. It is their first 
bilateral ... and from our perspective we have made important progress here in 
getting acknowledgement at the G20 level.”

However, Lorely Burt, the Lib Dem business spokeswoman, said it was 
“disgraceful thatTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
failed to raise the issue of steel exports with the Chinese”. She said: 
“Thousands of jobs at Port Talbot and across our steel industry are facing an 
uncertain future thanks to the dumping of steel on the EU market by China. It 
was the Conservative government who blocked EU plans to stop this practice, but 
now we are leaving the EU our new prime minister doesn’t even think it’s worth 
mentioning.

“It’s not good enough to allow Brexit to reduce our place in the world to 
silently sitting wishing someone will offer us a trade deal, like a nervous 
teenager waiting to dance at a school disco. We need a prime minister willing 
to fight for British industry and to make the case that the UK remains open, 
tolerant and united.”

 