
Steven Gerrard’s move into management is only “a matter of time”, according to 
his former team-mateJamie Carragher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jamie-carragher>.

Steven Gerrard turns down MK Dons and could be set for Liverpool return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steven-gerrard-turns-down-mk-dons-liverpool-coaching-role>
Gerrard, 36, is understood to have turned down the chance to take over at 
MK Dons after his playing contract with the LA Galaxy expired.

Carragher, a close friend of Gerrard, believes the opportunity came too soon 
after his move back from the United States but he thinks it will not be that 
long before the formerLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>
 and England captain does take his first steps in management.

“I don’t think that’s going to happen now going there, I just don’t think he 
fancies it [MK Dons],” Carragher said during a Twitter Q&A on Sky Sports’ 
Monday Night Football show.

“He’s turned it down now but the fact he spoke to a club shows it will only be 
a matter of time. I just think it’s come too early; six or 12 months down the 
line there would have been a good chance of it happening.

“I don’t think he is fully ready yet. That’s not to say he couldn’t do the job 
but maybe he wants to see if he can get more experience and he is still getting 
his coaching badges.”

Gerrard has not yet made any decision on whether he wants to extend his 
playing career for a while longer or take up coaching full-time. The Liverpool 
manager, Jürgen Klopp, has previously stated there will always be a place for 
him back at his former club.

Although a specific role has never been mentioned a position at youth-team 
level would be most likely should Gerrard decide to go back.

However, Carragher felt the fact his long-time friend was already looking at 
first-team options elsewhere was a credit to his former team-mate.

“I think it’s great he’s making noises about going into management,” he said. 
“We’ve all been criticised for not going into that and going on TV if you like. 
If he’d have taken the job it would have been a good decision in terms of the 
club.

“Alex Ferguson always used to say: ‘Don’t pick your club, pick your chairman.’ 
That chairman [Pete Winkleman] gave Karl Robinson plenty of time, gave Roberto 
Di Matteo and Paul Ince a chance. I think the chairman more than the club 
probably would have enticed him.

“But he’s only just got back from the States, his family didn’t go over fully 
so it would be a big move to move down to Milton Keynes with the kids in 
school, that type of thing.”
 