
Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce> may be half the 
man he used to be butAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>’s new manager remains a 
heavyweight promotion expert. So far so good for Tony Xia but, even though the 
clocks have still to go back, history suggests Villa’s ambitious Chinese owner 
may have to forget about an instant return to the Premier League this season.

Indeed should Bruce – who has lost a staggering amount of weight and, even 
more startlingly, coloured his hair ash blond sinceresigning as Hull City’s 
manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/steve-bruce-leaves-hull> in 
the summer – fulfil widespread West Midlands expectation having beennamed as 
Roberto Di Matteo’s successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/aston-villa-appoint-steve-bruce>
 on Wednesday, his first task will be to ensure Villa avoid relegation from the 
Championship.

After all, a side who have won only one of their first 11 second-tier matches 
reside in 19th position with only 10 points. Admittedly the division is tight 
but already the leaders,Huddersfield Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>, have 25 points, 
second‑placedNorwich City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> 
have 23 points and Rafael Benítez’s third‑placedNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> – still very much the 
title favourites – 22 points.

If automatic promotion via a top‑two finish already looks ominously out of 
bounds, the play-offs also appear a bit of a stretch. After all, sixth-placed
Birmingham City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc> are on 
20 points, twice Villa’s tally.

Steve Bruce says task at Aston Villa is the ‘biggest challenge’ of his career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/steve-bruce-aston-villa> 
All in all it looks as if Xia’s team are likely to be among the two-thirds of 
newly relegated clubs who fail to bounce back to the Premier League at the 
first attempt. During the past 10 seasons only 10 of the 30 fallen clubs have 
returned to the top flight 12 months later – and of those successes, merely one 
changed manager during the promotion campaign.

That exception is Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>
, who in 2006-07 appointed Roy Keane in late August. Helpfully, though, the man 
he replaced, Niall Quinn, was the chairman – who as caretaker manager presided 
over four successive defeats – and the transfer window had not closed, enabling 
Keane to make six immediate signings.

Usually clubs who switch manager mid‑season tend to flounder – unless, of 
course, they areWatford who, in 2014‑15, turned all sorts of established norms 
on their head by winning promotion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/25/watford-promoted-wigan-staring-at-relegation>
 despite working their way through four head coaches in Beppe Sannino, Óscar 
García, Billy McKinlay and Slavisa Jokanovic.

Generally, though, a change of coach rarely proves a promotion-winning magic 
wand, with a classic example arriving in October 2009 when Middlesbrough 
swapped Gareth Southgate for Gordon Strachan. At the time the newly-relegated 
Boro were fourth, one point off top spot, but they had to settle for 11th the 
following May.

Moreover the second-tier landscape has since changed dramatically with a 
markedly raised bar ensuring it is now probably more competitive than ever. 
“Technically the Championship’s a very good level now,” says Benítez. “Clubs 
are spending large amounts of money and there are a lot of good players.”

The good news for Villa – and probably Bruce – is that three of the 
Championship’s best strikers currently strut their stuff in front of the Holte 
End. Di Matteo may have struggled to unlock their goalscoring potential but, 
deployed within the correct framework, Ross McCormack,Jonathan Kodjia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/22/jonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa>
 and Rudy Gestede are arguably all 20‑goal‑a‑season forwards. Behind them Jack 
Grealish is, at his best, a match-changing midfielder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-championship-sunderland-hull-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b5bfcd65ce008c9990231a205eebf619bae6276%2F176_251_2594_1556%2F2594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Bruce%20shapes%20up%20to%20rewrite%20history%20with%20Aston%20Villa%20makeover%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-championship-sunderland-hull-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Bruce%20shapes%20up%20to%20rewrite%20history%20with%20Aston%20Villa%20makeover%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-championship-sunderland-hull-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b5bfcd65ce008c9990231a205eebf619bae6276%2F176_251_2594_1556%2F2594.jpg>
 Ross McCormack is one of three strikers at Aston Villa with the potential to 
score 20 goals a season, together with Jonathan Kodjia and Rudy Gestede. 
Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
At times under Di Matteo the team looked genuine promotion contenders before 
throwing away leads after the 85th minute of games – something they did five 
times in the League – and drawing fixtures they really should have won. This 
suggests a mental rather than technical problem within a squad which saw Di 
Matteo sign nine players for a collective £50m in the summer while offloading 
17 for £16m. As if that ‘churn factor’ was not sufficiently destabilising, the 
Italian was Villa’s third manager (fifth if you include caretakers) during a 
single calendar year.

The stage seems set for Bruce’s much-vaunted man-management. With his sharper 
messages leavened by Geordie humour, players have a habit of buying into the 
plans of a 55-year-old who, at Hull, brought the best out of, among others, 
Curtis Davies, Mohamed Diamé and David Meyler.

Steve McClaren back as Derby County manager 17 months after being sacked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/steve-mcclaren-set-for-shock-derby-county-return-manager>
Admittedly a man who likes his squads to contain a strong British/Irish 
nucleus failed to get a response from the gifted yet high-maintenance Hatem Ben 
Arfa and Gastón Ramírez on Humberside but this should not diminish his 
achievement in securing four promotions to the Premier League (two with Hull 
and two at Birmingham). No other manager has matched that feat – and his record 
explains why Villa fans would be short-sighted to obsess about his past 
consorting with the enemy at St Andrew’s.

Already there are plans to try to bring in Steve Agnew, Aitor Karanka’s highly 
rated assistant at Middlesbrough, as Villa’s No2. Boro will fight to keep their 
man but the prospect of Bruce and Agnew reprising a once successful double act 
at Hull can only enhance Xia’s hopes of an unlikely promotion dalliance.

Anyone puzzled at the notion that Agnew would consider stepping out of the 
Premier League has probably failed to notice that England’s old Second Division 
has undergone a makeover even more jaw-droppingly radical than Bruce’s recent 
effort.

During 2014-15 only the Premier League, the Bundesliga and La Liga attracted 
bigger audiences than theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> in Europe. With Villa and 
Newcastle in this season’s mix many observers expect La Liga’s attendances to 
be surpassed shortly. Such focus brings added pressure and scrutiny but, having 
previously survived a particularly brutal appointment in charge of Sunderland, 
Bruce is at least suitably battle-hardened.

It probably also helps that he has kept a home south of Birmingham ever since 
his St Andrew’s days and, unlike certain predecessors, is fullyau fait with 
both Villa’s backstory and the area’s nuances.

Xia has secured a candidate who is primed to spice up the promotion race by 
endeavouring to prove that modern Championship history is bunk.
 