
MK Dons have made an ambitious approach to Steven Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/steven-gerrard> about becoming the club’s 
new manager.

The former Liverpool and England captain is considering the next step in his 
illustrious careerhaving confirmed this week that he will not renew his 
contract with LA Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/steven-gerrard-leaving-la-galaxy>
. One option is the managerial vacancy at MK Dons, who have held preliminary 
talks with the 36-year-old and his representatives over the possibility of 
launching his coaching career at a club currently lying 21st in League One.

Pete Winkelman, the MK Dons chairman, has been seeking a high-profile 
managerial appointment sinceKarl Robinson’s six-year tenure ended last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/league-one-karl-robinson-leaves-mk-dons-by-mutual-consent>
 and Ryan Giggs and Frank Lampard have been linked with the job. Richie Barker 
has been in temporary charge since Robinson’s departure and will remain at the 
helm for Saturday’s league game at Bristol Rovers.

Steven Gerrard was a much better tourist than a player in LA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/steven-gerrard-los-angeles-galaxy-career-mls>
Talks with Gerrard are only at an embryonic stage and the former Anfield 
favourite wants to explore all options over the coming weeks before deciding 
whether to continue his playing career, accept a player/coach role or move into 
management. In the statement announcing his exit from LA Galaxy on Tuesday the 
midfielder said he had “options on and off the pitch”.

A return to Liverpool, where he starred for 17 years, remains likely at some 
point and Gerrard has been in regular contact with Jürgen Klopp since he became 
manager last October, visiting the club’s Melwood training ground during breaks 
in the MLS season and for treatment to a recent injury.Though Klopp is 
receptive to having Gerrard back at Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/jurgen-klopp-steven-gerrard-liverpool-role>
, the club’s former captain may have to take a coaching role below first-team 
level initially and he has yet to decide whether to call time on his playing 
career.

Gerrard has worked as a pundit for BT Sport since joining MLS but is keen to 
move into coaching and is working towards his Uefa A licence. He scored five 
goals in 34 appearances during his spell at LA Galaxy and his departure was 
expected after Bruce Arena’s team were beaten on penalties by Colorado Rapids 
in the Western Conference final.
 