
Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce> dedicated Hull 
City’s play-off victory to the chairman, Assem Allam and said the club would be 
ready to make an impact in the Premier League next season after bouncing back 
at the first time of asking.

Mohamed Diamé’s superb strike in the 72nd minute ensured a narrow 1-0 win for 
Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/hull-city-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
 over Sheffield Wednesday, earning Bruce his fourth promotion from the 
Championship. He offered to step down one year ago after relegation from the 
top flight but Allam persuaded him to stay and the owner is currently in 
hospital with a serious illness.

Sheffield Wednesday bring the noise but fall short of Premier League return | 
Alan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/28/sheffield-wednesday-premier-league-carlos-carvalhal>
In a game worth around £170m to the winners Hull were deserved victors and 
could have won by more were it not for the excellent performance of the 
Wednesday goalkeeper, Keiren Westwood. It is they, not Carlos Carvalhal’s side, 
who will benefit from the riches of a new TV deal in the Premier League next 
season and Bruce was relieved to have secured promotion.

“I’m delighted,” said Bruce. “The goal itself was a wonder goal that would 
grace any cup final. I honestly thought we had had too many real good chances 
and on a big occasion like today you can’t keep missing. I think we had five or 
six really gilt-edged ones.

“It’s been a long five weeks since we realised we couldn’t get automatic 
promotion. I thought I went through the wringer last week against Derby. Today 
in the last 15 minutes when they put the land of the giants on I thought: ‘Dear 
oh dear.’ But I think we deserved to win the game.

“Nobody gave us a cat in hell’s chance of staying up three years ago. We’ve 
got to be at our maximum. We’ve got to invest well which is always the most 
difficult part. We’ll get ready for the challenge.

“We’ve got a month before we start and then we’ve got to look at budgets and 
how much it means to the club. Nobody said last year that Leicester would be 
champions, that Chelsea would be 10th and Liverpool eighth. It gives the 
smaller club a chance, because of the wealth that the smaller club gets.”

On Allam Bruce added: “I’ll dedicate it to the chairman. He was hell bent on a 
name change that unfortunately upset a lot of people. But really his four-year 
tenure is there for everyone to see. Thankfully the owner didn’t want me to go 
[last year].”
 