
In opting for a second former Birmingham City manager in the space of five 
years – two managers who have been promoted and relegated with the Blues – 
Aston Villa might have expected a greater furore when they appointed Steve 
Bruce. But there are far fewer protestations about the club’s latest managerial 
change – their seventh since Martin O’Neill resigned six years ago – than when
they poached Alex McLeish from their old rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/apr/25/aston-villa-fans-alex-mcleish>
 back in 2011.

There are a number of reasons for that. The obvious difference from the 
McLeish move is that Bruce isn’t coming directly from St Andrews but, more 
pertinently, he also has a history of getting sides promoted from the 
Championship. Bruce has won promotion to the Premier League four times – twice 
withBirmingham City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc> and 
twice with Hull City.

Despite sitting in 19th, with just one win in 11 league games, Villa still 
hope to be in the top flight next season. With a 10-point gap to bridge to the 
play-off places – the last of which is occupied by Birmingham City at this 
stage – and 13 to the top two, Bruce faces a big task. He also has another 
derby to navigate on Saturday as Villa host Wolves in the evening kick-off in 
his first game in charge.

It has a been a curious season for a club that had been present in every 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> season. 
They could be very close to the top of the Championship table but are instead 
hovering above the relegation zone. Their 2-0 defeat to Preston before the 
international break, which cost Roberto Di Matteo (yet another manager with 
links to a fierce rival in West Brom) his job, was only their third in 11 
league matches. Villa’s real problem this season has been throwing away leads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-manager-championship-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c1a057595961b705d76e3d846d8d379a7256f6%2F0_0_658_638%2F658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Bruce%20took%20Birmingham%20City%20up%20%E2%80%93%20and%20down.%20How%20will%20he%20do%20at%20Aston%20Villa%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-manager-championship-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Bruce%20took%20Birmingham%20City%20up%20%E2%80%93%20and%20down.%20How%20will%20he%20do%20at%20Aston%20Villa%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsteve-bruce-aston-villa-manager-championship-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c1a057595961b705d76e3d846d8d379a7256f6%2F0_0_658_638%2F658.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Villa should have secured all three points on numerous occasions this season; 
they have dropped 12 points from winning positions, more than any other side in 
theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. The goals 
that have cost these points have been conceded in the 85th, 86th, 87th, 88th 
and 90th minutes – and in that order. The fans will take solace from knowing 
there can’t be too many minutes left to continue that trend.

Abolishing the nervousness that overcomes the players will be one of Bruce’s 
biggest tasks, though he will also have to work on his forwards’ inability to 
kill matches off. Bruce has shown he can set up sides that protect leads at 
this level – he won promotion in his debut seasons with both Birmingham City 
and Hull City. Given Aston Villa’s woes so far this season, he seems a good fit.

Hull City won 24 matches in the Championship last season and they managed to 
keep clean sheets in 18 of them. They had a propensity to perform terribly on 
their day – generally when they conceded first – but, when they went in front 
they were better than any other side in the division. Middlesbrough were a 
close second, with 17 wins without conceding, followed by Burnley and Derby on 
14, and another drop to Birmingham on 11. Villa fans will be desperate for 
Bruce to instil this toughness into their team.

Steve Bruce says task at Aston Villa is the ‘biggest challenge’ of his career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/steve-bruce-aston-villa> 
After a busy summer in the transfer window, the squad should have both the 
quality and experience to compete at the top of the table. The additions of
Tommy Elphick <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/36579937> and Mile Jedinak 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37101297> were seen as shrewd given their 
leadership qualities after last season’s capitulation; both had captained a 
side to promotion in the past, but they have both come up short. While they may 
yet come good, Bruce will need more from them than Di Matteo received; they 
rank among the worst performers at Villa this season – with Elphick achieving a 
6.88 rating and Jedinak earning only 6.77.


Villa’s problems have grown over such a prolonged period of time that they are 
now engrained in the club as a whole – and they are as much about mentality as 
technical ability. This is where Bruce’s track record of effective 
man-management could prove invaluable and why his appointment makes a lot of 
sense.

Bruce’s appointment may not be the most exciting, but there is at least a 
sense of logic to it that wasn’t there when Alex McLeish arrived. Given his 
previous employment and history as a “bluenose”, however, the 55-year old will 
know that fans want results to improve quickly. The upcoming derby with Wolves 
will give us a good clue about how much patience Bruce will be given.

• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 