
We may pat ourselves on the back that popular, and righteous, opinion has 
helped stop the cetacean circus that isSeaWorld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seaworld>. A 100 years from now – an age 
that a wild female orca born this year could well aspire to – our descendants 
may well look back and ask us: what took you so long? That’s if whales manage 
to hold out against the other threats we pose to their kind, of course.

SeaWorld’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/08/tilikum-seaworld-orlando-killer-whale-trainer-blackfish>
 on Thursday that it is to end the breeding of captive orcas was achieved in an 
agreement with the Humane Society of the United States. Its president and CEO, 
Wayne Pacelle, said: “Today’s announcement signals that the era of captive 
display of orcas will end.” His SeaWorld equivalent, Joel Manby,announced 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/03/17/470720804/seaworld-agrees-to-end-captive-breeding-of-killer-whales>
 in the same press release that the company intends to increase its “rescue 
operations”, which enable “thousands of stranded marine mammals like dolphins 
and sea lions” to have “a place to go”.


Some may sneer at the timing, which comes just weeks after SeaWorld’s star 
sperm-provider for captive breeding, a killer whale called Tilikum, was 
reported to have a debilitating bacterial infection. Others may lament that it 
has taken another death – in this case, that of Dawn Brancheau, Tilikum’s 
trainer, who was dragged to the bottom of his pool by her possibly demented 
charge. (Meanwhile, 200 killer whales have died 
<https://www.thedodo.com/seaworld-tilikum-sick-1649765261.html?utm_source=The+Dodo+Newsletter&utm_campaign=d5f8f399d9-03_09_2016_NL&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_4342b46fc5-d5f8f399d9-141937225>
 in captivity since the practice of displaying them in oceanaria began in the 
1960s.)


SeaWorld decides to stop killer whale breeding program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/17/seaworld-to-stop-breeding-killer-whales-orcas-blackfish>
But these factors only overlie the image of wild creatures reduced to a 
performing automata, artificially supported by daily doses of antibiotics and 
gnawing at the concrete sides of their compounds in what appears to be visceral 
frustration. As the documentary movie Blackfish demonstrated, Tilikum and his 
like appear to be suffering what would be diagnosed as psychotic states in 
their human counterparts, subjected as they are to close andunnatural 
confinement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/20/killer-whales-not-suitable-captivity-seaworld>

Orca are the alpha predator of the oceans. They are incredibly successful 
animals. They are present in almost every open sea. They express their 
sentience in highly developed communication, using a series of clicks and 
whistles including, we suspect, their own names. They are, as scientists Hal 
Whitehead and Luke Rendell haveshown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/cultural-lives-of-whales-and-dolphins-hal-whitehead-luke-rendell-rev%20http://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/cultural-lives-of-whales-and-dolphins-hal-whitehead-luke-rendell-review%20iew>
, animals who are collectively individual, capable of a sense of their abstract 
selves. They exhibit a culture that is matriarchal and transmitted down the 
matrilineal line. They learn, rather than behave by instinct. Female orca live 
for up to 100 years. They may be the only other animals other than us who 
undergo menopause, partly to be around to protect their sons:male orcas stay 
with their mothers their entire lives. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/19561076>

But even far away from SeaWorld, they face risks from humans in the open seas 
too. Scientists at the Zoological Society of London recently released data 
which shows that the northern Atlantic population of orca which live in west 
British and Irish waters have not had a healthy calf in 20 years.

Dr Conor Ryan, of the Hebridean Whale and Dolphin Trust, noted: “The prospects 
for the population were never good but now they’re worse.” He and his 
colleagues aren’t sure whether weakened females, reduced food resources (a 
concomitant of climate change) or pollution may be to blame. Their fate is a 
microcosm of the threats facing orca, and other whales, everywhere.

The 29 sperm whales – toothed cousins of the orca – that were stranded in the 
North Sea last January may be a paradoxical good sign: an indication that 
pre-whaling populations of great whales are recovering. But it is also likely 
that one reason for their stranding wasanthropogenic noise 
<http://www.parley.tv/updates/2016/2/15/philip-hoare-lost-leviathans-sperm-whales>
, such as seismic oil surveys, which scared them into shallow water, fatal for 
such deep-feeding animals.

And it is certain that because of their place at the top of the marine food 
chain, those sperm whales, like orca, are unwitting recipients of the pollution 
we have pumped into their environment: PCBs, organochlorines and heavy metals 
such as lead, chromium and mercury. These end up in the animal’s adipose fat, 
to be released when it suffers stress, such as dehydration and starvation. Or, 
in a terrible irony, the toxins are downloaded from a mother’s body via her 
milk when she suckles her calf.

We should certainly welcome SeaWorld’s decision, even if it was prompted by 
profit and loss. But the greater issue is us. SeaWorld will remain in business 
only as long as we think its fun and educational to pay to see captive 
cetaceans.


Animals “are not brethren, they are not underlings”, the naturalist Henry 
Beston wrote <http://www.henrybeston.com/quotes.html> from his dune shack on 
Cape Cod in the 1920s. He saw animals as “gifted with extensions of the senses 
we have lost or never attained, living by voices we shall never hear ... other 
nations, caught with ourselves in the net of life and time, fellow prisoners of 
the splendour and travail of the earth”. We can only countenance what we do to 
them, and their environment, because we forget that we are animals too.

 