
Every day on her way to work, Sarah Taylor drives up a two-mile private road 
through the beautiful rolling parkland of a 170-acre estate. She then steps 
into a 19th-century manor house, formerly owned by the Rothschilds, which has 
been exquisitely decorated and designed. Her office is a 'compact and bijoux' 
box, sandwiched between the indoor swimming pool and the tastefully relaxing 
morning room.

 Taylor, 26, is secretary to the general manager of Champneys at Tring in 
Hertfordshire - one of Britain's first, possibly foremost and certainly one of 
the most expensive health farms. Forget lettuce leaves, raw carrots and cold 
showers - these are the relics of a bygone age. In the health farm of the 
nineties, we are talking serious luxury, unabashed pampering and more 
treatments, activities and good dining than you could possibly fit into a month 
of Sundays, never mind the minimum two-day stay.

 Unassuming, helpful and well turned-out, Taylor displays a similar elegant 
charm to that of her surroundings. And as Champneys can cost up to Â£4,000 per 
week, this is only to be expected.

 But back to reality. The behind-the-scenes work of Taylor's day has its fair 
share of routine. Each guest generates a certain amount of paperwork. This 
involves confirmation of stay, notifying different departments of any dietary 
requirements and taking bookings for the spa, sport or specialist activities. 
This could be anything from archery to aromatherapy (one of the most popular 
treatments). As there are 80-90 guests at any one time, Taylor is kept on her 
toes. 'It is a seven hours a day, seven days a week business, so you're 
constantly working round the clock.' In addition, Taylor's boss oversees all 
the other departments, such as housekeeping, the spas, the management teams and 
the boutique, so Taylor frequently finds herself involved in all aspects of 
running and maintaining the resort. This can involve anything from typing the 
dinner menu to buying fish for the Feng Shui'ed fishpond - seven red and one 
black, to be precise. 'Sometimes I'm so busy, I don't even sit down at my 
desk,' she says.

 Such a luxurious business is labour intensive, with 2.3 employees to every 
guest. Taylor echoes Champneys' mantra: 'Everything revolves around the 
guests,' she says emphatically. But although most people are pleasant most of 
the time, Taylor admits some can be very demanding. 'They want everything to be 
perfect with their stay and they can go over the top with their requests. Some 
guests have complained that their flowers aren't changed often enough; others 
might want to fit in too many treatments and not understand that it is better 
for them not to have too many.' Despite the pressure of such high standards and 
perfection, it is a world Taylor clearly enjoys - and who wouldn't? 'It is a 
wonderfully luxurious environment,' she says and adds that the staff do enjoy 
the occasional perk. 'I swim twice a week in the pool and we have discounts on 
all the treatments.' As part of the induction course, all the staff experience 
a day at Champneys, including one overnight stay. 'It was lovely just wandering 
around in a dressing gown, sitting by a log fire in the evening and playing 
Scrabble.' And when Taylor's job does become very stressful, at least she is in 
the right place to put that right.
 