
PHILIP TREACY 

Photographer Kevin Davies  <http://www.kevindaviesphotography.com/>has 
chronicled the milliner's work for 20 years. This book collects his seminal 
moments in one lovely glossy tome. From hats created for Givenchy, Chanel and 
Alexander McQueen to his ownrecent show at London fashion week in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/sep/16/lady-gaga-philip-treacy-london-fashion-week>
, all the most iconic designs are here. Expect lots and lots and lots of Grace 
Jones.
Philip Treacy (£39.95, Phaidon) by Kevin Davies 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Philip-Treacy-Kevin-Davies/dp/0714865273> is out in 
February (phaidon.com <http://Phaidon.com>)

THE LOOK OF LOVE 


Actor Steve Coogan <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0176869/> teams up with director
Michael Winterbottom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-winterbottom> to 
bring thelife story of Paul Raymond to the big screen 
<http://www.empireonline.com/news/story.asp?NID=35744>. Following Raymond's 
career as an entrepreneur in the porn industry, the film captures changing 
attitudes in British society from the 60s to the 80s. The period detail is 
fantastic. Particularly watch out for Matt Lucas's performance as Divine.
The Look of Love is out on 8 March 

MARNI PERFUME 


Fans of the label known for its whimsical prints and boho vibe can now finish 
their look with a suitably off-beat scent. Marni launches its first perfume 
this spring. DesignerConsuelo Castiglioni  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consuelo_Castiglioni>says it'll be sophisticated 
but eccentric.
Marni perfume launches in February (marni.com <http://Marni.com>)

TOM AND RUTH CHAPMAN, OWNERS OF MATCHES <http://Matchesfashion.com> 

"We're really excited about new label Trager Delaney, 
<http://tragerdelaney.com/> two Saint Martins graduates' debut: he worked with 
Haider Ackermann <http://www.haiderackermann.be/>, she was at Céline and 
Rykiel. There's cool tailoring and an embellished jumpsuit that everyone on the 
team wanted to wear immediately. This is a brand to watch. We also can't wait 
to trySocial Eating House 
<http://www.hot-dinners.com/Gastroblog/Latest-news/social-eating-house-confirmed-as-jason-athertons-new-london-restaurant>
 – the second restaurant from Jason Atherton, who startedPollen Street Social 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/14/pollen-street-social-london-review>
. It's already creating a buzz."

KATE UPTON


All-American swimsuit model causing a stir in fashion world. In 2012 Upton 
<http://kateupton.com/> appeared on the covers of British and Italian Vogue 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/29/kate-upton-vogue-italia-cover_n_2038608.html>
 and the debut issue ofCarine Roitfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/sep/14/carine-roitfeld-vogue-golden-cage>
's newCR's Fashion Book 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/06/fashion/carine-roitfelds-new-magazine.html>. 
High fashion is sniffy about swimsuit girls (they have more boob and bum than 
you typically see in a style magazine), but Roitfeld andVogue editor Alexandra 
Shulman praised her "healthy" looks. Please take note, other fashion people.

NEIL HENDY, HEAD OF DESIGN FOR M&S WOMAN 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/MS-Woman-Womens/b/1326577031>

 "One of the strongest trends for next season is monochrome. While strong 
graphic stripes and the 60s silhouette make a real style statement, the look is 
still wearable and easy to achieve."

GANG BY HOGAN 


Stylist Katie Grand – best known for her work at Louis Vuitton and Marc Jacobs 
and for editingLove magazine – has got together with Italian accessory brand 
Hogan to create the shiniest, brightest bags, shoes and shades you ever did 
see. The smartest collaboration for the new year.
Gang is available from January (hogan.com)

STEPHEN AYRES, MENSWEAR BUYING DIRECTOR, LIBERTY

"We've really backed the colour and print trend for SS13 with brands such as 
Kenzo <http://www.style.com/fashionshows/review/S2013MEN-KENZO> which use so 
much print and also new designers such asJonathan Saunders 
<http://www.jonathan-saunders.com/>, Christopher Shannon 
<http://www.christophershannon.co.uk/> and Agi & Sam <http://www.agiandsam.com/>
 – we're really getting behind the home-grown talent this season."

J CREW 


Finally the American high-street giant opens a UK store in the new year. Known 
for its quality basics, super-smart cashmere and well-priced men's tailoring, J 
Crew has only been available online until now. In 2013 the company opens a 
megastore on London's Regent Street which will feature something for every man, 
woman and child of you. Start saving your pennies now. Until the store opens in 
late 2013, you can plan what you're going to buy atjcrew.com <http://jcrew.com>.

THE CLOVE CLUB 


Chef collective the Young Turks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/oct/21/ofm-awards-newcomers-young-turks>
 were 2012's kitchen heroes, creating imaginative and superlative menus for 
supper clubs and pop-up restaurants across London and New York and gaining an 
army of fans in the process. This January, chef Isaac McHale is striking out on 
his own and opening a permanent restaurant – called the Clove Club – in the 
recently and swankily renovated Shoreditch Town Hall  
<http://www.shoreditchtownhall.org.uk/>in London. Hale sourced £250,000 from 50 
donors atcrowdfunding website Crowdcube <http://www.crowdcube.com> to get the 
venture off the ground, showing that his customers are prepared to put their 
money where their mouths are. Very trendy, yes, but also very, very tasty.
thecloveclub.com <http://thecloveclub.com>

CAMBRIDGE SATCHEL COMPANY 

One of the fashion success stories of recent years, the award-winning 
Cambridge Satchel Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jun/03/british-satchel-maker-fashion-world>
saw a 400% sales increase of its smart update of the humble 70s school satchel 
in 2012. And all its bags are handmade in the UK using local craftsmen. In 2013 
the online company is going bricks and mortar. You can go and fondle its famous 
styles – from fluoro and metallic to classic brown – in its first shop in 
London's Covent Garden from February.
cambridgesatchel.co.uk <http://cambridgesatchel.co.uk>

HELLO WORLD: WHERE DESIGN MEETS LIFE 

Alice Rawsthorn <http://www.alicerawsthorn.com/>, design critic of the 
International Herald Tribune and one-time director of the Design Museum, writes 
about the universal importance of design in our lives. Covering everything from 
Apple products to the travails ofHarry Beck, the draughtsman who created the 
London Underground map 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/corporate/projectsandschemes/2443.aspx>, Rawsthorn 
skillfully weaves together the threads of the fabric of modern life and why 
good design makes it so much better. Clever but not clever clever.
Hello World (£20, Hamish Hamilton) is  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hello-World-Where-Design-Meets/dp/0241145309>out 
7 March

IN-EI LIGHT BY ISSEY MIYAKE 


Japanese fashion designer Issey Miyake has joined with light manufacturer 
Artemide to create the elegant IN-EI range. Coming from Miyake, it's not only 
pretty but smart. The shades are created using 2 and 3D mathematic principals, 
they're made from recycled material and they fold completely flat when not in 
use.
IN-EI is available from spring 2013 (artemide.com)

CAROLINE NEWELL, FASHION EDITOR, I-D

"I'm very excited about the David Bowie exhibition at the V&A in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/04/david-bowie-retrospective>. Hot 
names to watch out for atLondon fashion week 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/> this February include JW Anderson 
<http://j-w-anderson.co.uk/>, Marques Almeida <http://www.marquesalmeida.com/> 
andThomas Tait  <http://www.thomastait.com/>. All London-based talent designing 
exciting clothes and keeping Britain on top."

GLAM! THE PERFORMANCE OF STYLE


Tate Liverpool's spring show 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/glam-performance-style>
 looks at the androgyny, eroticism and extravagance of art from the glam era. 
Including work by Cindy Sherman, Guy Bourdin, Derek Jarman and Peter Hujar, 
this has more lipstick, originality and sparkle than all of Lady Gaga's videos 
played back to back.
Glam!, 8 February-12 May. Entry £8 (tate <http://www.tate.org.uk/>.org.uk)

SOPHIE FORTE, BEAUTY EDITOR, HARPERS BAZAAR 

"Hair is all about unconventional colour set against a natural base – it's 
crazy colour with a chic interpretation. Personally, hair stylist Josh Wood has 
dyed the underneath of my brown hair a shocking pink and purple. which I love. 
Peaches and lilacs to give a nuance of colour to blonde hair will be 
particularly strong."

PALMA VIOLETS

The charts are awash with pop, so start the new year with a good blast of 
rock. Palma Violets are like the Libertines without the annoyance of Pete 
Doherty. Their single "Best of Friends" was votedNME's track of the year and 
they're shortlisted for the BBC Sound of 2013 poll. Debut album,180, is out 25 
February.
roughtraderecords.com/palmaviolets

JEREMY LANGMEAD, EDITOR-IN-CHIEF, MRPORTER.COM

"Four London designers – Richard Nicoll <http://www.richardnicoll.com/>, Katie 
Eary <http://www.katieeary.co.uk/>, Sibling <http://www.siblinglondon.com/> and 
Matthew Miller <http://www.matthewmillermenswear.com/> – have produced capsule 
collections exclusively formrporter.com <http://mrporter.com> to celebrate the 
second season ofLondon Collections: Men <http://www.londoncollections.co.uk/men>
. Also, it's the 60th anniversary of the Gucci snaffle loafer 
<http://styleanderror.co.uk/2010/02/loafer-lovesnaffle-compulsion/>, and if 
you've never invested in a pair, then now is the time to do so, as designer
Frida Giannini <http://www.vogue.co.uk/spy/biographies/frida-giannini> has 
produced them in every colour and skin imaginable."

KIN BY JOHN LEWIS 

Everyone's favourite department store launches a new clothing brand this 
February. Made for men, women and children, the Kin label has a clean and 
simple aesthetic. Clothes range from quality T-shirts to classic macs, and 
they're a little bit Scandi, a little bit utilitarian and a whole lot well made 
and well priced. Children's T-shirts start from £7 and a men's lined mackintosh 
is £99.
johnlewis.com <http://www.johnlewis.com/>

LIBERTY LONDONGIRL, BLOGGER

"I've had a sneak preview of men's accessories designers Chris & Tibor' 
<http://www.christibor.com/>s handbag line Golden Lane 
<http://www.goldenlanebag.com/> which looks fresh and different. The bags have 
a clever design for efficient organisation of stuff."

KRAFTWERK – THE CATALOGUE 


The German electronica maestros' first British dates in nine years. The shows 
in Tate Modern's Turbine Hall will feature the back catalogue in chronological 
order. Expect 3D visuals and superlative effects.
Shows 6-14 February. Tickets £60 (tate.org.uk/kraftwerk) 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/music-and-live-performance/kraftwerk-catalogue-1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8>
 