
Suffragette, the first feature film to tell the story of women’s fight for the 
vote, will kick off this year’sLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival> (LFF). Starring Carey 
Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>, the film tells the 
story of the working-class British women who, inspired by the suffragette 
leader, Emmeline Pankhurst, took their fight for enfranchisement to the male 
establishment in Westminster.

Mulligan plays Maud, a housewife who defies her husband (Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw>) and risks losing custody of 
her children in the struggle for universal suffrage. Meryl Streep plays 
Pankhurst, the co-founder of the Women’s Social and Political Union, who 
undertook hunger strikes and advocated property destruction as a means of 
protest.
 Watch the trailer for Suffragette – video 
The trailer for the film suggests a gritty drama that doesn’t shy away from 
the violent aspects of the movement’s struggle. There are shots of mounted 
police striking protesters in the face and Mulligan as Maud planting a bomb in 
a post box and fleeing before it explodes. “We’re half the human race,” Maud 
tells the inspector tasked with quelling the protest. “You can’t stop us all.”

Mulligan has been a vocal proponent of equality in the film industry, which 
she has called “massively sexist” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/22/carey-mulligan-film-industry-is-massively-sexist-far-from-the-madding-crowd>
. “The mere fact that it’s taken 100 years for this story to be told is hugely 
revealing,” Mulligan told Time Out magazine in April. “This is the story of 
equal rights in Britain. It took years of struggle and women being tortured, 
abused and persecuted, and it’s never been put on screen. It’s such a 
reflection of our film industry that that story hasn’t been told yet.”
 The cast and crew of Suffragette Photograph: Brigitte Lacombe 
The film is directed by Sarah Gavron, who reunites with Abi Morgan, the 
screenwriter on her adaptation of Monica Ali’s Booker-shortlisted novel Brick 
Lane. Gavron was thefirst film-maker working on a commercial project to receive 
permission to film inside the Houses of Parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/parliament-opens-meryl-streep-suffragette>
. The cast also includes Helena Bonham Carter, Anne-Marie Duff and Brendan 
Gleeson.

“Suffragette is an urgent and compelling film – made by British women, about 
British women who changed the course of history,” said LFF director Clare 
Stewart. “It is, quite simply, a film that everyone must see.”

Suffragette will have its world premiere in London on 7 October, at the 
beginning of the 59thLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>, before opening 
nationwide in the UK on 30 October.
 