
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> have confirmed 
the signing of the Ghana striker Asamoah Gyan for a club record fee "in excess 
of £13m". The 24-year-old arrived on Wearside today to undergo a medical and 
has now signed a four-year contract.

Steve Bruce, the Sunderland manager, had been trying to secure Gyan's services 
from the French sideRennes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> after 
selling Kenwyne Jones to Stoke before the start of the Premier League season. 
The deal for Gyan was eventually completed around 15 minutes before today's 6pm 
transfer deadline.

"It's been a long day, but finally I'm happy to be here," Gyan told the 
Sunderland website 
<http://www.safc.com/news/20100831/record-breaker-gyan-on-move_2256213_2140943>
. "My family is in England already and I am happy this is the right place for 
me. The Sunderland coach has faith in me because he has been following me for 
two years now. I am pleased I have the opportunity to come to England.

"I follow English football and I know Sunderland have incredible fans. I 
especially know about the derby when they play against Newcastle. That is 
something incredible. I have witnessed that myself. I am here to do my best and 
show what I can do. I have watched Sunderland play before – I think it will be 
good."

Gyan scored three goals in Ghana's run to the World Cup quarter-finals, 
although he missed a penalty against Uruguay in the final minute of extra time 
that would have put the Black Stars into the last four. Gyan, who joined Rennes 
in 2008 from Udinese, has 22 goals in 44 appearances for his country.

The fee eclipses the £10m that Sunderland paid to bring Darren Bent to the 
Stadium of Light from Tottenham last summer.

Meanwhile Sunderland forward Fraizer Campbell will miss most of the season due 
to the serious knee injury he sustained against Manchester City. "He has 
ruptured his cruciate knee ligaments so he's going to be out for at least six 
months," Bruce said. "It's a tragedy."
 