
1) Self-help required

Phil Gould <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phil_Gould> has long been a character 
who polarises opinion in Australian rugby league. I'm led to believe that most 
Queenslanders have a healthy loathing of the former New South Wales State of 
Origin coach, and that a fair few south of the border aren't that keen on him 
either.

He made pretty exasperating listening for a Pom during the Channel Nine 
coverage ofthe World Club Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/22/sydney-roosters-beat-wigan-warriors-world-club-challenge>
 that was broadcast here on Sky on Saturday morning, apparently more 
enthusiastic about the results of other trial fixtures involving the likes of 
Manly and Parramatta than in the contest in front of him between Wigan and the 
Sydney Roosters.

A personification of the patronising parochialism that often characterises 
Australian league's attitude towards the game beyond their beloved eastern 
seaboard? Maybe, but there is an alternative argument that Gus had a point.

His professional league career, as player, coach and pundit, has spanned four 
decades, during which the southern hemisphere has left us for dead. At regular 
intervals during that period, the north has claimed to be closing the gap. But
on Saturday's evidence <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WuRD8shrKV0>, while the 
gulf may not be as wide as in 1997 when Super League clubs were humiliated in 
the disastrously expanded World Club Championship, it still exists, and has 
certainly not narrowed since Wigan stunned the Brisbane Broncos in the last 
one-off Challenge in Australia in 1994. Gould was entitled to roll his eyes.

This is the context for the latest attempts to expand the WCC. There are 
plenty of influential figures in Australian league, from the Roosters coach 
Trent Robinson to the Welsh chief executive of the National Rugby League David 
Smith, who see the potential benefit to their cause of credible international 
competition. Australian Rules Football, their major rivals in a fiercely 
competitive sporting landscape, do not have that option, and although rugby 
union is not a serious player in terms of television ratings, it can offer an 
international dimension tolure away the odd superstar such as Sam Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/17/sam-burgess-rugby-code-switch-world-cup>
.

The Burgess case should have confirmed to any intelligent Aussie league fan 
that it is in their interests to boost the British game, at both club and 
international level but they are still entitled to wonder whether British 
league is doing enough to help itself.

For example last Thursday night, Wakefield Trinity faced Bradford 
<http://www.superleague.co.uk/report/9914> in their first home Super League 
game of the season – in front of 4,049 spectators. There were plausible 
explanations for that – the inconvenient kick-off time, and Trinity's latest 
bout of financial problems during the winter. The game was scrappy, the 
officiating infuriating, and it was not that easy to tell the teams apart, 
thanks to some bright spark at Bradford deciding to have almost as much white 
on their change jerseys as on their home shirts.

On Saturday, the basket case that the London Broncos 
<http://www.superleague.co.uk/report/9917> have become after years of appalling 
mismanagement launched yet another new era, this time at The Hive in Barnet. 
Initial reports are that it is a more convenient and suitable stadium for the 
Broncos than the Stoop, but that hardly matters when the team are in such a 
mess – predictably, their gate just scraped into four figures for an equally 
predictable mauling by Salford.

There is a depressing lack of dynamism at the Rugby Football League, which can 
be contrasted so starkly and unfavourably with the way the World Cup was run so 
successfully last autumn.

The majority of clubs are doing their best – witness Hull KR's 11,500 sell-out 
for their season opener against Leeds, Huddersfield securing a 30% increase on 
the equivalent fixtures for their home opener at the weekend, crackling 
atmospheres at St Helens and Leeds last Friday night, and Widnes's attempts to 
spread their appeal to Runcorn, Liverpool and north Wales. The action on the 
field is usually terrific –watching the first half at Castleford on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/23/castleford-catalan-dragons-super-league>
 afternoon from the terraces, and seeing close up the skills and toughness of a 
range of admirable athletes from Craig Huby to Daryl Clark, was a reminder of 
the value for money and accessibility that league still provides. Yet there 
were only 5,100 at Wheldon Road on Sunday, fewer than attended Castleford's 
home game against the Catalans last season.

These are the issues, rather than petty point scoring, that should focus the 
minds of theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> clubs 
and the RFL when they meet in Hull on Wednesday. Work together, and work bloody 
hard, and even Phil Gould might notice.

2) The new Volcano? Or the Tank on the Flank?

On the field, the season is developing nicely. Of the four teams with two wins 
out of two, Castleford are the surprise packets, a tribute to the shrewd 
coaching of Daryl Powell who has already done enough to join Brian McDermott, 
Shaun Wane and Paul Anderson on the list of credible future contenders for the 
England or Great Britain job.

I've probably raved enough about Daryl Clark's try against the Catalans 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LyKtAV7v_9E&feature=youtu.be>, so it's time to 
give credit where it's due to Justin Carney – a 25-year-old wrecking ball from 
New South Wales who may now be the most unpleasant Super League wing to tackle 
since the retirement of Lesley Vainikolo. Credit for the Tank on the Flank 
description goes to Graham Colley of BBC Radio.

Michael Shenton was the usual long-striding beacon of common sense inside 
Carney – even if a couple of his try-making passes looked questionable – and a 
word, too, for the other centre Michael Channing, a 21-year-old from Surrey who 
stumbled on league after starting his professional rugby career with London 
Irish. He took a fair amount of physical punishment from Zeb Taia and Leon 
Pryce but kept coming back for more, showing again the amount of untapped 
talent that must be out there beyond the northern heartlands, just waiting to 
be discovered.

3) Prescott would've been proud … and amused

Friday night at St Helens was equally enjoyable, and a little more memorable 
because of the naming ceremony for the Steve Prescott Bridge before the match 
between the two clubs he served with such distinction. Prescott was also 
remembered in avideo tribute 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wuuCKEvBrqk&feature=youtu.be> shown on the big 
screen before kick-off, and as Paul Sculthorpe, his former Saints team-mate, 
noted, he would have been highly amused by the driving rain that soaked 
everyone who attended the ceremony.

The game itself was a decent contest, with Hull offering more reasons for 
cautious optimism about their prospects this season, and Lee Radford already 
shaping as a common-sense coaching appointment by Adam Pearson. Joe Westerman 
showed his class in the first-half before illness caught up with him, and Jamie 
Shaul was bright and gutsy at full-back, very much in the Prescott mode.

That left Saints playing catch-up, and their coach Nathan Brown confirmed in 
his usual pithy style that he had reminded his players of the need to do some 
tough stuff at half-time while stressing that "We don't have a dickhead at the 
club".

For all the hype surrounding Luke Walsh's stunning debut at Warrington, with 
premature suggestions that he would be a shrewd bet to be the season's Man of 
Steel, James Roby and Jon Wilkin should be the leading Saints contenders after 
two matches.

Now they face Salford, another of the unbeaten teams, on Thursday, while Cas 
go to Hull KR in one of three intriguing fixtures the following night.

4) South Yorkshire Sunday

The Championship is also developing some momentum, with Featherstone beating 
Halifax in the first heavyweight meeting of the season, and Leigh looking 
ominous under Paul Rowley. Featherstone's growing travelling support will 
surely enjoy their first trip to Wrexham to face the North Wales Crusaders on 
Sunday, while Leigh will hope for another 2,000-plus crowd at home to 
Whitehaven.

But with apologies to both, the competition's two most attractive fixtures are 
in South Yorkshire. Sheffield Eagles should make their return to Owlerton 
Stadium at the second attempt against attractive opposition in Barrow, after 
the washout of their game against Rochdale Hornets two weeks ago, and 20 miles 
or so to the north-east Paul Cooke's Doncaster take on Glenn Morrison's 
Dewsbury at the Keepmoat in a battle of two unbeaten teams.

It has been a much less positive start for the three Cumbrian clubs in the 
Championship. Whitehaven, Workington and Barrow do not have a win between them 
from a total of five games, raising the possibility that all three may fail to 
make the cut for next season's second tier, with five teams being relegated to 
Championship One as part of the divisional restructure.

The clumsily-named Championship One competition starts its 2014 season this 
weekend, with games inHemel Hempstead <http://hemelstags.com/>, Oxford 
<http://www.oxfordrl.com/>, Maesteg <http://www.scorpionsrl.com/Home/Page> and 
York. More of that in future weeks but there are interesting whispers about the 
future ofGateshead Thunder <http://www.thunderrugby.com/>, the league's ninth 
club and coached by the great Stanley Gene as part of a link with Hull KR. 
Could they also be formalising their links with the other code's Newcastle 
Falcons across at Kingston Park?

5) Of Hunters and Tossers

Mention of Stanley leads smoothly into arguably the most significant fixture 
of the league weekend, in the pleasant Brisbane suburb of Redcliffe. The Dick 
"Tosser" Turner Complex (seriously 
<http://www.redcliffedolphins.com.au/?id=2774>) will be the venue for the debut 
in what used to be the Queensland Cup of theSP Hunters 
<https://www.dropbox.com/sh/h6n6uifcyp70pz0/HJfPYopLa7/45#lh:null-QCUP_45_004_QUICKTIME1080.mov>
, a team from league-mad Papua New Guinea, whose journey to this point already
makes a wonderful read 
<http://www.qrl.com.au/default.aspx?s=article-display&id=90903>. The Kumuls see 
this as a chance to prove the viability of their bid to enter a club in the Big 
League, the National Rugby League, but their participation in the Queensland 
Cup, a competition which has been gaining in credibility and profile for 
several years, is already seriously big news at home – with predictions that 
the Hunters' fixtures will be watched by two million people.

They will play home games well away from the notoriously edgy capital, Port 
Moresby, in a boutique 8,000-capacity stadium in Kokopo, where the Mackay 
Cutters, the 2013 champions, will be the first visitors next weekend.

6) The Cup that cheers

It may be a world away from Kokopo, but the Road to Wembley, and the Challenge 
Cup final, continues to throw up some excellent and unusual stories. The 
highlight of the weekend's second-round programme seems to have been the 
British Army's 34-30 victory over the British Police, in golden-point extra 
time, which has secured the military men a crack at in-form Doncaster in the 
third round next month.

South West London Chargers gave the renowned Leeds amateur club Milford a real 
battle before losing 24-6 – more details of that, and all other things relating 
to league in the south, on the excellentRugby League Down South podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/rugby-league-down-south-spreaker/id604029710?mt=2>
 being produced every week this year by Ian Ramsdale of BBC London.

There's also a flavour here <http://www.superleague.co.uk/sltv#)> of East 
Leeds's victory over Leeds Metropolitan University, and the Cup also provides 
some much-needed good news for Cumbria, with Kells beating Leigh Miners to earn 
a trip to Batley, and Egremont Rangers, who boast Colin Armstrong and Rob 
Purdham among their off-field staff, drawn at home to Oldham after their win at 
Walney Central. That is a tie I'd love to see.
 