
It was at Wembley Stadium on Thursday lunchtime, just as mardy skies gave way 
to an unseasonable warmth and lustre, that the Super League’s general manager, 
Blake Solly, made a pronouncement as startling as the weather. The forthcoming 
rugby league season would, he said, be “the most hotly contested of all time”.

And three weeks away from the Super League’s 20th season, which kicks off on 5 
February when Wigan face Widnes, Solly went further still, saying he could hear 
the sound of a sport growing again after years of stasis.

“Anyone who is around rugby league realises it is on the march,” he told the 
Guardian after the draw for the first round of the Challenge Cup. “Last year 
the Grand Final was the most watched of all time with over 440,000 viewers. Our 
audience on Sky was 5% up. And the Magic Weekend had the most ticket sales 
ever.”

A preternatural spring was in the air and in Solly’s step. “We know the next 
year will be the best ever commercially,” he continued. “And there is a renewed 
enthusiasm for the sport with the new structure we have put in place.”

This is bold talk. For a few years now rugby league has too often been 
background noise in the sporting calendar – the Challenge Cup final, Grand 
Final and international matches aside. And in a year featuring an Ashes summer 
and a rugby union World Cup autumn, most expect the sport to be barged to the 
margins again.

Not Solly, though. “The rugby World Cup is a challenge but it is also an 
opportunity,” he says. “It’s a great tournament and there will be a lot of 
attention on it – which means people who probably wouldn’t be interested in 
either rugby code become interested in rugby in that period.”

Whether those new fans will gravitate to the Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> is an open question but this 
year’s competition will benefit from a much-needed trimming of excess fat.

The number of teams has been reduced from 14 to 12 for Super League XX. The 
bloated eight-team play-off format, which too readily rewarded mediocrity, has 
also been hacked down to a straight four-team semi-final and Grand Final. And, 
most radically of all, after 23 games (each v all, home and away, plus one for 
the Magic Weekend) the Super League will be chopped up – with the top eight 
sides settling the play-off positions among themselves while the remaining four 
sides enter a mini-tournament against the top four in the Championship to 
decide promotion and relegation.

No one is quite sure how it will work – as one below-the-line commenter on the 
Super League website put it: “I’ve been watching rugby league since 1955, I now 
have to go to an Open University course to understand who wins and loses. 
Help!” – but the reception has been broadly favourable.

Not everything in rugby league’s garden is rosy, however. There are question 
marks about whether the wide gap in resources between Super League and 
Championship teams will perhaps make the promotion/relegation play-offs a 
little one-sided, while the sight ofSam Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-burgess> playing union for Bath is a 
stark reminder about the relative strength of each code’s finances.

As Brian Noble, who coached the Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> to three Super League titles 
and brought a young Burgess to the club, admitted: “Unfortunately Sam was one 
of league’s X-factor players. But I’m a firm believer that there is a heck of a 
lot of talent out there for the England team.”

Noble cited the St Helens full-back Jonny Lomax, who has recovered from the 
knee injury that ended his 2014 season in June, and last year’s man of steel 
Daryl Clark, who has moved from Castleford toWarrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington>, as two names who could break 
through into the mainstream.

Meanwhile a happy consequence of the reduced number of overseas players – 
largely because the Australian game is so flush with money – has led to a 
seemingly endless flow of domestic young talent. The Leeds stand-off Liam 
Sutcliffe, Ben Currie at Warrington and Wigan’s George Williams, Joe Burgess 
and Ryan Hampshire are only 20, which bodes well for the national team and the 
game.

So does the fact that the six teams at the top of the Super League last season 
were separated by only six points. As Noble explained: “Things have changed 
because of the parity that’s been created with various rules and regulations 
and the talent being spread around.”

So is Solly really right to say that this season will be even closer and more 
dramatic? Perhaps even the most hotly contested of all time?

He nods his head. “I think we have probably got six, seven, eight teams who 
can make the Super League Grand Final and win the Challenge Cup,” he said. 
“Which compares favourably to other sports, when you can probably pick the 
winner amongst four.

“And we’ve got 12 teams who can make that top eight and save themselves from 
having to go through the relegation qualifiers. So from February through to 
October the season is jam-packed with exciting rugby league.”
 