
Sussan Ley has broken her silence over her expenses scandal, saying she erred 
in “judgement” by charging taxpayers for a trip to the Gold Coast in which she
bought a $795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.

In a written statement on Sunday, Ley said she had spent “the past 48 hours” 
examining her travel records and had discovered a few other problems with her 
entitlements.

She will ask the Department of Finance on Monday to invoice her for the costs 
of the car and travel allowance she claimed on Saturday, 9 May 2015, on the day 
she bought her luxury apartment on theGold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast>.

Sussan Ley bought $795,000 flat on impulse on taxpayer-funded trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
She will also ask the department to invoice her the costs of two more nights’ 
accommodation and a one-way flight. “My examination of my travel records has 
also brought to my attention two other claims for accommodation on the Gold 
Coast in 2014 and 2015 where I should have stayed and claimed in Brisbane, as 
well as a single one-way flight from Coolangatta to Canberra in June 2015,” Ley 
said on Sunday.

“I will also ask the Department of Finance to invoice me the costs of these 
claims, as well as the relevant penalty.”

The health minister has come under fire after it was revealed on Friday she 
bought a $795,000 apartment from a Liberal party donor while on a 
taxpayer-funded trip to theGold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> in 2015.

Government documents show 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P36_LEY_Sussan.pdf> Ley 
travelled from Sydney to Brisbane on 9 May 2015, where she announced at Wesley 
hospital $1.3bn in funding to list new medicines on the pharmaceutical benefits 
scheme. She travelled to Main Beach on the Gold Coast the same dayand bought a 
rental property 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/44p/LO/LeyS_44P.pdf>
. She and her partner then stayed the night, billing taxpayers $370 as travel 
allowance.

She claimed almost $4,000 in flights between Albury, Sydney and Brisbane over 
those two days. The vendor of the eighth-floor Main Beach unit, the childcare 
operator Martin Corkery, was one of theQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Liberal National 
party’s biggest individual donors in 2011, giving the party $50,000 on 30 June.

He told Guardian Australia he knew Ley on a professional basis through his 
advocacy for the industry when the sector came under her portfolio in 
opposition, then as an assistant minister. But their acquaintance and the 
purchase was pure coincidence, Corkery said.

He said he had been in Europe when the apartment was auctioned and had no idea 
Ley was the buyer until after contract was signed.

My examination of my travel records has also brought to my attention two other 
claims for accommodation on Gold Coast.
Sussan Ley 
On Friday a spokeswoman for Ley said she had “not planned nor anticipated” to 
buy the apartment but had done so after meeting with “health stakeholders” on 
the Gold Coast, which she later clarified to “patients”.

But her response was widely ridiculed, with Labor demanding she provide a 
better explanation for purchasing the apartment on a taxpayer-funded trip or 
resign from the frontbench. “Ley’s explanation that the purchase ‘was not 
planned nor anticipated’ is woefully inadequate and an insult to Australians,” 
Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, said on Friday.

“Sussan Ley needs to front up today and explain to Australians how purchasing 
a luxury apartment is considered to be ‘official business’. If she cannot do 
this she has no choice but to resign, or Malcolm Turnbull must move her off his 
frontbench.”

Ley said on Sunday she had spoken to Malcolm Turnbull about her travel 
allowance claim for her time on the Gold Coast, “and he agrees that this claim 
does not meet the high standards he expects of ministers”.

“I apologise for the error of judgement,” she said.

Sussan Ley’s statement in full:

I have spent the past 48 hours examining my travel records.

I travelled to Brisbane on 9 May 2015 to make a major announcement about the 
availability of new medicines at a specialist breast cancer clinic and to meet 
with patients in Brisbane and on the Gold Coast. As I had to be in Canberra on 
Sunday 10 May I decided to stay the night of 9 May on the Gold Coast rather 
than incur considerable extra expense by flying back to Albury and then to 
Canberra the following day. This travel is within the rules provided.

However, I have always sought to apply higher standards for myself in using 
valuable taxpayers’ funds. While attending an auction was not the reason for my 
visit to Queensland or the Gold Coast, I completely understand this changed the 
context of the travel undertaken. The distinction between public and private 
business should be as clear as possible when dealing with taxpayers’ money.

I have spoken to the Prime Minister and he agrees that this claim does not 
meet the high standards he expects of Ministers. I apologise for the error of 
judgement. Tomorrow I will ask the Department of Finance to invoice me for the 
costs for the car and travel allowance claimed on Saturday 9 May 2015, 
including the relevant penalty applied to erroneous claims.

My examination of my travel records has also brought to my attention two other 
claims for accommodation on the Gold Coast in 2014 and 2015 where I should have 
stayed and claimed in Brisbane, as well as a single one-way flight from 
Coolangatta to Canberra in June 2015.

I will also ask the Department of Finance to invoice me the costs of these 
claims, as well as the relevant penalty. In the interests of total 
transparency, I will ask the department to review all my ministerial travel to 
the Gold Coast.
 