
Paul Clement has signed a 2½-year deal to become Swansea City’s manager and 
will “restore some much-needed pride”, according to Huw Jenkins. The chairman 
also backed Clement to “regain the footballing belief” that was once at the 
core of Swansea’s values but has been lacking of late, with the club deep in 
relegation trouble.

Clement met the Swansea players at their hotel in London before Tuesday 
night’s 2-1 win at Crystal Palace. He is due to take training on Wednesday 
before being announced at a press conference at the Liberty Stadium on Thursday.

Swansea’s Àngel Rangel sinks Crystal Palace to give Paul Clement optimism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
“I would like to think my footballing philosophy goes hand in hand with the 
club’s,” Clement told Swansea’s website. “That’s part of the reason the club 
chose me and a big part of the reason why I wanted to come to the club. Over 
recent years there has been a certain style Swansea fans have been used to 
seeing. Maybe that hasn’t been there so much over recent times, but hopefully I 
will be able to put my imprint on the team very quickly and the fans will be 
able to see some good football – most importantly some winning football.”

Clement’s managerial experience is limited to the eight months he spent at 
Derby County last season but the 44-year-old has coached at some of Europe’s 
biggest clubs, including Chelsea, Real Madrid, Paris Saint-German and, more 
recently, Bayern Munich, working closely with Carlo Ancelotti. “I could have 
stayed at Bayern as an assistant but I’ve chosen to come into a very 
challenging situation,” he said. “It excites me to do that and that’s the 
attitude I want the players to have. It’s a big task but I think it can be 
done.”
Swansea City AFC (@SwansOfficial) 
#WelcomePaul <https://twitter.com/hashtag/WelcomePaul?src=hash> 👋 
pic.twitter.com/wc97v0ZDo4 <https://t.co/wc97v0ZDo4>
 <https://twitter.com/SwansOfficial/status/816317023412191232> January 3, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/SwansOfficial/status/816317023412191232> 
Jenkins hopes that Swansea will reap the rewards from Clement’s CV: “Swansea 
City’s strength over many years had been the quality of the football coached on 
the training field,” he said. “That has always been at the forefront of our 
success. There is no doubt in my mind that Paul can not only help us regain 
that footballing belief, but also restore some much needed pride back into the 
football club.

“Everyone connected to the club is fully behind the appointment and we see 
this a typicalSwansea City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> 
choice. It looks a good fit to get us back on track and provide one of the best 
young coaches in Europe with the chance to develop his own career and become a 
leading coach in his own right. I’m sure every Swans supporter, like me, would 
want to wish Paul the best of luck at the club and that he enjoys his time with 
us at Swansea.”

Clement becomes Swansea’s third manager of the season. Francesco Guidolin was 
sacked in October and Bob Bradley, the Italian’s replacement, was dismissed on 
27 December, after losing seven of his 11 matches.
 