
Reducing working hours for care workers reduces their sick leave, makes them 
feel healthier and improves the care they give to their patients – but comes 
with an appropriate price tag.

These are the preliminary findings of a two-year experiment with a six-hour 
working day in Gothenburg,Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>, 
which came to an end this month.

In February 2015, nurses at the Svartedalens retirement home switched from an 
eight-hour to a six-hour working day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/efficiency-up-turnover-down-sweden-experiments-with-six-hour-working-day>
 for the same wage – the first controlled trial of shorter hours in Sweden in 
about a decade.

Efficiency up, turnover down: Sweden experiments with six-hour working day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/efficiency-up-turnover-down-sweden-experiments-with-six-hour-working-day>
To ensure that patients at the home for the elderly were attended to for the 
same number of hours as before, 15 new employees were hired for the duration of 
the experiment, costing the centre about an additional €600,000 (£510,000) a 
year – a 22% increase in gross cost.

But preliminary results found the benefits of the trial were considerable. 
Reduced working hours led to a 10% drop in sick leave, meaning the employer had 
to spend less to hire cover. Compared with care home workers with normal 
working hours, the perceived health of the carers at Svartedalens improved by 
about 50%.

The employees started to spend more of their reduced working hours on what the 
analysts classified as “social activity” with patients, such as games or 
outdoor walks, which can be particularly valuable forpatients with dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/johns-campaign-dementia-forget-me-not-walk>
.

At the time, Lise-Lotte Pettersson, a 41-year-old assistant nurse at 
Svartedalens, said: “I used to be exhausted all the time. I would come home 
from work and pass out on the sofa. But not now. I am much more alert; I have 
much more energy for my work, and also for family life.”

Daniel Bernmar, the leader of the Left party group on Gothenburg city council, 
which pushed for the trial at Svartedalens, deniedreports 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-03/swedish-six-hour-workday-trial-runs-into-trouble-too-expensive>
 that the experiment had ended in failure.

“It still remains to be seen whether the economic costs of reduced working 
hours outweigh the benefits. The costs of the trial for the public economy were 
actually half of what we thought they would be,” he told the Guardian. A final 
set of results is expected in March.

Bernmar said the project had always been scheduled to end in 2017, and there 
had never been a plan to make the arrangement permanent at the end of the 
trial. During the experiment, the city council decided to set aside 20m Swedish 
krona (£1.8m) for similar reduced working hour trials in other sectors of
Gothenburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/insider-guide-gothenburg-sweden-west-coast-green-spaces>
’s public sector.

While historical data shows that the length of average working days has fallen 
in Sweden over the past century, there are no plans to establish six-hour 
working days at a national level.

The ideal length of a working day has also been the subject of debate in 
France, where the rightwing presidential candidateFrançois Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
 has proposed a return to a legal working week of 39 hours in the public and 
private sectors, up from the 35-hour week that since 2000 has obliged employers 
to pay higher rates or give time off for extra hours.

Fillon said the 39-hour week would apply straight away in the public sector 
and that negotiated deals in the private sector can allow people to work up to 
an EU ceiling of 48 hours. He has suggested state workers be shifted to 39 
hours, but paid for 37.
 