
The organisers of the party after which Sydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> forward Dylan Napa was 
alleged to have been knocked out have distanced themselves from the incident.

Napa was struck with a fire poker on Sydney’s northern beaches on Sunday 
morning having come to the aid of a woman,according to News Corp Australia 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/palm-beach-charity-party-turns-ugly-with-three-people-taken-to-hospital/news-story/8635347dc7f8ba0c651f4bf84229a8c8>
.

Related: Todd Carney issues 'come get me' plea to NRL clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/carney-issues-come-get-me-plea-nrl-clubs>

The Roosters player was allegedly asleep at the Palm Beach property when he 
was awoken by screaming, and he saw a man destroying property and yelling at a 
woman. He was reportedly knocked unconscious.

Host Theo Chambers, a mortgage broker and the son of Chambers Cellars owner 
Steven Chambers, has moved to distance the Palmbu event from the incident.

“I would like to particularly stress that the apparent break and entry and 
assault which took place at my premises the day after the charity event, 
happened a considerable time after the event had been closed and all attendees 
had been cleared from the premises by licenced security,” Theo Chambers said in 
a statement provided to AAP by his lawyers.

“I had also left and locked up the property for the evening. There is no 
information suggesting that the charity event and the break and entry and 
assault were in any way connected. As more information comes to hand, I will 
consider pressing charges and any other claims I may have against those 
responsible.”

Chambers said the event raised more than $13,000 for charity.

A police spokeswoman said emergency services were called to the Bynya Road 
premises around 3am on Sunday following reports of a fight. “Two men, aged 33 
and 24, and a 26-year-old woman, were treated at the scene by NSW ambulance 
paramedics for minor injuries,” the spokeswoman said.

Six hundred people attended the party at the Palm Beach mansion, which is an 
annual charity event called Palmbu in support of the Vasculitis Foundation.

The Roosters issued a brief statement saying they were aware of the incident 
and theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> had been informed. The 
24-year-old Napa was last week selected in the Queensland emerging 
representative squad.
 