
Star midfielder Josh Kennedy will captain Sydney from next year after Jarrad 
McVeigh and Kieren Jack’s surprise decision to stand down from theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> club’s co-leadership.

Three-time All Australian Kennedy has also extended his contract with the 
Swans for another three years to the end of the 2020 season.

He will be supported by Dan Hannebery, Luke Parker and Dane Rampe, who have 
been named vice-captains.

Pre-season AFL strike not off the table, says Patrick Dangerfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/pre-season-afl-strike-not-off-the-table-says-patrick-dangerfield>
Kennedy, 28, has played 183 AFL games and won a premiership with the club in 
2012 as well as helping the team to the 2014 and 2016 grand finals.

He moved to Sydney ahead of the 2010 season after being drafted by Hawthorn.

McVeigh has been a co-captain since 2011 alongside now-retired club legend 
Adam Goodes, with Jack joining him in the role two years later.

McVeigh said Kennedy’s appointment was a natural progression for the club.

“This is about handing over the baton to the next group who will take our 
football club into the future,” he said.

“It happened for us – Craig Bolton stepped aside for me and Adam Goodes did 
the same for Kieren.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fswans-new-captain-mcveigh-and-jack-stand-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333c8fd865fe6d40b5128264dd767f6fc0202fa5%2F10_267_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Swans%20name%20new%20captain%20after%20McVeigh%20and%20Jack%20stand%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fswans-new-captain-mcveigh-and-jack-stand-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Swans%20name%20new%20captain%20after%20McVeigh%20and%20Jack%20stand%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fswans-new-captain-mcveigh-and-jack-stand-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333c8fd865fe6d40b5128264dd767f6fc0202fa5%2F10_267_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
 Harley Bennell in action for the Fremantle Dockers. Photograph: Paul 
Kane/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, Fremantle’s off-season woes have continued with injured midfielder 
Harley Bennell having his car impounded after he was stopped by police, who 
discovered he was driving without a licence.


West Australian media reports indicate Bennell was stopped for a routine check 
on Tuesday and informed his licence had been suspended from November 30 for 
loss of demerit points.


Bennell told the club he was not aware of the loss of his licence because he 
had changed address recently.


The incident is just the latest in a string of issues for Bennell, who will 
fly to Germany this week for treatment on his troublesome calf.


The 24-year-old midfielder hasn’t played a regular season game for the Dockers 
since being traded to them by Gold Coast at the end of the 2015 season.


Bennell’s brush with the law comes just days after it was revealed that 
forward Shane Yarran is on personal leave from the club after he was charged 
with unlawful wounding over an incident in 2015.


Yarran had also landed in hot water in November when he was charged with 
aggravated common assault over an alleged incident that involved a family 
member.


Veteran defender Michael Johnson faces a nervous wait after being charged by 
police with assault over a bizarre incident that occurred in a kebab shop in 
November.


A Bunbury school teacher alleged he was struck by Johnson shortly after 
filming the All-Australian with his pants around his ankles.


Johnson will appear in court on January 18.
 