
The 86-strong Sydney to Hobart fleet will spend their first night at sea with 
an eye towards the history books – with weather forecasting showing that the 
race record could tumble.


As the race passed Batemans Bay it was the evergreen Wild Oats XI with the 
slightest of advantages at the front end of the flotilla.

Perpetual Loyal, the boat skippered by the accountant Anthony Bell and the 
race leader at the starting cannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/sydney-to-hobart-race-perpetual-loyal-takes-lead-after-wild-oats-xis-poor-start>
 and out of Sydney Heads, remains in second and in a tight duel with the 
eight-time line honours champion Wild Oats.

Sydney to Hobart race: Perpetual Loyal takes lead after Wild Oats XI's poor 
start
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/sydney-to-hobart-race-perpetual-loyal-takes-lead-after-wild-oats-xis-poor-start>
Almost in line with Oats and Loyal is the third super maxi, the Hong Kong 
entrant Scallywag, with Volvo 70 Black Jack in fourth. All have made a serious 
dent into the 628-nautical mile odyssey towards Constitution Dock in the 
Tasmanian capital.

It has been an aggressive start to the race for three of the four super maxis, 
which have maximised the power of the wind, with spinnakers unfurled since 
clearing the heads.

The experimental 100-footer CQS – skippered by the former Sydney to Hobart 
winner Ludde Ingvall – has struggled to implement her full arsenal of toys and 
is behind four smaller boats in eighth position.

Oats is the current record holder with a time of one day, 18 hours, 23 
minutes. While a new benchmark will hinge on the weather conditions around 
Tasmania the boat’s skipper, Mark Richards, knows his entrant can go quicker 
than the mark she set in 2012. Thanks, in no small part to the dramatic 
re-engineering which has helped shed 300kg off the Oatley family’s boat in the 
last four years.

Perpetual Loyal’s decision to focus on seasoned sailors rather than 
celebrities – as it has done in previous years – looks to be providing 
excellent reward. The giant black super maxi, now bolstered with crew from last 
year’s line honours conqueror Comanche, has hit speeds of 26 knots (some 
47km/h) on her way south.

While the majority of the fleet is racing significantly off the rhumb line 
Loyal has gone further offshore than Wild Oats XI in the hope of capturing more 
of the southerly current – and with the aim of avoiding the wind change that 
could come in the back half of the race. It is a calculated gamble laid out by 
the tactician Tom Slingsby, who has won an Olympic gold medal and is part of 
the world-beating America’s Cup team Oracle.

The corrected time leader is a jostle between a series of boats. Last year’s 
winner Balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/31/australian-boat-balance-named-overall-winner-of-2015-sydney-to-hobart-race>
 and Sailing Australia president Matt Allen’s Ichi Bahn are the current 
frontrunners for the Tattersalls Cup.

The skipper of the latter, a JV 52 yacht, is a veteran of the Hobart race and 
had entered two boats into this year’s blue-water classic, only making a 
decision on which boat to officially enrol once the weather forecast had firmed.

Sydney to Hobart 2016: where to watch and who to watch out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/sydney-to-hobart-2016-where-to-watch-and-who-to-watch-out-for>
For Loyal and Oats, negotiating the first night at sea will be psychologically 
important as this year’s two frontrunners were forced into retirement this time 
12 months ago.

Unlike the 2015 race – rough weather forced 30 boats to retire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/30/sydney-to-hobart-race-2015-finish>
 after the first two nights of racing in violent oceans – the first evening is 
expected to offer relatively smooth conditions.

The start of this year’s edition – the 72nd in Sydney to Hobart history – was 
without any penalty flags, though there were three early retirements.

The first was the pre-race exit of Jason Bond’s entrant Enigma, which proved 
to be just that – pulling out before midday owing to a motor issue.

The seven-decades-old Freyja was the next to succumb. She limped home to the 
Cruising Yacht Club after blowing out her headsail just beyond the heads.

Four hours into the racing Dare Devil, one of two boats to have a female 
skipper, became the third casualty after the 47-footer suffered rudder damage.
 