
North Queensland’s premiership defence has hit the skids after the Cowboys 
crashed to their third straight NRL defeat - a 22-10 loss to a Mitchell 
Pearce-inspiredSydney Roosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> at Allianz Stadium.


The Roosters enjoyed their best win of the year on Sunday, with Pearce and 
Jared Waerea-Hargreaves back from injury against a Cowboys side missing hooker 
Jake Granville and prop Ben Hannant.


Cronulla stumble, Jarryd Hayne field goal fires Titans to key NRL win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/nrl-saturday-round-23-roundup> 
It is the first time since round three in 2015 that the Cowboys have suffered 
three straight losses, and if Canberra beat Melbourne on Monday night, they 
will be four points outside the top four with three rounds to play.


Pearce outpointed his opposite Johnathan Thurston, who still appeared troubled 
by a hamstring injury he suffered three weeks ago. The Roosters pack, led 
strongly by Waerea-Hargreaves and Boyd Cordner, outmuscled their rivals, with 
Pearce and his halves partner Connor Watson able to cash in before 8,760 fans.

Ethan Lowe crossed for the visitors early, shortly after Roosters centre Dale 
Copley was taken off for concussion in the seventh minute and didn’t return. 
Copley’s replacement, Ryan Matterson, replied for the Roosters in the 21st 
minute, with Pearce throwing the final pass.

Latrell Mitchell’s conversion put the Roosters ahead 6-4 before tries to Shaun 
Kenny-Dowall, when the home side ran the ball on the last tackle in the 28th 
minute, and Boyd Cordner, who brushed his way past three Cowboys defenders 
close to the line, put them ahead 16-4 at the break.


Blake Ferguson was controversially denied a try by the bunker in the 33rd 
minute when he was ruled to have hit Kyle Feldt high before he dropped the ball 
and the Roosters No1 pounced.


Mitchell scooted past Lachlan Coote on a 40m angled run to put the Roosters 
further ahead in the 49th minute. Kane Linnett scored the Cowboys’ second to 
give them hope in the 64th minute, but the Roosters defence held firm for a 
deserved Tricolours win, which is just their fifth of the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsydney-roosters-inflict-third-straight-nrl-defeat-on-north-queensland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88142744573a8e81364badb64d0046ae51ea1d8a%2F0_0_4400_3048%2F4400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Roosters%20inflict%20third%20straight%20NRL%20defeat%20on%20North%20Queensland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsydney-roosters-inflict-third-straight-nrl-defeat-on-north-queensland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Roosters%20inflict%20third%20straight%20NRL%20defeat%20on%20North%20Queensland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsydney-roosters-inflict-third-straight-nrl-defeat-on-north-queensland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88142744573a8e81364badb64d0046ae51ea1d8a%2F0_0_4400_3048%2F4400.jpg>
 Waqa Blake celebrates a try with Panthers team-mates during the round 23 match 
against the Knights. Photograph: Darren Pateman/AAP 
A six-try, second-half blitz helped Penrith defeat last-placed Newcastle 42-6 
to confirm their place in a logjam at the bottom of theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> top-eight. After an uninspiring 
first-half at Hunter Stadium on Sunday, the Panthers and the Knights were 
locked at 6-6 at the break but Penrith dominated the second stanza, leaving the 
Knights to extend their club record losing streak to 15 games.

It also puts Newcastle into the top 10 on the all-time longest-losing streak 
list. They enjoyed 60% of the possession in the first-half, but despite 
repeated opportunities they couldn’t crack the Panthers line. Instead, it was 
the Panthers who opened the scoring, with winger Josh Mansour crossing 
untouched in the 12th minute after some good lead-up work by Waqa Blake.

The Knights hit back after 30 minutes when Brendan Elliot plucked a Trent 
Hodkinson bomb out of the air and raced over but that was as close as Newcastle 
got as they capitulated in the second half to let the Panthers run in six 
unanswered tries.

Matt Moylan broke the deadlock in the 44th minute when he ran off a Peter 
Wallace pass and touched down under the posts. From there the floodgates 
opened, with Blake (55th minute) and Tyrone Peachey (59th minute) each beating 
some flimsy Knights defence to take the score out to 18-6.

Penrith continued to dominate the Knights up the middle of the ruck and made 
them pay on the edges, with Dallin Watene-Zelezniak scoring a second-half 
double and Josh Mansour scoring his second as the siren sounded. The Panthers 
have now won four out of their past five matches and have leapfrogged the 
Titans into seventh spot on 26 points.
 