
Sharks make title statement with convincing win over Cowboys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/dragons-warriors-sharks-panthers-nrl-eels>
The Sydney Roosters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> held 
off a fast-finishing Newcastle to score a 38-22 victory and extend their 
winning streak to eight on Sunday. On a weekend where their fellow top four 
incumbents tripped up against lower-ranked teams, an irresistible Roosters side 
– minus rested skipper Mitchell Pearce – cruised to a 32-0 lead at one stage in 
the second half.

Having sauntered to a 26-0 lead by the break at Hunter Stadium, the Roosters 
looked well on their way to an easy victory when Roger Tuivasa-Sheck completed 
a hat-trick 40 seconds after the break. But for the second week in a row, the 
competition heavyweights fell into a second half slumber and conceded four 
unanswered tries.

Knights centre Sione Mata’utia powered over for the Knights first points of 
the match, before the hosts brought the surprisingly strong 17,718 crowd into 
the game with three tries in nine minutes. And it was two mistakes from 
Tuivasa-Sheck that got Newcastle back into the contest.

The Warriors-bound fullback failed to deal with a Tyrone Roberts grubber in 
the 61st minute that ended in Joe Tapine touching down, and then a simple 
dropped bomb three minutes later gave Jeremy Smith a try under the sticks. A 
Kurt Gidley four-pointer in the 70th reduced the deficit to 10, however their 
brave comeback ended when James Maloney sliced through minutes from full-time.

A Nathan Ross knock-on from the kick-off was simply the prelude of a first 
half effort where the Knights missed 18 tackles. A poor read from the right 
edge gave Daniel Tupou a saloon passage to the tryline in the eighth minute, 
before a similar play unfolded for Brendan Elliot on the opposite side of the 
field four minutes later.

More swift ball movement ended in Tuivasa-Sheck nabbing his first try in the 
30th minute before the Warriors-bound star was the only one to jump for a James 
Maloney cross-field kick minutes later. Roosters prop Kane Evans completed the 
first half rout when he chased through a Maloney bomb that was allowed to 
bounce.

The Knights were down to 15 men in the second half after Tyler Randell 
(scratched eyeball) and Beau Scott (foot) failed to come out of the sheds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fnrl-round-22-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6563905bb6c8b251be799dd69d648cc3c6727b49%2F0_231_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Roosters%20hold%20on%20in%20high-scoring%20encounter%20with%20Newcastle%20Knights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fnrl-round-22-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Roosters%20hold%20on%20in%20high-scoring%20encounter%20with%20Newcastle%20Knights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fnrl-round-22-sunday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6563905bb6c8b251be799dd69d648cc3c6727b49%2F0_231_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Nene Macdonald of the Titans is hauled to the ground by a posse of Storm 
players at AAMI Park. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
Melbourne remain in the hunt for an NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl>
 top four finals berth after over-running Gold Coast 36-14 at AAMI Park. The 
Storm were worried about losing touch with the ladder leaders after their shock 
loss to Wests Tigers last round but they made no mistake against the Titans and 
they remain in sixth but still a chance for a double-chance finish.

It took a while from them to stamp their authority on the match, blowing five 
scoring opportunities in the first half to trail 8-6 at the break. But a try to 
winger Marika Koroibete, his 15th for the season, in the 43rd minute saw them 
take the lead before fullback Cameron Munster showed a clean pair of heels for 
a 16-8 scoreline.

Munster finished with a hat-trick but the biggest cheers of the day by the 
Melbourne fans were reserved for winger Matt Duffie, playing his third game 
since early 2013. The 24-year-old, who has undergone two knee and shoulder 
reconstructions in his short career, scored a try in each half and had another 
disallowed.

The Titans, who were again with without injured skipper Nate Myles, started 
brightly with Aiden Sezer slotting a penalty after nine minutes. The 
five-eighth then had a hand in their first try when he combined with hooker 
Daniel Mortimer to put exciting halfback Kane Elgey over the line. But their 
8-0 lead only lasted until the 33rd minute when Duffie ran on to a Cooper Cronk 
inside ball to cross next to the posts.

Down 22-8, the visitors were unlucky when Koroibete appeared to hold back 
winger David Mead in the in-goal as he tried to get to a loose ball, with the 
video referees deciding it wasn’t even worth a penalty, let alone a penalty 
try. They got some revenge soon after when Koroibete missed a Sezer high kick 
and Josh Hoffman won the scramble to the ball. But the Storm finished in style 
with centre Will Chambers making a charge to the line before Munster collected 
another two to cap an impressive day out.
 