
A 22-year-old Australian has died after being bitten by a redback spider in 
what may turn out to be the first such death since the antivenom was introduced 
60 years ago.

Jayden Burleigh, from Sydney’s northern beaches, was reportedly bitten while 
walking on the north coast ofNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> last week.

Spiders' closest relative reveals silky secret of evolutionary success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/30/spiders-closest-relative-reveals-silky-secret-of-evolutionary-success-idmonarachne-brasieri>
According to the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/lachlan-family-mourns-another-son-jayden-seven-months-after-losing-lachlan-in-a-car-crash/news-story/111ed445e047a917a1768a0545047295>
, an abscess formed under his left arm, affecting his glands, and he was 
treated in hospital for four days. He was released on Thursday and given a 
course of antibiotics but died on Saturday.

Just eight months ago Burleigh’s younger brother, Lachlan, was killed in a car 
crash.

Burleigh’s mother, Deborah Burleigh, told the Sydney Morning Herald the exact 
cause of Jayden’s death would not be known for several weeks 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/sydney-family-mourns-death-of-second-son-in-eight-months-after-redback-spider-bite-20160411-go3z4d.html>
. “What we do know is that only a week ago he was in hospital, recovering from 
an infection due to a redback spider bite,”she said.

“He had a general anaesthetic to drain a severe abscess at Nambour hospital 
and was there for four days. He had also just recovered from injuries sustained 
in a car accident a few weeks prior.”

Nambour hospital, in south-east Queensland, has been contacted for comment.

Redback spiders are found across Australia, including in urban areas, and 
bites occur frequently – particularly during the summer months. But the last 
recorded death from a redback spider bite was in 1955, a year before the 
antivenom was developed.

According to the Australian Museum, more than 250 people are given antivenom 
each year, with several milder instances probably going unreported. Bites cause 
pain, sweating, muscular weakness, nausea and vomiting, but serious illness 
does not develop for at least three hours, allowing victims time to seek 
medical attention.

A spokesperson for Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> Service said that due to 
patient confidentiality legislation, they were unable to comment on the matter.
 