
Clare Hieatt remembers how the idea of moving to a Welsh farmhouse began to 
take shape. “I saw a photograph byJuergen Teller 
<http://juergenteller.tumblr.com/> of a remote homestead, pretty rough and 
ready, with chickens wandering in and out of the kitchen. I thought: “That’s 
what I want. Not the sanitised version of country living, with a Range Rover on 
the drive. We’ll do it properly.”’

We found out that jeans used to be a big industry in Cardigan. It was a eureka 
moment

Clare and her husband David Hieatt are both originally from Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> – “the Valleys, not the coast” she says 
– but for the past nine years, this farmhouse near Cardigan has been their home.

Back in the 1990s, she and David used to work in London – “but in our heads, 
that was only ever short term,” she says. “London was where the work was.” On 
the side, they set up their own T-shirt brand: “We thought that if we had our 
own business, we could move back to Wales and take our jobs with us.”
 A warm welcome: the path up to the front door of the farmhouse. Photograph: 
Penny Wincer for the Observer 
Those home-printed T-shirts grew into the original Howies clothing company 
<http://www.howies.co.uk/>. The clothes caught the mood of the moment: an urge 
to run for the hills wearing ethically made shirts and jeans, even if it was 
just for the weekend. The Howies’ slogans hinted at the back story of the 
Hieatts’ move to Wales, along with their daughters Stella, now 17, and Tessa, 
14. “Our factory was just along the river so, yes, David would ‘Work hard, 
canoe home’, says Clare. “People thought it was a bit of a gimmick, but, that 
was our real life, not just a slogan.”

This farmhouse marked the start of the next chapter of the family’s life. “We 
sold our share of the company just as this house came up,’ says Clare. With its 
rabble of outbuildings, this house had the space and wildness they were after.
 Sitting soft: a huge sofa dominates the sitting room. Note the polished oak 
floors and exposed brickwork. The portrait is from the Photographers’ Gallery 
in London. Photograph: Penny Wincer for the Observer 
“In the depths of winter it can be hard up here,” she continues. “That’s when 
the girls will moan, ‘Why can’t we live in a normal house in town, with 
radiators and nice fitted carpets?’ But eventually spring arrives, the kitchen 
door stays open and this place is just beautiful. You can’t help but wonder 
about the people who worked and lived here, who helped wear a dip into the 
porch.”

The decor is honest and homespun without a hint of twee. The wood and Welsh 
slate dining table is byFreshwest Design <http://freshwest.co.uk/> and the 
kitchen is made from reclaimed pine and sheets of stainless steel. A large 
portrait fromthe Photographers’ Gallery <http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/>
 dates from their London days, though now it hangs alongside paintings by local 
artistEloise Govier <http://www.eloisegovier.com/>.

Then there are hand-me-downs, like the bake stone that belonged to Clare’s 
grandmother. “When I was growing up, she lived with us and looked after us when 
we got in from school,” says Clare. “She’d give us lemon squash and pikelets 
cooked on that bake stone.” Clare now uses it to cook flatbreads. “When it 
heats up, I can smell those pikelets all over again. All that butter and sugar 
must have seeped into it forever.”
 Making plans: Clare at work at the dining table which is made of wood and 
slate. Photograph: Penny Wincer for the Observer 
The kitchen is also where the Hieatts have dreamed up new work ventures. Their 
Hiut Denim <http://hiutdenim.co.uk/> utility jeans are made up the road, in a 
unit they can see from their back window. “We discovered that jeans used to be 
a big industry in Cardigan, until the high street brands took production 
abroad. That was a eureka moment for us. We could go back to doing what we had 
done well and help restart a local industry,” says Clare.

Then there’s the Do Lectures Wales <http://www.thedolectures.com/>, which they 
hold in their old cow barn. These started as a one-off summer camp and have 
since expanded, with spin-offs in Australia and America. People come to listen 
to inspiring speakers, to swap ideas. ‘This is a place that gives you a 
breathing space. It helps you think about what you want to do next,” says Clare.

For future events, go to thedolectures.com <http://www.thedolectures.com/> 
 