
Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel has been lambasted for 
considering closing its UK pension scheme before making a £60m payment 
scheduled for next year.

Stephen Kinnock <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-kinnock>, the 
Labour MP for Aberavon, said it would be an “absolute disgrace” if Tata closed 
the scheme without making the payment and said the Indian company had “moral 
and social responsibilities”.

The British Steel pension scheme (BSPS) is a major obstacle to a rescue deal 
forTata Steel UK <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata>, which employs 
11,000 people and owns the Port Talbot steelworks, which is in Kinnock’s 
constituency in south Wales.

The BSPS has liabilities of more than £15bn and 130,000 members, making it one 
of the biggest retirement schemes in the country.

The future of Tata Steel UK has been in doubt since the Indian company 
announced in March that it was reviewing the future of the business amid 
mounting losses and its debts.

Ratan Tata, the interim chairman of Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/tata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel>
, aims to make a final decision about whether to keep Tata Steel UK or sell it 
offwithin the next few weeks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/tata-to-decide-future-of-port-talbot-steelworks-within-four-weeks>

Tata is in talks with the German company ThyssenKrupp about merging their 
European steel operations, but the UK business is only likely to be included if 
the pension scheme can be restructured.

Ratan Tata is understood to be keen to keep the UK business, either through a 
merger with ThyssenKrupp or keeping it wholly owned. However, an overhaul of 
the pension scheme is considered vital by the Indian company.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftatas-plans-close-british-steel-pension-scheme-stephen-kinnock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c8dce3744ffbcb8113ed0f6d5af3693a8bb4a3%2F1433_596_1344_1680%2F1344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tata's%20plans%20to%20close%20British%20Steel%20pension%20fund%20lambasted%20by%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftatas-plans-close-british-steel-pension-scheme-stephen-kinnock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tata%27s%20plans%20to%20close%20British%20Steel%20pension%20fund%20lambasted%20by%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftatas-plans-close-british-steel-pension-scheme-stephen-kinnock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c8dce3744ffbcb8113ed0f6d5af3693a8bb4a3%2F1433_596_1344_1680%2F1344.jpg>
 The Port Talbot steelworks is in Stephen Kinnock’s Aberavon constituency in 
south Wales. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Tata was initially in talks with the government about changing UK laws so the 
annual increase in benefits was pegged at a lower level of inflation, which 
could have cut billions of pounds from the future liabilities.

The government is considering a consultation on potential changes to the 
pension scheme, but Tata is understood to have shelved the inflation plan and 
is considering closing the scheme as part of a different restructuring, the 
full details of which are unknown.

Tata is due to make the £60m payment into the pension scheme in March after an 
agreement with trustees to financially support it. A further payment is due in 
2018.

Kinnock said he hoped Tata would “stand by their obligations to pensioners and 
steelworkers. It is an absolute disgrace if these reports are true. Tata have 
not only legal, but also moral and social responsibilities to the members of 
the BSPS and the workforce across the UK.

“To seek to escape those responsibilities and avoid their obligations, by 
exploiting a technicality, is not only a slap in the face to the workers and 
pensioners who have sought to work with the company to find a resolution, but 
it should trouble us all.”

In response, Tata said it remained in discussions about the future of the 
pension scheme.

A Tata Steel spokesman said: “Tata Steel UK continues to be in active dialogue 
and engagement with all relevant stakeholders to develop options to support a 
sustainable future for the business and find a solution to address the costs, 
risks and volatilities of the BSPS and the risks this brings to the future of 
the Tata Steel UK business. These discussions are currently ongoing with 
stakeholders as it is important to continue to explore viable alternatives for 
the BSPS.

“The UK’s Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> launched a public consultation in 
May 2016 to explore certain alternate options for the BSPS. The company awaits 
the outcome of that consultation but in the meantime is actively exploring 
alternative courses of action.

“Tata Steel is committed to working with the pension scheme trustee, the trade 
unions and relevant regulatory and government bodies to achieve a fair outcome 
for the British Steel pension scheme and its members against the backdrop of 
the difficult business conditions and the structural challenges the steel 
industry is currently facing.”
 