
The owner of Britain’s biggest steelworks has boosted the survival chances of 
the Port Talbot plant by committing to stabilising its ailing UK business.

The group executive director of Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel, Koushik Chatterjee, said the 
company is focused on turning around its UK operations as the company published 
its financial results.

 Chatterjee said Tata Steel’s performance had improved significantly over the 
past year thanks to cost cuts, more efficient use of its plants and the cheap 
pound.

Tata's plans to close British Steel pension fund lambasted by MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/tatas-plans-close-british-steel-pension-scheme-stephen-kinnock>
In the most positive comments about the future of the UK business since Tata 
Steel launched a review of the operations in March, he added: The company will 
strive to continue to focus on the improvement in the European performance with 
special focus to make UK structurally sustainable and de-risked to future 
external volatility.”

Tata Steel said the talks with German company ThyssenKrupp about a merger of 
their European steel operations are continuing, as are negotiations over the 
future of the British Steel pension scheme with trustees, the Pensions 
Regulator and the government.


But Chatterjee’s comments suggest that Tata Steel is paving the way to keep 
its UK business – whether the merger with ThyssenKrupp goes ahead or not – and 
try to turn around its performance.

The future of Tata Steel UK <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> and 
its 11,000 workers has been in doubt since its Indian owner announced the 
review, amid mounting losses and heavy debts.

The latest financial result for the European arm of Tata Steel show revenues 
in the three months to the end of September fell from £1.5bn in the previous 
quarter to £1.4bn, but underlying profits rose from £90m to £116m. The fall in 
the value of the pound has boosted the profitability of the UK business. It has 
made exports more valuable and imports to Britain from rival steel providers 
less competitive, although this benefit has been partly offset by an increase 
in costs because key raw materials such as iron ore and coal are bought in 
dollars.

Scunthorpe steelworkers plan for a brighter future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/scunthorpe-british-steel-profit-brighter-future>
Tata Steel declined to publish the financial results of the UK arm, which was 
losing more than £1m a day earlier in the year but is now understood to be 
performing significantly better. However, Tata Steel sources insisted that the 
UK business could not rely on a weak pound to be competitive and needed to make 
significant changes to be sustainable.

Ratan Tata, the interim chairman of Tata Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/tata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel>
 – Tata Steel’s Indian parent – aims to make a final decision about whether to 
keep its UK steel business or sell it offwithin the next few weeks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/tata-to-decide-future-of-port-talbot-steelworks-within-four-weeks>

The UK business is only likely to be included in the ThyssenKrupp deal if the 
pension scheme can be restructured. Tata is also in the process of selling its 
speciality steels business, which is based in the north east of England and 
employs 2,000 people. The company has shortlisted bidders, who are now 
conducting due diligence.

The British Steel pension scheme remains a major obstacle to the future of 
Tata Steel UK <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata>. It has liabilities 
of more than £15bn and 130,000 members, making it one of the biggest retirement 
schemes in the country.

Earlier this week, Stephen Kinnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-kinnock>, the Labour MP for 
Aberavon, which includes the Port Talbot steelworks, said it would be an 
“absolute disgrace” if Tata closed the scheme and said the Indian company had 
“moral and social responsibilities”.
 