
Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel has agreed to sell its 
speciality steels business in northern England for £100m to Liberty House, the 
metals company run by tycoon Sanjeev Gupta, ending months of uncertainty for 
1,700 workers.

The Indian-owned company put the business up for sale earlier this year after 
reviewing its struggling UK operations, which also include Britain’s largest 
steelworks in Port Talbot, south Wales.

Tata Steel has signed a letter of intent with Liberty about the deal, which 
means both parties now enter exclusive negotiations and can work on finalising 
terms.

The deal was welcomed by trade unions and MPs, who said the announcement 
secured the future of the business’s workers and key sites.

However, the future of the rest of Tata Steel UK, which employs 11,000 people, 
remains unclear.Tata Steel is understood to be keen to keep the rest of the UK 
business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/tata-commit-uk-steel-next-decade>
, including the strip products arm based in Port Talbot, and is in talks with 
German company ThyssenKrupp about merging their European steel operations. 
However, it needs to agree with the UK government, the Pensions Regulator, and 
pension trustees about the future of the British Steel pension scheme, which 
has liabilities of £15bn.

Liberty has bought a string of struggling steel sites across the UK - including
two Lanarkshire steel mills from Tata Steel – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/tata-scottish-steel-works-rescued-by-liberty-house>
 and also expressed an interest in buying the Port Talbot steelworks.

Tata's plans to close British Steel pension fund lambasted by MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/tatas-plans-close-british-steel-pension-scheme-stephen-kinnock>
The speciality steels business employs 1,700 people and produces materials for 
the aerospace, automotive and oil and gas industries. It isunder investigation 
by the Serious Fraud Office over forgery allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/tata-uk-steel-operation-underinvested-overmanned-ratan-tata>
, which led to the managing director of the business being suspended. Its 
primary sites are in Rotherham, Bolton and Stocksbridge near Sheffield.

Bimlendra Jha, chief executive of Tata Steel UK, said: “This is an important 
step forward in seeking a future for speciality steels and we have reached this 
stage thanks to the efforts of employees, trade unions and management.


“We continue to actively seek solutions to the company’s structural challenges 
and work with all stakeholders. Among those challenges, there is the need to 
develop a more sustainable business in the UK as well as a self-sustaining 
future for the British Steel pension scheme.”

Jha defended Tata Steel’s management of its UK business, saying it had 
invested £1.5bn over the last nine years and was investing £85m this year into 
ensuring its facilities can produce premium steels, which is a growing market.

Roy Rickhuss, general secretary of steel union Community, welcomed the 
announcement. There had been speculation in recent days that Tata Steel could 
scrap the sale process and keep the business.

“After months of uncertainty and delay from Tata, this will be welcome news 
for the thousands of steelworkers whose jobs depend on the success of this 
business,” Rickhuss said. “Community has worked with Liberty House Group at 
steel sites across the UK, and I have already spoken with the company about the 
next steps in this process.

“The number one priority for Community will be ensuring that Liberty has a 
proper plan to protect jobs and provide the long-term investment necessary to 
grow the business. Crucial to this plan will be ensuring that the business’s 
loyal workforce have a pension plan that provides dignity and security in 
retirement.”

Gill Furniss, Labour’s shadow steel minister, said: “After months of worry, 
steelworkers and their families in South Yorkshire at last have some certainty 
over what the future holds.

“There are still huge challenges facing the steel industry nationally and we 
shouldn’t be complacent. On energy prices, on business rates, on procurement; 
the government has made all the right noises about saving steel. Now is the 
time to act.”

Gupta, the executive chairman of Liberty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/sanjeev-gupta-uk-steel-tata>, 
pledged to work with trade unions on the future of the speciality steels 
business.

He said: “We look forward to working with Tata Steel over the coming weeks to 
complete this hugely important milestone transaction. We recognise the 
world-class skills of the speciality steels workforce and are eager to join 
with them to develop the business and increase market share, both domestically 
and internationally using our global presence.”

The deal is subject to due diligence and clearance from competition 
authorities. The agreement will not be completed until the first quarter of 
next year at the earliest.
 