
Tata Steel slumped to another loss in the three months to the end of June as 
thecrisis that has engulfed its UK operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/20/how-the-uk-steel-crisis-unfolded>
 weighed on the company’s global results.

The Indian steel firm’s European division, which includes Port Talbot 
steelworks in Wales and several other plants in the UK, enjoyed an operating 
profit of £90m during the quarter.

The company put the improved performance down to cost cuts in the UK and a 
boost in exports thanks to the weakness of sterling after the EU referendum.

But Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel fell £360m into the 
red on a group-wide basis after tax, when including a £370m loss on the sale of 
its UK long products business.

Tata sold the division to investment group Greybull Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/01/tata-steel-sale-to-greybull-saving-jobs-and-bringing-back-british-steel>
 for a nominal sum earlier this year in a deal that saw it crystallise a loss 
on the asset.

Executive director Koushik Chatterjee said that, despite the impact of the UK 
on Tata’s balance sheet, its British operation enjoyed a “significant benefit” 
during the quarter from the weakness of the pound.

But he did not offer any update on discussions with German rival ThyssenKrupp 
about setting up a pan-European joint venture.

Tata suspended the sale of Port Talbot in July to give it time to explore a 
larger tie-up with ThyssenKrupp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/tata-stops-port-talbot-plant-sale-as-talks-begin-with-german-steel-group>
 that the firms believe could help address overcapacity in the European steel 
industry.

One stumbling block is the British Steel pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/fears-british-steel-pension-scheme-folded-pension-protection-fund-tata>
, which has 130,000 members and a £700m funding deficit.

Chatterjee said: “We need more time – there is the complication of pensions. 
All bidders come with a univocal approach – that pensions have to be separated 
from the business.”

He warned observers not to read too much into the £90m quarterly operating 
profit within Tata Steel Europe, given that this was due largely to theweakness 
of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/british-pound-given-boost-by-projected-remain-win-in-eu-referendum>
.

“Currency is always short term,” he said. “Today we see a more depreciated 
pound, which is where exporting competitiveness has improved. That provides a 
lever [for the UK business] to sustain itself ... but that’s very fickle.”

The company added that the currency effect will not be beneficial only to UK 
exporters.

“The weaker pound is expected to improve [the] UK’s short-term competitive 
position on exports. However, it will add cost pressure due to higher cost of 
raw materials purchased in US dollars.”

It also warned that the UK’s growth “may slow down following the referendum 
result”.

However, Chatterjee was more circumspect about the likely long-term effect of 
Brexit.

“We don’t know how trade agreements will pan out between UK and the rest of EU 
and rest of world. We’ve got to watch and wait and see,” he said.

Nonetheless, he was optimistic about the government’s commitment to supporting 
key industries.

“There is a clear signal to look at industrial strategy in a more focused 
manner. When the government has more to talk about, we’ll get to know more 
about the industrial strategy for the UK.

“These are early days and we should give the government time to frame its 
thought, because it also has huge work ahead in terms of the whole Brexit 
complication.”
 