
Helen Glover & Heather Stanning (Rowing, Women’s coxless pair)

The pair have gone from strength to strength since the London Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/01/london-2012-glover-stanning-gb-gold>
, continuing to dominate their field. Thriving under the guidance of Robin 
Williams, Stanning and Glover are undefeated together since 2011 and are the
world champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/06/british-rowers-helen-glover-heather-stanning-pairs-world-title-aiguebelette>
, defending the title they won in Amsterdam in 2014 by powering their way to 
more glory in Aiguebelette last year. They also won their second successive 
gold at the European championships this year and could become the first British 
women rowers to defend an Olympic title successfully.

Bradley Wiggins wins Olympic gold and powers into British record books | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold>
Bradley Wiggins (Cycling, Men’s time trial)

Wiggins was named the BBC’s sports personality of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/dec/16/bradley-wiggins-sports-personality-year>
 for 2012 and then, 12 months later, becameSir Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/dec/31/sir-bradley-wiggins-knighthood-video>
. Back in the saddle, however, came frustration, with a chest infection and 
knee injury preventing Wiggins from competing at the 2013 Tour de France, and 
therefore defending the title he had won prior to the Games. On the track, 
Wiggins has excelled,breaking the hour record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/bradley-wiggins-uci-hour-record> 
in June 2015 and then teaming up with Mark Cavendish towin gold in the madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/sir-bradley-wiggins-mark-cavendish-world-madison-championships>
 at March’s Track World Championships. Aged 36, Wiggins will be aiming to win a 
British record eighthOlympic medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold>
 in Rio.

Timothy Baillie & Etienne Stott (Canoeing, Men’s slalom C-2)

They were both awarded MBEs after their surprise success in London but have 
gone in separate directions since then, with Baillie retiring two years ago. 
That prompted Stott to team up with Mark Proctor. They finished sixth in the 
world championships last year. Yet Stott has struggled with a 
career-threatening shoulder injury and he missed out on a chance to defend his 
Olympic title in qualifying this year.

Peter Wilson (Shooting, Men’s double trap)

Having won a third global title at the 2013 Shotgun World Cup in Al Ain, 
Wilson announced his retirement from shooting in October 2014, aged 28.Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/02/peter-wilson-gold-shooting-olympics>
 wrote to the International Shooting Sports Federation (ISSF) in April 
expressing his concern over a report which suggested the double trap should not 
be included at the forthcoming Games. It has remained on the Rio roster.

Philip Hindes, Chris Hoy, Jason Kenny (Cycling, Men’s team sprint)

Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/jason-kenny-sprint-gold-medal-world-track-cycling-championships>
 is the team’s leader now thatHoy has retired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/15/chris-hoy-retire-cycling>, with 
the gap filled by Callum Skinner. They won the gold medal in the team sprint in 
the final round of the Track World Cup series but failed to reach the medal 
finals of the men’s team sprint after qualifying only sixth fastest on the 
opening day of the Track World Championships in London in March. There will 
need to be an improvement if they are to mount asuccessful defence of their 
Olympic title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/02/chris-hoy-olympic-gold-team-sprint>
.

Katherine Grainger & Anna Watkins (Rowing, Women’s double sculls)

Grainger retired immediately after London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/03/london-2012-grainger-watkins-rowing-gold>
 before returning to training in September 2014 with the intention of competing 
in Rio. She formed a new partnership with Vicky Thornley and the pair won 
bronze in the double sculls at last year’s European championships. Grainger, 
now aged 40, and Thornley, 28, will also team up in Rio. Watkins will not be in 
Brazil having decided she was not up to the required level. The 32-year-old had 
returned to training in 2015 after a three-year absence, during which she had 
two children.

Steven Burke, Ed Clancy, Peter Kennaugh & Geraint Thomas (Cycling, Men’s team 
pursuit)

There is a new look to the team in Rio, with Kennaugh and Thomas both set to 
compete on the road. But Burke and Clancy remain from the squad that shone in 
London. Burke has recovered from the broken collarbone he suffered last year, 
winning gold at the Track European Championships in Switzerland and silver in 
the Track World Championships in London, while Clancy is also looking strong 
after injuring his back at the end of 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5074c1f375d24ed07ee4b3db2bd32dc56d110a3%2F191_133_3864_2319%2F3864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5074c1f375d24ed07ee4b3db2bd32dc56d110a3%2F191_133_3864_2319%2F3864.jpg>
 Victoria Pendleton followed her golden London 2012 by forging a brave career 
as an amateur jockey. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Victoria Pendleton (Cycling, Women’s keirin)

Pendleton retired from cycling after the 2012 Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/aug/07/london-2012-victoria-pendleton-olympic>
 and has gone on to compete as an amateur jockey, finishing fifth in the 
Foxhunter Chase at this year’s Cheltenham Festival, an achievement she 
described as “a dream”. Pendleton has returned to cycling in recent months to 
criticise the “corrosive culture” within the sport in this country and 
following theresignation of Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/06/shane-sutton-sergeant-major-commanding-officer-cycling-rio-2016>
 as British Cycling’s technical director amid accusations of sexism and 
discrimination.

Alex Gregory, Tom James, Pete Reed, Andrew Triggs-Hodge (Rowing, Men’s coxless 
four)

While James announced his retirement in 2013, his three team-mates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/16/olympicgames.rowing> are still 
rowing. Gregory and Reed are as solid as ever and both claimed their fifth gold 
medals in the world championships in the men’s eight in Aiguebelette last year. 
Reed is aiming for his third consecutive Olympic title, while Triggs-Hodge, the 
longest-serving rower in the men’s heavyweight squad, has managed to recover in 
time for Rio after missing much of the 2015 season because of illness. This 
will be Triggs-Hodge’s fourth successive Olympics.

Katherine Copeland & Sophie Hosking (Rowing, Women’s lightweight double sculls)

Copeland took a year out after her surprise success in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/aug/04/hosking-copeland-rowing-gold-video>
 and, on her return to the water in 2014, teamed up with Imogen Walsh. The pair 
won a bronze medal at the European championships that year prior to a World Cup 
gold in Aiguebelette and Lucerne. The 25-year-old will have yet another new 
partner in Rio – Charlotte Taylor. Hosking retired from rowing in June 2013 so 
she could focus on a career in law and is now a trained solicitor.

Dani King, Joanna Rowsell, Laura Trott (Cycling, Women’s team pursuit)

King turned her focus away from the team pursuit after suffering a 
life-threatening training crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/17/dani-king-returns-home-hospital-training-crash>
 that left her with eight broken ribs, a punctured lung and a bruised liver two 
years ago, yet she was unhappy to be overlooked for the road event.Rowsell and 
Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/gb-womens-team-pursuit-olympic-gold>
 are still in the picture, though. They were part of the team that won gold at 
the Track European Championships in Grenchen, while there was a bronze medal to 
celebrate in the Track World Championships this year despite a poor qualifying 
round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1550716dbc60ddd96ea1a2603410e8fd1b1b816%2F0_0_3571_2396%2F3571.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1550716dbc60ddd96ea1a2603410e8fd1b1b816%2F0_0_3571_2396%2F3571.jpg>
 Jessica Ennis-Hill will be going for gold again in the heptathlon in Rio. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Jessica Ennis-Hill (Athletics, Women’s heptathlon)

The heptathlete finished third in the running for BBC’s sports personality of 
the year in 2012 and, the following year, became Jessica Ennis-Hill after 
marrying her partner, Andy Hill. The 2013 world championships was meant to be 
her first big event post-Olympics but she was forced to withdraw because of an 
achilles injury. Ennis-Hill also missed the 2014 Commonwealth Games having 
given birth to son Reggie that July. A little over a year later, however, she 
returned to action bywinning gold at the world championships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/jessica-ennis-hill-heptathlon-gold-beijing-world-championships>
 in Beijing. Aged 30, Ennis-Hill is aiming to defendher Olympic title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-jessica-ennis-gold> 
in Rio.

Greg Rutherford (Athletics, Men’s long jump)

The 29-year-old heads to the Olympics as the holder of all four major long 
jump titles and well placed todefend his gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-greg-rutherford-gold>
. Rutherford is in excellent form,retaining his European crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/greg-rutherford-rio-olympics-european-long-jump-title>
 with a leap of 8.25m in Amsterdam last month. Rutherford, who hashad his sperm 
frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/07/greg-rutherford-freezes-sperm-over-olympics-zika-fears>
 as a precaution against the Zika virus, bounced back from his disappointing 
performance in the Birmingham Diamond League in June, which ended an unbeaten 
run that had stretched back to last July.

Mo Farah (Athletics, Men’s 10,000m & 5,000m)

Farah has continued to rack up medals since London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/mo-farah-team-gb-olympic-medals>
, most notably repeating his 10,000m and 5,000m double-gold triumphs at the 
2013 and2015 world championships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/mo-farah-5000m-world-championship-gold>
, as well as at the 2014 European Championships. The 31-year-old also made his 
London Marathon debut this year, finishing eighth. There have been problems, 
too, with Farah’s long-time coach, Alberto Salazar, accused of being involved 
in doping. Both have denied any wrongdoing and Farah will be in Rio aiming to 
defend his titles.

Ben Ainslie (Sailing, Finn class)

The most decorated British sailor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-ben-ainslie-fourth-gold>
 of all time will not be chasing his fifth Olympic gold in Rio, having decided 
against competing shortly after London 2012, worn down by the physical toll of 
his rigorous training regime. However, Ainslie helped Oracle Team USAwin the 
America’s Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-victory-team-usa-comeback>
 in 2013 and now the 39-year-old wants to challenge them with his own British 
team in 2017, Ben Ainslie Racing. The trophy has not been won by a British team 
before.

Andy Murray (Tennis, Men’s singles)

Post-London, the Scot has established himself as one of the finest players of 
tennis’s modern era. He has won three grand-slam titles, the most recent of 
which beingthis year’s Wimbledon crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
, helped Great Britainwin the Davis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
 for the first time since 1936 and risen to No2 in the world rankings, behind 
Novak Djokovic. The 29-year-old is in the form of his life and willhope to 
carry that into the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-federer>
.

Scott Brash, Peter Charles, Ben Maher, Nick Skelton (Equestrian, team jumping)

Losing Brash, the highest-ranked showjumper in the world last year and still 
GB’s leading rider in the global standings, after his two top horses picked up 
injuries was a blow. Hello Sanctos and Hello M’Lady have both failed to recover 
in time. Charles, who sold his horse to Bruce Springsteen’s daughter after 
London 2012, is also not part of the squad.Maher and Skelton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/06/london-2012-olympics-showjumping>
 will be in Rio, though, with the team securing its spot after finishing fourth 
at the European championships.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb567b5e7c107e20b1ff0fdda0fad24d3b6f9b6e9%2F0_0_3180_2028%2F3180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb567b5e7c107e20b1ff0fdda0fad24d3b6f9b6e9%2F0_0_3180_2028%2F3180.jpg>
 Jason Kenny’s cycling achievements have gone from strength to strength since 
2012. Photograph: Odd Andersen/AFP/Getty Images 
Jason Kenny (Cycling, Men’s sprint)

The 28-year-old has won two world titles since London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/06/london-2012-cycling-jason-kenny>
, the most recent of which coming in the sprint atLee Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/jason-kenny-sprint-gold-medal-world-track-cycling-championships>
 in March. He also won two silver medals at the 2014 Commonwealth Games, in the 
team and individual sprint. Kenny is competing in the same events at the 
Olympics, as well as in the keirin, and all being well he could return home as 
a six-times Olympic gold medallist, equalling Hoy’s haul.

Alistair Brownlee (Triathlon, Men’s triathlon)

Aiming to win his second Olympic gold, the older Brownlee brother has enjoyed 
further success sinceLondon 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/07/london-2012-alistair-brownlee-triathlon>
, winning the men’s race and the mixed team relay at the Commonwealth Games. He 
also won mixed relay gold at the world championships and the individual title 
at the European championships in 2014. Injury problems had prevented him from 
making the podium in recent World Series events but he has put those problems 
behind him, triumphing in Stockholm and Leeds in the past two months.

Laura Bechtolsheimer, Charlotte Dujardin & Carl Hester (Equestrian, team 
dressage)

Bechtolsheimer became Tomlinson in March 2013 after marrying professional polo 
player Mark Tomlinson and is the only one of the three who will not be 
competing in Rio having, post-London, forged a career in PR and marketing.
Dujardin will be there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/09/london-2012-charlotte-dujardin-olympic-gold>
 with horse Valegro, who she won gold with in 2012. Hester has switched horses 
since London, going from Uthopia to Nip Tuck, with whom he has won two team 
silvers, in 2014 and 2015.

Laura Trott (Cycling, Women’s omnium)

Trott has excelled since London 2012, dominating the team pursuit and omnium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/laura-trott-olympic-omnium> 
events. She won omnium and scratch gold in the Track World Championships this 
year but perhaps her biggest achievement came in the 2015 Track European 
Championships in Grenchen, where victories in the omnium, scratch and team 
pursuit events saw her become a10-times European champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/laura-trott-european-championships-title-omnium>
. She also overcame illness to claim gold in the points race at the 
Commonwealth Games two years ago, pipping her GB team-mate Elinor Barker on the 
final sprint.

Chris Hoy (Cycling, Men’s keirin)

Hoy retired from cycling in 2013 and soon made a transition into business, 
launching his own range of machines – Hoy Bikes. Post-Olympics, the 40-year-old 
has taken to endurance driving and recentlycompeted in the Le Mans 24 Hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/sir-chris-hoy-le-mans-24-hours>.

Charlotte Dujardin (Equestrian, individual dressage)

The 31-year-old has remained loyal to Valegro, the horse with whom she struck 
gold in London. Since the Olympics, the pair have won five team medals and 
seven individuals golds at championship level and they will be in Rio aiming to 
defend their Olympic title.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcd99c1ba2afaac61364f4a9ff75b6b1cbd95a5%2F190_179_3593_2156%2F3593.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%2029%20gold%20medals%20from%20London%202012%3A%20where%20are%20those%20Olympians%20now%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fteam-gb-gold-medals-london-2012-where-are-olympians-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcd99c1ba2afaac61364f4a9ff75b6b1cbd95a5%2F190_179_3593_2156%2F3593.jpg>
 Nicola Adams prepares to defend her title at Rio 2016 during a training 
session in Belo Horizonte. Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images 
Nicola Adams (Boxing, Women’s flyweight)

The 33-year-old, who became boxing’s first ever female Olympic champion four 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/09/nicola-adams-olympic-boxing-gold>
, is well placed to defend her title judging by her performances since London 
2012. Adams won gold at the European Games in Baku last year, in the 
Commonwealth Games two years ago and at the European Union Boxing Championships 
in 2013. She secured her place in Rio after a unanimous-decision win over 
Marielle Hansen of Norway at the European qualifying tournament in Turkey this 
year.

Jade Jones (Taekwondo, women’s 57kg)

Jones has won a host of medals since London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/10/jade-jones-olympic-gold-taekwondo>
, including gold at the 2015 European Games in Baku and at this year’s European 
championships in Montreux. The 23-year-old, who was also awarded an MBE in 
2013, will be seeking to defend her Olympic title in Rio.

Ed McKeever (Canoeing, Men’s K-1 200m)

The accountancy and finance graduate has won silver and bronze medals at world 
and European level since theOlympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/ed-mckeever-gold-kayak-sprint>. 
The 32-year-old will not be defending his title in Rio after failing to qualify 
for the Games during May’s Sprint World Cup in Duisburg.

Luke Campbell (Boxing, Men’s bantamweight)

The 28-year-old turned professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/london-2012-olympics-luke-campbell>
 in April 2013 and won his first 12 fights, including a WBC lightweight 
eliminator against his fellow Hull fighter Tommy Coyle. The 28-year-old lost 
his next bout, against the Frenchman Yvan Mendy, but won the one after that, 
against Gary Sykes. His most recent success came against the Dominican Argenis 
Méndez.

Anthony Joshua (Boxing, Men’s super heavyweight)

Joshua turned professional after London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/anthony-joshua-wins-gold-boxing> 
and has progressed at high speed since then. The 26-year-old became IBF world 
heavyweight world champion in only his 16th professional fight,stopping Charles 
Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/anthony-joshua-wins-ibf-world-heavyweight-title-against-charles-martin>
 in two rounds at London’s O2 Arena in April before retaining his title by
knocking out Dominic Breazeale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/anthony-joshua-dominic-breazeale-world-heavyweight-title-fight>
 in June. He is Britain’s sixth world heavyweight champion and only the fourth 
man to win a pro heavyweight world title while still a reigning Olympic 
champion.
 