
Britain's hi-tech boom powered the biggest gain in manufacturing output for 
four-and-a-half years in November but the strong pound is still handicapping 
many more traditional industries, according to official figures published 
yesterday.

Overall output leapt 0.6% in the month - twice as high as expected in the City 
- taking it 2.2% above the level of a year ago, and the biggest annual increase 
since June 1995.

Analysts said the surprising strength of the data from the office for national 
statistics reinforced expectations of further interest rate rises in the wake 
of last week's 0.25% increase to 5.75%.

"Although it is other data, such as the labour market, service sector and the 
housing market which is driving rates higher, the strength of this report 
should help seal another 0.25% increase at the next MPC meeting on February 
10," said Deutsche Bank economist Ciaran Barr.

November's surge produced a 1.1% increase in manufacturing output over the 
past three months, illustrating a dramatic turnaround in the sector's fortunes 
from early last year, when it was in recession.

But analysis by industrial sub-sector reveals a patchy performance with only 
five out of 14 recording significant growth - chemicals, electrical and optical 
equipment, transport equipment, food, drink and tobacco, and base metals.

Leading the way between September and November was the chemicals sector, where 
output rose 4.3% compared to the previous three months.

ONS officials said the pharmaceuticals industry was do ing particularly well, 
benefiting from robust demand for new treatments for baldness and irritable 
bowel syndrome.

In joint second place, recording an output growth of 2.5%, were electrical and 
optical equipment and transport equipment. Production volume of mobile 
telephones increased by 11% in the quarter and output of TV receivers - 
including digital set-top boxes - by 7%. Firms manufactur ing equipment for 
linking homes and businesses to the internet also did well, as did the 
semiconductor industry.

The latter picked up business lost by storm-damaged factories in Taiwan. 

Sectors suffering declines in output included textiles and leather - underwear 
production was down almost 4% in the last three months - and machinery and 
equipment.

Dharshini David, an economist at HSBC, said the figures indicated that the 
manufacturing recovery has shifted up a gear, due to robust demand.

But Neil Parker of the Royal Bank of Scotland said the strength of the data 
may have been exaggerated by manufacturers rebuilding stock before the 
millennium. "We should not read too much into these figures, but they certainly 
suggest a more positive outlook for manufacturing," he said.

Scots not suffering, says George

Eddie George, the Bank of England governor, yesterday denied that the Scottish 
economy was suffering from high interest rates designed to cool overheating in 
the south-east.

In a speech to the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, he said monetary policy was 
set to curb inflation in the economy as a whole and that there was no evidence 
that growth and employment were suffering. He said that employment in Scotland 
was around its all-time high and that the Scottish economy had grown by an 
average of 2.6% over the past seven years or so, compared to 2.8% for the 
economy as a whole.

"Indeed, is seems clear on the facts that over time the Scottish economy 
prospers very much in line with the economy of the UK as a whole. So let's keep 
the national conflict where it belongs - on the rugby field", Mr George said.
 