Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&media=>
Arrival trailer: Amy Adams makes first contact with aliens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/17/arrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
In the small world of science fiction short stories, Ted Chiang is a 
superstar. It’s easier to list the major SF awards he hasn’t won than those he 
has, and he’s equally acclaimed in the broader field of literary short fiction 
– all for a body of work that could probably fit within half aGame of Thrones 
novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/05/game-of-thrones-an-epic-publishing-story-george-rr-martin>
.

Chiang is sometimes described as a literary science fiction writer, but that’s 
a lazy label in which “literary” means “good” – a fairer one would be to say 
that Chiang is the Platonic ideal of a science fiction writer: his writing 
displays no particular interest in style, and yet it shines with a brutal, 
minimalist elegance. Every sentence is the perfect incision in the dissection 
of the idea at hand.

Arrival review: heartfelt alien-contact movie communicates spectacular ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
The quantum event about to flip Chiang from niche superstar to widespread 
recognition is the movieArrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
, an adaptation of his 1998 short story Story Of Your Life. A linguist assists 
the US military in their “first contact” with an alien race and as she learns 
their language, her own perception of reality is altered by it. It is an 
exploration of theSapir-Whorf hypothesis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity> that Chiang reflects in 
the text’s shifting tense structure. On the surface, Story Of Your Life may 
seem an unlikely candidate for the Hollywood mill. But with directorDennis 
Villeneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/denis-villeneuve-sicario-cannes-2015>
 at the helm, fresh from his tour de force crime thrillerSicario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
, and on his way to the as yet untitledBlade Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/27/blade-runner-2-harrison-ford-ridley-scott-10-things-to-hope-for>
 sequel, there’s every indication Arrival will capture the essence of Ted 
Chiang’s storytelling on screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fted-chiang-science-fiction-genius-arrival-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81e939884538e7341abee3e34a9f5e644077b14f%2F207_126_1293_776%2F1293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Chiang%2C%20the%20science%20fiction%20genius%20behind%20Arrival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fted-chiang-science-fiction-genius-arrival-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Chiang%2C%20the%20science%20fiction%20genius%20behind%20Arrival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fted-chiang-science-fiction-genius-arrival-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81e939884538e7341abee3e34a9f5e644077b14f%2F207_126_1293_776%2F1293.jpg>
 ‘His rigour and logic take him to a point of mysticism’ ... author Ted Chiang. 
Photograph: Penguin Random House 
If there is a recurrent theme, it's squaring the circle between fantasies of 
belief and the scientific worldview

But why stop here, Hollywood? Chiang’s 2002 short story, Hell Is the Absence 
of God is a restrained, brilliant demolition of fundamentalist religious belief 
that explores the possibilities of a reality where biblical angels roam 
suburbia. The Merchant and the Alchemist’s Gate, which scooped both the Hugo 
and Nebula awards, isa Silk Road fantasy 
<http://aidanmoher.com/blog/tag/silk-road-fantasy/> about a simple merchant who 
stumbles upon a gateway to the future in the market place of old Baghdad. The 
Life Cycle of Software Objects traces the accidental emergence and evolution of
artificial intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/artificialintelligenceai>. A tech 
startup develops learning algorithms as virtual pets, and two engineers find 
themselves looking after these software objects over the decades that follow. 
Chiang’s real interest is less with AI, than with life as a whole – perhaps 
rare for an author in the SF genre.

When AI rules the world: what SF novels tell us about our future overlords
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/mar/18/ai-sf-novels-artificial-intelligence-science-fiction-gibson-neuromancer>
If there is a single recurrent theme in Ted Chiang’s work, it’s the attempt to 
square the circle between human fantasies of belief, and the perceived 
certainties of a rational, scientific worldview. There’s a strong sense in 
Chiang’s work that he sees conflicts of faith v reason, or freedom v 
determinism, as illusionary. That if we can simply see clearly enough, all 
conflicts give way to harmony. Chiang’s rigour and logic take him to a point of 
mysticism.

Ted Chiang is all the more conspicuous for his absence from all forms of 
authorial self-promotion. There is no Ted Chiang Twitter feed issuing 
entertaining quips on pop culture. His work has been published almost 
exclusively in limited runs through the small press, with the text often 
released free online. It is tempting to wonder why: perhaps the status games of 
writerly life as are illusory to Chiang as the boundaries between space and 
time. Or, perhaps, he’s simply busy doing what he does best – writing great 
stories.
 