
A moment of professional crisis and self-loathing inspired Gideon Mendel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gideonmendel>’s photographs of abandoned 
objects in the now-demolished Calais refugee camp. He had travelled to the site 
to participate in a thoughtful-sounding project, where refugees were loaned 
cameras to allow them to document their own experiences. But it wasn’t going 
tremendously well; the refugees had more pressing concerns on their hands than 
documenting their own lives, such as finding food and somewhere to sleep.

Mendel was disturbed by the level of hostility that cameras provoked. “There 
were so many cameras coming in; there were no gatekeepers, because it wasn’t an 
official camp, so any photography student, tourist or sympathiser could wander 
in. The general feeling was that the camera was an enemy of some sort.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aa934584a6431c909a6b213793d6cb61753c18a%2F0_0_6379_7974%2F6379.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aa934584a6431c909a6b213793d6cb61753c18a%2F0_0_6379_7974%2F6379.jpg>
 Empty teargas canisters remade into hanging plant pots. Photograph: Gideon 
Mendel 
He was also bewildered by the array of misguided benevolent ventures 
converging on the camp: “Calais felt at times like a music festival gone 
wrong.” During one visit in early May, he watched as a Spanish circus came 
waltzing through the tents and huts with jugglers and musicians, followed by a 
Christian procession with a healing donkey and, later, a delegation of 
sympathisers from Essex – all taking pictures. “They were making a donation, 
and they had to be photographed handing over the cash,” he says. “There were 
all kinds of weird and wonderful and terrible things that came into the camp. I 
thought, ‘What people really need is immigration lawyers.’”

He followed the procession into a church built by Eritrean refugees from 
sticks and tarpaulin, and had just begun to take some pictures when he was 
confronted by a refugee who started shouting at him: “You fucking 
photographers. You come here and you take our photographs and you tell us that 
it’s going to help us, but nothing changes. The only person that it helps is 
you.” It was an acutely worded attack, and Mendel became “quite revolted with 
the idea of photographing in the camp. I didn’t want to lift a camera any more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29370a1c15d4588c21311ba39e785d11cd1c8fe8%2F38_37_1487_1205%2F1487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29370a1c15d4588c21311ba39e785d11cd1c8fe8%2F38_37_1487_1205%2F1487.jpg>
 Assorted toys and clothing collected between May and October this year. With 
no electricity in the camp, many possessions were accidentally burned. 
Photograph: Gideon Mendel 
He was already uneasy with the photographic tropes that have emerged from the 
crisis: the lines of waiting, needy people; the emotional faces of people 
trying to cross borders; the queues of people stepping off boats; the images of 
people sitting around campfires; the shacks. “The most infamous image of 
queueing migrants isthe one Ukip used so brilliantly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
, playing on the sense that they are queueing to come and take stuff that is 
ours. Even if the intention of the photographer is compassionate and 
sympathetic, the usage can be problematic and add to the stigma and the fear.”

But Mendel was reluctant to retreat from the subject. His work has always 
focused on challenging subjects;his last major project was Drowning World 
<http:>, a series of portraits of people in homes submerged by flood waters, 
highlighting the effects of climate change. The migrant story had a personal 
resonance. His parents were refugees from Nazi Germany; his father’s mother 
died in the Holocaust. He felt moved by the difficulties faced by the thousands 
of people stuck in Calais.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2097ddb901b865ac50774041cec6182b80a59ef%2F0_0_7517_6014%2F7517.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2097ddb901b865ac50774041cec6182b80a59ef%2F0_0_7517_6014%2F7517.jpg>
 Gideon Mendel lined up footwear abandoned or lost by child refugees. 
Photograph: Gideon Mendel 
So Mendel turned his gaze to the detritus left behind. His photographs of 
abandoned toothbrushes and soft toys encrusted with mud and sand give a 
powerful alternative portrait of the human misery of the camp. Eighteen months 
of the refugee crisis have made many in Britain hardened and desensitised to 
the issue. The Guardian’s own online news consumption analysis shows that 
articles about refugees are often clicked on in small numbers. Readers have 
been cauterised to the pain of the unfolding human disasters and are often 
jaundiced in their approach to individual stories. The shock factor of 
distressing images has waned through repeated exposure – all of which makes 
Mendel’s sideways view more arresting, harder to skip over. His pictures of 
flattened footballs, singed clothes, ripped sleeping bags and recycled teargas 
canisters force you to think about the experiences of the people who lived in 
the camp. A picture of muddy children’s gloves reminds you of the utter squalor 
that infected the whole site.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf4f6d17b616dd5813296f3540542e3d422fd8d3%2F0_762_6473_6421%2F6473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf4f6d17b616dd5813296f3540542e3d422fd8d3%2F0_762_6473_6421%2F6473.jpg>
 A doll’s head found in the Calais mud. Photograph: Gideon Mendel 
He has lined up worn-down shoes with the forensic precision of a medical 
photographer. “The shoes speak of distress. Some shoes are burnt; fire was a 
recurring thing in the camp, first because there was no electricity, just 
candles, so a lot of things were burned accidentally, and later people were 
torching things before the demolition.”

Anxious to avoid the pictures becoming “ruin porn”, another photographic 
cliche (used particularly in relation to the beautiful images of 
post-industrial Detroit), Mendel was careful to display the objects in as 
dignified a way as possible. “There was such chaos in the place, I had this 
instinct to make things as organised and neat as I could.” He made several 
trips to dig around in the sandy wasteland, sifting through layers of rubbish, 
asking himself, “How would someone in 1,000 years understand what had happened 
here?” This activity was viewed with bemusement by the camp’s inhabitants, but 
without the antagonism that photography provoked.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c0f758f54a8c98607023f610a2c260c989e227%2F0_0_8415_6732%2F8415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c0f758f54a8c98607023f610a2c260c989e227%2F0_0_8415_6732%2F8415.jpg>
 ‘There was such chaos, I had an instinct to make things as organised and neat 
as I could’: a shot of 83 toothbrushes found in the Calais mud. Photograph: 
Gideon Mendel 
His last trip was made as the camp was demolished by French police, and the 
inhabitants were bussed to nearby hostels, where many remain, applying for 
formal asylum in France. Others have returned to sleep rough in smaller 
settlements along the coast, still trying to make their way to join relatives 
in the UK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151f74dd82c2bad9ee902c47f1fceb95a8622b7b%2F0_0_7756_6205%2F7756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151f74dd82c2bad9ee902c47f1fceb95a8622b7b%2F0_0_7756_6205%2F7756.jpg>
 Pages from children’s books, including The Tiger Who Came To Tea by Judith 
Kerr. Photograph: Gideon Mendel 
Just before the site was sealed by police, Mendel carted away black bin bags 
full of rubbish: burnt children’s books (including The Tiger Who Came To Tea by 
Judith Kerr, herself a refugee), scraps of bedding, used tampons (a reminder, 
he says, of the particular difficulty of being a woman in a camp of 10,000 
people with just a handful of Portaloos). To the “non-delight” of his family, 
he still has a collection of bits in the basement. His project has provoked 
scepticism from his teenage son, who said, “Dad, most people bring things to 
refugee camps. You go in and take things away.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30350ad9479ca0593f0bbf7742404e4aa8d0bc1d%2F0_0_2917_2386%2F2917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddies%20and%20teargas%20canisters%3A%20what%20remained%20in%20the%20Calais%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fteddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30350ad9479ca0593f0bbf7742404e4aa8d0bc1d%2F0_0_2917_2386%2F2917.jpg>
 While scouring the site, Gideon Mendel found spent shotgun shells, predating 
its use as a refugee camp. Photograph: Gideon Mendel 
Mendel hopes that the pictures will “touch people on a deep emotional level. I 
want to do work that makes an impact, that touches people’s consciousness. I 
wish I could offer a clear response and say, You can do this to help the 
situation; but I’m afraid that isn’t there for me. The work is my response to 
this world, where you have places of relative safety and places of danger; 
places of wealth and places of poverty.”

• This year’s Guardian appeal is in aid of child refugees; to donate, go to 
theguardian.com/charity-appeal-2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/charity-appeal-2016>

An exhibition of these pictures, Gideon Mendel: Dzhangal, runs at Autograph 
ABP Gallery <http://autograph-abp.co.uk/>, London EC2 from 6 January-11 
February (admission free). A book, Dzhangal, is published on 27 January byGost 
Books. <http://www.gostbooks.com/>
 