
The first thing that stands out about Teddy Sheringham as he strides into his 
office at Stevenage’s training ground is he looks as fit and wiry as ever, even 
though he turns 50 in April. He offers a firm handshake, flashes a smile and 
swings his feet on to his neat and tidy desk. He seems at ease, comfortable in 
his new surroundings. But lingering in the background, behind Sheringham’s 
easy-going confidence, lies the sense he may not be here for long if he cannot 
steer Stevenage away from the lower reaches ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> soon.

Sheringham is a man in a hurry. He has entered management late after spending 
a few years on the poker circuit. Aside from hisspell coaching West Ham 
United’s strikers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/30/teddy-sheringham-returns-west-ham-attacking-coach>
 last season, he lacks experience and he puffs out his cheeks when he thinks 
about theopportunity Stevenage’s chairman, Phil Wallace, has given him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/21/teddy-sheringham-stevenage-appointed-manager-west-ham>
.

Stevenage’s Teddy Sheringham will not play cup game despite being registered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/teddy-sheringham-stevenage-register-player-age-49-herts-senior-cup>
“It’s a massive risk for him,” Sheringham says. “Hopefully it comes off. One 
of my family did actually say: ‘why don’t you try and get a job at a higher 
level? Because if you don’t do it right atStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>, where would you go from 
there?’ You can understand that theory; that if it doesn’t work here, then a 
Championship team or a League One team’s not going to take me. It was something 
I thought about. But when I spoke to the chairman and came here and looked 
around at the building and the pitches, what a fantastic place to learn my 
trade.”

He knows his name will not win him matches. Sheringham had a wonderful playing 
career – the club say nothing should be read into himregistering as a player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/teddy-sheringham-stevenage-register-player-age-49-herts-senior-cup>
 this week – and as Stevenage prepare to host Gillingham in the first round of 
the FA Cup on Saturday afternoon, the mind turns back to him replacing Roy 
Keane in the ninth minute of the 1999 final andscoring Manchester United’s 
opener against Newcastle United <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6cPDKYIL_tk> 
two minutes later. He scored a rather importantequaliser against Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/may/26/teddy-sheringham-1999-manchester-united-bayern-munich>
 on a balmy night in Barcelona four days later.

Yet great players do not necessarily make great managers. Gillingham are 
managed by Justin Edinburgh, a former team-mate of Sheringham at Tottenham, and 
are third in League One, while Stevenage are 20th in League Two, five points 
above the teams in the relegation zone.Play-off semi-finalists last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/14/southend-stevenage-league-two-play-off-match-report>
, they were thrashed 5-1 by Oxford United last weekend, finishing the game with 
nine men.

Stevenage’s rocky start is the elephant in the room. “That’s the beauty of 
being involved at this level of the Football League,” Sheringham says. “If I’d 
have had this start in the Premier League or the Championship, I probably would 
have lost my job.”

Wallace has a reputation as a sensible owner and when Stevenage made their 
offer, Sheringham spoke to Sam Allardyce, his manager at West Ham last year. 
“He knew how sound financially the club was,” Sheringham says. “He knew all 
about the chairman, he knew all about the set-up. He said it couldn’t be 
better.”

There is a feeling Stevenage’s players are adjusting to a new style after the 
departure of Graham Westley, who spent eight of the past 12 years with the 
club. Stevenage have often started games superbly, only to fade in the second 
half.

“I’m getting to know the players and individuals,” Sheringham says. “They’re 
getting to know me. It takes a little while for any new manager to come in, I 
would presume, let alone a first-time manager who’s not even sure about 
himself. About what he would and wouldn’t do at certain times, and they’re 
reacting to that. All right, I’m a big name in football, but a first-time 
manager.”

He finds he is waking early, his mind racing as he tries to work out his 
Saturday afternoon strategy, and he has discovered his managers were not wrong 
to warn him about having to be a psychologist when players are going through 
tough times. It was said the first yard was in Sheringham’s head when he was 
playing. That awareness could take him far, but at the moment it can feel like 
someone has jammed the fast-forward button and he is having to race at 
breakneck speed to absorb everything about the profession Arsène Wenger has 
jokingly called hell.

Sheringham may be a novice but he is a young manager only in terms of mileage. 
His peers have way more hours on the clock. Edinburgh is 45 and he has been 
managing in the lower leagues for years, growing gradually, building his 
knowledge at a steady pace. Yet Sheringham argues his fast-tracked route was 
necessary. He retired when he was 42 and needed to relax away from football. 
Playing poker allowed him to recharge mentally.

“Some people will have their own team for a couple of years as a youth team or 
reserve team manager, or they’re an assistant manager,” he says. “If I did all 
that, it takes me into 56, 57 and then you have a real short shelf life. Coming 
in now, jumping in two-footed, it’s a massive leap into League Two. I’d never 
managed anyone before – only myself. Now here I am, managing a football club 
and managing people. Everyone is under my leadership and it’s a massive change 
for me.”

Sheringham was lucky to play for some top managers. He benefited from the 
discipline of George Graham and John Docherty when he was a youngster at 
Millwall in the 80s. He speaks fondly of Bruce Rioch, Alan Pardew and Glenn 
Hoddle. He played for Brian Clough at Nottingham Forest, he loved turning out 
for England under the adventurous Terry Venables at Euro 96 – he won 51 caps – 
and he saw how Sir Alex Ferguson ruled United.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fteddy-sheringham-stevenage-rookie-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc53062f471a0be8ca876b804f92bffedadef00b%2F828_253_3781_2269%2F3781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teddy%20Sheringham%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99d%20had%20this%20start%20in%20the%20Premier%20League%20I%E2%80%99d%20have%20lost%20my%20job%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fteddy-sheringham-stevenage-rookie-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teddy%20Sheringham%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99d%20had%20this%20start%20in%20the%20Premier%20League%20I%E2%80%99d%20have%20lost%20my%20job%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fteddy-sheringham-stevenage-rookie-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc53062f471a0be8ca876b804f92bffedadef00b%2F828_253_3781_2269%2F3781.jpg>
 Teddy Sheringham is trying to learn froim all the managers he has played under 
in his new role at Stevenage. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
When he was older, Harry Redknapp’s willingness to let him skip training at 
Portsmouth was invaluable. “Before I’ve even mentioned it to him, he’s seen 
it,” he says. “All of a sudden I’m perked up for Saturday and raring to go.”

Sheringham does not want to model himself on his managers but he does find 
himself unwittingly borrowing some of their techniques at times. Poker, 
meanwhile, has given him the ability to read people.

“As a poker player you have to study players,” he says. “People’s movements 
and their psyche, what they’re doing. What do they do when they’re bluffing? 
What do they do when they’re telling the truth? How do they speak? That’s 
little things you can take in as a football manager. It’s like: ‘Cheeky fucker, 
I know you’re lying.’”

He tells a story about how a player might tweak something in training on 
Tuesday, have a day off on Wednesday and then claim he suffered the injury on 
Thursday morning, just to avoid having treatment on a rest day. “I did the same 
as a player,” Sheringham says. “Do you think I’m fucking stupid?”

Who knows what goes on inside someone else’s head? “They might be thinking: 
‘This fella’s the bollocks’, or they might be thinking: ‘Who are you kidding, 
he’s absolute rubbish,’” Sheringham says. “But I don’t know, do I?” The proof 
will be visible on the pitch in the end.
 