
Today we launched our most recent multimedia interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/firstworldwar> to coincide with the 100-year 
anniversary of the first world war.

It’s a summary of the war, but with a global twist: stories from the outbreak 
of war to its aftermath are told through the voices of 10 historians from 10 
different countries.

It is available in seven languages: English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, 
Hindi and Arabic. We are also inviting our readers to translate the project 
into even more languages for relaunch in the autumn. In fact, if you want to 
get involved, pleaseemail us <mailto:firstworldwar@theguardian.com>!

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680054744%2F0cc6730c-19d8-4734-a8ed-425c46534f01-2060x1166.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680054744%2F0cc6730c-19d8-4734-a8ed-425c46534f01-2060x1166.png>
 Photograph: Guardian 
The documentary is told through seven chapters: each opens with a video and 
ends with an interactive, providing an opportunity to dig deeper into the 
stories introduced in the videos. Within the interactive maps there is fresh 
writing, picture galleries, extended interviews from the historians and articles
from the Guardian’s archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/series/from-the-archive>. So after 
first watching the brief introductory film you can then spend up to three hours 
in further exploration.

The making

We aimed to create a beginner’s guide to the first world war, but with the 
quality of journalism that the Guardian prides itself on. A cross-media piece 
seemed to be an ideal treatment for a richly emotional experience as well as a 
technically accurate and detailed story. The films allow to get to the 
emotional heart of the story immediately – essential for non-experts. Once we 
have interested users, the idea is that the interactive guides can provide 
depth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680139139%2F34381581-f2ab-4a5c-814e-c5559e6fe5e5-2060x1162.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680139139%2F34381581-f2ab-4a5c-814e-c5559e6fe5e5-2060x1162.png>
 Photograph: Guardian 
I started by interviewing the historians from around the world. I was 
determined to give a global take on the war. As a child, I learned about this 
war from a very British perspective. But I wanted our introductory guide to be 
more international in both content and feel. That approach chimed with the 
Guardian’s editorial ambition: to be a global liberal voice.

So we found 10 historians from key regions involved in the war and allowed 
them to tell their stories of the war, with their own perspectives and accents. 
I also sourced letters, diary entries and poems from around the world. We’re 
familiar here in the UK with war poets Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon, but 
I thought there must be Turkish and Indian equivalents. With the help ofModern 
Poetry in Translation <http://www.mptmagazine.com/> we found poems from all 
over the world. Of course, cutting all this together is itself editorialising. 
But as much as possible we wanted this global story to be told through the 
words of participators rather than a posh, English, scripted voiceover!

Once the backbone of the narratives was arranged in audio, our executive film 
producerLindsay Poulton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lindsay-poulton> 
got to work. She and her team of researchers and producers searched through 
hours of archive film footage and stills. We worked with theImperial War Museums
 <http://www.iwm.org.uk/> for this project and they have a vast archive, most 
of which you can view online. We also scoured Getty, Corbis and Pathé. With all 
of this footage they were seeking to immerse the viewer in the sights and 
sounds of war. This was not a place for reconstructions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680317759%2Fb9413744-466e-47e0-a249-0a7ddcdb31cf-2060x1158.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680317759%2Fb9413744-466e-47e0-a249-0a7ddcdb31cf-2060x1158.png>
 Photograph: Guardian 
In parallel, we were working with Kiln <http://kiln.it/>, an amazing team of 
interactive designers, developers and journalists. We spent some time working 
out the concept – what this thing would actually be. We asked why we needed all 
the different kinds of media, and what the story we were trying to tell was. 
Weren’t the films enough? Why bother with the interactive too?

Once Kiln started building the technology in April, the interactive design 
developed. For interactive 5 Kiln visualised their data to show the death-toll 
numbers around the world – a key detail that when rattled off by a historian 
quickly in a film can be hard to absorb. In interactive 6, Kiln laid the 1920 
postwar map of the world over the 1914 prewar version. It’s complicated – 
something you need to take your time over.

The Guardian archive articles from the time were dug up by our research team 
and our feature writerStephen Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephenmoss> started to write the copy. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680370449%2F0e88e992-53d3-4d00-8ce1-5b033a0ffb39-1020x805.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680370449%2F0e88e992-53d3-4d00-8ce1-5b033a0ffb39-1020x805.png>
 Photograph: Guardian 
Once we had all the content and had established that the interactive was 
working, we had it translated into multiple languages by professional 
translators atBusiness Languages Services 
<http://www.businesslanguageservices.co.uk/>. Kiln designed a clever mechanism 
that displayed the subtitles and an international team of Guardian journalists 
checked them for accuracy. We had all languages skills in-house, except Hindi! 
The Guardian has never before made a large-scale project like this available in 
so many languages, and it was far from easy. But opening up this story to our 
users around the world seems worth the effort.

Inevitably there were bumps along the way. One of the most challenging aspects 
of these multimedia interactives was accounting for all the hundreds of devices 
that our users will view this on and the variations in the speed of their 
internet connection. We built an innovative detection system that will help to 
serve the most suitable file-sizes and and the highest possible image 
resolution while maintaining a smooth experience. We also have a team of people 
methodically testing the strength of the interactive. But as hardware and 
software change so quickly it is not an exact science. It is a set of 
compromises.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680452562%2F23bab89f-12fa-4825-9c64-eb63dd0cfa63-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telling%20the%20story%20of%20the%20first%20world%20war%20with%202014%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Ffirst-world-war-2014-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405680452562%2F23bab89f-12fa-4825-9c64-eb63dd0cfa63-1020x612.png>
 Photograph: Guardian 
Strategy

This first world war project is intended to be a resource to the public. This 
is the first time we have ever offered up such an ambitious project up in so 
many languages and it comes under the area of innovation which I’m responsible 
for as the Guardian’s special projects editor.

We’re lucky at the Guardian that we have such a big audience online – now more 
than 100 million unique browsers a month. It means our website is our main 
stage. For a storyteller, that’s exciting, because digital is an open space 
with endless possibilities in terms of treatment and format.

The large pieces I’ve created over the last few years include View from the 
Shard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/interactive/2013/feb/01/view-from-top-shard-london-interactive>
,Firestorm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/may/26/firestorm-bushfire-dunalley-holmes-family>
,The Shirt on Your Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2014/apr/bangladesh-shirt-on-your-back>
 andDigital Sins <http://digital-deadly-sins.theguardian.com/>. In all these 
cases we experimented with form, using film, words, pictures and audio in new 
ways, to push forward what the Guardian can do.

I often get asked where all this will go and my answer is always the same: 
technology is at the steering wheel, but there is always going to be a demand 
for great content. If we can be creative and fleet of foot enough to stay ahead 
of the game, then as an organisation we will develop and thrive. This is what 
the Guardian has always done – been brave – and innovations in digital 
storytelling is part of that strategy.
 