
Aleksandar Mitrovic <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/115279>

There are plenty of players to choose from in a Newcastle side who have been 
tipped to bounce back to the top-flight at the first time while dominating the 
league. We saw the best and worst of Aleksandar Mitrovic in his debut campaign 
in England but, now that he is settled in the north east, he’s well equipped to 
take the Championship by storm. The Serbian striker scored nine goals last 
season and registered four assists, while a tally of 33 headed attempts was 
second only to Olivier Giroud. That aerial threat makes him well suited to the 
league and, alongside the pace ofDwight Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/newcastle-dwight-gayle-crystal-palace-close-signing>
 and Ayoze Pérez, it’s little wonder the Magpies are well fancied under Rafa 
Benítez.

Sergi Canós <https://twitter.com/sergicanos?lang=en-gb>

It’s been a quiet summer at Norwich City and, aside from the arrival of 
Northern Ireland keeper Michael McGovern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/michael-mcgovern-jubilation-belfast>
, there have only been two major deals at Carrow Road.Nathan Redmond 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/36630126> made an immediate return to the 
Premier League with Southampton, with former Barcelona and Liverpool youngster 
Sergi Canós signed as his replacement. The 19-year-old spent last season on 
loan at Brentford, scoring seven goals and registering four assists, having 
made 20 of his 38 appearances from the bench. Many fans were surprised when 
Jürgen Klopp sold the youngster but Norwich will hope Liverpool’s loss is their 
gain.

Jordan Ayew <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/67491>

Team talks are a waste of time – and I heard hundreds of them as a professional
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2016/aug/02/team-talks-waste-time-footballer-manager>
There were few positives for Aston Villa to take from last season but the 
performances of Jordan Ayew were a highlight. He looked a cut above most of his 
team-mates and, while a tally of seven goals was modest, the Ghanaian is very 
talented so it will be interesting to see whether he excels in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. He has been in good form 
in pre-season and, with the club taking a very firm stance on his future at the 
club, Villa hope Ayew is the man who will guide them back to the top flight. 
Capable of moments of magic from distance and running at opponents with pace 
and power – averaging 2.5 dribbles per game last season – he is undoubtedly one 
of the biggest names in the second tier.

Anthony Knockaert 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/86794/Show/Anthony-Knockaert>

Brighton came so close to earning automatic promotion last season but they 
could only draw with Middlesbrough in a winner-takes-all league match that 
ultimately helped Aitor Karanka’s side go up on goal difference. The Seagulls 
began the season with an incredible unbeaten run, but after that came to an 
abrupt end, they struggled for form until Anthony Knockaert was signed in 
January. A £1m bargain from Leicester City, the Frenchman has proven twice that 
he can help to inspire a promotion push, having impressed for Leicester when 
they won the Championship in 2013-14. His rating of 7.41 last season was the 
highest for Chris Hughton’s side and he had a direct hand in 11 league goals 
from 20 starts.

Fernando Forestieri 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/23442/History/Fernando-Forestieri>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F395d4a366597f9e94b83651f4ea530ae72fbec2c%2F0_16_4832_2900%2F4832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20players%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20the%20Championship%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20players%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20the%20Championship%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F395d4a366597f9e94b83651f4ea530ae72fbec2c%2F0_16_4832_2900%2F4832.jpg>
 Fernando Forestieri playing for Sheffield Wednesday against Brighton & Hove 
Albion last season. Photograph: Reuters Staff / Reuters/Reuters 
Starring for a Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> side that reached the 
Championship play-off final last season, Fernando Forestieri was unable to 
inspire the Owls to victory at Wembley. Nevertheless, he has proven to be a 
very dangerous player at this level, including his time at Watford, and had a 
direct hand in 21 league goals last season – with 15 goals and six assists. 
With another promotion push now the aim, and with Forestieri now playing 
alongside his former Watford team-mate Almen Abdi, Wednesday will hope the pair 
can combine well and lead them into the Premier League.

Shane Duffy <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/75692>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85171eba73d66aca1eed192f95e33938acaa04d5%2F0_48_2954_1901%2F2954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20players%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20the%20Championship%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20players%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20the%20Championship%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fchampionship-players-season-mitrovic-will-grigg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85171eba73d66aca1eed192f95e33938acaa04d5%2F0_48_2954_1901%2F2954.jpg>
 Shane Duffy at Euro 2016. Photograph: Ian MacNicol/Getty Images 
Ending last season as our sixth highest rated player in the Championship 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Regions/252/Tournaments/7/Seasons/5827/Stages/12497/PlayerStatistics/England-Championship-2015-2016>
 (7.40), Duffy has been an incredibly consistent performer in the league, 
having failed to make the grade at Everton. Now a full international with the 
Republic of Ireland, starting two matches at Euro 2016, it’s surprising that 
the 24-year old has not been given an opportunity to return to the Premier 
League. The centre-back is dominant in the air – winning the second most duels 
per game in the league last season (7.4) – and he also popped up with four 
goals from set pieces. He will be crucial to Blackburn’s hopes of a play-off 
push.

Jordan Graham <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/140549>

Jordan Graham had been in fine form for Wolves before he tore cruciate 
ligaments in his knee in January. The injury will keep him out of the opening 
months of the season, with the 21-year old hoping to return in October. Aston 
Villa may come to regret selling the young winger. In 11 starts last season he 
scored once and registered five assists, with figures of 2.5 key passes and two 
dribbles per game both leading the way for Wolves.

Kemar Roofe <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/101634>

Leeds were quick to secure the services of Oxford United’s Kemar Roofe 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united/leeds-united-roofe-relishing-challenge-with-whites-1-8044682>
, who played a starring role in their promotion from League Two to be named the 
division’s player of the year last season. Capable of playing in any position 
in the final third, the 23-year old’s versatility would be a bonus to any side 
at this level. Roofe scored 17 times in the league last season and added eight 
more goals in domestic cup competitions. For a side that scored just 50 goals 
last time around – only six scored fewer in the Championship – his acquisition 
looks very astute at around £3m.

Tom Bradshaw <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/134255>

He may not have played at this level before but Tom Bradshaw’s move to 
promoted Barnsley is something of a coup for the Tykes. Top scorer for 
high-flying Walsall in League One last season with 17 goals, the 23-year-old 
equalled his tally from the previous campaign. Having scored a healthy 70 goals 
last season,Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> will have 
plenty of firepower, with Bradshaw set to combine with top marksman Sam 
Winnall. They have a real shot at securing their Championship status.

Will Grigg receives as many votes as Paul Pogba in search for Europe’s best 
player
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/18/will-grigg-votes-paul-pogba-uefa-best-player>
Will Grigg <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/70118>

Speaking of top marksmen, no player scored more goals in League One last 
season than Will Grigg, who the watching world were praying to see this summer 
at the European Championship. It wasn’t to be, with the Wigan striker not 
seeing a single minute of action for Northern Ireland, and he’ll be keen to put 
that disappointment behind him. The famous chant that will no doubt follow 
Grigg wherever he goes threatens to overshadow his performances on the field, 
which is harsh given he scored 25 goals for the Latics last season. Fighting 
off any interest in his signature was likely to be a top priority for the club. 
They’ll now hope he can make an effective transition to the second tier.

• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 