
1) Manchester United can set down an early marker for next season

Chelsea have not quite faltered of late, but you can take or leave most of 
their recent performances and it is tempting to wonder just how much more 
interesting the rest of the season would be if the teams directly beneath them 
had put their houses in order sooner. Saturday’s match withManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> at Stamford Bridge 
should help us reach a conclusion and might provide a dress rehearsal for 
encounters of more consequence next season. If the talk around Old Trafford has 
been of pennies dropping in the last month, victory for Louis van Gaal’s team 
might point towards a clattering release of gold ingots. Nobody disputed their 
superiority during a tough run against Tottenham, Aston Villa, Liverpool and 
Manchester City; much more of the same would provide persuasive evidence of 
their revival and set an early marker for 2015-16. Is that all it would do? 
Probably – although if United do take the points then, with Chelsea visiting 
Arsenal next Sunday, there are bound to be excitable headlines about the 
revival of a meaningful title race. In reality it would be foolhardy to expect 
a change in the status quo, but it would do the league no harm to go into the 
summer with things having tightened at the top. Nick Ames
• Player of the Year nominees: Costa, Coutinho, De Gea, Hazard, Kane, Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/pfa-player-year-award-shortlist-costa-hazard-de-gea-kane-sanchez>
• Who should win the PFA awards? – poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/poll/2015/apr/16/pfa-player-year-awards-costa-coutinho-de-gea-hazard-kane-sanchez>
• Hazard not the standout Player of the Year of recent seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/16/eden-hazard-player-of-the-year-jose-mourinho>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fpat-nevin-career-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429111711360%2Fcrop_KP_179333_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pat%20Nevin%3A%20'At%20the%20peak%20of%20my%20career%2C%20no%20top%20club%20would%20touch%20me'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fpat-nevin-career-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pat%20Nevin%3A%20%27At%20the%20peak%20of%20my%20career%2C%20no%20top%20club%20would%20touch%20me%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fpat-nevin-career-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429111711360%2Fcrop_KP_179333_640x360.jpeg>
 Pat Nevin: ‘at the peak of my career, no top club would touch me’ 
2) With or without Clyne, can Southampton gatecrash the top four?

Ronald Koeman claimed he left Nathaniel Clyne on the bench last week because 
the right-back was tired and not because of the stalled contract talksand 
mounting transfer speculation surrounding an excellent player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/nathaniel-clyne-southampton-difficult-ronald-koeman>
. So it will be interesting to see whether the 24-year-old starts on Saturday. 
The uncertainty around Clyne offers a reminder of the upheaval Southampton 
endured last summer and, of course, of the splendid job done since then. 
Indeed, the team coped fine without Clyne last week, with Maya Yoshida looking 
assured in central defence as Toby Alderweireld manned the right-back slot. 
Whoever Koeman selects at the Britannia, surely all right-thinking folks will 
be hoping for a Southampton win? Nothing against Stoke, who have also been 
admirable this season, it is just that it would be heartening to see Saints 
gatecrash the top four and take a Champions League spot. A win this weekend 
could help tee up a mouthwatering showdown with Manchester City on the final 
day of the season.Paul Doyle
• Premier League managers’ table: where do the coaches rank? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/16/premier-league-managers-table-garry-monk-manuel-pellegrini>
• Clyne eyes Champions League stage after nailing England spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/13/nathaniel-clyne-england-right-back-roy-hodgson-southampton-champions-league>
3) Tables turned as Pulis returns to Palace under pressure

Tony Pulis, you suspect, did not foresee this scenario. When he walked away 
fromCrystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> at the 
start of the season it was basically because he did not think the club had the 
players to improve on last season’s finish or, indeed, that they might sink 
back into relegation bother. And under Neil Warnock, Palace seemed on course to 
vindicate that view. But Alan Pardew has altered minds and performances since 
riding to the rescue in January and Palace are now in a comfortable position 
and confident form. Instead Pulis returns to Selhurst Park with his new team in 
trouble. West Brom have lost their last three matches and conceded 10 goals in 
the process, leaving Pulis with important questions to resolve. In particular, 
he needs to get his full-back selections right – if he sticks with Chris Brunt 
on the left and Craig Dawson on the right, then we can look forward to more 
thrilling capers from Yannick Bolasie.PD
• Pardew deserves credit, and not just for revival at Crystal Palace  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/12/alan-pardew-credit-revival-crystal-palace-newcastle-united>
• Ward signs Palace contract extension to 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/crystal-palace-defender-joel-ward-contract-2018>
4) Burnley will have to step things up yet again at Everton
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Feverton-fight-point-roberto-martinez-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429191708468%2Fcrop_KP_181417_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everton%20will%20fight%20for%20every%20point%2C%20says%20Roberto%20Mart%C3%ADnez%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Feverton-fight-point-roberto-martinez-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everton%20will%20fight%20for%20every%20point%2C%20says%20Roberto%20Mart%C3%ADnez%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Feverton-fight-point-roberto-martinez-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429191708468%2Fcrop_KP_181417_640x360.jpeg>
 Everton will fight for every point, says Roberto Martínez 
Arsène Wenger admitted to being surprised by the application shown by Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/apr/12/arsenal-arsene-wenger-burnley-video>
 during Arsenal’s narrow win at Turf Moor last Saturday, and he is far from the 
first manager to have admired the diligence with which Sean Dyche’s team 
applies itself. Perhaps he was slightly generous in this instance – a rare 
first-half drop in their usual high-octane level contributed to Burnley’s 
defeat and the concern now is that even their very best might not be good 
enough. Hard work comes first for Dyche, an attitude that has left teams like 
Manchester City and Chelsea with their noses bloodied, but a record of one win 
in 12 games does not paint a promising picture and there are signs that their 
relegation rivals are finding hope in what had seemed to be lost causes. 
Leicester have won two in a row and, although QPR’s defeat to Chelsea was 
cruel, their performance continued the form shown in impressive away results at 
West Brom and Aston Villa. These two sides have raised their games but do 
Burnley have anything extra in the tank? Perhaps they do if Danny Ings can end 
his seven-game goal drought, but the Clarets have stretched every sinew this 
season and you wonder whether they have enough in reserve to save them now.NA
• Are Burnley the hardest working side in the Premier League? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/30/premier-league-stats-chelsea-manchester-united>
5) Do Leicester have a happy ending for their story?

A home fixture against a mid-table side who are deprived of their first-choice 
forwards? That is as good a hand as a team is likely to be dealt in the run-in 
to a Premier League season, and Leicester will feel they must take full 
advantage on Saturday if they are to increase belief in the most sensational 
escape since Gretel lured an old woman into an oven and burnt her alive. Yes, 
who wouldn’t love to see such a fairytale end to thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> this season, more or less? 
PD
• Pearson cautious on survival despite win at West Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/12/eicester-city-nigel-pearson-west-brom-premier-league>
6) Arsenal against Reading should not be a matter of choice

It will matter little to the 30,000 Reading fans who will wear blue and white 
T-shirts to their shot at history this Saturday teatime, and nor might the 
Arsenal supporters flocking to Wembley be too concerned. But their FA Cup 
semi-final kicks off just 10 minutes before Chelsea’s game against Manchester 
United, which will of course be televised live on Sky and is of theoretical 
consequence to the title race. Arsène Wenger says that it “shouldn’t happen” 
and that “you would not want [such a game] to conflict with other 
competitions”, and it is difficult to disagree that the FA Cup has been dealt 
another blow that is not of its own making. There used to be something special 
about semi-final weekend; it is not really the case now and the casual fan with 
access to Sky is more than likely to be checking in on the score from Wembley 
during breaks in play at Stamford Bridge. Maybe the situation has not been 
helped by the fact that it should not be much of a contest on paper, with 
Reading enduring an inauspicious campaign in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and Arsenal looking their 
most sleek for some years. Would extra measures to protect the fixture have 
been taken if Arsenal’s opponents had been another team from the top half of 
the Premier League? We will never know, but those who – hopefully – tune in 
will remember Wigan’s performance at this stage last season and be reminded 
that the FA Cup has never been put quietly in its box.NA
• FA Cup semi-final with Arsenal overshadowed, says Reading’s Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/fa-cup-semi-final-arsenal-reading-steve-clarke>
• Meet the 93-year-old Reading fan whose dislike of Arsenal dates to the 1920s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/reading-arsenal-fa-cup-semi-final>
• Wenger criticises TV clash of Arsenal semi-final with Chelsea match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/arsene-wenger-arsenal-semi-final-chelsea-manchester-united>
7) Would a win at Wembley finally earn Sherwood some praise?

Tim Sherwood does not always help himself but his continued depiction as an 
oafish, tactically-lacking luddite is utterly tiresome unless you view your 
world in binary. The joke means less with each positive result Aston Villa 
achieve and you wonder if it would be too much to ask for Sherwood, who has won 
four of his seven games since taking over, to receive anything better than 
faint praise if his team prevail against Liverpool at Wembley. They must do so 
without the suspended Carlos Sánchez but last weekend’s win at White Hart Lane 
suggested a resilience to go with their added sense of adventure and Sherwood 
will be preaching the positives here. His Villa side plays a more 
attack-minded, direct football than that of his predecessor Paul Lambert, 
hitting Gabriel Agbonlahor and the in-form Christian Benteke earlier and 
exposing defences that play too high a line. Liverpool are rightly favourites 
to reach the final but are unlikely to face the shrinking violetsthey beat 2-0 
at Villa Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/17/aston-villa-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 in January. If Sherwood does pull off a shock then we will certainly be 
hearing about it, but that might be preferable to drawing lax conclusions that 
ignore the body of evidence that he is a perfectly good coach. NA
• Sturridge a doubt for FA Cup tie against Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/daniel-sturridge-liverpool-aston-villa-fa-cup>
• So what if Raheem Sterling took laughing gas?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/15/so-what-if-raheem-sterling-took-laughing-gas-many-footballers-have-done-worse>
8) Blink and miss out in an enthralling Championship
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Ften-things-weekend-football-premier-league-fa-cup-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f5c6adde14d8d54fc175075b833cc3a7327fc5%2F0_138_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20this%20weekend's%20football%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames%20and%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Ften-things-weekend-football-premier-league-fa-cup-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20this%20weekend%27s%20football%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames%20and%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Ften-things-weekend-football-premier-league-fa-cup-championship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f5c6adde14d8d54fc175075b833cc3a7327fc5%2F0_138_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
 Alex Neil’s Norwich side must not lose against Middlesbrough. Photograph: 
ProSports/REX 
This has been the least predictable Championship promotion race in memory and 
its remorseless intensity can be summed up by the fact that sixth-placed 
Ipswich, who have 74 points with three games to play, could quite conceivably 
miss out on the play-offs. The focus will be on two of the teams above them on 
Friday night, Norwich hosting Middlesbrough in a game that neither dare lose if 
they are not to be edged into the end-of-season lottery.

Alex Neil’s impressive Canaries are second, by a single goal from Watford, and 
have won five in a row; Boro are a point behind but have lost four of their 
last five away games – including their last two, against Watford and the 
leaders Bournemouth. They have, in fact, picked up points in only one of their 
away fixtures against the current top six and not even the excellence of 
Patrick Bamford – seven goals in his last nine games – can really create a case 
for their being favourites here. But pressure can do strange things and Norwich 
will be aware that a draw would be little good to anyone. Watford should beat 
Birmingham at home on Saturday and it is hard to envisage Sheffield Wednesday 
coming away from Bournemouth with much. Then again, guess who won 4-2 at Dean 
Court exactly a year ago to the day, puncturing the Cherries’ play-off 
aspirations? Somebody, somewhere, may still receive a nasty surprise over the 
next two weeks.

Wolves play Ipswich on Saturday lunchtime in the weekend’s other shoot-out 
between promotion hopefuls. This time a draw would do fine for Mick McCarthy, 
with the past week having completely reversed a situation that had seen Wolves 
storm three points ahead of their ex-manager’s club. Defeat would surely give 
Wolves too much to do; even a win for Ipswich might not shake off the presence 
of seventh-placed Brentford, who will be expected to defeat Bolton at home. 
Nobody in the top eight can drop their guard now, and perhaps the biggest shock 
of all would come if any of this was much clearer on the morning of 2 May, when 
the final round of fixtures is played.NA
• Twenty-eight English clubs are now owned overseas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/14/english-football-clubs-owned-abroad-tax-avoidance>
• Why are English clubs owned overseas? Their responses  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/14/why-are-english-clubs-owned-abroad-their-responses>
9) Hasselbaink and Burton near the finish line

Burton Albion could have won promotion from League Two on Wednesday with a win 
over relegation-threatened Carlisle and other results going their way. In the 
event, neither materialised and they were thankful for an equaliser in the 
ninth minute of injury time at the Pirelli Stadium – having missed a penalty in 
the third. It encapsulated both the jitteriness and the good fortune that 
title-chasing teams encounter at this time of year but their ascent still seems 
a formality and would be all but confirmed with a win at Morecambe. Albion have 
improved iteratively since promotion to theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> in 2008-09, reaching the 
play-offs in the last two seasons and losing agonisingly to Fleetwood in the 
final at Wembley last year. They have done so in the manner of a lower-division 
Swansea, seeing managers such as Nigel Clough and Gary Rowett picked up by 
bigger clubs but subsequent recruitment being conducted in a manner that has 
maintained their upwards trajectory. Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink took over upon 
Rowett’s departure for Birmingham in November and has built an inexorable 
momentum with a team that has lost only three times under his tutelage. If he 
keeps this up then he will be destined for bigger things; for now, he will be 
hoping for a rather more straightforward 90 – or even 99 – minutes in 
Lancashire on Saturday. NA
• Luton show spirit to restrict Burton leaders but are beaten by late goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/apr/12/luton-town-burton-league-two-match-report>
10) Barnet are on the brink of an emotional return

It would not have been outlandish to fear Barnet’s terminal decline upon their 
relegation from the Football League in 2013. Their penultimate match in League 
Two was the last to be played at their cherished former home, Underhill, and 
with their new stadium in Canons Park – The Hive – having no roots in their 
local community they might have fallen into the pack of former league clubs 
treading water in an increasingly competitive Conference, before withering 
away. But Barnet, expertly managed by Martin Allen in what is remarkably his 
fourth spell in charge at the club, are on the way back and victory at 
Kidderminster – coupled with Bristol Rovers dropping points at Dover – would be 
enough to win them automatic promotion with a game to spare. Their star man is 
their striker John Akinde, who has scored 31 goals this season and has a point 
to prove in the league after a big early move to Bristol City from Ebbsfleet 
did not lead to success there or in subsequent stints with Crawley and 
Portsmouth. Like Barnet, he has had to gather himself further down. Player and 
club now have a big opportunity to build again and, although a stadium in their 
home borough still looks a long way off, promotion would giveBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> cause to be thankful that they 
stopped themselves before reaching terminal velocity on a potentially slippery 
slope.NA
• All the latest from the football league blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog>  