
When Terry Campese agreed to make the move to Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> with Hull Kingston Rovers just 
over two years ago, he may have wondered what would follow. Ups, downs and 
setbacks are part and parcel of a rugby league career but to describe Campese’s 
two years as a rollercoaster would be somewhat of an understatement.

Drama and the unexpected is never far away when it comes to a club like Hull 
KR and 12 months on from theirChallenge Cup final defeat to Leeds Rhinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/leeds-emphatically-shut-out-hull-kr-to-win-challenge-cup>
, they face a final of an entirely different kind against Salford Red Devils on 
Saturday, with entirely different consequences at stake for the losers.

Million Pound Game a disgrace and a danger to mental health, says player
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/million-pound-game-hullkr-salford-super-league>
Win the 2016 Million Pound Game and Hull KR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> know they will be in Super League 
next year, able to look ahead with confidence as the former Australia coach Tim 
Sheens takes charge. Defeat? The ignominy of relegation, a season (at least) in 
the Championship, and the likelihood of players losing their jobs.

Careers, livelihoods and futures are at stake for both Rovers and Salford on 
Saturday afternoon. Campese’s time at Hull KR has fluctuated between spells of 
brilliance on the field and significant periods in the treatment room – he 
missed the Wembley defeat to Leeds last year due to injury – but the man who 
has played both Test and State of Origin rugby is in no doubt about the 
significance of the game.

“After the siren goes, it’s probably bigger than any other game I’ve ever 
played,” he said. “If you lose [normally], you’ve still got your job. This week 
you don’t. That’s the scary thing about it. You try not to think about it but 
it’s hard not to with having a young family.”

The spotlight has been on the Million Pound Game concept this week after 
Campese’s team-mate Ben Cockayne described it as a “disgrace” to the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/million-pound-game-hullkr-salford-super-league>
. With a year left on his existing deal, Campese faces the prospect of being 
unemployed come Saturday evening and he admits the game does not sit 
comfortably with him, either.

“I’m pretty sure that’s the case, that contracts become null and void,” he 
said. “You either have to renegotiate or move on I think, that’s the way I see 
it: haven’t been told otherwise. I didn’t like the concept when I first heard 
about it last year; I don’t think this works. The team that finishes bottom 
gets off, which was Huddersfield this year.”

Salford sweep Batley aside to set up survival showdown with Hull KR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/salford-batley-match-report> 
It is rare to see the city of Hull unite when it comes to rugby league, but 
Campese insists that he has had messages of goodwill from the most unlikely 
areas this week as KR prepare to keep their Super League status, and the Hull 
derby, intact.

“I went to my son’s rugby on Sunday and there were a few FC fans there that 
have kids in his team and they want us to stay up as well because of the derby 
and the rivalry – it brings the town together,” he said. “It’s important to a 
town like Hull. Hopefully we’ll put in a performance that gives these people 
the derby next year.”

With the stakes so high, talk of what ifs and worst-case scenarios is only 
natural. But if KR do emerge victorious on Saturday, the irony is that despite 
coming so close to disaster this year, there is scope for a bright future with 
a man of Sheens’ experience taking charge.

“I’ve never been at a club like it where we’ve been hit by so many injuries, 
but I’m sure if we can have a healthy squad we can do some good things in the 
future,” Campese said.

“I’d much rather be out on the field than sitting in the stands. It’s in my 
hands what I can do and what part I play in the success on Saturday.”
 