
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has agreed to increase the 
amount it pays farmers for milk used to produce cheese, in a major victory for 
the dairy industry in its battle with supermarkets.

Britain’s biggest retailer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/20/tesco-promises-british-milk-own-brand-yoghurt>
will pay farmers a price based on the cost of production in what farming 
leaders described as a significant move.

Tesco already pays a price linked to the cost of production for milk itself, 
but it is the first major supermarket to extend the link to cheese.

The move means it will pay 29.93p per litre for milk in cheese over the winter 
period, according to the National Farmers Union.

The NFU has said dairy farmers face a “state of emergency” after a 25% fall in 
the wholesale price of milk in the past year. The average farmgate price of 
milk stands at 23.35p a litre, below the estimated cost of production of 30p a 
litre.

Farmers blame supermarkets for the slide in milk prices, saying it has been 
used as a weapon in the industry price war and that retailers are not doing 
enough to promote British-sourced products. In protest they have blockaded 
distribution centres and herded two cows through an Asda store in Stafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/tesco-talks-dairy-farmers-protests-milk-imports-avonmouth>
.


Ministers may force supermarkets to say whether fresh food is from UK on label
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/tesco-talks-dairy-farmers-protests-milk-imports-avonmouth>
Supermarkets say the fall is the result of an oversupply of milk in Europe, 
but they have bowed to pressure from farmers on a number of issues.Asda, 
Morrisons, Aldi and Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/17/tesco-talks-dairy-farmers-protests-milk-imports-avonmouth>
 have increased the amount they pay, and Tesco has agreed to use only British 
milk in its own-brand yoghurts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/20/tesco-promises-british-milk-own-brand-yoghurt>
 instead of importing from Germany, as it had done previously.

Matt Simister, Tesco’s commercial director for fresh food and commodities said 
the company was now increasing the amount it pays for milk in cheese because it 
“can understand how difficult the current market conditions are for farmers”.


He said: “By introducing a higher price, linked to our cost of production, 
customers can be confident that when they buy Tesco Standard Mild & Medium 
cheddar, Tesco Value and Standard Red Leicester and Double Gloucester cheese, 
all our producers have benefited from a fair price for their milk.

“British farmers deliver some of the highest standards of milk quality in the 
world and some of the best conditions for animal welfare.

Tesco promises to use only British milk in its own-brand yoghurt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/20/tesco-promises-british-milk-own-brand-yoghurt>
“It is a naturally healthy and nutrient rich product we can all be very proud 
of. Across the UK, customers tell us that they want to buy milk products from 
cows which are looked after properly and they want the price that’s paid to 
producers to be fair.


“It’s important to acknowledge that there isn’t a single simple solution to 
resolve the uncertainty faced by many farmers, but a shared challenge for 
everyone in the supply chain to play their part, towards building a truly 
sustainable British dairy industry.”

Michael Oakes, the vice-chairman of the NFU’s dairy board, said: “We are 
pleased that Tesco has recognised the challenging time the dairy industry is 
currently facing. This is especially welcome as we are heading towards the 
winter, as farmers face significantly higher costs of production while cows are 
housed.

“This is the first retailer we have seen to make this move and this is a 
positive step given the current environment. Consumers have made it clear that 
they want to see a dairy sector that is sustainable in the long term and all 
retailers need to be accountable for this.”
 