
Four years ago the historic Twickenham Studios, home to some of the best-loved 
moments in British cinema history, stood on the brink of oblivion. The site 
seemed set for demolition and redevelopment as prime residential land in west 
London and an era of film history appeared to be drawing to a close.

How the British film industry could flourish outside the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/29/brexit-how-the-british-film-industry-could-flourish-outside-the-eu>
That disaster was averted is thanks in large part to British businessman and 
cinema-lover Sunny Vohra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/17/twickenham-studios-saved-film-production>
. As the studios prepare to announce major investments in independent British 
films and television dramas, business is booming again. Studios that were 
suffering six-figure losses before he acquired them are now in profit and 
film-makers are plying their trade in south-west London.

Those being drawn to Twickenham include Sir Ridley Scott (for Alien: Covenant, 
the next instalment in his science fiction series), Stanley Tucci (forThe Final 
Portrait, starring Oscar-winner Geoffrey Rush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/geoffrey-rush> as artist Alberto Giacometti), 
and John Madden, whose previous films includeShakespeare in Love (for Miss 
Sloane, a gun-control drama).

For Vohra, financing the Twickenham renaissance was a no-brainer. Asked 
whether he was under some obligation, having purchased the site, to keep it as 
a film studio, he said: “Technically, no. Morally, I was – because of the 
history.”

Carol Reed, Sam Peckinpah and Richard Attenborough are among the directors who 
worked at Twickenham. Seminal films made there includeSaturday Night and Sunday 
Morning, The Italian Job and The Eagle Has Landed. Vohra has spent big in an 
attempt to bring back some of the spirit of the glory days. So far, in what he 
describes as “a labour of love”, Vohra has invested £16m.

“Before we took it over,” he says, “[the studios] were losing about half a 
million pounds a year. The first year we had it, we lost half a million. Then 
we turned it around and made a small profit. A large part of it was changing 
the management and … the infrastructure.”

Actress Vanessa Redgrave now has an office there, making documentaries, and 
Angelina Jolie has just spent several months on site producing her next film,
First They Killed My Father, a true-life drama about Cambodia’s deadly Khmer 
Rouge regime.Stephen Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears>, 
director ofThe Queen, starring Dame Helen Mirren, opened an office there last 
week for his new film,Victoria and Abdul, about another monarch – Queen 
Victoria – and her unlikely friendship with an Indian clerk. Dame Judi Dench is 
returning to the role she played inMrs Brown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftwickenham-studios-british-film-glory-days-sunny-vohra-ridley-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fe93fc42325c21fa569d2769427321f63d1e76f%2F0_147_6695_4017%2F6695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20glory%20days%20return%20to%20one%20of%20British%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20spiritual%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftwickenham-studios-british-film-glory-days-sunny-vohra-ridley-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20glory%20days%20return%20to%20one%20of%20British%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20spiritual%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftwickenham-studios-british-film-glory-days-sunny-vohra-ridley-scott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fe93fc42325c21fa569d2769427321f63d1e76f%2F0_147_6695_4017%2F6695.jpg>
 The 2015 film Florence Foster Jenkins, starring Meryl Streep, was shot at 
Twickenham Studios. 
Frears shot most of his period comedy Florence Foster Jenkins, with Meryl 
Streep as a socialite with ambitions to sing, in Twickenham. Asked why he was 
returning, he told theObserver: “The modesty of it is very nice. At Pinewood, 
you’re overwhelmed by James Bond and all the American films. Twickenham is much 
more domestic and feels appropriate to the films we’re making.”

Born in Kenya, Vohra came to Britain aged 13. His family built up their 
business, which includes the Rembrandt hotel in south Kensington, from a 
bicycle shop opened by his Indian grandfather in Kenya. “That’s why I like 
riding bicycles,” he said. His grandfather emigrated from India to Kenya to 
work on the railway: “He was one of the workers that laid the tracks. Then they 
bought a bicycle shop.” The family still have that shop. “We will never close 
it,” he said, repeating his grandfather’s words: “Remember where everything 
started.”

He added: “We’re probably the biggest retailers and wholesalers of bicycles in 
Kenya, and probably Africa.”

Pinewood studios considers £350m sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/pinewood-studios-considers-250m-sale>
A film studio, of course, is a very different proposition from a hotel. “The 
operational side is different,” said Vohra, “but, in the hotels, we’re renting 
out rooms for people to sleep in. Here we’re renting out offices, stages and 
sound theatres for people to come and work in. But it’s still the same thing – 
commercial space available for rent.”

Twickenham came to his attention after a chance visit to a friend’s office 
there. While the friend tried in vain to persuade him to invest in movies, 
Vohra told him that, if the site itself ever became available, he “could be 
interested”. The friend told him: “Actually, they’re in trouble.” Twickenham 
was eventually placed in administration, but post-production supervisor Maria 
Walker organised a campaign to save it, drawing support from Steven Spielberg 
and other major film-makers.

She said: “I’d worked here a lot and knew it was a great facility. But it was 
obvious to an outsider that no money had been spent on it. The owner had died 
about seven years before and it was just a rudderless ship. So I started the 
campaign. I was so angry, I just couldn’t imagine it not being here.”

Vohra was so struck by her passion that, on acquiring the studio, he appointed 
her as chief operating officer. He said: “The studio had the wrong management 
in place. That needed changing. The first thing to do was to bring the right 
person in.”

From the outside, a series of unprepossessing studio buildings, some rundown 
and ramshackle, give little clue to the state-of-the-art technology and 
facilities at the UK’s oldest studio.

But if there is one film that Vohra would have liked to have invested in, it is
Casablanca, the classic starring Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman: “I have 
watched that movie once a month for the past 40 years.”

Asked about his budget for investing in independent British films, he said: 
“There’s no set figure. We’re going to look at every project that comes along. 
We want to attract strong scripts. It’s about going to the cinema and being 
able to say: ‘You know, that movie was done at Twickenham.’”

STILL FLYING THE FLAG

Pinewood

Merged with Alexander Korda’s Denham in 1938 by Sir Charles Boot and J Arthur 
Rank. Will open five new sound stages this week.

Famous for: The Red Shoes, Carry on Sergeant, Dr No.

Recently home to: Star Wars: The Force Awakens and Victor Frankenstein.

Ealing

Synonymous with comedies and thrillers in the 1940s; revamped last year with 
new plans and money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/ealing-studios-cannes-revival>.

Famous for: The Lavender Hill Mob, The Ladykillers, Passport to Pimlico, Kind 
Hearts and Coronets and The Man in the White Suit.

Recently home to: Downton Abbey, Weinstein Company’s One Chance and Working 
Title’s The Two Faces of January.

Shepperton

Its 15 sound stages are part of the Pinewood Studios Group.

Famous for: The Third Man, I’m Alright Jack, Oliver!, The Day of the Jackal, 
The Elephant Man, Blade Runner, Four Weddings and a Funeral, Billy Elliot, Bend 
it Like Beckham and Atonement.

Recently home to: Alice in Wonderland: Through the Looking Glass, The 
Huntsman: Winter’s War, Into the Woods and Gravity.

Elstree

Just received planning clearance for an expansion to be completed late next 
year.

Famous for: The first British talkie, Alfred Hitchcock’s Blackmail, The Hasty 
Heart, with Richard Todd and Ronald Reagan, the original Star Wars trilogy, The 
Dirty Dozen and 2001: A Space Odyssey. The Dam Busters used the water tank.

Recently home to: The Danish Girl and Paddington.

Warner Bros, Leavesden

A newcomer first built as a factory more than 70 years ago.

Famous for: Star Wars: Episode One: The Phantom Menace, Sleepy Hollow and all 
eight of the Harry Potter films.

Recently home to: Tarzan, Pan, In the Heart of the Sea.

 * This article was amended on 3 July 2016. An earlier version said that 
Lauren Bacall starred in Casablanca. This has been corrected.  