
Who would steal a crossword clue?

You can imagine it as the motive in a lost Inspector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/09/top-10-crosswords-fiction-inspector-morse>
Morse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/08/crossword-blog-farewell-to-jeremy-morse>
 yarn: a don with a sideline in setting who pinches another’s pithy anagram, a 
crime only discovered when his corpse is spotted bobbing under Magdalen bridge.

In real life? Those who compile crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/meet-the-setter> do so for love 
– it’s decidedly not for the money – and nothing can stop them endlessly 
rearranging the English language into teasing puzzles.

The American crossword world, though, is facing up to what looks like a kind 
of clue-theft, not of the odd 12 across, but on an industrial scale, going back 
at least a decade.

Americans have never taken to the cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/dec/18/cryptic-crosswords-too-rude-for-americans-puzzle>
, and so there’s an impression here that their crosswords are simple fare: 
elementary definitions that will soon and as well be generated by some machine.

In fact, the best-loved American puzzles are constructed around themed answers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/24/crossword-blog-merl-reagle>
, clued with precisely the allusive wit for which you need a human – or another 
human to copy from.

Universal Uclick is a syndicate that provides puzzles for hundreds of 
publications, and a startling number bear similarities to hand-crafted puzzles 
that have previously appeared elsewhere. The data-crunchers at FiveThirtyEight 
– Nate Silver’s site which famously called all 50 states correctly in the last 
US election – suggest that there areover 1,500 puzzles with at least a 75% 
overlap with someone else’s 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/a-plagiarism-scandal-is-unfolding-in-the-crossword-world/>
. Oops.

What’s especially upsetting American solvers is that many of the themed 
answers had originally appeared in theNew York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times>, the gold standard for 
original and honest clueing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-great-us-crossword-plagiarism-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a6d83370ae23f7847d91ab1e9709d5767f2051%2F0_0_1220_1146%2F1220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20US%20crossword%20'plagiarism'%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-great-us-crossword-plagiarism-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20US%20crossword%20%27plagiarism%27%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-great-us-crossword-plagiarism-mystery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a6d83370ae23f7847d91ab1e9709d5767f2051%2F0_0_1220_1146%2F1220.jpg>
 Data from FiveThirtyEight 
The paper’s national-treasure puzzle editor Will Shortz reckons the numbers 
make it“clear it’s plagiarism” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/06/business/media/questions-raised-over-crosswords-seemingly-copied-from-the-new-york-times.html?_r=0>
; Universal Uclick has not officially commented, though the man in charge of 
their puzzlesoffered 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/a-plagiarism-scandal-is-unfolding-in-the-crossword-world/>
: “To me, it’s just mere coincidence”.

Referring to 65 alleged similarities with New York Times puzzles, he said: 
“Out of 15,000, I’m not surprised at all. I would expect it to be a couple of 
hundred.”

Until recently, puzzling plagiarism would have been easier. As newsprint found 
its way to the dumpster, so too would have any evidence. But thedatabases 
<http://xd.saul.pw/xdiffs/> of clues assembled by devoted crossword fans and 
some clever code <https://github.com/century-arcade/xd> have made it possible 
to pull a Morse on anyone who might be cribbing crosswords. After all, these 
are people who are used to cracking clues.

The odd theft has been uncovered before – in India, and on very rare occasions 
over here. But British setters tend to work across the few papers that publish 
cryptics; no hi-tech forensics should be necessary to uncover any skulduggery 
in our smaller crosswording world. The Guardian’sArachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
 told me that some solvers “can quote clues from years ago with eye-popping 
accuracy”, adding: “some setters, by contrast, can’t remember the clues they 
wrote last week, ahem”.


Besides, what a joyless crime it would be to copy and paste the ingenious work 
of another, then hastily tinker with a couple of clues to cover your tracks. 
The magic of crosswords comes from finding new ways of looking at very old 
words: if you take this on as your job, your task is, through perspiration as 
well as inspiration, to create something from nothing.

For the avoidance of doubt, the Clueing Coincidence feature that appears at 
this blog has never been meant to suggest anything other than the greater 
appeal that some words have to setters! The winners ofthe BOJO clueing 
competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/22/crossword-roundup-tory-name-calling>
 will appear next week and I can be contacted at@alanconnor 
<https://twitter.com/alanconnor>. 
 