
It has been wonderful watching Planet Earth II 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td>. What a glorious, spectacular and 
fascinating series. Hats off to the production team, the camera crews, the film 
editors and the splendid music – and to David Attenborough himself for the 
marvellous commentary and script. We have surely never been so close to the 
action and never have the pictures looked so luxurious.

I have the greatest admiration for the teams who made Planet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii> – whose final 
episode was broadcast last night on the BBC – but I fear this series, and 
others like it, have become a disaster for the world’s wildlife. These 
programmes are pure entertainment, brilliantly executed but ultimately a 
significant contributor to the planet-wide extinction of wildlife we’re 
presiding over.

The Guardian view on Planet Earth: its life in our hands | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/the-guardian-view-on-planet-earth-its-life-in-our-hands>
The justification, say the programme makers, is that if people (the audience) 
become interested in the natural world they will start to care about the 
natural world, and will be more likely to want to get involved in trying to 
conserve it. Unfortunately the scientific evidence shows this is nonsense.

Do David Attenborough’s programmes help or hinder the natural world? | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/03/do-david-attenboroughs-programmes-help-or-hinder-the-natural-world>
For instance, the World Wide Fund for Nature and Zoological Society of 
London’s authoritative2016 Living Planet Report 
<http://www.livingplanetindex.org/home/index> has concluded that between 1970 
and 2012 there was a58% decline of vertebrate population abundance worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
. This encompasses the period in which Attenborough’s outstanding natural 
history series have been broadcast (starting with Life on Earth in 1979). The 
prime factor in this destruction is humankind’s insatiable need for space – 
destroying and degrading habitat at an appalling rate – coupled with species 
over-exploitation, pollution, invasive species, climate change and rampant 
poaching.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbbc-planet-earth-not-help-natural-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4fea7bf6a8a4c97cdef972342f81f8fafb9bb5%2F0_187_4344_2607%2F4344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20did%20not%20help%20the%20natural%20world%20%7C%20Martin%20Hughes-Games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbbc-planet-earth-not-help-natural-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20did%20not%20help%20the%20natural%20world%20%7C%20Martin%20Hughes-Games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbbc-planet-earth-not-help-natural-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4fea7bf6a8a4c97cdef972342f81f8fafb9bb5%2F0_187_4344_2607%2F4344.jpg>
 Planet Earth II: there may be as few as 3,500 snow leopards left in the wild. 
Photograph: David Willis/BBC 
Yet these programmes are still made as if this worldwide mass extinction is 
simply not happening. The producers continue to go to the rapidly shrinking 
parks and reserves to make their films – creating a beautiful, beguiling 
fantasy world, a utopia where tigers still roam free and untroubled, where the 
natural world exists as if man had never been.

By fostering this lie they are lulling the huge worldwide audience into a 
false sense of security. “If David Attenborough is still making these sorts of 
wonderful shows then it can’t be that bad, can it?” Yes it can, and it’s going 
to get much, much worse. Even as Planet Earth II was being broadcast, it was 
reported that elephant and lion numbers were tumbling, and last month it became 
clear that the giraffe could beheading towards extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/giraffes-decline-vulnerable-species>
, with numbers plummeting by 40% in the past 15 years. But no hint of the 
continuing disaster is allowed to shatter the illusion.

I’m not for one moment suggesting such shows should not be made. They are 
wonderful records of the beauty rapidly disappearing from our planet. I believe 
that in 100 years people will be amazed, and profoundly sad, that it was still 
possible to make such programmes. What I am suggesting is that the fantasy 
should be balanced by reality.

The 50 best TV shows of 2016: No 1 Planet Earth II
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii>
I would like to propose a “conservation tax” among natural history 
commissioners across all channels. This tax would insist that a fifth of 
natural history commissions are significantly conservation-oriented. As a 
matter of urgency, a development team should be set up to think how the reality 
of what’s happening to wildlife worldwide can be portrayed in innovative ways, 
integrated in dramas, in children’s shows – in collaborations with producers 
likeAardman Animations, <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> perhaps, or 
video diaries of inspirational people working with animals, and cartoon 
characters.

Some shows could be overtly conservation-oriented, others more subtle – 
perhaps a detective drama where the villains are smuggling rhino horn or ivory. 
But why would any TV development team put effort into imaginative conservation 
programming when escapist productions are so successful – unless it were taxed?

The BBC is in a unique position to work with a conservation tax. It could do 
this as part of its public service remit, without having quite the financial 
pressure and need for profit that independents and commercial producers do. It 
would also be a very positive initiative for the BBC to be seen to be doing.

We cannot simply carry on producing escapist wildlife fantasy almost totally 
ignoring the manmade mass extinction raging around us.
 