
Momma’s Boy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=843Wc2uah0s>

There’s no shame in losing to the better man, as light heavyweight Tony Wilson 
learned in the third round of his fight with Steve McCarthy in 1989. What is 
shameful though is that Wilson’s mother, 62-year-old Minna Wilson, couldn’t 
bear to witness her son taking a beating any longer so climbed into the ring 
and began beating McCarthy around the head with her shoe, triggering a riot.

Bleeding from the head, McCarthy left the ring and refused to return. As a 
result the referee declared that he had retired and named Wilson the winner. 
Instead of thanking his mother for her help, Wilson banned her from going to 
any more of his fights.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D843Wc2uah0s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D843Wc2uah0s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D843Wc2uah0s&media=>
Quit hitting yourself <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdFP-R_LYSM>

Everyone remembers this moment from Tyson Fury’s early days. During his fourth 
professional fight against Lee Swaby, the heavyweight contender became a bit 
overexcited. Not satisfied with his opponent’s performance, he started hitting 
himself to make the fight more of a challenge.

Some advice for Fury’s future opponents: make him angry. The more angry he is, 
the more likely he is to become careless. And the angrier he gets the harder 
the punches he’ll throw. Stay the hell out of the way and watch a giant man 
knock himself out. He might forget you’re even there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwdFP-R_LYSM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwdFP-R_LYSM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwdFP-R_LYSM&media=>
The swing-and-hoper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dADz2E5xcmc>

Light heavyweight Brian Sutherland claimed he had never set foot in a ring 
before his first bout, so no one is really sure how the fight ended up on TV. 
Perhaps word of mouth landed him a spot on the show Tuesday Night Fights. 
Perhaps they couldn’t resist when he showed up with a reputation as a street 
fighter who had never lost, with an iron will and a haircut that says “don’t 
mess with me”.

And he nearly lasted a full minute, before Liverpool’s Kenny Rainford bored of 
watching him hop around and hit him with his first, and only, real punch of the 
fight. He only needed one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdADz2E5xcmc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdADz2E5xcmc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdADz2E5xcmc&media=>
Ricky Hatton predicts his own downfall 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m6BtVS0-w9A>

This clip from Manny Pacquiao’s utter destruction of Ricky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> is marred only by the effect 
the loss had on the defeated man.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm6BtVS0-w9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm6BtVS0-w9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm6BtVS0-w9A&media=>
It also features the incomprehensible Floyd Mayweather, Sr.: “Same move 
thaswasgufduganfre what I was trying to tell you.” Speaking of Floyd, Sr…

Charlie Zelenoff’s entire ‘career’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t0xkyhbs85E>

Welterweight Charlie Zelenoff is boxing’s greatest internet celebrity. Despite 
losing his one and only fight, having been disqualified for repeatedly spitting 
out his gumshield, Zelenoff claims to be the pound-for-pound No1 and the 
greatest boxer of all time.

He also regularly boasts about knocking out heavyweights with his “4500 psi” 
punches that he says pack as much power as a meteorite. He hit the headlines 
earlier this year when Deontay Wilder knocked him around in response to alleged 
threats from Zelenoff.

He’s most famous for a sparring session with 59-year-old Mayweather, Sr. After 
crawling out of the ring, Zelenoff, 23, runs back in to sucker-punch a man more 
than twice his age.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0xkyhbs85E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0xkyhbs85E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0xkyhbs85E&media=>
The debut of ‘Illusive Fighting’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=li537lWQUg4>

The Shadow (?-?-?) is so mysterious that there is almost no information about 
him on the internet apart from his fight with “Insane Zane” on Canadian Fight 
Network show So You Wanna Fight.

The creator of “illusive fighting” may look a simple office worker but we are 
assured that he has undergone a rigorous training regime including intensive 
hiking, meditation and “dodging cars at busy intersections”.

In practise, this is less impressive. The Shadow shows that he has little 
understanding of fighting or even of getting out of the way of big, hairy men. 
Maybe he would have done better if Zane had been a car.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli537lWQUg4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli537lWQUg4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli537lWQUg4&media=>
The scaredy cat <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_A77xlV4U4>

Jerry “Harm’s Way” Hackney was never going to be a world champion. He lost 
every single one of his eight fights and had one of the most terrible nicknames 
in boxing history. As if losing all of his fights isn’t embarrassing enough, he 
performed amazingly badly against George “Da Butcher” Klinesmith.

In the fourth round, Hackney decides he has had enough of a beating so turns 
his ginger dreadlocks (always a great choice) and runs. He jumps on to the 
ropes, where Da Butcher “makes mincemeat outta him” by punching him into the 
crowd. Hackney claims he was “just jogging across the ring”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_A77xlV4U4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_A77xlV4U4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_A77xlV4U4&media=>
Glass-jaw Grimsley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JH5wEEFfer0>

In 1997 Crawford Grimsley was a heavyweight showing promise. He had a history 
of impressive first-round knockouts and managed to go the distance against the 
legendary George Foreman. Grimsley was the real life Ivan Drago: a sharp, 
blonde knockout master.

That is until his fight with Jimmy Thunder, in which he was knocked out almost 
immediately. If you squint it can be a really underwhelming alternative ending 
to Rocky IV.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJH5wEEFfer0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJH5wEEFfer0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJH5wEEFfer0&media=>
Wait until he hits you <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xrysDcXajE0>

Paul Briggs was an Australian light heavyweight. His comeback fight against 
Danny Green lasted only 29 seconds as Briggs went to the canvas after the first 
punch. Which sounds like Grimsley, except this time the punch didn’t even touch 
him.

Briggs was then booed out of the stadium while Green labelled his opponent as 
“less than canine.” Briggs was later fined $75,000, had his license revoked and 
had details passed to the police about the $100,000 bet placed on the outcome 
by Perth street gang, the Sword Boys.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrysDcXajE0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrysDcXajE0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrysDcXajE0&media=>
Don’t Bet On Yourself And Lose 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=ofvuh3yDtrM>

James DeGale was so confident that he would win his fight against long-time 
rival George Groves that he made a bet that the winner take all the money. “I 
am so confident, I will cover your wage,” DeGale said. After shaking hands on 
the bet, DeGale walked away, saying: “The drinks are on me.”

It was lucky for him that his opponent didn’t force him to hand over the money 
when he lost, as ringside after celebrating the win, Groves trainer Adam Booth, 
said “We’ll let James off the bet.” I hope he has the balls to double the bet 
for their inevitable rematch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dofvuh3yDtrM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dofvuh3yDtrM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dofvuh3yDtrM&media=>
The wild card <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M82dM-9CAMc>

Cuban Pedro Cardenas found himself in a tough spot at the final of the 1982 
North AmericanBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Championships.

Caught against the ropes by opponent Willie DeWitt, Cardenas began swinging 
wildly in the hope of catching his opponent, but his fists find referee Bert 
Lowes instead, instantly knocking him out.

Accidents happen, so a new referee was found and the fight went on. Cardenas 
soon found himself in the same position, desperate and against the ropes and 
manages to hit the second referee as well.

Luckily, DeWitt finishes Cardenas soon after, to the great relief of any other 
potential referees and the judges, who could well have been on Cardenas radar 
too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM82dM-9CAMc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM82dM-9CAMc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM82dM-9CAMc&media=>
• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://www.queensberry-rules.com/>
• Follow The Queensberry Rules <https://twitter.com/tqbr> and Cathal McGuigan 
<https://twitter.com/cathalmcguigan> n Twitter
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 