



TENNIS TASK ...




Having taken her third WTA title at the Monterrey Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/heather-watson-kirsten-flipkens-third-wta-tour-singles-title>
 and reached the fourth round of the Miami Open, Heather Watson is confident of 
ensuring her place at the Rio Olympics, a task she will continue, a strain to 
her left quad-permitting at the Katowice Open on Monday (Eurosport 2). Now 
British No2, behind Johanna Konta, Watson expects to be in the mid-fifties in 
the world rankings when the next table is published, with the cut off for the 
games around the No60 mark. She picked up 142 ranking points in Miami and 
several more good results will see her safely to Rio. She will be joined in 
Katowice by British No3 Naomi Broady, who has also shown good form, entering 
the top 100 this year







TROPHY FINAL ...




Added burst of momentum or unnecessary distraction? Well, one of each for 
Oxford and Barnsley after Sunday’s Johnstone’s Paint Trophy final (Sky Sports 
3, 2.30pm). Oxford are looking for promotion and second in League Two, while
Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> are fighting for a 
play-off place in League One. A result here might be just the fillip they need. 
Win or lose it’s still a trip to Wembley, where both sides have only played 
twice before. The Tykes most famously when they won the FA Cup in 1912 and 
Oxford for their League Cup triumph in 1986. It will be a farewell too as, 
after 10 years, Johnstone’s Paint are ending their sponsorship, with the 
football league yet to announce a replacement.




The gifs that keep on giving: Cristiano Ronaldo, Peter Sagan and Steph Curry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/gifs-giving-steph-curry-peter-sagan-boat-race>



EURO 2017 QUALIFIER ...




Following the highs of reaching the World Cup semi-final in Canada last year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/womens-world-cup-heartbreaking-own-goal-kills-englands-dreams>
 England’s women have had to settle down to the sobering business of qualifying 
for the 2017 European Championships in Holland. Their campaign began well with 
two wins butthe 8-0 victory over Estonia in September  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/21/england-women-estonia-euro-2017>
was followed by onlysqueezing past Bosnia and Herzegovina 1-0. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/england-bosnia-herzegovina-women-euro-2017-qualifier-match-report>
 A disappointing run, failing to win against Germany, USA and France, in last 
month’s SheBelieves Cup will have to be put firmly behind them as they face 
their toughest opponents in Group seven, Belgium, in Rotherham on Friday (BBC2, 
7.30pm). Striker Ellen White, who has 55 caps, returns to the squad after being 
left out of the SheBelieves Cup and Mark Sampson’s side will go on to face 
Bosnia again in Zenica four days later.







TITLE FIGHT ...




Britain’s super heavyweight gold medallist from London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/anthony-joshua-wins-gold-boxing>
, Anthony Joshua, fights for his first world titleagainst the USA’s Charles 
Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/charles-martin-anthony-joshua-ibf-heavyweight-title>
 on Saturday (Sky Sports Box Office, from 6pm). Joshua is unbeaten in 15 bouts, 
all of which he has won by a knockout and is favourite to win but faces stiff 
competition for the IBF heavyweight title at the O2 arena in Martin, who is 
also undefeated with 21 KOs from 24 fights. Martin, who took the belt in 
January after Tyson Fury refused a mandatory challenge, believes the fight will 
be decided by a knockout and is bullish about his chances. “You’re in front of 
me now and I’m going to step right over you,” he said. “I walk this earth like 
a God. That’s who I am. I’m world champion now and she’s staying right there 
with me.”







T20 CRICKET ...




With one of the best – in terms of cricket, pacing and genuine ebb and flow of 
games – World Twenty20 tournaments coming to a close on Sunday, anyone fearful 
of missing the unorthodox thrills, the costly spills and the uninhibited 
biffing, can rest easy with the return of the Indian Premier League on 
Saturday. The competition opens with last year’s winners the Mumbai Indians 
taking on the newly-formed Rising Pune Supergiants (Sky Sports 3, 3pm). 
England’s Jos Buttler ,who in recent weeks once again proved his worth in 
limited overs cricket,will be playing for Mumbai, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/england-jos-buttler-ipl-indian-premier-league-auction>
 while Pune have signed Kevin Pietersen.
 