
1) England v Australia at Headingley, 1975

Some 45 years after football but 12 years before rugby union, the cricketing 
visionaries hit upon the idea of a World Cup. Naturally, it – and its second 
and third iterations – needed to be held in England, so in the summer of 1975, 
the various nations arrived and West Indies won.

England made it as far as the semi-finals, where they were beaten by Australia 
– who hung around for an impromptu four-Test Ashes series. Just a few months 
earlier, they had brutalised a Geoff Boycottless England to the tune of 4-1, 
with Dennis Lillee and Jeff Thomson at their petrifying peaks and supplementary 
needle supplied by Ian Chappell and Rodney Marsh.

It came as no great surprise when England were humped again in the first Test 
at Edgbaston, so for Lord’s they handed a debut to the 33-year-old David 
Steele. And, incredibly, it worked <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDMrI_bDSJM>
. His 50 stabilised England after a dodgy start, and they went on to have the 
better of a drawmore famous for the artistry of Michael Angelow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/lords-streaker-michael-angelow-ashes-1975>
, whose streak added a new wrinkle to the phrase“middle stump” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FVro7oZP-vI>. 

For the third Test the teams moved to Headingley, where England began well 
before collapsing to a below-par but competitive 288 all out. Australia found 
batting far harder, particularly against the debuting Philippe Edmonds. He 
opened with six maidens, and six overs later had 5 for 17, removing Ian 
Chappell and Ross Edwards in successive balls and finishing on 5for 28, the 
tourists dismissed for 135. And while they were down England booted them hard, 
Steele adding 92 to his first innings 73, before a classic lower-order collapse 
left Australia needing a mere 445 to win.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPl1uZKY990&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPl1uZKY990>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPl1uZKY990&media=>
 No one had ever made more to win a Test match – no one has even now – and 
noting the presence of Jon Snow and Derek Underwood in the England attack, the 
bookies had an Australia win at 9-1. Typically, Ian Chappell was entirely 
unfazed, whacking 11 fours and one huge six before he was confounded by a 
challenging lbw decision.

Returning to the dressing room, Chappell hurled soap and profanities before 
taking a long shower, during which a premonition came to him: Doug Walters 
would score a century. So he ventured on to the balcony in his towel and told 
Walters that he was in next; Walters reminded him that Ross Edwards was. “Doug, 
go and put the fucking pads on,” came back the retort. “I’m going to bat you 
next. You go in next and get a hit against the old ball. You get a good start — 
I’ve seen you get hundreds on much worse pitches than this one. It’s a fucking 
good pitch.”

So when Greg Chappell went shortly afterwards, Walters joined Rick McCosker at 
the crease, and by the end of a thrilling day four, Australia were 220 for 3, 
with McCosker only five runs shy of a maiden Test century. The odds on them 
winning had halved, and the cricketing community was primed for something 
unique. That was precisely what they got.

In 1974 George Davis, a minicab driver, was sentenced to a 20-stretch for his 
part in a payroll robbery at the London Electricity Board offices, during which 
a policeman was shot. Those close to him argued that he had been “mistakenly 
identified” by two police officers, plotting a spectacular campaign to that 
end. His brothers-in-law spent seven hours on top of St Paul’s Cathedral, one 
of his friends drove into the gates of Buckingham Palace, Roger Daltrey wore a 
Free George Davis t-shirt and Sham 69 recorded “George Davis Is Innocent 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKpA78cXHZc>”. 

Even now, that paragraph reads like a bizarre non-sequitur, but it is not. 
While the players slept, a band of Davis’s supporters daubed various slogans on 
Headingley’s outside walls – “FREE GEORGE DAVIS”, “GEORGE DAVIS IS INNOCENT” 
and “SORRY HAD TO DONE” [sic]. They also broke into the ground, dug holes in 
the pitch and poured oil over the Rugby Ground end of the square, just on a 
good length.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff233a4b2049f85fae8dfc92d1a0965a4e6faf1a7%2F1_0_5781_3469%2F5781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff233a4b2049f85fae8dfc92d1a0965a4e6faf1a7%2F1_0_5781_3469%2F5781.jpg>
 Graffiti on the walls at Headingley. Photograph: Patrick 
Eagar/Popperfoto/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Early the following morning, George Cawthray, the head groundsman, arrived on 
the scene 
<http://www.cricketcountry.com/articles/ashes-1975-vandals-force-the-abortion-of-a-thriller-at-headingley-30072>
. “When I first saw the damage it did not sink in,” he said. “I was amazed. I 
thought I should be able to repair the holes but it was the oil that did the 
damage.”

The captains were summoned from their hotels – Ian Chappell, who had not yet 
showered, arrived in the middle wearing jumper and slip-on shoes. There, he and 
Tony Greig were informed by the umpires, David Constant and Arthur Fagg, that 
because the pitch had changed in nature, the game could be called off according 
to the laws of the game – but there was also scope for an agreement to 
continue. The prospect of Underwood pitching in oil was not one that Chappell 
found appealing, but before he was forced to respond, Greig gallantly stepped 
in. “Well, I agree with you, the pitch is not fit for play and I think we’ll 
have to call the game off,” he said. “Thanks very much for that mate, I 
appreciate that,” Chappell replied.

So the game was abandoned as a draw, and in the event, the rain which fell 
from 4pm would probably have effected the same outcome. There was talk of 
squeezing in another match, but the Australian players, all in full-time 
employment, needed to get back to work. Which meant that, with a 1-0 lead and 
only one Test remaining, Australia had retained the Ashes.

The Joy of Six: extreme sporting conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/25/joy-of-six-extreme-sporting-conditions>
That evening, Colin Dean, one of Davis’s brothers-in-law, was interviewed on 
telly. “We can get the Ashes back anytime,” he noted. “What have we done? Dug a 
little bit of ground up. Is it sacred?”

He was one of four people eventually prosecuted for the damage – he, and two 
others, received suspended sentences, while Peter Chappell was jailed for 18 
months. Later that summer a man drove his car across the square at Silverdale
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club in Staffordshire, 
protesting against balls being hit into his garden.

As for Davis, he incurred the wrath of cricket-loving fellow inmates, before 
his conviction was upheld by the Court of Appeal in December 1975. But then in 
May 1976, Roy Jenkins, the Home Secretary, reviewed the case, invoking the 
Royal Prerogative of Mercy to recommend Davis’s release; though he was not 
declared to be innocent, his conviction was deemed “unsafe”.

Two years later, he was inside again, pleading guilty after being caught 
robbing a bank, and in 1987 he was jailed again for attempting to steal 
mailbags. But in 2011, his initial conviction was finally quashed – he 
considered this a victory, despite the Court of Appeal feeling unable to 
positively exonerate him.DH

2) Flamengo v Atlético Mineiro at Serra Dourada Stadium, 1981

Because the Brazilian rivals Flamengo and Atlético Mineiro finished level on 
points in theCopa Libertadores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-libertadores> group stage. Having 
played out a pair of 2-2 draws, they had to meet for a playoff at a neutral 
venue. Goiânia at least satisfied that condition – but just look at the state 
of the markings on the pitch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfE7ySCKdnMA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfE7ySCKdnMA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfE7ySCKdnMA&media=>
There was already plenty of bad blood between the teams going into the game 
but the psychedelic motif seemed to mess with some players’ heads even more, 
especially those of Mineiro: they had five men sent off within 35 minutes, 
leading to the abandonment of the match and the club’s expulsion from the 
tournament. Flamengo, featuring Zico, Junior and Leandro went on to be 
champions, a victory that qualified them for the Intercontinental Cup final, 
where they administered a memorable thrashing to Liverpool, who were dazzled by 
their opponents’ skill and movement rather than any of the groundsman’s 
stylings.PD

3) Scotland v Australia at Murrayfield, 2004

Australia beat their hosts 31-14 at Murrayfield in November 2004 but that did 
not stop the visitors’ coach, Eddie Jones, complaining about Scotland’s 
“underhand tactics”. A shapeshifting pitch was what riled him, but his Scotland 
counterpart and fellow Aussie, Matt Williams, reckoned all was fair dinkum.

Jones was miffed that the pitch was five metres narrower on matchday than it 
had been when Australia trained on it the previous day. He scoffed at a 
cowardly attempt to contain his wingers by literally giving them less room in 
which to manoeuvre. “We had a ground that was 70 metres wide when we trained on 
it yesterday and was 65 metres when we played on it,” protested Jones, whose 
anger was slightly softened by the fact that his side ran in four tries in the 
first 20 minutes. “It is a little bit comical and we’ve taken it in good jest 
but I don’t think we want to see this sort of thing continuing in international 
rugby. Hopefully that is something that can be put to bed.”

Williams was unrepentant and so was his captain, Gordon Bulloch, who noted: 
“There is nothing in the laws to say what the size of a pitch is and nothing in 
the laws to say you have to train on the same size of pitch that you play on. 
The pitch was fine on Saturday, there was green grass on it.” He was right: the 
grass had a lovely parakeet hue, and the laws made no stipulation about pitch 
size. The IRB – now called World Rugby – moved to close the loophole but there 
is still scope for mischief, as is clear from these provisions: “The field of 
play does not exceed 100 metres in length. Each in-goal does not exceed 22 
metres in length. The playing area does not exceed 70 metres in width.”

A maximum size is indicated – but no minimum, with a weak follow-up clause 
stating: “The length and breadth of the playing area are to be as near as 
possible to the dimensions indicated.” Time, perhaps, for someone to bring a 
bit ofNew York Flash v Seattle Reign 
<http://(https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/nwsl-match-tiny-pitch-western-new-york-flash-seattle-reign-carli-lloyd)>
 action to rugby union.PD

4) Chelsea v Charlton at Stamford Bridge, 2003

On 11 January 2003 Chelsea defeated Charlton 4-1 at home in the Premier 
League. Nothing surprising there, you might think – apart from the fact the 
game was played on a pop-up beach at Stamford Bridge. As Will Buckley wrote in 
the following morning’s Observer: “It was an expanse of sand ideal for beach 
cricketbut troublesome and wearisome for serious football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/Observer_Match_Report/0,,-41197,00.html>.”

The Joy of Six: football abandonments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/07/joy-of-six-football-abandonments>
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, as the headline in the 
following morning’s paper glibly pointed out, coasted to victory. Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink put the hosts in front inside three minutes after Chris Powell 
conceded a harsh penalty, and William Gallas made it 2-0 eight minutes later. 
In terms of the scoreline, the damage was done early but it took a little 
longer for players to start hurting. John Terry was the most notable victim, 
injuring his back midway through the first half and the game descended into 
farce when Carlo Cudicini was forced to pick up a back pass that bobbled 
freakishly in front of him.

Hoofing the ball became the most sensible approach and in the aftermath not 
even Claudio Ranieri, then in charge of Chelsea, was best pleased despite the 
three points, comparing the surface to Copacabana and Ipanema.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd546dbf9535db0025c202cf43c0f248951f825e%2F0_74_1106_664%2F1106.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd546dbf9535db0025c202cf43c0f248951f825e%2F0_74_1106_664%2F1106.jpg>
 The sandy Stamford Bridge turf. Photograph: John Stillwell/PA 
Charlton claimed the beach had breached Premier League rules that stipulated 
artificial pitches were not allowed, saying they had, as reported by the 
Guardian,“no chance to prepare on a similar surface or bring appropriate 
footwear” <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/jan/16/newsstory.sport2>, 
and requested for the match to be replayed.


An investigation was opened and Chelsea were given a financial sanction but 
the points remained theirs and they qualified for the Champions League, three 
points clear of Liverpool. Charlton finished in the no-man’s land of 12th. A 
new pitch was put down immediately after the game and there was grass for the 
next home fixture. “The holiday is over,” Ranieri said.AS


5) Croatia v Italy at the Poljud Stadium, 2015

So often delightful on the pitch but too regularly ugly off it – the dark side 
of Croatian football was apparent again during this summer’s European 
Championship when, in the latter stages of the group game against Czech 
Republic, a portion of supportersbegan throwing flares and smoke canisters on 
the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/why-croatia-fans-disrupt-euro-2016-match-czech-republic>
 in a protest against the country’s football federation. The resentment and 
nastiness had been bubbling from some time before that, most notably 12 months 
previously, whena swastika was visible on the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/jun/13/croatian-football-nazi-swastika-pitch-euro-video>
 during their qualifier against Italy in Split.


“As far as we have learned, the symbol was imprinted into the pitch between 24 
and 48 hours before the match so that it could be visible during the game,” 
said Tomislav Pacak, a spokesperson for the Croatian FA. “We apologise to all 
fans watching the game on television, to both teams and to our guests from 
Italy for the Nazi symbol.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fcroatian-football-nazi-swastika-pitch-euro-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F13%2F1434193357242%2FKP_274026_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatian%20football%20association%20apologises%20for%20swastika%20on%20pitch%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fcroatian-football-nazi-swastika-pitch-euro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatian%20football%20association%20apologises%20for%20swastika%20on%20pitch%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fcroatian-football-nazi-swastika-pitch-euro-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F13%2F1434193357242%2FKP_274026_crop_640x480.jpg>
Croatian football association apologises for swastika on pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/jun/13/croatian-football-nazi-swastika-pitch-euro-video>
It soon became apparent that the symbol was created by a chemical agent, only 
visible under lights, that had been sprayed on the surface by the member of an 
ultra-rightwing organisation. Furthermore, the fixture was already being played 
behind closed doors due to previous sanctions for racist chanting against 
Norway earlier in the campaign, and there had been trouble in the reverse 
fixture at San Siro too.

As explained by Alex Holiga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/17/modric-rakitic-mandzukic-swastika-croatian-football-federation>
, “a small group of people took complete control of Croatian football and 
concentrated all power in the hands of the seven-man urgency committee, which 
can decide on anything it finds urgent without the need of approval from the 
HNS’s executive committee. It is controlled by Zdravko Mamic, the Dinamo Zagreb 
executive who has strong ties in politics, the judicial system, the police and 
the media.”

That also makes the fact the match was played in Split increasingly relevant. 
Notably it was only the second international played in the city for 18 years, 
where there has long been an us versus them mentality, but there were 
accusations the federation, controlled by Davor Suker, had been aware the match 
would be played behind closed doors so decided to play it in Split, 
antagonising the hosts even more.

Nonetheless, it seems remarkable that a troublemaker could still get in to 
draw the swastika on the pitch considering the security precautions implemented 
near the stadium. Police had blocked off routes to the ground days in advance, 
there were 80 cameras positioned around the area and an anti-drone unit was 
dispatched to ensure there would be norepeat of Serbia v Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/14/serbia-albania-euro-2016-flag-halted>
. Yet someone found a way in and was left undetected while applying the 
chemicals.

Uefa deducted the team, themselves innocent, one point and the federation was 
fined but evidently the supporters have not taken any heed, and their 
relationship with those in power remains fractious.AS

6) West Indies v England at Sabina Park, 1998

“Everything was fine. Beautiful. So I left the match after it had started and 
went to my house for a cup of tea. And when I came back I couldn’t hear 
anything. So I knew something had happened.” That was Charlie Joseph,talking to 
the Guardian’s Paul Weaver in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/31/cricket-england-west-indies-2009-englandcricketteam>
. What had happened was that shortly after Joseph, the groundsman at Jamaica’s 
Sabina Park, had ambled off for his cuppa, a Test match was abandoned for the 
first time in cricket’s 122-year history because the pitch that Joseph was in 
charge of was deemed too dangerous.

After 10 overs and one ball, England were 17-3 and players were being battered 
by Curtley Ambrose and Courtney Walsh because, on top of those fearsome 
bowlers’ laudable hostility, the pitch had introduced a vicious degree of 
randomness. “On a new clay surface that bore an uncanny resemblance to a strip 
of corrugated iron, the ball flew, from a length, towards the throat, or 
scuttled along the ground,” wrote Weaver. England’s captain, Michael Atherton, 
took the players off and the umpires endorsed his decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c7e3d9fae0935983f05f300faa625490a41a88%2F0_77_2011_1207%2F2011.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20sporting%20pitch%20fiascos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fthe-joy-of-six-sporting-pitch-fiascos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c7e3d9fae0935983f05f300faa625490a41a88%2F0_77_2011_1207%2F2011.jpg>
 Alec Stewart has a bruised arm treated before play was abandoned. Photograph: 
Laurence Griffiths/Getty 
Joseph was vilified almost to the point of despair, telling Weaver: “They were 
all blaming me. I couldn’t walk on the road because people wanted to beat me 
up. A lot of money had been lost, millions went down the drain. Was it only 
three overs? My name was on the wireless. I wanted to go away and leave the 
country. I didn’t eat, hardly anything for three weeks. I thought about 
suicide, honestly I did. I saw a policeman with his back to me and I thought I 
would grab his gun and shoot myself. But I have children. We get over that now. 
Move to better times.”PD
 