
1) Leeds beat Liverpool in the 1992 Charity Shield

1992 was such a good year for Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>, their first title-winning 
season for 18 years. They had succeeded Arsenal as Division One champions and 
had held off the challenge of Manchester United.

It was even better when you consider Leeds’ recent history. They had been 
relegated to Division Two in 1982, and stayed there until 1990, when they were 
promoted as champions, by which time Howard Wilkinson had been in charge for 
two seasons. Two years later, they had the third league title in their history. 
To some extent, it smacked of Nottingham Forest’s trajectory in the late 1970s. 
Forest, under Clough, were promoted to Division One in 1977, won the league the 
following year and then won consecutive European Cups.

In 1992, Leeds, who had won the league by four points from Alex Ferguson’s 
men, were entitled to think of European glory too. At least that’s what they 
would have thought after the Charity Shield win, inspired by Eric Cantona’s 
hat-trick.

Wilkinson had signed the France international in February 1992 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/24/eric-cantona-career-in-video>
 and three months later they had the league title in their hands. Alex 
Ferguson’s reaction on ITV, after United’s 2-0 defeat to Liverpool confirmed 
Leeds were champions, was a peach: “Leeds haven’t won the league, United have 
lost it”.

Then the Charity Shield rolled around. Liverpool, who had won the FA Cup 
against Sunderland, were beaten 4-3, in a humdinger of a match. Cantona’s third 
goal made it 4-2 three minutes from the end. Gordon Strachan’s own goal two 
minutes later didn’t spoil Leeds’ seemingly never-ending party.

But, although no one knew it, Cantona was closer to the exit than the entrance 
at Elland Road. Yet a hat-trick against Tottenham in a 5-0 thumping, as the 
first Premier League season was getting under way, seemed to show all was happy.
Mais non.

Leeds were in the European Cup and played Stuttgart home and away in the first 
round. Out-thought in the first leg, they were embarrassed 3-0. At Elland Road, 
they won 4-1 and were out on away goals, only for Uefa to order a third game on 
neutral ground, because Stuttgart hadfielded an ineligible player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/17/the-joy-of-six-football-fiascos>
. Thanks to Carl Shutt’s goal at Camp Nou, Leeds progressed to play Rangers in 
the second round, but they lost 4-2 on aggregate, and were out of Europe by 
early November.

Cantona left soon after the Rangers defeat, joining Manchester United for 
£1.2m, one of the great deals in Manchester United’s, if not Leeds’, history.

Leeds were in a dreadful funk from which they did not recover. They did not 
win one away league game that season, and finished 17th, two points off the 
relegation zone. Victory in the Charity Shield was a poisoned chalice. They 
have won no trophies since.CL

2) Andy Cole takes a summer friendly seriously

It is perhaps an exaggeration to say that Simon Colosimo had the world at his 
feet, but his career would surely have been better if, in July 1999, he hadnot 
had Andy Cole at his knee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/1999/jul/19/thefiver.sport>. The future 
had looked so bright for a player who, at the age of 20, was being acclaimed as 
a future Australian great. He had excelled in the National Soccer League with 
Carlton, the team set up in 1997 by the Aussie Rules side of the same name in a 
bid to broaden their sporting prowess, and Bayern Munich and Panathinaikos were 
among the swanky suitors said to be eyeing him up.

Having made his senior Socceroos debut at the age of 19, the defender was 
given a chance to add to his flourishing reputation when he was called up for a 
prestigious friendly in Sydney between an Australia XI and Manchester United, 
who had just won the Treble.

Although the MCG was full and ticket prices extortionate, it was, 
unsurprisingly, not a particularly intense encounter, particularly not as far 
as the visitors were concerned, with slightly miffed Australian commentators 
claiming sniffily that Cole did not even bother warming up before kick-off.

Soon those commentators were decrying Cole’s over-zealous engagement: because 
in the second half, while ostensibly attempting to dispossess Colosimo, the 
striker sent his foot studs-first into the youngster’s knee. Amid fury and 
incredulity over such a challenge in an exhibition game, Colosimo was carried 
off the pitch with his hands covering his tear-stained face and his knee in 
need of total reconstruction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437061726163%2F2aac2c47-cfcb-4ef7-94cb-a9c9c90262dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437061726163%2F2aac2c47-cfcb-4ef7-94cb-a9c9c90262dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Simon Colosimo is taken off in extreme pain after being tackled by Andy Cole 
during the friendly against Manchester United. Photograph: Robert 
Cianflone/Getty Images 
Carlton aired the possibility of legal action, though none was ever taken. 
Cole apparently did not even believe there was any need for a word of 
commiseration, some human gesture of support. “I have not spoken to Colosimo 
and why should I, because I went for the ball,” he said after the game. “I 
don’t feel I have done any wrong and I haven’t a malicious bone in my body.”

Colosimo, and most Australians, had a different view. “If he kicked me on the 
shin or the ankle, well that’s part of the game, but so high up on my knee was 
malicious. If it had been me, I would have gone to see him and apologised,” 
said Colosimo, who did not so much as kick a ball for another six months. It 
would be a year before he was able to resume his career. “When our players 
replayed the moment on the big screen afterwards let’s just say they wanted to 
knock Cole’s block off.”

Although he finished with 26 caps for his country and played for a dozen clubs 
– even spending a potentially intriguing but ultimately brief and fruitless 
spell at Manchester City in 2001-02 – Colosimo never scaled the heights for 
which he had once been tipped. Cole, meanwhile, returned from United’s tour and 
went on to become his team’s joint-highest Premier League scorer as he picked 
up his fourth Premier League winner’s medal in his fifth season at Old Trafford.
PD

3) Liverpool hammer Parma

Liverpool fans will be watching Brendan Rodgers’ new-fangled team with much 
interest this summer, but few will get carried away if things go well in 
pre-season. After all, last summer they thrashed Borussia Dortmund 4-0 and that 
was not a sign of things to come – well, not for Liverpool anyway. Having said 
that, promising pre-season performances might make some fans hark back to the 
summer of 2000 and a rollicking 5-0 win over Parma.

The Italians, who had finished fifth in Serie A the previous season, had just 
sold Hernan Crespo and Ariel Ortega but they still boasted sterling 
credentials: but a defence featuring Lilian Thuram and Fabio Cannavaro was torn 
apart by a Liverpool side playing with a verve and edge not previously seen 
under Gérard Houllier.

Dietmar Hamman scored a stonking free-kick, Nicky Barmby crowned a wonderful 
personal display with a nifty goal, the new signing Gary McAllister underlined 
the important influence that he would become by chipping in with a goal, too, 
and Michael Owen hit a pair ahead of a Premier League campaign in which he 
would be the team’s most prolific scorer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060495215%2F9b9253c9-42b6-4d42-954d-6d38502f1e79-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060495215%2F9b9253c9-42b6-4d42-954d-6d38502f1e79-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Liverpool won the Uefa Cup final in 2001 against Alaves, almost a year after 
an excellent pre-season. Photograph: John Sibley/Action Images 
Under the captaincy of Sami Hyypia – perhaps the finest signing of the 
Houllier era – and with a young Steven Gerrard emerging as a dynamic force, 
Liverpool went on to enjoy a season of enthralling performances, preposterous 
matches and the first trophies of Houllier’s reign as Liverpool edged out 
Birmingham City in the League Cup final, somehow came out the right side of an 
FA Cup final battering by Arsenal and thenbeat Alaves in a barmy Uefa Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/may/16/minutebyminute.sport>. The 
wait for the Premier League title was prolonged – Liverpool only finished third 
– but the promise of the previous summer was certainly fulfilled during a 
season of rare thrills.PD

4) Dixie Dean comes off his bike

As omens go, a motorcycling accident that leaves the victim with a fractured 
skull and jaw seems definitively inauspicious. So when such a calamity befell 
Dixie Dean, age 19, while he was on holiday with his girlfriend in Wales in the 
summer of 1926, Everton fans were anything but optimistic about the chances of 
the striker repeating the heroics of his first season with the club, in which 
he plundered 32 goals. Especially as doctors suggested his head injuries were 
so severe that he might never be able to play again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060636163%2F8559b161-13d4-49b6-9d88-97a486c3557f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060636163%2F8559b161-13d4-49b6-9d88-97a486c3557f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dixie Dean recovered from head injuries in a motorcycle crash and went on to 
set goalscoring records for Everton. Photograph: Colorsport/Rex 
Gloom abounded at Goodison Park. That deepened as Everton’s first eight league 
matches of the new season brought seven defeats and a draw, a sorry downswing 
for a club that had believed it was on the up after finishing 11th the season 
before. Things turned for the better when September’s Merseyside derby brought 
Everton’s first win of the season. And in October, just 15 weeks after his 
potentially career-ending crash, Dean made his comeback in a match at Leeds – 
and scored with his head.

He played 26 more games that season, claiming another 20 goals as Everton 
scraped to a 20th-place finish and survival. Middlesbrough’s George Camsell, 
meanwhile, set a new, seemingly unbeatable record, by ending the season with 59 
goals. Dean went and beat that the following season, scoring a 
still-unsurpassed 60, with the last goal coming on the final day of season when 
he rose to meet an Alec Troup corner against Arsenal and powered the ball into 
the net with his head. Everton were champions, Dean was immortal.PD

5) Keith Burkinshaw gets in touch with Bill Nicholson

Young Arsenal fans who do not already know about Terry Neill need to be told 
what he did for the club. And they should also be told what he did between his 
two successful stints at the club (a playing career during which he made 270 
appearances and became the club’s youngest ever captain, and a managerial spell 
during which he led the club to three successive FA Cup finals and the 1980 
European Cup Winners’ Cup final). Because that was when he did something that 
may have endeared him even more to certain Arsenal fans: he took charge of 
Tottenham Hotspur and spread dismay at White Hart Lane.

Neill, who did well as Hull City player-manager after over a decade at 
Highbury, was the surprising choice to replace the legendary Bill Nicholson as 
Tottenham manager in the summer of 1974. Spurs had won two League Cups and a 
Uefa Cup in the previous four years and had just become the first English club 
to contest three major European finals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060897369%2Fc1f32f69-26f2-43ce-ba08-7d1e6a6f7e50-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437060897369%2Fc1f32f69-26f2-43ce-ba08-7d1e6a6f7e50-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Keith Burkinshaw took Tottenham to FA Cup and Uefa Cup success in the early 
1980s. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
Under Neill they made an awful start to the season – losing even to Carlisle 
United, who were playing in the top flight for the first time – and the 
campaign barely improved, with the club avoiding relegation by a single point. 
Things got better in Neill’s next season but he then caused fresh consternation 
by resigning to defect back to Arsenal.

But here’s the other thing, young Gooners: Neill had left a living legacy at 
White Hart Lane in the form of Keith Burkinshaw, whom he had hired as 
first-team coach (after Burkinshaw, in a move that might make even Mike Ashley 
blush, was laid off by Newcastle to cut costs). Burkinshaw was appointed Spurs 
manager after Neill and one of his first acts, in the summer before the 1976-77 
season, was to reach out again to Nicholson. “I think we needed his experience 
and wisdom,” said Burkinshaw who came from the same South Yorkshire village as 
Nicholson. “So I rang him up and he invited me around to his house. We got on 
very well and he was only too pleased to come back to the club as a consultant.”

Tottenham were back on the path to glory. But not immediately. Because 
Burkinshaw’s first season ended with a Spurs side featuring players such as 
Glenn Hoddle, Alfie Conn and Pat Jennings sprawled at the bottom of the league. 
However, the club kept faith with Burkinshaw, who, sure enough, did bring the 
glory days back to White Hart Lane. He went on to become the second most 
successful manager in the club’s history, with a trophy haul surpassed only by 
that of Nicholson.PD

6) Mido: the Barnsley months
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437057173216%2Faebde476-dde3-4398-a3f6-530e2e011b27-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20pre-season%20and%20all%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjoy-of-six-pre-season-leeds-andy-cole-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437057173216%2Faebde476-dde3-4398-a3f6-530e2e011b27-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mido, middle, at pre-season training with Barnsley in 2012. Photograph: Ed 
Sykes/Action Images 
Mido: four letters to throw fear into the hearts of many a football fan, and 
manager. Partly because he played for so many clubs and managers. Just the fact 
that hestarted his career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/28/tottenham-mido-zamalek-egypt>
 with Zamalek, one of Cairo’s two big clubs, and left a year later, perhaps 
should have told prospective managers a thing or two. He was not some seasoned 
professional when he left Egypt to play for Gent – he was 17. And in a hurry.

He went through clubs like nobody’s business. From Belgium he moved around 
like a student on an Interrail pass. The Netherlands, France, Spain and Italy, 
before he turned up at Tottenham in 2005. The miracle was he stayed at White 
Hart Lane for the best part of two seasons. His big-boned physique made him a 
tricky proposition for many a defender but his temperament was just as tricky 
an obstacle to his career. Playing the Africa Cup of Nations on home soil in 
early 2006, his country reached the final, except Mido wasn’t there,having 
fallen out with his manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/feb/08/africannationscup2006.africannationscup2>
, Hassan Shehata, during the semi-final and subsequently being banned by his FA 
for six months.

But English clubs were still attracted to the man with one moniker. He played 
for Wigan, Middlesbrough and West Ham but by 2010, the gig was all but up, as 
he returned to Zamalek, on loan from Boro. But then a return to form. Or was 
it? The 2011-12 season saw him average two goals every three games with Zamalek 
– the thing was he played three games all year.

And yet. He refused to give up and 13 years after that transfer to Gent, he 
was on the moveagain, to Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/21/mido-to-sign-for-barnsley>, 
after his latest stand-off with Zamalek. He had fallen out with Shehata, his 
manager once more. Shehata stayed, Mido left.

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> had just avoided 
relegation from the Championship in May 2012 and were looking to kick on. Mido 
seemed in the mood to do likewise. “I just want to work hard, train hard and 
score goals for this club. I’ve moved on from the mistakes I’ve made in my past 
and I’m a different person to who I was,” he said.

It was not to be. See the picture in this article if you don’t believe me. He 
was bigger than he should have been, if he was to help out the manager, Keith 
Hill. There will be no statues at Oakwell in Mido’s name, no stands named after 
him. He left the club in January 2013, with 30 minutes as a substitute under 
his expanding waistbelt, and he retired that summer.CL
 