
FOOTBALL GONG

Football’s most prestigious prize for individual achievement, the Ballon d’Or, 
has been shared between Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messisince Kaká’s win in 
2007 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/dec/17/newsstory.acmilan> and 
the idea of anyone else winning seems farfetched even by 2016’s high standards. 
The Portuguese is overwhelming favourite after a season that culminated in
European triumph for club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
andcountry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
.Barcelona won La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/barcelona-pip-real-madrid-la-liga-title-luis-suarez-hat-trick>
 but Messi’s missed penalty in the Copa América final and failure to deliver 
Argentina’s first trophy in 20 years will likely rule him out of a fifth award. 
Antoine Griezmann and Luis Suárez are outside bets while Jamie Vardy is the 
only Englishman nominated. (The last English winner was Michael Owen in 2001.) 
As of this year, the Ballon d’Or is no longer a Fifa-sanctioned gong since 
football’s world body has ended its six‑year bond with the event, which has 
been run byFrance Football since 1956. Those Zurich-based blazers will now 
relaunch their world player of the year prize under a new name, details of 
which remain sketchy. Perhaps they will broaden it out to 48 players.

ARROWS JAMBOREE

Stand up, if you love the darts. The PDC World Championship has become a 
staple of the Christmas sporting calendar and kicks off again on Thursday (Sky 
Sports 3, 7pm) as Gary Anderson looks to claim a third successive title. World 
No1 Michael van Gerwen and 14-times winner Phil “The Power” Taylor are among 
the other favourites for the game’s flagship tournament. The 
two-and-a-half-week event has players competing for a share of more than £1.5m 
in prize money at Alexandra Palace with the final on 2 January.

MIDWEEK PROGRAMME

It’s beginning to look a lot like Christmas – yes, there’s a slew of Premier 
League matches coming down the track. Arsenal’s visit to Goodison Park 
(Tuesday, BT Sport 1, 7.45pm) is the most eye-catching fixture in a full round 
of midweek games. Wednesday’s televised match is Crystal Palace welcoming 
Manchester United (BT Sport 1, 7.45pm). Elsewhere, Middlesbrough take on 
Liverpool and Burnley travel to West Ham.

SCOTS POT BLACK 

Snooker’s inaugural Home Nations series gave Liang Wenbo his first world 
ranking title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/liang-wenbo-wins-first-ranking-title-beating-judd-trump-english-open-snooker>
 at the English Open in Manchester whileMark King won in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/mark-king-first-professional-ranking-title>
 after beating Barry Hawkins in a thrilling final‑frame decider. The 
penultimate tournament, theScottish Open in Glasgow, plays host to some of the 
biggest names in the sport including Ronnie O’Sullivan, who will expect to make 
at least the semi‑finals that begin on Saturday (Eurosport 1, 12.45pm). John 
Higgins, Stephen Maguire and Anthony McGill will be hoping that local support 
can help them make an impression on home turf.

LOOK OUT FOR … THE CLUB WORLD CUP

That still exists? It does. It’s international football’s Checkatrade Trophy – 
derided, confused, over-sold and hard to ignore.

What’s on offer this year, then? The usual seven-club format of mis-matched 
global champions. Last year Barcelona sauntered to 3-0 wins over Guangzhou 
Evergrande and River Plate. This year it’s Real Madrid’s turn to win it. The 
stats say everything: European teams haven’t conceded a goal between them since 
Chelsea lost 1-0 to Corinthians in 2012 – the only time since 2006 that a 
non-European club has won it.

Real can’t be looking forward to it? They’re being diplomatically upbeat. They 
start at the semi-final stage on Thursday in Japan against either Mexico’s Club 
America or South Korea’s Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors, with the final next Sunday. 
Gareth Bale is out injured, but Cristiano Ronaldo (pictured) is there, and he’s 
saying all the right things. “It’s been a perfect year. Now I want to win this 
as well. I just like to win trophies.”

So who else is in it this year? Oceania’s Auckland City were there, but 
they’re out already after losing their first-round game to local favourites 
Kashima Antlers. The Antlers face South Africa’s Mamelodi Sundowns next - but 
Real’s only serious competition comes from Atlético Nacional. The Colombian 
side arrive in Japan with plenty of popular support too, due to their reaction 
to last month’s air disaster. They successfully lobbied the South American 
federation Conmebol for the Copa Sudamericana title to be awarded to 
Chapecoense – the team they would have faced in the final.

And they stand a chance? They seem sure to meet Real in the final, so yes, it 
could happen. But otherwise, don’t expect any shocks. After Auckland’s exit, 
the minnows are the Sundowns – 80-1 to win a six-team competition.

All in all, then, this tournament just isn’t working. So will Fifa be ditching 
it soon?Come on now, you know that’s not how Fifa works. President Gianni 
Infantino is eyeing a souped-up 32-team version instead. “We need to make the
Club World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldclubchampionship> 
more interesting,” he says. And by “interesting”, he means: “More clubs will 
attract more sponsors and TV companies from around the world.”

And this is the tournament Manchester United snubbed the FA Cup for in 2000? 
It is. A defining low moment for modern football. United, under pressure to 
boost England’s bid to host the 2006 World Cup, played in Fifa’s inaugural 
showpiece instead of defending their trophy. They failed to get out of their 
group.
 