
Take a look at the two shapes in the image above. Imagine they were real-world 
objects that you’d found, and you had to give them a name – one has to be 
called ‘bouba’, and the other has to be called ‘kiki’. Which name would you 
assign to which object?

It probably makes intuitive sense to assume that the way that we map sounds 
onto objects, with the exception ofonomatopoeias 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onomatopoeia>, is arbitrary. Take the word 
‘ball’ for example - at face value, there’s nothing obvious that links the 
actual spherical object with the name that we’ve assigned to it. But is this 
mapping truly, completely random?

In 2001, UCSD scholars VS Ramachandran and Edward Hubbard 
<http://cbc.ucsd.edu/pdf/Synaesthesia%20-%20JCS.pdf> asked a group of 
participants a similar question to the one posed above, in which they had to 
guess which of the two figures was a Martian ‘bouba’, and which was a ‘kiki’. 
95% of those participants picked the left object for kiki, and the right object 
for bouba, even though these were completely novel words being matched with 
drawings that they had never seen before.

What’s going on?

The bouba/kiki effect actually finds its origins in much earlier work, by 
German psychologist Wolfgang Köhler in 1929. The experimental setup was 
essentially the same. Köhler showed people shapes similar to the ones above, 
and asked them which was a ‘takete’ and which was a ‘malumba’. By now you can 
guess what the majority of participants said.

Ambiguous figure illusions: do they offer a window on the mind?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2016/oct/03/ambiguous-figure-illusions-do-they-offer-a-window-on-the-mind>
Why this phenomenon occurs isn’t entirely clear, but Ramachandran and Hubbard 
have speculated that it may be due to the nature of the connections that exist 
between sensory and motor areas of the brain. For example, the visual shape of 
the object - either round or spiky - is linked to the shape that our lips make 
when we say that corresponding word - either open and rounded, or narrow and 
wide. In turn, this is linked to the way that our tongue moves in order to 
generate the word itself; kiki requires you to make a ‘sharp’ movement of the 
tongue on your palate, where as bouba involves a more ‘rounded’ movement. These
similarities <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multisensory_integration> all 
increase the likelihood that bouba will be linked to the rounded object, and 
kiki to the sharper, spikier object. In later work in 2003, Ramachandran and 
Hubbard provided supporting evidence for this theory. In that paper, they found 
that damage to an area of the brain important for language called theangular 
gyrus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_gyrus> resulted in a person being 
much less likely to match the rounded object with the word bouba.

The effect is interesting, because it helps us to shed light on the potential 
evolutionary origins of language. The fact that so many people, andeven young 
children 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00495.x/abstract>, 
tend to consistently assign a sharp word to a spiky object suggests that, at 
least in some situations, the way that we map sounds onto objects isn’t random. 
Instead, there’s some sort of natural constraint or system in place that helps 
us to build those maps. And while having that sort of framework on its own 
might not be fully sufficient for language to have originally developed, it may 
at least have provided a building block for the emergence of verbal 
communication.
 