
It’s all come down to one final penalty kick. If the club captain and terrace 
hero can put the ball past the goalkeeper our heroes achieve their aim; a 
nine-year odyssey reduced to a single moment of condensed tension. A club 
formed by disgruntled fans who had their team taken away from them are on the 
verge of completing the most implausible comeback in football history. One 
tight camera shot follows the blue shirted figure as he runs up.

The player eschews all subtlety and simply leathers the ball as hard as he 
can. The net billows, the player wheels away in triumph and several thousand 
fans go completely bonkers. The watching audience can barely hear the 
commentator yell, “The fairytale is complete.” Fade to black and cue end 
credits.

What a ridiculous cliche of a movie script; what an overwritten overwrought 
Hollywood ending that would be. It’s about as plausible as a group of allied 
prisoners of war drawing a match with the Nazis despite a biased referee and 
then managing to hide an injured Pelé in 1940s Paris by draping him in an 
overcoat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db-gl9-_ReEI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db-gl9-_ReEI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db-gl9-_ReEI&media=>
 AFC Wimbledon v Luton Skrill Premier league penalty shootout 2011 
Except, the first story is actually true 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b-gl9-_ReEI&feature=youtu.be&t=6m31s>. Real 
life threw up the denouement of a sporting story that the makers ofAir Bud: 
World Pup <http://buddies.disney.com/air-bud-world-pup> might have thought a 
bit saccharine. The facts are as follows: nine years after AFC Wimbledon was 
formed by fans who felt abandoned when Wimbledon FC moved 50 miles up the M1 to 
Milton Keynes to become MK Dons, they made it back to the Football League after 
completing their fifth promotion via aplay-off final penalty shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/21/afc-wimbledon-luton-town-play-off-final>
, against similarly wronged-by-the-football-authorities Luton Town. They went 
from open trials on Wimbledon Common to League Two inside a decade. If that’s 
the mundane reality, how sensational does the fiction have to be to beat it?

That’s the challenge for American author John Green, who announced yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/01/fault-in-our-stars-john-green-football-afc-wimbledon-film>
 he has secured the rights to the AFC Wimbledon story. Not only has it proved 
almost impossible to make a film about football where the football action 
itself is plausible, his source material is, frankly, ridiculous. I’m still not 
quite sure that day in Manchester really happened, and I was there.

Fault in Our Stars author John Green to make film about AFC Wimbledon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/01/fault-in-our-stars-john-green-football-afc-wimbledon-film>
I vividly remember a committee meeting many years earlier (they always make 
for great films, don’t they, committee deliberations?) at which people argued 
that the aim of being back in the Football League inside a decade was so 
over-ambitious as to invite ridicule. But an aim it became, overseen by Bill 
Nighy-look-a-like Wimbledon AFC chief executiveErik Samuelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/afc-wimbledon-new-stadium-plough-lane>
.

The club has one other major ambition left to fulfil, and right now, Wimbledon 
fans would probably most appreciate a remake of theArsenal Stadium Mystery 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P2idGkJkPhk>, recast with Boris Johnson 
explaining his recent decision 
<http://www.yourlocalguardian.co.uk/news/local/wimbledonnews/14376437.AFC_Wimbledon__Mayor_of_London_Boris_Johnson__calls_in__Plough_Lane_stadium_application_for_further_consultations/>
 to call in Merton Council’s unanimous approval for a new stadium development 
back on Plough Lane.

Despite the uselessness of most films about football, Green – the best-selling 
American author of young adult fiction and one of the100 Most Influential 
People in the World <http://time.com/70799/john-green-2014-time-100/> according 
to Time magazine – certainly knows more than most about creating stories for a 
wide audience. He says he was first attracted to the club across the pond 
because of its origin story. He has confused his huge (and largely American) 
fanbase with increasingly frequent references to his love for this 
community-owned protest movement turned sporting triumph for some time. It was 
presumably therefore a logical step for him to use the movie studio clout he 
has gained through adaptations ofThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
 andPaper Towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/paper-towns-review-cara-delevingne-is-not-enough>
 to pitch what he describes as “the greatest underdog sports story you’ve never 
heard 
<https://medium.com/@johngreen/the-greatest-sports-story-never-told-c9039e82967e#.eel76jms5>
”.

Now he is a club sponsor and his Nerdfighters 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/a-note-on-nerdfighters> slogan, 
DFTBA, is on the players’ shorts (yes, really). Apparently it stands for Don’t 
Forget to Be Awesome. The question is: can he Depict Football that Brings 
Audience?
 