Who painted a house that looks like it’s flowing with blood?  Vincent van Gogh  
Edvard Munch  Jake Chapman  Edward Hopper In what horror story does an artist 
carve a dream portrait of a squid-headed monster?  The Fall of the House of 
Usher by Edgar Allan Poe  The Horla by Guy de Maupassant  The Call of Cthulhu 
by HP Lovecraft  Lot No 249 by Arthur Conan Doyle Which of these horror films 
is named after an illness that afflicts people overcome by art in Florence?  
The Nudomaniac  Michelangelo’s Hands  The Stendhal Syndrome  Twice-Told Tales 
Whose paintings have influenced horror films the most?  JMW Turner  Mark Rothko 
 Caspar David Friedrich  John Constable Which classic horror film did Douglas 
Gordon slow down to win the 1996 Turner prize?  Psycho  The Exorcist  Carry on 
Screaming  Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde Which of these London museums has a Monk’s 
Parlour decorated with spooky art?  Sir John Soane's Museum  Tate Modern  The 
Wallace Collection  Dulwich Picture Gallery Who painted The Nightmare?  
Francisco Goya  Henry Fuseli  JMW Turner  Honoré Daumier Who put a terrifying 
skeleton in St Peter’s in the Vatican?  Caravaggio  Gian Lorenzo Bernini  
Antonio Canova  Michelangelo Whose late works dwell on the gory, gothic colours 
red, purple and black?  Robert Ryman  Lucian Freud  Jackson Pollock  Mark Rothko
In which horror story does a man paint his wife to death?  The Oval Portrait by 
Edgar Allan Poe  The Picture in the House by HP Lovecraft  Schalken the Painter 
by Sheridan Le Fanu  The Mezzotint by MR James  You got…  You’ve won a monkey’s 
paw. Please collect it today. Please.  You’ve won a monkey’s paw. Please 
collect it today. Please.  You’ve won a monkey’s paw. Please collect it today. 
Please.  Those are not your hands.  Those are not your hands.  Those are not 
your hands.  You're a scream.  You're a scream.  You're a scream.  You're a 
scream.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  