
Oscar hopefuls La La Land, The Birth of a Nation and Snowden are among the 
films to be screened duringthe 60th BFI London film festival 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/news-bfi/announcements/60th-bfi-lff-announces-full-programme>
.

Actors including Nicole Kidman, Amy Adams, Jeremy Renner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeremy-renner> and Lupita Nyong’o will arrive 
next month for premieres of their films, as well as directors Oliver Stone, Tom 
Ford and Ben Wheatley.

And the Oscar might go to: 25 sure bets and underdog films premiering this fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/oscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites>
The festival will open with A United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival-david-oyelowo-amma-asante>
, British director Amma Asante’s film about the real-life love story between 
the King of Bechuanaland (now Botswana) and a London office worker in 1948, 
starring David Oyelowo and Rosamund Pike.

It will close with Ben Wheatley’s Free Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/27/ben-wheatley-swaps-a-field-in-england-for-a-warehouse-in-boston>
, starring Oscar winner Brie Larson in a film about an arms deal that goes 
wrong.

Director Nate Parker will bring The Birth of a Nation, an account of the life 
of Nat Turner, a slavewho led a revolt in Virginia in 1831 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
. Parker plays Turner, as well as serving as director, writer and producer, and 
the film has already generated Oscar buzz after a world premiere at the 
Sundance film festival in January.

La La Land, starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone in a love letter to the 
golden era of Hollywood musicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, is director Damien Chazelle’s follow-up to Whiplash.

Stone will return to London with his film about  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/snowden-the-movie-ewen-macaskill-watches-the-nsa-super-leak-come-back-to-life>
Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/snowden-the-movie-ewen-macaskill-watches-the-nsa-super-leak-come-back-to-life>
, with Joseph Gordon-Levitt in the title role. Kidman stars opposite Dev Patel, 
previously seen in Slumdog Millionaire, in Lion, which is adapted from Saroo 
Brierley’s memoir A Long Way Home, while Adams and Renner star in a science 
fiction movie, Arrival, directed by Denis Villeneuve.

The bigger they come: how to film an 'unfilmable' book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/challenge-film-adaption-individual-reading-great-novels-the-english-patient-the-wings-of-the-dove-great-characters-powerful-cinema>
Adams also stars in a Tom Ford film, Nocturnal Animals, featuring Jake 
Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal>, Michael Shannon 
and Isla Fisher. Nyong’o hopes to follow up her Oscar-winning success in 12 
Years A Slave, by playing opposite Oyelowo in Queen Of Katwe, based on the true 
story of a Ugandan chess champion.

Steve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, the British 
director famous for 12 Years a Slave and Shame and Hunger, will be given the 
BFI fellowship – the highest award of the institute’s governors. The BFI has 
also announced Black Star, a season of film, TV and special events celebrating 
the achievements of black actors.

Other films receiving gala premieres include Manchester by the Sea, starring 
Casey Affleck andMichelle Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams>, A Monster Calls starring 
Sigourney Weaver and Felicity Jones, and Their Finest, with Gemma Arterton and 
Sam Claflin. American Honey, starring Shia LaBeouf and Riley Keough, along with 
Ava DuVernay’s documentary The 13th – which examines the history of racial 
inequality in the US, will be the special presentations.
 