
From Wednesday night chess lovers can finally get some sleep. The world chess 
championship, which has been gripping chess fans for three weeks, with some 
games lasting seven hours or more, must be decided in New York on Wednesday. 
More than two decades ago the Soviet grandmastersGarry Kasparov and Anatoly 
Karpov <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Chess_Championship_1984> played a 
match that lasted for more than five months, and even then wasn’t finished, the 
world governing body decreeing that the players’ health was in danger if the 
match lasted any longer. Chess today marches to a faster beat. The current 
world title match between the Norwegian champion Magnus Carlsen and his Russian 
challenger Sergey Karjakin won’t be such an epic struggle.

A series of tie-breakers – rapidplay games, blitz games with very short time 
controls, and even a so-called “Armageddon” game where the player with the 
disadvantage of the black pieces and less time on the clock only has to draw 
the game to win the title – will determine who is champion. It is the chess 
equivalent of a penalty shootout and would have horrified the purist former 
world championMikhail Botvinnik 
<http://www.chessgames.com/player/mikhail_botvinnik.html>, founder of the 
Soviet chess system, who, when asked whether he ever played blitz, replied that 
yes, he had played it once, on a train.

Wednesday is Carlsen’s 26th birthday, and he will be strong favourite to 
triumph – he won both the world rapidplay and blitz championships in 2014. A 
Carlsen victory would suit chess fans, sponsors and federations in the west: he 
is personable, good looking (at least compared with the average chess player) 
and presents an image of chess as a tough sport rather than a pastime for 
elderly gentlemen in draughty church halls.“Smart is the new sexy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/magnus-carlsen-being-smart-is-the-new-sexy-chess-world-champion>
, Carlsen likes to say, which again would not have been a sentiment shared by 
Botvinnik.

It is tempting to draw Karjakin as the villain of the piece – a Ukrainian who 
became a Russian citizen in 2009, is portrayed as“more Putin than Putin” 
<http://pagesix.com/2016/11/11/meet-the-russian-chess-star-whos-more-putin-than-putin/>
, and who supported Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 despite having grown 
up there as a Ukrainian citizen. The Carlsen-Karjakin tussle recalls an age of 
ideological rivalry. It is tempting for the chess media to present the battle 
in New York as a clash between east and west in the grand tradition of the 1972 
match between Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer in Reykjavík. But for the most 
part the latter temptation has been resisted: in an age of global upheaval, the 
icy certainties of the cold war just can’t be recreated.

We should similarly give Karjakin, who is also 26 and was the world’s youngest 
ever grandmaster at the absurd age of 12, the benefit of the doubt. It is wrong 
to portray him as a Ukrainian turncoat. He is an ethnic Russian who chose to 
side with Moscow on both patriotic and pragmatic grounds – in Russia he could 
get more skilled coaches and attract more sponsors. We can question the wisdom 
of his close identification with Vladimir Putin, but it is as a chess player 
that we should judge him. In this match he has proved a redoubtable competitor 
and a benign, perpetually smiling presence in the postmortems after each game. 
It was Carlsen who, disgusted at his own performance, stormed out of a press 
conference after hisshock defeat with white in game eight 
<https://chess24.com/en/read/news/carlsen-karjakin-game-8-sergey-stuns-magnus>. 
Carlsen will probably retain his title, but Karjakin would not be an unworthy 
17th world champion. After all, politics is only politics, but chess is chess.
 