
Chris Deane’s day starts like any other at the busy Warwickshire practice 
where he works. First he triages calls from patients, decides those who will 
need a home visit later in the day, and books others into free slots in his 
morning or afternoon surgeries.

Like his GP colleagues, he deals with around 60 patients a day, but unlike 
them he is not a family doctor. Instead, Deane is a qualified physician 
associate – a new breed of healthcare professional taking pressure off 
hard-pressed doctors and providing patients, especially those with long-term 
conditions, the continuity of care they need.

“I have my own patient list, I can diagnose and make referrals and the GPs 
refer patients to me as I have an interest in paediatrics and mental health,” 
he says. “I do work in a similar way to a GP, but it’s important that patients 
understand we have a different role, we are not doctors.”

Deane, now a partner at his practice, was one of the first handful of 
physician associates to qualify in the UK a decade ago. Today there are 
approximately 350 practising in both primary and secondary care and another 550 
in training, with numbers in training predicted to rise.

Related: My career in general practice opened up a world of possibilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/general-practice-careers-val-wass>

Currently, around 20% of graduate physician associates are recruited to roles 
in primary care. But that is about to change. By 2020, the Department of Health 
and Health Education England (HEE) – the organisation responsible for NHS 
workforce training – want to see a total of 1,000 physician associates 
recruited to primary care roles. This is because of the potential they have to 
address GP shortages and help deliver the five-year plan for primary care, as 
outlined inthe General Practice Forward View (pdf) 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/gpfv.pdf>. 

Professor Liz Hughes is the director and dean for education and quality for 
HEE, working across London and the south-east, and co-chairs the HEE board 
leading on developing the physician associate role and its regulation.

“Physician associates have an increasing role to play in primary care as part 
of a multi-skilled workforce, alongside pharmacists and advanced nurse 
practitioners,” she says. “They can provide that continuity of care for 
patients with long-term conditions, which patients value as they don’t have to 
keep retelling their story and where it’s important for them to see the same 
person long-term; often that can be quite difficult for GPs in terms of their 
time.”

Whereas practice nurses traditionally specialise, physician associates are 
generalists; medically trained across a wide range of conditions. This means 
they are able to diagnose and treat children, as well as adults, with a range 
of clinical problems.

The physician associate role developed in the UK is fashioned on the model 
established in the US around 50 years ago. Today, 100,000 physician associates 
work in primary and secondary care across the US.


Related: ‘Being a GP and trying to solve patients’ problems is a privilege’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/being-gp-trying-solve-patients-problems-privilege>

In the UK, physician associates must complete a full-time post graduate 
diploma, which is offered by 25 universities. Applicants must already have a 
degree in a life or healthcare science and experience of working in the health 
service. Programmes must all meet the national standards laid down in the 
competence and curriculum framework approved by the Faculty of Physician 
Associates, which is part of the Royal College of Physicians.

The course lasts a minimum of 3,600 hours over two years and is split equally 
between theory and practice. Students have to complete a minimum of 1,600 hours 
of clinical training across a range of specialities; community and general 
medicine, mental health, surgery, obstetrics and gynaecology and paediatric 
services are standard.

There is no national funding scheme for the physician associate postgraduate 
diploma but HEE says that is changing. “We are beginning to see innovative 
funding models emerge because there is now a very significant demand for this 
work, and people want to attract them,” explains Hughes.

Physician associates, who can expect to start on a £27,000 salary, are 
currently an unregulated healthcare profession but, once qualified, are 
strongly encouraged to join the physician associate managed voluntary register. 
Once on the register they have to complete 50 hours of continuing professional 
development annually and pass a re-certification examination every six years.

Professional regulation is seen as crucial in the development of this new 
healthcare role. Currently, physician associates are able to work under 
supervision of a doctor but are unable to prescribe medicines or refer patients 
for an x-ray or CT scan. In practice this means physician associates like Deane 
have to ask a GP colleague to sign a prescription or x-ray referral form on his 
or her behalf.

Regulation, it is expected, would lead to physician associates being given the 
power to prescribe – on completion of additional training – as well as bring 
protection to the title. Jeannie Watkins, a physician associate who, with 
Deane, was one of the first qualified in the UK, has worked both in primary and 
secondary care and is now president of the faculty board, says: “Professional 
regulation is vitally important; it would protect the physician associate title 
and provide the legal and professional accountability and authority for the 
standards of behaviour, competence and education that they must meet. This will 
mean that the public are appropriately protected, and encourage public and 
professional confidence in the role.”

Deane agrees: “Regulation will make a huge difference, we can then work 
towards prescribing rights. This will also give us the assurance that all 
physician associates are working to the same framework, the role is 
standardised and that the physician associate title is protected.”

Content on the page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by NHS England 
and Health Education England
 