
Set aside the personalities, the politics and the policy issues and it might 
just be possible to see the£11.2bn bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/sky-executives-share-bonanza-rupert-murdoch-21st-century-fox-buyout>
 byRupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>’s 21st 
Century Fox to take control of James Murdoch’s Sky as just a smart piece of 
business timing. Rupert Murdoch, after all,has always wanted to buy the 61% of 
Sky 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2016/12/newsonomics-seizing-the-brexit-trump-moment-the-murdochs-bid-for-sky/?utm_source=Pew+Research+Center&utm_campaign=e9a2bef36a-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2016_12_12&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_3e953b9b70-e9a2bef36a-399347997>
 that he does not already own. He only stepped back from doing so in 2011 
because the phone-hacking scandal, and the setting up of the Leveson inquiry 
forced him to. With the Sky share price at its lowest in four years, an 
EU-enforced challenge from BT Group in the pay TV sports market, and a sharp 
drop in the value of sterling, it didn’t take a genius to see Fox would soon be 
ready to pounce.

Mr Murdoch Sr will also hope opposition will be confined to the hard core of 
usual suspects. He may be right. Media ecology has moved on since 2011. With 
the further rise of digital platforms such as Google and Facebook, television 
and newspapers no longer command the world as they did. So some will see a 
Fox-Sky merger as just another big merger of the sort that is common across the 
world, from AT&T and Time Warner down, as media have come under siege 
financially.

Politics have changed too. The coalition and David Cameron are history. Labour 
is in eclipse, Leveson wilfully forgotten, and there is no Milly Dowler scandal 
to shame the press. News Corp has been split in two, and the media is freshly 
confident of its post-Brexit power. The old fox may sniff a good time to 
re-enter the media hen house.

The problem with every bit of this, though, is that you can’t set aside the 
personalities of the Murdochs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/murdoch-sky-bid-schedule-of-agreement-shareholders>
, the politics that their consolidation in full control of Sky would raise, and 
the policy and public interest issues around regulation, plurality, business 
practices and standards – especially post-Brexit. Sky is headed by the same 
James Murdoch whom Ofcom criticised in 2012 for repeatedly falling short of its 
standards of governance. And Fox is run by the same Rupert Murdoch who, when 
asked why he was so opposed to the EU,is said to have replied 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/anthony-hilton-stay-or-go-the-lack-of-solid-facts-means-it-s-all-a-leap-of-faith-a3189151.html>
: “When I go into Downing Street, they do what I say; when I go to Brussels, 
they take no notice.” Though the media world has changed and is changing – and 
regulatory systems ought to do more to catch up with it, not least in relation 
to the personal data implications of such mergers – some things never change at 
all. On the steps of Downing Street in July,Theresa May  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
told the just-about-managing that “The government I lead will be driven not by 
the interests of the privileged few, but by yours.” Two months later, Mrs May 
took time out in New Yorkto meet Rupert Murdoch privately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/theresa-may-meeting-rupert-murdoch-times-sun>
.

On Monday Labour was quick to raise the Sky bid in the Commons. The government 
taskedMatt Hancock <https://www.gov.uk/government/people/matthew-hancock>, 
minister at the DCMS, to play for time, saying no formal notice of the bid has 
yet been received. That will presumably change soon. When it does, culture 
secretary Karen Bradleyshould refer the bid to Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/rupert-murdochs-sky-takeover-pass-public-interest-test>
, as in 2010. But that is not enough.

The absolute minimum need in this case is for cast-iron safeguards. Sky should 
be bound in perpetuity to the same standards of impartiality and fairness as 
the BBC and ITV. There should be no overlap of personnel between Fox and Sky at 
executive and board level. James Murdoch, still the subject of phone-hacking 
claims, should confine his role to one part of the business. There should be an 
independent editorial board at Sky. There should be no cross promotion between 
broadcast and newspaper interests.

All this should be enforceable by Ofcom. Britain needs more media plurality, 
not less. It is parliament’s high responsibility to set the strongest terms to 
nourish its future.
 