
Hassan was 14 when he fled Damascus on his own to join family in western 
Europe. He hasmade it safely to Athens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/help-refugees-charity-central-athens-vulnerable-young-people>
. Like many of the young refugees, what he most wants is the chance of an 
education and a future. But now he is stuck, and he has been for weeks. One of 
the toughest things these young lone refugees must face is uncertainty. Hassan 
(not his real name) has just learned that he will be going nowhere for at least 
another four months; his first interview with the authorities who must process 
his application to get to his family in Berlin will not happen before April. 
But at least he is no longer eking out a perilous existence on the city 
streets, trying to avoid the pimps, the people smugglers and the drug dealers 
that prey on refugee children travelling alone.Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
, one of the three charities the Guardian and Observer are supporting this 
Christmas, cannot help his battle with bureaucracy. But it has rescued Hassan 
from the street, and it’s paying for his accommodation; with 63,000 refugees in 
Greece overwhelming state services, it’s all down to charities like Help 
Refugees.

Last year’s Guardian and Observer appeal, which raised an extraordinary and 
unprecedented £2.6m for refugee charities, was made against the backdrop of a 
crisis that was self-evidently one of the great humanitarian disasters of our 
time. It was clear then that it was unlikely to be over within the year. But 
not only are hundreds of thousands of people still fleeing war and hunger; the 
savage turmoil inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> remains the 
biggest driver of the crisis. Readers are responding even more generously than 
last year, partly in angry riposte to the mean and laggardly response of the 
British government to those who want to join family in the UK.

Help Refugees was set up 16 months ago by a group of friends, frustrated by 
official inaction and inspired to help the refugee crisis in Calais. Their 
original plan was to raise £1,000 to buy food and clothes. In a week they had 
collected £56,000 and tonnes of donated goods. In the space of a year they 
raised £3m. HelpRefugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> is now 
one of Europe’s largest distributors of emergency aid, supporting more than 50 
projects in Greece, Turkey, France and Syria.

Safe Passage <http://safepassage.org.uk/>, another charity set up in response 
to the crisis by Citizens UK, tries to fill another gap in the journey that 
child refugees face by identifying unaccompanied minors on the streets of 
Greece and Italy, and in the camps and hostels in Germany and France – and 
sometimes in police cells. Then it works with other NGOs to provide a legal 
route to get them to the UK. It successfully lobbied parliament to amend the 
Immigration Act to allow more unaccompanied minors into the country. With Help 
Refugees, it was awarded aLiberty Human Rights award 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/news/press-releases-and-statements/refugee-rights-take-centre-stage-liberty-human-rights-awards-2016>
, a new award given in memory of the MP Jo Cox.

But for many of the child refugees, reaching the UK is not the end of their 
journey. That is where theChildren’s Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/> steps in. It runs a network of nine 
programmes across England that support young refugees, asylum seekers and 
migrants. It can help provide legal advice and housing support, advocacy, 
mentoring and befriending, help with language skills, therapeutic support, 
social and creative activities, and life skills, from money management to 
relationship counselling. Readers’ generosity has already exceeded all records. 
But it has never been needed more.

• Support our three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 or calling 0151 284 1126 (lines reopen 10am on Wednesday).
 