
Polly Toynbee assumes few people understand Labour’s parlous national 
electoral situation (The truth hurts. No wonder Corbynites block their ears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016>
, 27 September). However, it is clear to most, given the Scottish referendum, 
the recent general election and the referendum on Europe that Labour faces 
defeat in the next general election, whether the party is led by Jeremy Corbyn 
or not. The danger is that a loss will be seen as a consequence of his 
leadership, while the underlying problems will go unattended. For support 
Toynbee’s article refers to “A solid old [Labour] councillor from Sunderland” 
who says that people are turning away from Labour and will not vote again for 
Labour “while Corbyn’s the leader”.

It is disingenuous (or a logical slip?) not to acknowledge that the “turning 
away from Labour” (often to Ukip) occurred when Corbyn was not leader. It 
follows, surely, that the effects of economic and social exclusion – with the 
perceived negative corollary of immigration – is at the heart of such 
disaffection. Much of which is arguably the co-responsibility of previous 
“there is no alternative” supporters withinLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and the persuasive power money 
can buy to promote the current ideological climate.
Edwin Prevost
Matching Tye, Essex

• What Polly Toynbee and other supporters of the parliamentary Labour party 
have failed to pick up on is that the policies of the past have failed to 
deliver. Labour have now lost two elections in which their policy offer was 
designed to appeal to moderate Tory voters. Whatever may be said about Labour’s 
policy offer at the last election, it was intended not to frighten the middle 
England horses. Radical policies such as rail nationalisation were rejected in 
favour of a meaningless compromise measure. All governments since 1990 have 
followed John Major’s policy lead of offering a mix of right-of-centre economic 
policies with left-of-centre social policies. The past 26 years have 
demonstrated the failure of this policy as the social divide within the country 
has worsened and economic policy has become one failure after another. Interest 
rates are at rock bottom levels because the economy is so fragile that any 
moderate increase would tip it into recession and perhaps worse. Yet 
politicians on both sides of the parliamentary divide want to continue to 
espouse the same old failed policies.

While the majority of Labour MPs will find it impossible to support the 
“progressive politics” ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, they can still contribute 
to the progressive politics of this country by uniting with their ideological 
soulmates in the Osbornite faction of the Conservative party to prevent a hard 
Brexit and the damage it would inflict on the social and economic fabric of the 
UK.
Derrick Joad
Leeds

• Polly Toynbee writes of a councillor who claims that the new members in his 
constituency aren’t getting involved in canvassing. In my ward in south-east 
London, many of us who have been out canvassing in the last few elections are 
new members. If her councillor’s experience is more representative than mine, 
as it may be, we need to persuade the new membership to get out and campaign. I 
don’t believe that condemning them as naive is going to do that.
Giles Barrett
London

• Has the split threatening the Labour Party reached the Guardian? The dismay 
aroused here by Polly Toynbee in Tuesday’s paper was only lifted by Paul Mason 
in G2 (The real lesson from Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership victory? You can’t hold 
back history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/the-real-lesson-from-corbyns-victory-you-cant-hold-back-history>
, 27 September).
Alec Gordon
London

• Paul Mason is right when he says we can’t hold back history. The steady 
tramp of yesteryear has long demonstrated that the judgment of Karl Marx was 
fatally flawed, both economically and politically. Sadly the left everywhere 
has failed to develop either an alternative to Marx’s ideology, or a detailed 
transition from a real today to a preferred tomorrow.
Martin London 
Henllan, Denbighshire

• Dr Robert Crowcroft is dismayed about the calls for unity in the Labour 
party (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/can-the-centre-hold-in-corbyns-new-model-labour-army>
, 26 September). “Unity is not a good in itself,” he claims. Perhaps not, but 
he seems to be oblivious to the arguments from many academics, commentators and 
politicians of every stripe that good government is dependent on a strong 
opposition who will challenge the governing party’s ideas; and that a strong 
opposition will not emerge from a divided party. Therefore, if we are to have 
good government from this Conservative party, there needs to be a strong Labour 
opposition. That will not happen should the party lack unity. It is not putting 
party before country as he suggests, but a commitment to democratic government.
David Rowbottom
Stockport

• What is the evidence for Lynsey Hanley’s claim (The long read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/27/why-class-wont-go-away>, 27 
September) that “to believe in the strength of collective public institutions 
such as unions, publicly funded health and education systems” was regarded by 
Labour as “unhelpfully Bolshevik”? Labour’s record of investment in these 
services and many of its other policies belies this glib assertion, though one 
can always argue more remained to be done. And I write as a former member of 
Labour’s national executive who criticised the simplistic “hard-working 
families” mantra.
Jeremy Beecham
Labour, House of Lords

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 