
Times are hard for the health service: performance is on the decline, the 
money doesn’t add up, morale is low, there are finite resources and increasing 
demand. Is it a perfect storm? Or a very long winter of discontent?

 NHS Providers has published its new report, The State of the Provider Sector 
<https://www.nhsproviders.org/state-of-the-provider-sector-11-16>, which gives 
a clear appraisal — and the picture is, in places, quite gloomy. But we also 
show how hospitals, mental health, community and ambulance services are 
responding with ingenuity in such challenging times.

The findings in the report are drawn from a wealth of published data alongside 
the largest ever survey of NHS trust chairs and chief executives, carried out 
just a few weeks ago. We had responses from well over half of NHS trusts across
England <https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/england>. They raised 
important concerns, including worries over the workforce and sustaining quality 
of care at current levels.

Quite rightly these are the conclusions that will capture the headlines. The 
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is seven years into the longest 
and deepest financial squeeze in its near-70-year history. But amid fears over 
staffing and funding, it is important not to overlook the work trusts are doing 
to deal with these challenges, sometimes with great success. In pulling 
together this report, we have been struck by examples of innovation and 
improvement. This has spurred us to search for the kernel of gold in this 
situation.

The key to finding that kernel is to think about patients and service users: 
they should be at the heart of NHS reform. So whether it’s delayed transfers of 
care, A&E admissions, or mental health crisis care, it is the combination of 
improving an individual’s experience and making the system work better that can 
prove a successful approach.

Stop asking us to deliver the impossible, NHS trusts urge ministers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/stop-asking-us-to-deliver-the-impossible-nhs-trusts-urge-ministers>
Overcoming delayed transfers of care is a strong reason to focus on what is 
keeping mainly frail, elderly people in hospital when they are medically fit 
enough to leave. AtOxford University hospitals <http://www.ouh.nhs.uk/>, 
providers have struggled with one of the worst rates of delays for the past 
five years but under new leadership and new approaches, Oxford has halved its 
delays. In effect it grew its own social care provision.

It did this firstly through better collaboration with social care providers 
and secondly by creating its own social care workforce and capacity. This means 
people can be discharged straight into the community. This not only provides a 
better and safer experience for patients but also frees up hospital beds, which 
improves the flow of patients and generates capacity for planned elective work.

Sometimes navigating the myriad health and care organisations must, to a 
patient or service user, feel like finding your way through a maze. The whole 
process can be daunting, frustrating and woefully inefficient.

Southwark and Lambeth Integrated Care Programme <http://slicare.org/> (Slic) 
decided its situation just wasn’t slick enough. It embarked on a “radical” join 
up of services across the local NHS and local authority social care systems. So 
GPs, community healthcare, social care and local hospitals came together and 
put the patient first. Over the past four years the Slic approach has not only 
stabilised the number of hospital bed days used — quite a feat in the face of 
exponentially rising demand — it also led to a 61% reduction in the number of 
nursing home placements.

In terms of mental healthcare, Surrey and Borders partnership 
<http://www.sabp.nhs.uk/> has worked with local charities and commissioners 
across the south to launchSafe Havens 
<http://www.sabp.nhs.uk/services/mental-health/adult/safe-havens> — a drop-in 
service that provides out-of-hours help for anyone experiencing a mental health 
crisis. It has close links toFrimley Park hospital <https://www.fhft.nhs.uk/> 
and provides a safe alternative to using A&E. Six months after opening, the 
service has helped to reduce psychiatric admissions by 33%. Not only is that a 
better experience for a service user, it also helps to prevent the ongoing call 
on expensive resources.

We know that hospitals and other services are running at capacity levels well 
beyond those of other western economies. We know that the NHS is now missing 
most of its key performance targets. And we know that it interacts with more 
than five million patients and service users every week.

But that shouldn’t blind us to what’s happening. With these and other 
projects, services and programmes that consider the quality of individual 
experiences and the needs of the wider system together, NHS trusts are 
innovating, improving care and driving efficiencies. These are the kernels of 
gold.



Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

 