
There is no country other than Britain where Gemma Collins could have 
happened, and for that reason alone we should embrace her. Collins – for those 
who have not read heressential tome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/basically.html> Basically … My Life as a Real 
Essex Girl – is a reality-TV mainstay. The book is chapter after chapter 
detailing all the wordless older men she has variously been romantically 
involved with and how many of whom were arrested, intercut with vivid 
retellings of every stage school appearance she made between the ages of 11 and 
17.

She is safe only in her home on ITVBe, in the warm embrace of Towie, sipping 
cocktails with gay BFFs and occasionally swirling wine at bastards while 
shouting, “Don’t mug me off!”

Attempts to pull Collins, kicking and screaming, into other reality realms 
have always ended badly: her appearance on ITV’s Splash resulted in one of the 
mostmedically unviable tit bruises <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YMHCRhJGEaA>
 ever seen on a living human; an attempt at the I’m a Celebrity … jungle ended 
after three days; her Celebrity Big Brother appearance resulted in a live 
eviction to a chorus of boos. What must Collins do to find a home away from 
Towie?

I would like to humbly suggest her new gig might be explaining the news on Sky 
to Kay Burley. This week, Collins appeared ina now-iconic two-minute segment 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNews/status/790942709087244289> as a dissenting voice 
to the ever-rumblingEssex Girls dictionary story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/oct/25/essex-girls-campaign-remove-phrase-dictionary>
, uttering immortal line after immortal line and seemingly painting a picture 
of a deep and brutal war between dictionaries and Essex girls.

“The dictionary should be paying everyone in Essex some compensation,” Collins 
suggested, vastly overestimating the income stream of actual print dictionaries 
in this, the year of our Lord 2016. She went on to add: “I’m a massive fan of 
the dictionary.” What I would give to see her on Countdown, propping up 
Dictionary Corner and occasionally throwing to the adverts with a rambling 
anecdote about howArg is never going to get this candy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B_s-7nSN2zI>. What I would give.
 