
The assaults on Britain’s international development budget and the parallel 
assault on salaries thatsome charities pay their chief executives 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4044686/Meet-begging-bowl-barons-helping-fund-international-charity-chiefs-eye-popping-pay-bankrolled-BRITISH-aid.html>
 are being merged into a single weapon of attack. The aim is to unpick the 
legal commitment to dedicating 0.7% of GDP to aid after the next election. Some 
media organisations have always been hostile to any attempt to support the 
development of poorer countries; but the attacks of the past month have reached 
extraordinary depths. And, while not all the claims are justified, some of them 
are. The voluntary sector has to do more to get out and explain why its chief 
executives and other senior officers are worth paying four or five times more 
than the median wage, and at the same time charities need to develop a culture 
of openness about projects that work, and the ones that don’t.

Pay for senior staff in the charitable sector has often been open to 
criticism: it is always jarring to see a charity appealing for donations from 
members of the public – many of them not that well off themselves – and then to 
learn that top staff in that charity are paid hundreds of thousands of pounds. 
There is a disconnect in perceptions: while charity appeals to the generosity 
of ordinary people, some charities are multimillion-pound organisations that 
play a global role in developing and delivering aid and lobbying governments.

There is a defence, as the chief executive of the Alzheimer’s Society argued 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/14/myths-charity-pay-staff-income-sun-alzheimers-society>
 after the Sun picked up on its accounts showing that half its income was spent 
on staff costs. Most of its 2,500 staff work on the frontline with very 
vulnerable people. The great majority of charities – like the inspiring winners 
ofthe Guardian’s charity awards last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/gallery/2016/dec/15/guardian-charity-awards-2016-in-pictures>
 – are small and work in their local communities to deal with particular 
problems, and pay little more than the average wage. The big charities argue 
that theypay their bosses broadly in line 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/charity-pay-study-highest-earners/management/article/1335060>
 with other organisations of a similar size, and that their overall pay bill is 
falling.

Five questions we should be asking about the impact of UK aid | Mark Goldring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/08/five-questions-impact-uk-aid-mark-goldring>
The question of aid effectiveness, the second prong of the current attack, is 
even more contested. As the Guardian found duringits rural development project 
in Katine <https://www.theguardian.com/katine>, north-east Uganda, doing good 
development aid – as opposed to emergency aid – is a slow and complex business 
that involves multiple players. It is about identifying need and securing local 
buy-in, engaging with local leaders and politicians, taking two steps forwards 
and sometimes two steps backwards as well. And even then results may not be 
what had been foreseen, and often depend on external factors that cannot be 
predicted. There are important and difficult questions, too, about the best 
methods of development, such as the importance of security, and the choice of 
priorities between supporting economic development or providing health 
facilities.

These are all big and legitimate areas for debate. So is the argument about 
the significance of Britain’s national interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/09/spending-aid-budget-making-britain-better>
. But it is not the debate that is happening. The international development 
secretary, Priti Patel,grandstands her scepticism about aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
 – sometimes, it seems, about the very principle of it – and is cheered on by 
her allies in the media. The NGOs that often rely on Department for 
International Development contracts for their survival keep their heads down 
for fear of being named and shamed. Development matters. So stop the name 
calling and start a constructive conversation abouthow to do it better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/10/rate-my-aid-and-other-ways-that-tripadvisor-could-revolutionise-development-work>
.
 