
The daily quiz has been running every weekday (bar some well-needed Christmas 
holidays) since September 2013. In that time, we’ve written over 300 quizzes 
and published more than 60 contributions from our readers.

Unfortunately, the more quizzes you write, the harder it is to write quizzes. 
The stockpile of useless general knowledge kicking around our brains that 
hasn’t been tapped for some quiz or other is depleted, and the novelty of 
reading about bridges, medieval armour, binary etc is wearing off. On top of 
this, we’ve both changed roles significantly since the quiz began and can no 
longer dedicate as much time to it. We haven’t fallen out of love with the 
daily quiz, but sadly we can’t keep running it every day as we have been up 
until now.

The hundreds of emails we’ve received over the years have been mostly welcome, 
especially the ones that didn’t begin, ‘I think you’ll find that …’ Of 
particular note were those of you who wrote in to point out our ‘mistaken’ 
repetition of the same five questions in this year’sGroundhog day quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/feb/02/daily-quiz-2-february-2015>, 
the professor of American history who explained the finer points of theMonroe 
doctrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/jan/16/daily-quiz-16-january-2015> 
and the offence caused by referring tocities as countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/mar/05/daily-quiz-5-march-2015> and 
popstrels as opera singers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/jan/26/daily-quiz-26-january-2015> 
(all since updated).

We’ve had a lot of fun writing questions. Regular readers might have noticed 
there are way more questions about cycling than you’d expect from the average 
general knowledge quiz – we didn’t quite get round to asking which classics 
feature cobbles or who won the E3 Harelbeke but hopefully you know yourleaders’ 
jerseys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/jan/12/daily-quiz-12-january-2015> 
andworld champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/oct/07/daily-quiz-7-october-2014> 
by now. There are other common topics – cricket, Greek philosophy, Elmore 
Leonard, dogs and vegetables crop up a lot.

Part of the joy of multiple choice quizzes is making up the wrong answers. 
We’ve taken inspiration from our own and other people’s pets – Artie is notthe 
computer that chooses the premium bond numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/dec/01/daily-quiz-1-december-2014> 
but a whippet, Mrs Peel and Mrs Lovett are cats, notthe housekeeper in Father 
Ted <https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/mar/09/daily-quiz-9-march-2015>
. Some require greater creativity such asthe size of the corn in Oh What a 
Beautiful Mornin’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/feb/19/daily-quiz-19-february-2015> 
or the names ofLynx deodorant scents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/aug/28/daily-quiz-28-august-2014>. 

The headlines too have had their share of wordplay – a Moe, a mass, a Matt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/sep/30/daily-quiz-30-july-2014> is 
our favourite ever. There’s alsotea with Milk and two humps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/nov/10/daily-quiz-10-november-2014>
, and all manner of other something and something else titles.

Some quizzes had hidden themes – some eventually explicit (for example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/sep/04/daily-quiz-4-september-2014>,
those with links 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2015/mar/02/daily-quiz-2-march-2015>), 
some contained secret messages to friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/feb/24/daily-quiz-24-february-2014>,
some had references 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2013/dec/17/daily-quiz-17-december-2013> 
that would only be recognised by, for example, a Guided By Voices fan. Some 
just had fun questions. If you don’t know how tospell the name of the band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/quiz/2014/feb/10/daily-quiz-10-february-2014> 
that brought you such dubious hits as Girls, Girls, Girls, you should.

And so to what’s next. After this week, the daily quiz is going to take a 
sabbatical for an undetermined amount of time. We hope it will come back, but 
in the meantime feel free to leave comments below to let us know what you’ve 
liked and not liked, and include any suggestions for what we could do in 
future. And thanks for answering so many of our questions.
 