
A festive message for prospective students this week. Firstly, most Ucas forms 
are due in January. And while I wouldn’t want anybody to spend the entire 
Christmas break fretting about the carbon emissions they’ll emit over the next 
three years, you deserve an establishment that reflects your values.

I realise that few people choose a university on the basis of which is the 
most responsible. But sustainability is a special case, not least because 
research tells us that millennials and post-millennials expect green. Often 
they have to fight for it, however. Students at the University of California 
are engaged in a showdown with officials over land once used to teach and 
research agro-ecology (the science of green land management) being sold for 
development. They allege an “iron triangle” among industry, universities and 
the state, where the green curriculum is repressed. We can’t be complacent. If 
it is built into the campus, it will be harder to jettison it from the 
curriculum.Ecocampus.co.uk <http://www.loreus.com/EcoCampus> has a register of 
UK universities certified to international standards on everything from energy 
ratings to low-impact building materials.

Some are seriously impressive: Nottingham University built its new bioscience 
block out of straw bales, and the building also features green roofs (to slow 
down rainwater and grow vegetation as an insulator), photovoltaics, passive 
ventilation and a student allotment. You can see the logic in this: the average 
British university has 15,000-18,000 students. The higher and further education 
sector spends a total of £116m annually just to power its ICT.

But few people get excited about a library’s energy efficiency until it’s 
wrapped up in a competitive format. This explains the rise of awards for the 
greenest establishments. Winners at the recentGreen Gown Awards 
<http://www.eauc.org.uk/green_gown_awards> included the universities of 
Bradford and Brighton, where students designed a house built from waste 
materials, and Fife College for opening a green hairdressing training salon.

But it was Plymouth University that topped the People and Planet league table 
<https://peopleandplanet.org/university-league/2015/tables> with its top-level 
sustainability teaching. Tradition dictates that these institutions prove their 
might with sports events – a certain boat race springs to mind – but I’d prefer 
them to do battle on the amount of solar panels or volume of recycling.

The big picture
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff077d00c628accdbab12be173c396f5a35e8056d%2F0_45_2499_1500%2F2499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20green%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20green%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff077d00c628accdbab12be173c396f5a35e8056d%2F0_45_2499_1500%2F2499.jpg>
 Crime against nature: after a one-year pause in whale hunting, a Japanese 
whaling ship leaves Shimonoseki in western Japan on 1 December for the 
Antarctic. Photograph: Jiji Press/Getty 
As officials waved goodbye to the first Japanese whaling boat to go hunting 
after a one-year suspension, activist boatSea Shepherd 
<http://www.seashepherd.org/?gclid=CJ-HhOrx28kCFUNmGwodKwgKAQ> was preparing 
for battle. The International Court of Justice was probably raising an eyebrow, 
too. It ruled against Japan’s whaling programme last year on the grounds that 
it was a commercial operation masquerading as research. Japan plans to kill 300 
whales over the next three months.

Well dressed: recylced workwear
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5f604cbd91a0a67de0bb1772a4c7474cade5eb6%2F210_88_4021_2411%2F4021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20green%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20green%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Feco-guide-to-green-universities-whaling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5f604cbd91a0a67de0bb1772a4c7474cade5eb6%2F210_88_4021_2411%2F4021.jpg>
 Neat: Everything in Colour’s repurposed apron 
From time to time a famous designer is enlisted to invest corporate uniforms 
with some style, but it rarely works. This time, however, it’s different. The 
duo behindEverything In Colour <http://www.everything-in-colour.co.uk/>, a 
design house based in Hackney, east London, has already made a name for 
themselves by creating new contemporary pieces out of donated and repurposed 
fabrics.

The staff of Britain’s offices, warehouses, shops and factories get through 
around 32.9m garments (16,290 tonnes) each year, of which 90% is incinerated or 
sent to landfill.

Now Everything In Colour has got its hands on Ocado’s old uniforms and is 
redesigning them to make desirable, valuable pieces, including a repurposed 
apron and a tote bag (pictured – available in January), which are manufactured 
in HMP Northumberland’s textile factory.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle <mailto:@lucysiegle>
 