
Politics is sport in America, where every televised debate needs a clear 
winner and a loser – even when, like Thursday night, there was neither. The 
truth aboutthe Republican primary debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/republican-debate-donald-trump-was-garbled-incoherent-and-dominant>
 was that every single candidate on the stage was defeated. If there must be a 
victory trophy, let it be shared between the three Fox News anchors who gave 
Washington’s sycophantic press corps a lesson in how to hold politicians to 
account.

Black lives don't matter, apparently, to Republican candidates for president | 
Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/07/black-lives-dont-matter-republican-presidential-candidates>
Fox News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> put on an exemplary 
spectacle. It was not so much a debate between candidates, but an interrogation 
that each man, in turn, had to endure. Moderators Chris Wallace, Megyn Kelly 
and Bret Baier were forensic, unrelenting and pointed.


Critics may say it was all about ratings, a cable news extravaganza that was 
more dramatic than it was substantive. The reality is thatFox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> News achieved a rare feat in journalism 
– making often dry policy debates entertaining.

Liberal critics of Fox News should at least acknowledge it performed a public 
service, testing the Republican frontrunner,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, beyond his limits.

“Is there anyone on stage, and can I see hands, who is unwilling tonight to 
pledge your support to the eventual nominee of the Republican party?” Baier 
asked in the debate’s opening question. “And pledge to not run an independent 
campaign against that person.”


It was the perfect opening salvo, aimed at Trump without naming him, 
electrifying the debate by slicing to the heart of what makes his candidacy 
such a radioactive force. And it set the tone.

Within the first 15 minutes, neurosurgeon Ben Carson was asked how he could be 
president given he thought Alan Greenspan had been treasury secretary instead 
of federal reserve chairman, and governor Chris Christie was pressed to explain 
why New Jersey has undergone nine credit rating downgrades under his watch.

As candidates ducked and dived, the moderators did not let them off the ropes. 
When Trump declined to meet Wallace’s demand for evidence for his incendiary 
claim about the Mexican government sending criminals across the border, the 
anchor did not relent.

“I’ll give you 30 seconds to answer my question, which was, what evidence do 
you have – specific evidence – that the Mexican government is sending criminals 
across the border? Thirty seconds.”

The persistence paid off, laying bare Trump’s questionable sourcing. “Border 
Patrol, people that I deal with, that I talk to, they say this is what’s 
happening,” he replied. “Because our leaders are stupid. Our politicians are 
stupid.”

Of course, Fox News could adopt this forceful approach – so unusual in 
political journalism – because it is Fox News.Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> know the easiest pivot away 
from a difficult interview is to complain about the “liberal” media, clearly 
not an option here.

Republican debate: Trump was garbled, incoherent – but dominant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/republican-debate-donald-trump-was-garbled-incoherent-and-dominant>
None of this is to say the Fox moderators were without fault. There was not a 
single question during the two-hour debate, for example, about climate change, 
arguably the most important issue to face the next occupant of the White House. 
The selection and tone of questions reflected the right-wing bias of Fox News – 
although, in its defense, those prejudices echo those of Republican primary 
voters.

Kelly asked one or two silly questions, which detracted from what was 
otherwise a fearless performance. Those familiar withher previous controversies 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/media/2013/12/megyn-kelly-jesus-and-santa-were-white-179491.html>
 would not have expected her to be a liberal hero. And that’s unlikely a label 
she wants. But she repeatedly struck the 10 male candidates where it most hurt, 
peeling back the curtain on a party that cannot let go of its war on women.

Kelly called out Florida senator Marco Rubio when he suggested he is against 
“exceptions” to bans on abortion, such as in cases of rape or incest, 
contradicting positions he’s taken in the past. She turned the screw on 
Wisconsin governor Scott Walker on similar terrain, pointing out that he wants 
to make abortion illegal even in cases of rape, incest or to save the life of 
the mother.

“Would you really let a mother die rather than have an abortion, and with 83% 
of the American public in favor of a life exception?” she asked. “Are you too 
out of the mainstream on this issue to win the general election?”

Yet her more notable exchanges were, unsurprisingly, with Trump, the 
silverback gorilla in the middle of the stage that, for the most part, the 
other candidates were too scared to even prod.

She had the temerity to ask the billionaire to explain derogatory remarks he 
has made about women, calling them “fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting 
animals”. When he responded with a joke intended to diffuse the situation,Kelly 
refused to let him off the hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/06/donald-trump-misogyny-republican-debate-megyn-kelly>
. “Your Twitter account has several disparaging comments about women’s looks. 
You once told a contestant on Celebrity Apprentice it would be a pretty picture 
to see her on her knees. Does that sound to you like the temperament of a man 
we should elect as president?”

Donald Trump retweets Megyn Kelly 'bimbo' jab as women react to insults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/donald-trump-megyn-kelly-bimbo-women-republican-debate>
Appearing backstage in the spin room shortly after the debate, Trump could not 
conceal how irritated he was with Kelly.

“The questions to me were not nice. I didn’t think they were appropriate,” he 
told a mob of reporters. “And I thought Megyn behaved very badly.”

Later, at 3:30am, Trump, apparently unable to sleep, tweeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/donald-trump-megyn-kelly-bimbo-women-republican-debate>
 that Kelly “is totally overrated and angry” and “totally bombed tonight”. He 
retweeted another user who called Kelly, who is blond, “a bimbo”.

It is a great achievement when a reporter gets under a politician’s skin with 
nothing more toxic than a series of difficult questions. In that sense at 
least, Fox News won the fight.
 