
A lot has happened in the five years since we published our book, The Spirit 
Level <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/13/the-spirit-level>. New 
Labour were still perhaps too relaxed about people becoming "filthy rich". And 
there was an assumption that inequality mattered only if it increased poverty, 
and that for most people "real" poverty was a thing of the past.

But so much has changed. In the aftermath of the financial crash and the 
emergence ofOccupy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy-movement>, there 
has been a resurgence of interest in inequality. Around 80% of Britons now 
think the income gap is too large, and the message has been taken up by world 
leaders.

According to Barack Obama, income inequality is the "defining challenge of our 
times", while Pope Francis states that "inequality is the roots of social ills".

The unexpected success of The Spirit Level owes more to luck than judgment. 
Although serious non-fiction books rarely sell well, for a week or so we even 
outsold Jeremy Clarkson. We now feel a bit like the dog being wagged by its 
tail: in the past five years, we've given over 700 seminars and conference 
lectures. We've talked to academics, religious groups, thinktanks of both right 
and left, and to international agencies such as the UN, WHO, OECD, EU and ILO.

The truth is that human beings have deep-seated psychological responses to 
inequality and social hierarchy. The tendency to equate outward wealth with 
inner worth means that inequality colours our social perceptions.It invokes 
feelings of superiority and inferiority, dominance and subordination 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22506751> – which affect the way we relate 
to and treat each other.

As we looked at the data, it became clear that, as well as health and 
violence, almost all the problems that are more common at the bottom of the 
social ladder are more common in more unequal societies – including mental 
illness, drug addiction, obesity, loss of community life, imprisonment, unequal 
opportunities and poorer wellbeing for children. The effects of inequality are 
not confined to the poor. A growing body of research shows that inequality 
damages the social fabric of the whole society. When he found how far up the 
income scale the health effects of inequality went, Harvard professorIchiro 
Kawachi <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16338630>, one of the foremost 
researchers in this field, described inequality as a social pollutant. The 
health and social problems we looked at are between twice and 10 times as 
common in more unequal societies. The differences are so large because 
inequality affects such a large proportion of the population.

To the political defenders of inequality, the idea that too much inequality 
was an obstacle to a better society was a monstrous suggestion. They accused us 
of conjuring up the evidence with smoke and mirrors.

But since our book, research confirming both the basic pattern and the social 
mechanisms has mushroomed. It's not just rich countries or US states where 
greater equality is beneficial, it is also important in poorer countries. Even 
the more equal provinces of China do better than the less equal ones.

Most important has been the rapid accumulation of evidence confirming the 
psychosocial processes through which inequality gets under the skin. When we 
were writing, evidence of causality often relied on psychological experiments 
that showed how extraordinarily sensitive people are to being looked down on 
and regarded as inferior.

They demonstrated that social relationships, insecurities about social status 
and how others see us have powerful effects on stress, cognitive performance 
and the emotions. Almost absent were studies explicitly linking income 
inequality to these psychological states in whole societies. But new studies 
have now filled that gap. That inequality damages family life is shown byhigher 
rates of child abuse <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24515511>, and 
increased status competition is likely to explain thehigher rates of bullying 
confirmed in schools in more unequal countries 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2667858/>.

We showed that mental illnesses are more prevalent in more unequal societies: 
this has now been confirmed by more specific studies of depression and 
schizophrenia, as well as by evidence that your income ranking is a better 
predictor of developing illness than your absolute income.

Strengthening community life is hampered by the difficulty of breaking the ice 
between people, but greater inequality amplifies the impression that some 
people are worth so much more than others, making us all more anxious about how 
we are seen and judged. Some are so overcome by lack of confidence that social 
contact becomes an ordeal. Others try instead to enhance self-presentation and 
how they appear to others. US data also show that narcissism increased in line 
with inequality. The economic effects of inequality have also gained more 
attention. Research has shown that greater inequality leads to shorter spells 
of economic expansion and more frequent and severe boom-and-bust cycles that 
make economies more vulnerable to crisis. The International Monetary Fund 
suggests that reducing inequality and bolstering longer-term economic growth 
may be "two sides of the same coin". And development experts point out how 
inequality compromises poverty reduction.

Lastly, inequality is being taken up as an important environmental issue; 
because it drives status competition, it intensifies consumerism and adds to 
personal debt.

In Britain, one of the few signs of real progress are the fairness commissions 
set up by local government in many cities to recommend ways of reducing 
inequalities. Partly as a result, many local authorities and companies now pay 
the living wage. But the coalition government has failed to reverse the 
continuing tendency for the richest 1% to get richer faster than the rest of 
society. TheEquality Trust <http://www.equalitytrust.org.uk> calculates that 
the richest 100 people in Britain now have as much wealth as the poorest 30% of 
households. The top-to-bottom pay ratios of around 300:1 in the FTSE 100 
companies is not diminishing.

It is hard to think of a more powerful way of telling people at the bottom 
that they are almost worthless than to pay them one-third of one percent of 
what the CEO in the same company gets. Politicians must recognise that reducing 
inequality is about improving the psychosocial wellbeing of the whole society.
 