
No more talk of title races, please. Napoli’s hopes of catching Juventus this 
season had already been dealt a fatal blowwhen they lost to Udinese two weeks 
ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/04/serie-a-title-race-champions-league-napoli-totti>
, but now we are running out of space for nails in the coffin.

Beaten 2-0 by Inter on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/internazionale-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
, thePartenopei finished the weekend nine points off the pace. Gonzalo 
Higuaín’s suspensionfor the tantrum he threw against Udinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/napoli-gonzalo-higuain-four-match-ban-reaction-red-card-udinese-serie-a>
 has been reduced on appeal, meaning he will be back to face Roma next Monday 
(after missing the midweek visit from Bologna) but it is too little, too late. 
The race is run, the contest over,the parrot definitely deceased 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=npjOSLCR2hE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRRB92DEOJo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRRB92DEOJo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRRB92DEOJo&media=>
 Inter 2-0 Napoli: highlights 
Serie A’s relegation battle, by contrast, has come alive. Not so long ago, the 
identity of the bottom three looked inevitable. Verona were doomed to the drop 
after failing to win any of their first 22 games, and would be joined by
Frosinone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone> and Carpi. The 
latter two clubs had been overmatched from the start in their first season of 
top-flight football.

Or, at least, that was the narrative. Both Frosinone and Carpi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carpi> - representing towns of 46,000 and 
70,000 people, respectively - had been trapped in the relegation zone for most 
of the season. Neither was about to buy its way out of trouble. Their combined 
transfer spend between last summer and this January added up to a mere €700,000.

Roma’s Luciano Spalletti in meeting after alleged Francesco Totti row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/18/francesco-totti-luciano-spalletti-roma-meeting-argument>
And yet each side had shown glimpses of the quality that got them promoted in 
the first place.Frosinone drew away to Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/24/frosinone-leonardo-blanchard-juventus-serie-a>
 and turned their Stadio Matusa home into a daunting place to visit, winning 
there as often as they lost. Carpi went unbeaten through their first five games 
of 2016, surviving visits to both Inter and Lazio.

It was enough to prevent either side from getting cut adrift completely. When 
Palermo started to implode amidendless managerial changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/14/palermo-zamparini-managerial-meddling-serie-a>
, the minnows were in position to capitalise.

 By the end of March, Carpi had levered their way up to 17th – above the 
Sicilians on goal difference (they could not be separated on a head-to-head 
tie-breaker). Frosinone were only one point behind. That was how the picture 
still looked at the start of this weekend.Right up until Carpi smashed Genoa 4-1
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q9H1GEqaiXk>.

Whoever could have seen this coming? Certainly not the 1,500 Genoa fans who 
packed out the away end at the Stadio Alberto Braglia. TheGrifone had been in 
good form, winning four of their previous six matches. Their buoyant mood was 
only improved when Leonardo Pavoletti opened the scoring.

Carpi had come from behind to beat Genoa 2-1 in the reverse fixture, but few 
would have counted on a repeat. That was the only time all season they had 
recovered from a losing position to win. Only Verona had scored fewer goals 
this season inSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
16 Udinese 33 -19 35 
17 Carpi 33 -18 31 
18 Frosinone 33 -30 30 
19 Palermo 33 -32 28 
20 Verona 33 -28 22 
But this match would turn on refereeing decisions. Nicola Rizzoli, who might 
still have had criticism ringing in his ears from the mistakes he made towards 
the end ofAtlético Madrid’s Champions League quarter-final against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
, committed another significant error when he showed Genoa’s Armando Izzo a 
second yellow following a midfield tussle. Replays suggested that Carpi’s 
Gaetano Letizia had initiated the contact by tugging on his opponent’s shirt.

Despite going a man down, Genoa almost doubled their advantage moments later: 
Alessio Cerci chipping over the bar when through on goal. Instead, his team 
fell behind by the interval. Rizzoli compounded the red card decision by 
allowing the first-half to run on longer than expected, and Carpi took 
advantage by scoring in the third and fourth minute of injury time.

The first of those goals was really rather good, Antonio Di Gaudio digging out 
an overhead kick from only a few feet off the floor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gv6i0YM46Ws>, but such technical merit did 
nothing to temper Genoa’s fury. The visitors’ manager, Gian Piero Gasperini, 
was sent off for excessive protests after the half-time whistle finally blew.

None of this was the fault of Carpi, who only deserved credit for keeping 
their heads as their opponents started to lose them. Their manager, Fabrizio 
Castori, demands an aggressive high press, and his players delivered that for 
90 minutes. Genoa’s 10 men were worn down by the onslaught - allowing Lorenzo 
Pasciuti and Stefano Sabelli to pad out the hosts’ advantage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq9H1GEqaiXk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq9H1GEqaiXk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq9H1GEqaiXk&media=>
 Carpi 4-1 Genoa: highlights 
There are so many great stories to be told in this Carpi team, from Pasciuti – 
the first player ever to score for the same team in all of Italy’s top five 
divisions – through to the ever-more impressive Jerry Mbakogu. The forward had 
never been part of a football school or academy team before he moved to Italy 
from Lagos at 12 years old.

Perhaps the most romantic tale, though, belongs to Castori himself. Fired in 
late September after Carpi made a slow start to life in Serie A,he was re-hired 
a month later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/said-and-done-english-football-league-rebrand>
 following a protest by fans who refused to accept that the man who brought 
them into the top-flight should be treated in such a way.


A 61-year-old journeyman manager who had never before worked in Serie A, 
Castori is a motivator whose team plays in his image. Outside of football, his 
great love is rock music. He told Gazzetta dello Sport on the eve of this 
season that “if Carpi were a song then we would be Stairway to Heaven by Led 
Zeppelin, or maybe Bob Dylan’s Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door.”


Truth be told, those songs both feel a little slow for a team that does its 
best work when playing at a high tempo. But the musical analogy is apt. The 
spirit of fun and togetherness in this team is captured in the perfectly cheesy 
club anthem, Forza Carpi <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iqpwCNXmpZE>, created 
by singer/song-writer Paolo Belli and recorded last year with guest vocals from 
Castori together with a number of the team’s players and directors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc290b513e74038dbfd58afbe9115bf5c9c4d4f48%2F0_366_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20is%20done%2C%20the%20real%20battle%20is%20down%20at%20the%20bottom%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20is%20done%2C%20the%20real%20battle%20is%20down%20at%20the%20bottom%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc290b513e74038dbfd58afbe9115bf5c9c4d4f48%2F0_366_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Carpi’s manager Fabrizio Castori: ‘if my team were a song, then we would be 
Stairway to Heaven.’ Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
Saturday’s win allowed Carpi to stay 17th, widening their advantage over 
Palermo - who were thrashed 4-0 by Juventus a day later - but not over 
Frosinone, who won away to Verona. With Udinese stumbling ahead of them, the 
relegation race looks set to go down to the wire. But the chance of at least 
one of Carpi or Frosinone staying up continues to rise.


The prospect must make Claudio Lotito, who infamously raged about 
unfashionable teams ruining ‘his’ TV deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/18/capri-frosinone-promotion-serie-a>
, quite furious. Especially with Crotone, a Calabrian team representing a city 
of barely 60,000 people, currently top of Serie B.


But perhaps Lotito could pause to dwell on some different numbers. There were 
close to 9,500 fans in attendance for Carpi’s game on Saturday, some of them 
paying as little as €3 for a spot in the Curva. There were only around 10,000 
for his own Lazio team when they played at home to Empoli a day later - with 
Ultras continuing a season-long boycott.


Which of those stories does more damage to the image of Italian football 
abroad? And which of the two deserves our applause?

Talking points

• How about Parma, earning promotion back into the professional leagues at the 
first time of asking? There wereclose to 15,000 in attendance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ps94htHceug> at the Tardini to see a Parma 
team –reformed under the new name Parma 1913 – managed by the club legend Luigi 
Apolloni, and with Nevio Scala as their president, beat Delta Rovigo 2-1 to 
secure automatic promotion to Lega Pro. Among the many cool aspects of this 
story was the sight of the club captain, Alessandro Lucarelli, sticking to his 
promise that he would stay with Parma and help them to rebuild. Instead of fans 
invading the pitch at full time,the players invaded the Curva 
<http://www.gazzettadiparma.it/video/parma1913/348248/Invasione-di-campo--Lucarelli-resta.html>
.

• A good weekend for Juventus became a terrible one for Claudio Marchisio, who 
tore a cruciate ligament during a challenge with Franco Vázquez. Marchisiois 
certain to miss Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/17/italy-claudio-marchisio-miss-euro-2016-injury>
 – a major blow to Italy, with Marco Verratti already struggling to overcome a 
long-term groin problem – and quite possibly the start of the next season as 
well.

• Napoli’s defeat should have opened a window for Roma to put pressure on them 
in second place but the Giallorossi blew a two-goal lead as theydrew 3-3 in 
Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/17/serie-a-roundup-juventus-palermo-francesco-totti-roma-atalanta>
. You might have presumed under such circumstances that the team’s defending 
would come under scrutiny but, instead, all the conversation focused, as so 
often, on Francesco Totti. Brought on as a second-half substitute, it was he 
who scored Roma’s third and generally left a more positive impression than Edin 
Dzeko – who fluffed one open goal in the first half and later a very 
presentable opportunity laid on by Totti himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd19a489fd406f82d2d323d99df3c76c6702559ba%2F20_64_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20is%20done%2C%20the%20real%20battle%20is%20down%20at%20the%20bottom%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20is%20done%2C%20the%20real%20battle%20is%20down%20at%20the%20bottom%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fserie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd19a489fd406f82d2d323d99df3c76c6702559ba%2F20_64_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Roma’s head coach, Luciano Spalletti, has denied reports of a row with 
Francesco Totti. Photograph: Alessandro Di Meo/EPA 
There were reports afterwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/18/francesco-totti-luciano-spalletti-roma-meeting-argument>
 that Luciano Spalletti had rowed with Totti in the dressing room, supposedly 
accusing the player of staying up until two in the morning playing cards in the 
team hotel. But the manager was firm in denying that anything more than words 
had been exchanged. “I deny in the most categorical way that there was a row or 
worse yet a physical confrontation with any of the players. I do not put my 
hands on my players.”

(Oh, and the club’s video team slipped a happy moment of manager and captain 
laughing together into theedited highlights of today’s training session 
<http://www.asroma.com/en/video/2016/4/18/watch-best-of-training-april-18>.) 

• Buona la prima. Cristian Brocchi’s tenure as the Milan manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/sinisa-mihajlovic-sacked-milan-christian-brocchi-silvio-berlusconi>
 got off to a positive start with a 1-0 win away to Sampdoria, Carlos Bacca 
making amends for anabsurdly self-indulgent missed rabona 
<https://twitter.com/RossoneriFreak/status/721793486542888960> by later scoring 
the winning goal. I’m not sure that the overall quality of Milan’s football was 
drastically superior to that played under Sinisa Mihajlovic but then, it has 
always been my suspicion that Silvio Berlusconi’s decision to part ways with 
the Serb came down tomore than just performances on the pitch 
<http://gazzettaworld.gazzetta.it/features/mihajlovic-hampered-by-rocky-relationship-with-ac-milan-president/>
.

• It was buona la seconda, meanwhile, for Simone Inzaghi, who made it two wins 
from two in charge of Lazio. More importantly, he got a front-row seat for this
this no-look pass from Keita 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/721790826498502656>. 

• Strong own goal of the season contender from Andrea Consigli 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QmXUbVJqll4>. But was it worse than last 
season’s number from Daniele Padelli 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJBdYJbuuu0>? 

Results Atalanta 3-3 Roma, Bologna 0-1 Torino, Carpi 4-1 Genoa, Fiorentina 3-1 
Sassuolo, Inter 2-0 Napoli, Juventus 4-0 Palermo, Lazio 2-0 Empoli, Sampdoria 
0-1 Milan, Udinese 0-0 Chievo, Verona 1-2 Frosinone
 