
No one exactly expected the Chinese to seize a United States underwater drone 
in the South China Sea on Friday. But Beijing has so far proved rather more 
predictable than the president-elect of the US. Since Donald Trumpsought to 
rattle its cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
 by sharing a phone call with Taiwan’s president Tsai Ing-wen and questioning 
the“one-China” policy 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2016/12/13/an-open-letter-to-donald-trump-on-the-one-china-policy/>
 which has underpinned bilateral relations for decades, it has responded in 
ways familiar to China-watchers: careful official statements of displeasure, 
sabre-rattling in a populist state-owned tabloid, and a series of actions which 
could be coincidental but send a convenient message. Those include the first 
live-fire exercises by China’s aircraft carrier group, the warning that a US 
carmakercould face fines 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-autos-penalty-idUSKBN143014> for 
monopolistic behaviour, and the scooping up of the oceanographic survey ship’s 
drone. It has so far moved with caution. But the risks created by Mr Trump’s 
behaviour are real and substantial.

In reality, Taiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> has been 
self-ruled since Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang (KMT) fled there at the end of 
the civil war in 1949. But the three-cornered relationship has long been 
governed by polite fictions. The US acknowledges the belief that there is only 
one China; Taipei and Beijing have said there is only one China, but how one 
interprets that is a matter of deliberate ambiguity. These diplomatic acts of 
imagination are peculiar: Washington has security ties with the entity which it 
does not recognise diplomatically, to protect it from the one it does 
recognise. But they have smoothed Sino-US relations and stabilised 
cross-straits relations.

The US role has essentially been to help maintain the status quo should either 
side try to veer away. Under the previous KMT president, Ma Ying-jeou, 
cross-straits ties grew quickly, bringing economic benefits but also concern: 
while few on Taiwan want formal independence, many more were concerned about 
Beijing’s influence. China did not want the election of the Democratic 
Progressive party’s Tsai Ing-wen, and appears to have made itself felt in 
significant but deniable ways – tourist numbers are down and Taiwan wasnot 
invited to this year’s meeting 
<http://thediplomat.com/2016/09/international-civil-aviation-organization-shuts-out-taiwan/>
 of the International Civil Aviation Organisation, despite attending 
previously. But it has not, for example, repudiated the agreements signed with 
Mr Ma. The experienced Ms Tsai has so far played a careful hand and 
has indicated her desire for good relations. But there is always a risk that 
action by Beijing and domestic political pressure might push her further.

There is a reasonable case to be made that the US should be more vocal in 
supporting Taiwan, a thriving democracy overseen by the only woman ever elected 
to top office in Asia without a political dynasty behind her, to discourage 
Beijing from trying to disturb the present balance. Advocates say that China’s 
growing military power means that challenge should come sooner not later. But 
that does not appear to be what Mr Trump is doing. Putting aside the 
possibility that he is acting on whim – this call appears to have been 
well-planned – there are three theses about the president-elect’s intentions. 
The first is that he is bringing his business tactics to diplomacy, seeing what 
advantages he can accrue by throwing his weight around and being unpredictable. 
The second is that he plans a“reverse-Nixon” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/best-friends-forever-china-wary-of-rex-tillerson-wooing-away-russia>
, cosying up to Moscow while encouraging it to distance itself from Beijing. 
His advisers are hawkish towards Beijing, and the Sino-Soviet relationship has
always been one of convenience rather than love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/13/booming-chinese-frontier-town-reveals-growing-russian-ties--age-old-divide>
, scarred by deep suspicion and repeated separations.

Taiwan could become a stick to beat China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, using the sinophobia he embraced in 
his campaign to bolster his popularity in office. But while Beijing fosters and 
manipulates popular nationalism, it does not control it and must also answer to 
it; Taiwan is an issue on which both leaders and people feel extremely 
strongly. There is a profound risk of destabilising the region, and of 
miscalculations and missteps escalating the situation. Even if that peril is 
avoided, the long-term future of Taiwan matters much more to Beijing than 
Washington. Beijing is likely to react angrily and seek to punish the US – but 
will find it even easier to punish Taiwan.

That leads to the third possibility: that Mr Trump wants to use the island as 
leverage – as he suggested explicitly, tweeting that “I don’t know why we have 
to be bound by a one-China policy unless we make a deal with China having to do 
with other things”. But Taiwan deserves better than to be used as a cudgel or a 
bargaining chip.
 