
Few electoral shocks were expected in Scotland and Wales on Thursday. A big 
win for the Scottish National party and another solid winning performance by 
Welsh Labour had been widely predicted.Both things duly occurred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/may/05/uk-election-results-tracker-2016>
. But not quite in the way the polls suggested. Both elections, in Scotland in 
particular, also produced real surprises too.

The headline story in Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is 
the SNP’s success in winning a third successive term in government. With 63 of 
the 129 Holyrood seats in their corner, and their opponents divided, the SNP’s 
ascendancy has won a renewed mandate. It is a formidable achievement. It 
represents a continuing reward as much for political brilliance as for good 
government, where the SNP’s record is very much open to challenge.

But the SNP has also been dented. Nicola Sturgeon will lead a minority 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/nicola-sturgeon-rules-out-holyrood-coalition-snp-falls-short-majority>
 now, not the majority government she inherited in 2014 from Alex Salmond. On a 
reduced turnout, the SNP’s share of the vote slipped from 50% in the UK general 
election to 46.5% in the constituency section and 42% in the regional list this 
time. These are commanding shares, but they suggest that the SNP may have 
peaked. Ms Sturgeon has been given food for thought. Considering the SNP’s long 
run of success, this is a refreshing and necessary development in what has 
begun to seem a bit like a one-party state.

True, with Green support, there is still a majority at Holyrood for 
independence, but the chances of a second independence referendum in Scotland 
before 2021 have dimmed this week. The SNP may aspire to leading Scotland to 
independence, but it has been elected to go on fighting Scotland’s corner 
within the union, now armed with the “devo-more” powers that followed the first 
referendum. Its task now is to govern. A halfway house will frustrate many 
hardliners in the SNP, and may mean trouble from the grassroots for Ms Sturgeon 
eventually.

It had become lazily fashionable over the last couple of decades to say that 
Scotland was a Tory-free zone. But theScots Tories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/tories-scotland-ruth-davidson-scottish-conservatives>
 never went away altogether.The charismatic Ruth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/holyrood-elections-see-rise-of-team-ruth-and-demise-of-labour-vision>
 has now led the party to twice as many Holyrood seats as in 2011 and becomes 
the principal opposition. This will change the dynamic of Holyrood. Meanwhile 
the once-mighty Labour has been pushed into third place after a near wipeout by 
the SNP in the west. There looks to be no quick way back for Labour, or perhaps 
even any way back at all. Much will depend both on the SNP and on Labour’s 
credibility in England.

Labour’s continued success in Wales will help. Although the party lost votes 
in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
 on Thursday and is now two seats short of overall control in Cardiff Bay, it 
remains the most formidable force in Welsh politics and it is not seriously 
threatened by a nationalist alternative on Scottish lines. Labour’s bigger 
worry, in Wales as in England, remains Ukip’s ability to eat into its 
traditional vote.

These Scottish and Welsh elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2016/may/06/snp-win-historic-third-term-politics-weekly-podcast>
 were not freak or peripheral events. With a grassroots “people before profits” 
campaigner shaking up theNorthern Ireland assembly 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election/2016/northern_ireland/results> contest by 
topping the poll in traditionally Republican west Belfast and the Dáil finally 
voting to approve a fragileFine Gael-led minority government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/enda-kenny-wins-second-term-as-irelands-prime-minister>
 in the Irish Republic, this week’s elections have produced a new set of 
reminders that politics across these islands have become more volatile and 
march to many different drums.
 