
Up Close and Personnel Write down National Hill, Olympia, April 13-15 in your 
new diary. That's the venue for the 13th annual Human Resource Development Week 
Exhibition. Running alongside the Institute of Personnel and Development HRD 
Week conference, it's the largest conference and exhibition in Europe for 
training and development professionals.

 Some 300 suppliers of products and services will keep visitors up to date 
with developments across the training spectrum, as well as providing 
information on established tools and techniques.

 A dedicated management centre will offer advice in areas such as professional 
qualifications, executive development, open learning and leadership skills and 
an activity zone will offer participation in interactive learning methods such 
as role playing and team building.

 Details from 0181 332 0044 (exhibition) and 0181 263 3434 (conference).

A New Calling? Something new for jobseekers or those just fancying a change of 
office scenery: from this month the Employment Service is staffing a new Jobs 
Hotline (0845 606 0234) that enables callers to access vacancies for the cost 
of a local-rate call. The adviser will have access to the complete database of 
available jobs and can identify appropriate local vacancies.

 Details of callers can be forwarded to employers and interviews arranged in 
the same way as at a Jobcentre.

Open for business Good news for those who serve the business travel and 
conference booking needs of Marriott hotels users. The 390-room Heathrow 
Marriott opened its new 70-foot-high atrium last Thursday. Facilities include 
13 meeting rooms, the largest accommodating 630 delegates, and a 24-hour 
business centre. The four-star deluxe hotel, situated on the Bath Road, also 
has an early arrival/departure lounge, a leisure club with heated swimming 
pool, two restaurants and an American Grill.

 Standard room rate is A135, executive rooms are £15 more and the ambassador 
and diplomat suites cost £295 and £225 respectively. Booking: 0181 990 1100.

 Compiled by Penny Cottee, editor of Executive PA magazine 
 