
It’s the kind of pastime you either hate, love to hate, or just find mildly 
interesting to debate: pound-for-pound updates of the best fighters in the 
world, regardless of weight. We have seen some movement on the list sincewe 
last undertook this exercise six months ago 
<http://thecomeback.com/queensberryrules/2016-articles/pound-for-pound-top-20-boxers-update-516.html>
: we have a new entrant to the top three, a few new names in the top 10 and 
several departures from the list. As always, the main standard is quality wins, 
especially of recent vintage. Fighters who have been inactive for a year, or 
who officially retire, are eligible to return once they fight again. (Looking 
at you this weekend, Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/the-agenda-fa-cup-magic-manny-pacquiao>
.)

1) Román González, flyweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/roman-gonzalez-adds-super-flyweight-belt-to-burgeoning-world-title-collection>

It feels as if Román “Chocolatito” González’s pound-for-pound reign has been a 
tease, as he hasn’t had a rematch with Juan Francisco Estrada or faced Naoya 
Inoue sincehe replaced Floyd Mayweather on the throne a year ago 
<http://thecomeback.com/queensberryrules/2015-articles/pound-for-pound-top-20-boxers-update-1015.html>
. He hasn’t faced another flyweight fighter with pound-for-pound status but at 
least he took on the next best thing by moving up to junior bantamweight and
conquering hard-hitting Carlos Cuadras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/roman-gonzalez-adds-super-flyweight-belt-to-burgeoning-world-title-collection>
. He showed vulnerability at the new weight, albeit against a terrific 
opponent, but still triumphed.

2) Sergey Kovalev, light heavyweight <https://twitter.com/KrusherKovalev>

When we last saw Sergey Kovalev, he struggled against Isaac Chilemba 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Kovalev_(boxer)>. When we next see 
Kovalev, it might be to decide the pound-for-pound king.Later this month 
Kovalev will face Andre Ward 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/10641815/kovalev-vs-ward-see-what-andre-ward-has-to-say-to-sergey-kovalev>
, a man a couple spots lower on this list. Regardless of whether you think it 
might be “boring” because of Ward, it’s one of the best match-ups in the sport.

3) Terence Crawford, junior welterweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/28/terence-crawford-blasts-hank-lundy-to-defend-junior-welterweight-title>

Terence Crawford’s win over Viktor Postol in July 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/10511019/terence-crawford-knocks-viktor-postol-down-twice-to-win-world-title-unification-fight>
 gave him his best win yet, cementing the impression that this kid might one 
day take over boxing. He’s now a two-division lineal champion. His next fight 
is a step down, against John Molina Jr., but he’s still a perfectly acceptable 
opponent.

4) Andre Ward, light heavyweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/oaklands-andre-ward-americas-finest-boxer-is-at-home-out-of-the-spotlight>

Ward is still coasting on work he did years ago, but he will really earn this 
spot if he beats Kovalev on 19 November.Ward beat Alexander Brand in August 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/10526523/andre-ward-outpoints-alexander-brand-in-california-stroll>
 in a fashion that, for two consecutive fights, raises doubts about whether 
he’s a real light heavy, and whether he might be getting old.

5) Gennady Golovkin, middleweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/19/canelo-alvarez-gennady-golovkin-fight-boxing>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75aac6ea38977a5576153e7db89c6fbd7c03eb3%2F0_369_5196_3116%2F5196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75aac6ea38977a5576153e7db89c6fbd7c03eb3%2F0_369_5196_3116%2F5196.jpg>
 Gennady Golovkin catches Kell Brook in their middleweight title contest in 
September. Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images 
Welterweight Kell Brook gave Golovkin his toughest fight in years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/kell-brook-title-bid-ended-gennady-golovkin>
, as an over-eager Golovkin got caught plenty by the skilled and fast-handed 
Brit. Once he settled down, it was the usual demolition job for Golovkin. Too 
bad a comparable fight against someone his own weight –Daniel Jacobs – has been 
pushed to 2017 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/10588285/gennady-golovkin-and-daniel-jacobs-are-negotiating-to-fight-the-wba-told-sky-sports>
.

6) Canelo Álvarez, middleweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/canelo-alvarez-liam-smith-fight-golovkin>

So the 155lb middleweight king fought someone closer to his desired weight, 
junior middleweightLiam Smith, and looked spectacular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/canelo-alvarez-liam-smith-fight-golovkin>
. The bad news is that he broke a thumb and is out of commission for a while, 
pushing the long-desired Golvokin showdown back even further.

7) Shinsuke Yamanaka, bantamweight 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinsuke_Yamanaka>

The first time Shinsuke Yamanaka faced Anselmo Moreno, he was lucky to get 
away with the win. The second time, in September,he finished him off via 
knockout 
<http://www.boxingnews24.com/2016/09/shinsuke-yamanaka-vs-anselmo-moreno-results/>
. So now he’s back in this list, deservedly. It’s unclear what he’ll do next 
and it wouldn’t be surprising to see him take some time off.

8) Carl Frampton, featherweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/carl-frampton-beats-leo-santa-cruz-wba-featherweight-title>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d2dcfd116aeba5fdb864e3704149bcc260ac716%2F0_74_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d2dcfd116aeba5fdb864e3704149bcc260ac716%2F0_74_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 Carl Frampton celebrates after his victory over Scott Quigg in February. 
Photograph: Jason Cairnduff/Reuters 
In one of the better fights of 2016, Carl Frampton came out on top of Léo 
Santa Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/carl-frampton-beats-leo-santa-cruz-wba-featherweight-title>
 in July. It was just what Frampton needed to shake off a couple so-so 
performances since demonstrating his pound-for-pound potential.We’ll be treated 
to a rematch in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/25/carl-framptons-world-featherweight-title-rematch-with-leo-santa-cruz-set>
.

9) Timothy Bradley, welterweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/09/manny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-fight-live>

Timothy Bradley is talking about retiring sooner rather than later 
<http://www.desertsun.com/story/sports/boxing/2016/04/08/tim-bradley-could-start-thinking-retirement-after-saturday/82818102/>
. There’s been a bit of footsie around the notion of facing Miguel Cotto, which 
is a nice match even at 154, because Cotto isn’t the world’s biggest junior 
middleweight. But Bradley’s spot on this list is vulnerable to keep dropping as 
he’s not doing anything but talking.

10) Vasyl Lomachenko, junior lightweight 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vasyl_Lomachenko>

Remember how we were screwed out of one of the best fights that could be made 
in boxing, Vasyl Lomachenko v Nicholas Walters? Well,that fight is going happen 
on 26 November 
<http://www.badlefthook.com/2016/9/27/13079622/vasyl-lomachenko-vs-nicholas-walters-set-for-november-26th-at-the-cosmopolitan>
. Lomachenko climbed up to tenth on this list after dominant wins against good 
fighters but on Thanksgiving weekend we’ll see what he looks like against 
someone closer to great.

11) Keith Thurman, welterweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2016/jan/27/unbeaten-fight-danny-garcia-angel-thurman-porter>

Keith Thurman got the best win of his career in June against Sean Porter 
<http://www.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/10325315/keith-thurman-outpoints-shawn-porter-to-defend-wba-welterweight-title>
. He no longer looks like the knockout artist he once was hailed as, but he has 
become a solid all-round fighter. That makes him a bit less fun – although the 
Porter fight was pretty good – and gives him a better chance against Danny 
García next year, in another stellar fight.

12) Juan Francisco Estrada, junior bantamweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2015/apr/20/the-young-boxers-on-the-rise-in-2015>

Juan Francisco Estrada is chasing González, still, which is why he moved up in 
weight. He would also be happy to fight Naoya Inoue. He needs to be in a good 
fight for the first time in forever.

13) Guillermo Rigondeaux, junior lightweight 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guillermo_Rigondeaux>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556906ee28cf89f973a68950d90b7dd291dd576f%2F0_83_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2020%20best%20pound-for-pound%20boxers%20in%20the%20world%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fqueensberry-rules-boxing-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbest-pound-for-pound-boxers-gonzalez-ward-golovkin-crawford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556906ee28cf89f973a68950d90b7dd291dd576f%2F0_83_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
 Guillermo Rigondeaux in action against Drian Francisco in November 2015. 
Photograph: Joe Camporeale/USA Today Sports 
Every now and then Guillermo Rigondeaux pops his head up to say he wants some 
fight or the other, or someone says something about wanting to fight him. Then 
he faces James Dickens.

14) Naoya Inoue, junior flyweight 
<http://www.boxingnewsonline.net/boxing-results-naoya-inoue-good/>

We’ve reached the big zone of fighters who haven’t done much lately, but have 
good resumes overall. Inoue is also talking about facing Gonzalez, a welcome 
bout.

15) Adonis Stevenson, light heavyweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2013/nov/07/ranking-boxing-10-hardest-punchers>

Here’s another one. Thomas Williams, Jr. gave Stevenson a real scrap in July. 
He’s set to go against another top 10 light heavyweight, fellow Canadian 
Eleider Álvarez, next year – but his whole championship reign has been 
lacklustre.

16) Danny García, welterweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/danny-garcia-beats-gutsy-robert-guerrero-to-claim-wbc-welterweight-title>

And another one. But, at least, like some of the others in this netherzone, 
Danny García is finally about to face someone worthy (see Thurman, above). 
First up isSamuel Vargas later this month 
<http://www.boxingnews24.com/2016/10/danny-garcia-vs-samuel-vargas-on-november-12/>
.

17) Nicholas Walters, junior lightweight 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicholas_Walters>

It’s annoying that he turned down big money to tackle Lomachenko 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vasyl_Lomachenko>, originally, but all – or at 
least most – is forgiven now that we’re finally getting that slobberknocker.

18) Kell Brook, welterweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/kell-brook-title-bid-ended-gennady-golovkin>

A portrait of a modern-day boxing gym, an authentic home for men and women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2016/jun/02/portrait-modern-day-boxing-gym>
I opted not to dock Kell Brook for a competitive showing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/kell-brook-title-bid-ended-gennady-golovkin>
 against that monster Golovkin at a weight where he clearly doesn’t belong. He 
just drops overall because others moved up.

19) Carlos Cuadras, junior bantamweight <https://twitter.com/cuadrasoficial>

When you give the pound-for-pound king 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/roman-gonzalez-adds-super-flyweight-belt-to-burgeoning-world-title-collection>
 the hardest fight of his life, you just might climb into the pound-for-pound 
ranks yourself. A hearty welcome, Carlos.

20) Wladimir Klitschko, heavyweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/wladimir-klitschko-anthony-joshua-world-heavyweigh-boxing-title-fight-wba>

It’s weird to see Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> here instead of the man 
who beat him last, but Tyson Fury is functionally retired and we’re going to 
treat him that way. Plus, Klitschko has done plenty over the years to keep his 
spot.

Honorable mentions: Floyd Mayweather, Manny Pacquiao, Bernard Hopkins, Juan 
Manuel Márquez, Tyson Fury, Miguel Cotto, Erislandy Lara and Léo Santa Cruz.

• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://bloguin.com/queensberryrules/>
• Follow The Queensberry Rules <https://twitter.com/tqbr> and Tim Starks 
<https://twitter.com/timstarks> on Twitter
 