
The amount of ice on the narrow footpath came as a surprise. Hidden from the 
sun on the south side of the valley, it had probably accumulated over a number 
of days – along with the layered, crusted frost on the nearby vegetation. Few 
people seemed to have walked this stretch of theWales coast path 
<http://www.walescoastpath.gov.uk/?lang=en> recently; a fox crossing the track 
ahead and a briefly perched buzzard both seemed shocked to see me.

As I reached the footbridge above the beach at Wallog, I folded away my 
heavily used Ordnance Survey map and consulted its nautical equivalent. While 
OS maps provide only scant information about the space beyond the coast, 
admiralty charts give detailed data on the underwater landscape – in this case 
thegeological oddity that is Sarn Wallog 
<http://website.lineone.net/~dyfival1/histcant.htm>.

 Sarn Wallog. Photograph: John Gilbey 
Glacial in origin, this feature is one of several similarly narrow lines of 
stone that reach westwards from the coast of Wales. Made up of water-rounded 
cobbles, graded in size by the elements and the passage of time, they look 
beguilingly like the work of our ancestors – a pervasive theme in the rich 
historic literature ofWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

Related: Cliffs and teeming clefts in the coastal landscape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/03/cliffs-and-teeming-clefts-in-the-coastal-landscape-country-diary>

Sarn Wallog and its close companion Sarn Cynfelyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/oct/07/ruralaffairs.comment> reach out 
more than 10km towards Ireland, concealed in places by only a metre or so of 
seawater at certain states of tide, the seaward extremity being marked by the
Patches buoy 
<https://www.ceredigion.gov.uk/English/Resident/Travel-Roads-Parking/Coast-Harbours/Pages/default.aspx>
.

The sarn forms a natural breakwater, and as the tide fell the extent of this 
natural “causeway” below the sea was visible from its influence on the surface 
of the water. To the south small wavelets fussed confusedly, but north of the 
sarn a darker stillness prevailed – drawing the line of the feature across 
Cardigan bay.

As though for scale, three people, heavily muffled against the cold, walked 
out to the seaward end of the exposed bank and began taking photos, making it 
look more like a causeway than ever. The already low sun edged behind 
thickening cloud and the chill of the wind became profound, my thoughts turning 
to tea and a crackling fireplace.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 