
The League Cup has a reputation for occasionally allowing unlikely sides to 
claim a slice of glory. So far 25% of its 54 finals have been won by teams that 
have never claimed either of England’s two other major honours, the FA Cup and 
First Division (though it will go down to 20% if three-times winners Leicester 
excuse themselves from that list by finishing top of this year’s Premier 
League). Five winners, as well as 12 beaten finalists, were not in the top 
flight at the time of their triumph. Five finalists, two of them victorious, 
weren’t in the second flight, either.

In that context Oxford United’s victory 30 years ago as a First Division side 
might seem unexceptional. But in the context of that club’s history, the very 
fact that it was unremarkable is itself astonishing. This, after all, is a club 
123 years old that have four significant pots in their trophy cabinet, all bar 
one of them won between 1984 and 1986. Between those years Oxford streaked 
towards the summit of English football as if rocket-propelled, and then paused 
briefly to enjoy the view before gravity started doing its thing. After the 
highs of 1986 a second visit to Wembley finally came 24 years later, in the 
Conference play-offs. They are currently preparing for a third, against 
Barnsley in the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy in April.

Jim Smith, the architect of Oxford’s successive league titles as they sprinted 
from Third Division to First over the previous two campaigns, must have 
experienced a particularly complex mix of emotions that afternoon, watching 
from the dugout as the side he had assembled produced one of their finest 
performances to dismantle a stage-struck QPR. Mainly because he was watching 
from theQPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> dugout, having switched 
sides in the summer of 1985. “It was going to be a new happening for me any 
road, walking out at Wembley,” he said before the final, “but 10 of them 
players walking out for Oxford I probably know better than I know my own.”

Oxford had quite a lot in common with that day’s opponents. In 1967 QPR had 
won the League Cup – when in the Third Division – and then became the first 
club since the war to win back-to-back promotions into the top flight, only for 
their chairman, Jim Gregory, tosack their manager once they got there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/30/forgotten-story-alec-stock-qpr-manager>
. In 1985 Oxford became the second club since the war to win back-to-back 
promotions into the top flight, only for the QPR chairman, Jim Gregory, to hire 
their manager once they got there, and then they won the League Cup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d3f519acf091026cd90d1475794556f2861f16%2F100_243_2850_1709%2F2850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d3f519acf091026cd90d1475794556f2861f16%2F100_243_2850_1709%2F2850.jpg>
 Robert Maxwell, Oxford’s owner, after the 2-1 semi-final second leg win 
against Aston Villa with scorers Jeremy Charles, left, and Les Phillips. 
Photograph: David Cannon/Getty Images 
Smith, 45 at the time of the final but already widely known as the Bald Eagle, 
had asked Oxford’s chairman, Robert Maxwell, to increase his annual salary to 
£50,000 after their arrival in the First Division*. Maxwell offered £45,000, 
and during the impasse Gregory stepped in. “When somebody got more publicity 
than him, he didn’t like it and pushed them away,” Smith said of Maxwell, “and 
I was getting all the publicity. Maybe I shouldn’t have jumped. If I had stayed 
at Oxford, won the Milk Cup, I would have won two championships and a Milk Cup 
in three years, and I would have been manager of Arsenal or Manchester United.”

“I think we were all very disappointed,” Trevor Hebberd, Smith’s favourite 
signing (“an unsung hero, a man who could do anything”) and man of the match in 
the 1986 final, tells me of Smith’s departure. “I personally really enjoyed 
playing with him. He was a great manager and a great personality, and 
everything was really enjoyable when he was at the club. And it was still Jim’s 
team. It was strange, really. It would have been great if he was our manager 
that day, but that’s life, isn’t it? I’m glad we won and he lost.”

“I’m a professional and I’ve got to set about winning the game, but it would 
be silly to say that I haven’t still got some thoughts for Oxford,” said Smith 
in the buildup to the final. “After all, I was there for three and a half 
years, and they were very good to me. You get close to clubs, and I probably 
got too close. I would have preferred to meet somebody else in the final.”

Smith was replaced at Oxford, eventually, by Maurice Evans. Evans had played 
for, coached and finally managed Reading until his 25-year association with the 
club was abruptly ended in January 1984, with his side third in the Fourth 
Division and competing for promotion. “I could not understand it,” he later 
said of his sacking. “It sickened me. I became so depressed that I was ready to 
give up football for good.”

He was tempted back by Smith, who made him coach and chief scout and was 
swiftly rewarded when Evans spotted a promising young striker playing for 
Newport County, by the name of John Aldridge. Following Smith’s departure Evans 
seemed a natural choice as successor, and the only person who really disagreed 
was Evans himself. “I didn’t want to go back into management,” he said. “When 
the job came up I told the chairman there was no way I wanted it. He kept 
saying I was an idiot and might never get another opportunity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedddda6281f6caf8b949b355046a207fffacc6e8%2F196_240_3085_1852%2F3085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedddda6281f6caf8b949b355046a207fffacc6e8%2F196_240_3085_1852%2F3085.jpg>
 QPR’s manager, Jim Smith, left with his successor at Oxford United, Maurice 
Evans, before the match. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
He eventually agreed to take caretaker charge, giving Maxwell time to find an 
alternative. Meanwhile, Oxford’s first season in the top flight began with 1-1 
draws against West Brom and Spurs. Their third game was against Leicester, at 
the Manor Ground. “We beat them 5-0,” said Evans, whose side suddenly found 
themselves sixth in the table. “Everyone was up in the air about it and in a 
weak moment during the celebrations Mr Maxwell finally talked me into taking 
the job.”

Inevitably they won only one of their next 10 and by the end of that run they 
were 18th and set for a season of toil towards the foot of the table. They 
found respite, however, in the Milk Cup. Over the previous couple of seasons 
they had knocked Arsenal, Newcastle and Manchester United out of the 
competition, reaching the quarter-finals in 1984. This time they went all the 
way to Wembley, without ever meeting a top-10 side.

They were considered emphatic underdogs once they got there. They hadn’t won 
in seven league games, while QPR were unbeaten in eight. What’s more, it had 
started to appear that Rangers’ success in the competition had been in some way 
preordained. They had won their quarter-final against Chelsea in extra time 
after the Chelsea goalkeeper (and future QPR caretaker manager)Eddie 
Niedzwiecki dribbled the ball way out of his area 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CR9kOLGlWAI#t=26m53s> only to miscontrol as he 
approached the centre circle and skew a desperate lunging kick straight to 
Michael Robinson, who sent the ball into an empty net from the halfway line. 
They then faced a semi-final against a Liverpool side seeking to reassert their 
dominance of a competition they had won in four successive years between 1981 
and 1984. After winning their home leg 1-0, Rangers found Liverpool in 
comically generous mood at Anfield: Jan Molby’s weak penalty was saved, and 
both Ronnie Whelan and Gary Gillespie scored own goals (though credit for the 
first should really go to Jim Beglin, who thwacked a clearance straight into 
Whelan’s shins, whence it flew past Bruce Grobbelaar) in a 2-2 draw.

Most of the Oxford team had never been to Wembley before, and Evans’ attempts 
to arrange a pre-final visit to the stadium were in vain. “I’d been trying for 
weeks to arrange with Wembley a suitable date for my team to look at the 
pitch,” he said, a few days before the game. “Yesterday they finally made us an 
offer but that was too late and I told them to get stuffed.”

It is a jarringly untypical quote from a man renowned for being unfailingly 
calm and polite, and who had played 459 games for Reading without once being 
booked. “Maurice was a perfect gentleman,” says Jeremy Charles, nephew of the 
great John Charles, son of the Welsh international Mel Charles, and scorer of 
Oxford’s final goal both in their semi-final against Aston Villa, and at 
Wembley. “He knew the game inside out and although quietly spoken he knew 
exactly what he wanted and the players knew what he wanted from them. He’d get 
his point over without any sort of shouting or whatever. Players respected him 
and he didn’t really have to shout.”

The way the final transpired he had very little reason to shout until the 
celebrations began. After a sterile opening half-hour, Oxford settled while 
Rangers crumbled. “Oxford won because for the last hour they remembered the 
sound footballing habits which had brought them their continued success over 
the last five years,” wrote David Lacey in the Guardian. “Smith must have given 
more than one wry smile as he watched his former charges destroy Rangers’ 
defensive cover with attacking movements of verve and accuracy not often seen 
in Wembley finals.”

If Lacey was happy to give credit to Oxford, other observers preferred to 
attach blame. “Rangers were lamentable,” wrote Stuart Jones in the Times. 
“Woefully poor in defence, laborious in midfield and negligible in attack, they 
offered only one direct attempt during the game and that came, significantly, 
from one of their full backs. Unable to construct a single move of any 
consequence, their challenge was surely one of the most feeble ever to have 
been staged in the national stadium.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15e8772277be25404b90243ac026a180db4e27eb%2F0_169_2176_1306%2F2176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15e8772277be25404b90243ac026a180db4e27eb%2F0_169_2176_1306%2F2176.jpg>
 Trevor Hebberd scores Oxford United’s first goal. Photograph: 
Colorsport/Rex/Shutterstock 
“I thought we were dominant throughout,” says Charles, who considered himself 
a centre-half even if a succession of managers considered him a centre-forward, 
and who was playing in large part because of an injury to the first-choice 
striker Billy Hamilton. “Our midfield was magnificent. I think we always had 
the upper hand but once we got the first couple of goals we could relax a bit, 
and then with three minutes to go I popped the third one in. That’s when you 
know things are really going your way.” (In Oxford’s next League Cup game, 
against Gillingham the following September, Charles sustained the knee injury 
that ended his career.)

Charles was one of the more recent arrivals to the Oxford squad, having joined 
in February 1985 from, as it happened, QPR. Steve Wicks, his best friend and 
neighbour during an unhappy spell in Shepherd’s Bush, was supposed to be 
marking him when he scored.

“They had a couple of chances, but we dominated the game,” says Hebberd, for 
whom the match represented a catharsis after he was dropped by Southampton for 
the 1979 League Cup final they lost 3-2 to Nottingham Forest. “We played well – 
I don’t think they played to their full potential but we played well. We 
weren’t expected to win, so we just went out there to enjoy it. We had a decent 
side, we just relaxed and played our football.”

As Oxford’s players climbed Wembley’s famous steps to collect their medals, 
Evans stayed on the turf. Having downplayed his role in the buildup to the game 
– “I think Jim Smith should lead both teams out” – and said he wouldn’t mind if 
his side lost – “There’s too much emphasis placed on being a winner nowadays. I 
am one of those strange people who likes to put entertainment first and winning 
second” – then asked Ken Fish, 72-year-old trainer and veteran of 22 years at 
Oxford, to collect, and keep, his medal. “Everybody will say I’m strange but 
going to get the medal did not mean anything to me. Mr Fish has been at the 
club so long he deserves it.”

Perhaps Evans already had his mind on Oxford’s four remaining league games. 
Third-bottom as the final was played, they won two of them – beating 
title-chasing (and eventual runners-up) Everton and then Arsenal 3-0 on the 
final day, to survive by a point. They ended up 18th and finished in an 
identical position the following season, at the end of which Maxwell found 
himself a new toy, buying Derby County and handing control of Oxford to his son 
Kevin. Despite this the U’s started the 1987-88 campaign excellently. After 14 
games they were ninth, with six wins and six defeats, but then the wheels 
didn’t so much come off as run away weeping. They won none of their remaining 
26 league games, losing 15 of them, finished bottom and haven’t been near the 
top flight since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79a02083befc20b6eafc99cb5b494c4b8fd6974%2F0_131_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Oxford%20United%20winning%20the%201986%20League%20Cup%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-oxford-united-winning-the-1986-league-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79a02083befc20b6eafc99cb5b494c4b8fd6974%2F0_131_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Back row, left to right: Ray Graydon, Ray Houghton, John Aldridge, Trevor 
Hebberd, Andy Thomas, Alan Judge, John Trewick. Front : Kevin Brock, Les 
Phillips Gary Briggs, Malcolm Shotton, David Langan, Jeremy Charles. 
Photograph: Colorsport/Rex/Shutterstock 
For one reason or another, 1988 proved a pivotal year for many of the key 
characters of the Milk Cup final a couple of years earlier. John Aldridge, by 
then at Liverpool, went back to Wembley in pursuit of a Double and became the 
first person to miss a penalty in an FA Cup final as Wimbledon produced a 
memorable upset. QPR finished fifth – they had been top after 10 games – with 
Smith employing a revolutionary (for England) 5-3-2 formation with which he had 
dabbled at Oxford, his finest hour in top-flight management. And Evans, with 
his Oxford side crumbling, resigned in March to go back to scouting. “I 
thought, why should I keep going home at weekends and be sick to death with 
everything?” he said. “Job satisfaction means more to me than anything at this 
stage of my career. When I came here as scout I was very happy.”

Oxford replaced him with Mark Lawrenson, the former Liverpool centre-back who 
had just been forced into retirement because of injury and would thus, 
unusually, end the league season holding both the wooden spoon and a winner’s 
medal. But that October Robert Maxwell came back to Oxford to buy their best 
player, Dean Saunders. A furious Lawrenson was sacked on his way to hand in his 
notice. Precisely a year earlier they had been ninth in the top flight. 
Suddenly, and emphatically, the period when the idea of Oxford winning a major 
trophy might have been considered unremarkable was over.

* (By way of context, in 1985 the average UK salary was £11,691, so Smith was 
seeking 4.3 times the national average wage; the current average UK salary is 
£27,531, while a mid-ranking Premier League manager can expect to earn around 
£1.5m, or 54.5 times the national average wage. The background of the players 
also contrasts with those that populate the modern-day top flight. Oxford’s 
captain, Malcolm Shotton, had been working as a knitter in a hosiery factory 
and playing non-league football before moving to the Manor Ground in 1980. 
“I’ve known what it’s like to struggle,” he said. “Those hard, sweating hot 
days on the factory floor will always be in my mind. There’s never any question 
I will take my profession for granted.” Aldridge had a similar experience. “I 
was an apprentice toolmaker at the British Leyland plant in Speke,” he said. “I 
came off the factory floor. I know what that’s like. That has kept my feet on 
the ground.” Current British top-flight footballers are extraordinarily 
unlikely to have spent much time in factories, and only partly because there 
aren’t really any left for them to work in.)
 