
The little grebes 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/l/littlegrebe/index.aspx>
 have changed into their smart off-season outfits – smoky-brown, with a dark 
cap worn low on the brow – and moved upriver, westward, to winter with us. The 
quickening of the current has brought a dipper down from the river’s higher 
reaches. In a hawthorn that overhangs the water, redwings gorge on the dull red 
fruit.

These aren’t the first redwings I’ve seen 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/r/redwing/index.aspx>
 this season: since the turn of October they’ve been skipping through high 
overhead in threes and fours and fives,calling seep, seep 
<http://www.garden-birds.co.uk/birds/redwing.htm>. The warden, hunkered in the 
adjoining meadow on autumn “vismigging”(visible migrant) 
<http://www.sbsg.org/visible-migration> duty, pointed out to me their 
distinctively irregular wingbeats.

But these are the first I’ve seen in close-up: close enough to see the 
clotted-cream eyestripe and vermilion underwing of these dapper little 
thrushes. Newly arrived from Scandinavia or north-eastern Europe, they’ll gulp 
down haws and other autumn fruits until the trees are bare. Then they’ll repair 
in flocks to the fields.

Predatory menace of the peregrine in the pylon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/08/predatory-menace-peregrine-pylon-country-diary>
Because they only come to us in winter, it’s easy to think that, for all their 
delicacy (the redwing is the smallest thrush commonly seen in the UK), these 
are robust birds, nordically indifferent to frost and snow. But in fact 
redwings can suffer terribly when the temperature drops.

Writers of the early 20th century were familiar with the bird’s fearful 
vulnerability to cold. “A redwing starved to death used to be no unfrequent 
sight in the course of a winter’s ramble,” wroteCA Johns 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Alexander_Johns>, while John Henry 
Salter remembered, in the spring, finding “the dried remains of redwings in the 
crevices into which they crept for shelter when the frost was cruel”.

Better, perhaps, to think of the redwing as it is known in the far northern 
beechwood where it is born and breeds. The Newcastle naturalistWilliam Chapman 
Hewitson <http://www.digplanet.com/wiki/William_Chapman_Hewitson> visited 
Norway in 1833, and saw the bird in its full breeding-season splendour, 
“perched upon the summit of the highest trees, pouring forth its delightfully 
wild note”.

Here, now, the redwings are quiet, too busy eating to sing, and for the moment 
the only wild note comes from an irate wren, tutting and sneezing deep in the 
green-grey brambles.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>




 