
George Monbiot makes many good points (Farmers fear life outside the EU, but 
it could mean a rebirth for rural Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>
, 11 January), including free markets’ impact on small farmers whose incomes 
fall in times of plenty. He could have said more on food security. Climate 
change, including gas escapes from frozen deposits, is a growing threat but 
pests, diseases, routine weather and even large volcanic eruptions (egTambora, 
1815 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1815_eruption_of_Mount_Tambora>) can create 
havoc. So who is actually responsible for food security, here or abroad?

“Britain can always import” is the reply despite a falling pound, but a recent 
Russian drought caused a grain export ban which could spread if global supplies 
struggled. Fisheries are exhausted, good British land is vanishing under 
development, yet nobody wants the bill for food storage. Instead surplus food 
yields quick profits via livestock feed, biofuels, brewing or even cosmetics.

Related: Of course farmers fear Brexit, but it could save the British 
countryside | George Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>

There are various possible improvements but cutting waste may be simplest. The 
Institution of Mechanical Engineers estimates that over 30% of global food 
production never reaches shops or markets while food wastage in supermarkets, 
restaurants, shops, homes, canteens and airlines is massive. Feeding human food 
to livestock is wasteful, as are over-eating, too many cash crops, killing then 
spurning edible animals and (until recently) fishing throwback.

Improving food security won’t be cheap or popular but is easy if supplies are 
the priority. If Britain faced shortages, though, why should anyone rescue a 
rich country that fecklessly produces far less food than it could?
Iain Climie
Whitchurch, Hampshire

• George Monbiot is on the right track. But I’m not clear why he won’t allow 
continuing financial support for ecologically sensitive food production. I’m a 
small, part-time farmer raising pedigree beef cattle and at the same time 
planting trees and trying to restore the ecology. Without “subsidy”, I would 
either have to subsidise this enterprise myself out of other income or hand the 
land over to a bigger or more intensive farmer, who might well trash it. Many 
producers below the very largest would be faced with similar decisions. Does 
George really want all his food to come from City-based absentee landlords or 
overseas corporate agribusiness? Financial support for agro-ecological 
producers – and only them – would be a payment for provision of public goods, 
not a subsidy.
Richard Middleton
Castle Douglas, Dumfries and Galloway

• While the prospect of putting right much that is wrong with our current 
Tory-determined agriculture is attractive, George Monbiot should recognise that 
sheep and goats, along with pigs and cattle, are farmed not only for their meat 
but also for their milk, cheese and wool or hides. You have to factor these 
into the economic argument or any comparison with other forms of farming will 
be invalid.

Furthermore, there is nothing to stop us reconfiguring the way we use 
agricultural labour. Any tales of cockneydom, for instance, would be incomplete 
without the recollection of good times enjoyed hop-picking in Kent, while 
plenty of British students have spent their summers harvesting grapes in French 
vineyards. Granted, the weather conditions the approach to these, but a 
properly enforced national minimum wage, with no gangmaster-led rip-offs, minus 
unrealistic picking quotas, would be a far better way to attract our own 
unemployed, plus those getting by in the gig economy, so it is theoretically 
easy enough to keep the produce coming. Polytunnels and automated picking 
machinery are already familiar in some sectors, so the handpicked stuff might 
eventually be restricted to hipster markets, but we don’t have to carry on as 
we are.

This country used to be a byword for innovation in agriculture; can you really 
believe we have lost it?
John Starbuck
Huddersfield, West Yorkshire

Related: Your opinions: what the Brexit vote means for farmers and EU 
nationals in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/your-opinions-brexit-vote-farmers-eu-nationals-uk>

• It is wrong to assert that sheep grazing is wasting land that could be used 
for other purposes, and that it is ecologically harmful. Sheep grazing is 
directly responsible for the creation and management of chalk down land, which 
is the aesthetic and ecological treasure of southern Britain; while the uplands 
of the rest of the country are not suitable for anything else, which is why the 
sheep are there. Without sheep grazing, both would degenerate to scrub. 
Woodland would take thousands of years to regenerate, if at all. As I prefer 
home-produced natural fabrics on my skin, as opposed to imported or synthetic 
fabrics, I am happy to continue subsidising sheep farming, with or without the 
EU. Read some paleogeography George.
Michael Heaton
Warminster, Wiltshire

• While true hill flocks may now be uneconomic without subsidy as they do 
produce very little, the vast majority of the sheep meat we eat is produced on 
improved grasslands. These flocks are profitable and could survive Brexit if we 
are not swamped with subsidised imports.

Our case is typical of many upland farms. The land is too poor to grow food 
crops such as wheat or potatoes so we feed livestock on rotational grass and 
forage crops. If we were to stop producing lamb and beef the farm could be 
turned over to wildlife but that would mean more food imports, wildlife being 
displaced in another part of the world, and the loss of this family farm and 
the employment it gives.
Luke Gaskell
Melrose, Scottish Borders 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 