
In their quest to make employees happier, companies around the world have been 
busy installing play equipment in the workplace. Google has set upslides in its 
Zurich office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/feb/17/workplace-design-office-space-fun>
 so engineers can whizz between floors. The online shoe retailer Zappos 
encourages employeesto dress as their favourite animal 
<http://qz.com/317918/holacracy-at-zappos-its-either-the-future-of-management-or-a-social-experiment-gone-awry/>
 on certain days. There are US companies that give staffan opportunity to be 
ninjas 
<http://www.vice.com/read/the-go-game-pays-poor-artists-to-dress-up-in-costumes-and-entertain-office-workers-000>
 for the day.Fussball tables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/03/olympics2012-tablefootball>
, computer games, action figures and scooters have become fixtures in some 
workplaces. And if you walked into the offices ofInventionland 
<http://inventionland.com/>, you could be mistaken for assuming you were in a 
children’s playground: workspaces there include a fake pirate ship, a tree 
house, and a giant shoe.

The lengths companies go to in order to make employees happy to spend 
increasingly long hours at work do not stop there:Tony Hsieh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/zappos-shoes-profits-happiness-business>
, chief executive of Zappos, has been known todown vodka shots with employees 
in interviews 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/micahsolomon/2014/03/05/do-you-really-want-to-hire-like-zappos-cultural-fit-and-its-very-dangerous-pitfalls/#1d53534b3954>
. And Expedia, ranked this year as the happiest workplace in the UK, has
modelled its London office on a night club 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/inside-the-happiest-workplace-in-the-uk-where-staff-can-get-a-14000-travel-allowance-2016-3?r=US&IR=T>
 with free bars, chill-out zones and Formula One simulators.

In The Wellness Syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/22/the-wellness-syndrome-carl-cederstrom-andre-spicer-persuasive-diagnosis>
, the book I wrote with Carl Cederström, we took a look at the increasing 
fascination with happiness at work. We found a growing industry of 
“funsultants” offering advice on how to make workforces more positive. Firms 
such as Zappos have started to employchief happiness officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jul/13/if-youre-happy-and-you-know-it-become-a-chief-happiness-officer>
. There is also a booming field of management research on positivity at work.

But despite all this effort, work still sucks. According to a recent study by 
the London School of Economics, the place wherewe feel most miserable is work 
<http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/48924/1/dp1187.pdf>. There is only one place and 
circumstance that makes us feel worse – being sick in bed.

Workplace design: how office space is becoming fun again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/feb/17/workplace-design-office-space-fun>
The clamour to make employees happy at work is driven by one of the oldest 
cliches in the human resource management playbook: that a happy worker is a 
good worker. As William Davies shows in his bookThe Happiness Industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/03/the-happiness-industry-by-william-davies-review>
, this idea has been part of management theory since at least the 1930s. The 
problem is that there have been decades of research on the link between 
employee satisfaction and productivity, and the resultsare pretty inconclusive 
<http://epublications.bond.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1307&context=business_pubs>
.

There are studies that find if you show students a standup comedy routine and 
then get them to spot errors in a piece of writing,they will do better than 
students who have not seen the comedy routine 
<http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/1335/1/WRAP_Oswald_twerp_882.pdf>. However, another 
study, of a major UK supermarket chain, found that the stores withthe least 
satisfied employees were the most productive and profitable 
<http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/full/10.1108/01443570210412060>.

Happiness at work may be good for some jobs – such as customer-facing work 
where you need to make members of the public feel upbeat too – but there is 
evidence to suggest happiness could be a liability in other roles. One study, 
for instance, found that people who were angry tended to get better outcomes 
during a negotiation than a happy person would. People in a good moodwere also 
worse at noticing an act of deception 
<http://www.communicationcache.com/uploads/1/0/8/8/10887248/on_being_happy_and_gullible-_mood_effects_on_skepticism_and_the_detection_of_deception.pdf>
 than people in a bad mood.

While happiness at work is not always good for productivity, surely it must be 
good for individual employees? This is not always true either. To proceed with 
an unerring emphasis on being happy can crowd out other emotions; anger, 
sadness, anxiety and uncertainty – all staples of the contemporary workplace – 
become a no-no. This implicit ban on negative emotions can therefore be 
emotionally stunting for employees. A number of recent studies show that being 
able to express a range of positive andnegative emotions 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/negative-emotions-key-well-being/> 
is important, particularly when people are dealing with difficult experiences.

But giving space for a range of emotions at work can also be important for the 
health of the entire organisation. This is wonderfully illustrated by a recent 
study consideringwhy the mobile phone maker Nokia failed 
<http://knowledge.insead.edu/sites/www.insead.edu/files/images/asq_2015_print_vuori_huy_distributed_attention_and_shared_emotions_in_innovation_process.pdf>
. In 2007, the year the iPhone launched, Nokia was the world’s leading 
mobile-phone maker. It had ample information about Apple’s venture, so should 
have been able to successfully challenge it.

However, the Finnish company had invested heavily in a smartphone operating 
system called Symbian, which wasn’t working well. Middle managers in the 
company knew it, but they feared communicating the bad news up the hierarchy 
because they didn’t want to appear to be negative. They had got the message: if 
you wanted to keep your division open, it was imperative to be only upbeat and 
pass on positive news. Because senior managers only got positive news, it took 
them too long toditch Symbian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2010/nov/29/nokia-symbian-closes-meego-awaits>
, switch operating systems and launch a decent smartphone. By that point,Apple 
and Samsung had overtaken Nokia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jun/18/nokia-mobile-phones-microsoft>
. NowNokia no longer makes mobile phones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/nokia-returns-phone-market-microsoft-sells-brand-hmd-foxconn>
.

The sad truth is that being constantly on the lookout for happiness may 
actually mean happiness eludes us. This pointwas illustrated by a study 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3160511/> in which psychologists 
got two groups of people to do something that usually makes people happy – 
watching a film of someone winning an ice-skating competition. They then tested 
how happy the experience made them. Before watching the video, one group read 
out a statement about how important it was to be happy and have an upbeat 
attitude; the other group did not.

The psychologists found that the group that didn’t read out the statement 
actually tended to be more happy after watching the video. This suggests that 
when we talk about how important happiness is, we become less likely to find 
it, even when we have experiences that usually make us happy.

Wanting to be happy at work is fair enough. But being forced to be happy at 
work can be troubling. If organisations were genuinely interested in making 
their employees happy at work, then they would probably give up on the 
corporate clowning and look at some much more downbeat interventions. A simple 
step would be allowing employees to work from home at least some of the time. 
One experimental study found employee satisfaction andproductivity shot up when 
people were allowed to work from home 
<http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/130/1/165.short>.

A second simple step would be to stop interrupting workers with all sorts of 
pointless demands such as long emails, bureaucratic forms and compulsory 
happiness initiatives.A study by researchers at Harvard Business School 
<https://hbr.org/product/the-progress-principle-using-small-wins-to-ignite-/an/10106-HBK-ENG>
 found workers felt most satisfied on days at work when they were just able to 
consistently focus on an important piece of work and make some meaningful 
progress on it.

Finally, removing some of the endemic uncertainty that is built into many 
workplaces would be an excellent step towards making employees more happy at 
work.In my own work with Mats Alvesson 
<https://profilebooks.com/the-stupidity-paradox.html> we found that many 
organisational restructuring and change initiatives achieve very little apart 
from making employees miserable, building the reputations of a few managers, 
and fattening the coffers of consultants.

One way organisations really could make their employees happier, aside from 
slides and vodka shots? Think long and hard before pointless restructuring.
 