
Today I’m excited to announce the launch of the first Guardian app on Google 
Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/guardian-glassware-google-glass-uk-explorer-programe>
 - known as ‘Glassware’.

 Our experimentation with Glassware is another step along our digital journey. 
Wearable tech is firmly on its way into our lives, and with an audience more 
connected and tech savvy than ever before, it makes sense for us to be 
innovating in this space.

Google Glass <http://www.google.co.uk/glass/start/> has been making tech 
headlines for some time now, but it is still very much a product for early 
adopters. As with any significant developments in tech, a beta period is 
essential to weigh up the benefits, best practices and best uses for the 
technology and the way it interacts with our lives. Being there at the start 
and collaborating with Google means we are working well ahead of the curve.

We are proud that the Guardian is launching its very first Glassware 
<http://glass.theguardian.com> this week, as part of our dedication to 
experimenting on innovative platforms for our journalism. It is part of our 
mission to explore exciting possibilities to figure out what works - and what 
doesn’t - whether in terms of our users’ needs, rapid software development, or 
for the daily working lives of our journalists.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fthe-guardian-launches-the-guardian-for-glass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403537093956%2F4f5d2923-2363-4802-9bcd-23d97000e0c9-bestSizeAvailable.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20launches%20the%20Guardian%20for%20Glass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fthe-guardian-launches-the-guardian-for-glass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20launches%20the%20Guardian%20for%20Glass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fthe-guardian-launches-the-guardian-for-glass%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403537093956%2F4f5d2923-2363-4802-9bcd-23d97000e0c9-bestSizeAvailable.png>
 Glastonbury forecast Photograph: /Guardian 
Wearable tech is here to stay. These devices will develop quickly from niche 
applications and early adopters into much more mainstream products, whether it 
will be glasses, watches or even items of clothing.

This emerging area of technology presents many opportunities for news 
organisations - both in terms of offering readers a fresh way to receive 
journalism with highly personalised news and information, as well as offering 
journalists new ways to gather news and storytelling. Publishers who ignore it 
do so at their peril.

It is easy to imagine how wearable technology might revolutionise live 
reporting. It is clear thatGoogle Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-glass> and other such products 
could become essential and exciting tools for journalists, and we have been 
experimenting in this area. The largest parts of our efforts and our Glassware, 
however, is concentrated on the Glass experience for our users; to learn how, 
when and what people choose to consume on this platform.

Personally it has been fascinating over the past few years (and I admit quite 
wonderful) to see how people have turned to reading the news every time 
technology has liberated more disposable time. We are constantly learning, and 
re-evaluating our mobile products through our own usability research, and we 
will continue to do this with Glassware.

Google Glass will give the Guardian its first insights into wearable 
technology. But it may also unlock an abundance of other information about 
mobile in general: small screens, voice commands and reading news-on-the-go.

Only one thing is certain; this is a new adventure and one of those wonderful 
moments in time when we really don’t know quite what to expect. And those 
instances of significant technological changes are moments to cherish, enjoy 
and learn from.
 