
It was never my plan to become a professional interviewer. For the life of me, 
I can’t think why not. I fell into the job by accident nearly 10 years ago, and 
to this day it still feels like implausibly good luck to get paid to make 
conversation.

An interview is not the same thing as a conversation, but it’s my job to make 
the subject feel as if it is. No one talks freely under interrogation, or if 
conscious of every word being recorded, so the art of interviewing lies in 
creating the atmosphere of a kitchen table chat. An occupational hazard is that 
friends in my kitchen sometimes accuse me of interviewing them, but mostly I’m 
just studying what makes us want to open up.

There is a widely held misconception that nobody likes to be asked intimately 
personal questions. I don’t know where that came from, but I do know it’s not 
true. If it were, why would so many people like to play truth or dare when 
they’re drunk? I can only think most of us are too nervous to give it a go, so 
on the rare occasion we blunder in, it goes horribly wrong. I hadn’t a clue 
what I was doing the first time I tried, and will never forget the stunned 
disgust on MP Ruth Kelly’s face when I asked, without preamble, if “the rumours 
about you being a lesbian” were true. The devoutly Catholic mother of four had 
been quite unaware of the rumours, which was hardly surprising, given they 
contained not an ounce of truth. Nor were they an appropriate line ofinquiry to 
put to the secretary of state for education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/sep/24/interviews.schools>.

I had learned my lesson by the time I interviewed the rapper Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/04/chris-brown-rihanna-interview-x>
. When someone’s favourite subject is themselves, and they find everything else 
a yawn, no question can be too intrusive or impertinent. The interview only 
really got going when I asked at what age he lost his virginity.

But with most people, it’s just a matter of asking their permission. “Can I 
ask you a dreadfully rude question?” may sound rhetorical, but I’ve found 
people usually answer, and almost always with a yes. Once complicity has been 
established, no one takes offence – which is howI recently asked Usain Bolt if 
he practised cunnilingus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/usain-bolt-feel-good-because-know-done-it-clean>
. It took a while for him to stop laughing enough to answer. (And, no, he 
doesn’t.)

More often than not, the subject someone says they do not want to discuss is 
the one they really want to talk about. If it’s a scandal, and they are 
supposedly in disgrace, however profuse their public apology may have been, 
what they actually are is indignant.Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/feb/03/angus-deayton-affair>’s 
publicist was adamant that his 2002 cocaine-and-call-girls indiscretion was 
off-limits, andJonathan Ross warned me off Sachsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/09/jonathan-ross-interview>. But 
privately both felt thoroughly wronged and were keen to tell their side of the 
story, even if only off the record.

I used to think that total ignorance of a person’s expertise would present a 
problem. Funnily enough, it doesn’t. No one seems to mind that I don’t know 
what I’m talking about – as long as I admit it. The great mistake is to bluff. 
Beforeinterviewing the physicist Peter Higgs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/06/peter-higgs-interview-underlying-incompetence>
, I spent a week trying to get my head around the God particle, and in the end 
we had a much more interesting conversation about what was wrong with academia 
today.

People often imagine that professional interviewers have an “agenda”. In my 
experience that would be a complete waste of time, because the funniest things 
people say are never the ones I could have predicted. It would be a very odd 
interviewer who planned to getGeorge Galloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/29/george-galloway-interview-bradford-west>
 to say he was a catch because “I’m like a broom handle in the morning”, or to 
ambush the cultural theoristSlavoj ŽiŽek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/10/slavoj-zizek-humanity-ok-people-boring>
 into admitting he doesn’t know his own door number.

In the era of the online echo chamber, it’s perfectly possible to talk only to 
people who agree with you, on everything. This is a shame. Two of my favourite 
recent interviewees wereNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/nigel-farage-ukip-eu-referendum-interview-vote-leave-brief-every-day>
 and theTory MP David Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/david-davies-mp-have-a-look-at-my-teeth-whats-the-problem>
, because so much of what they think is fascinatingly mad. The Twittersphere 
encourages us to tell anyone with whom we disagree that they’re stupid and 
wrong; I find it more rewarding to find out why they think they’re right. Katie 
Hopkins would have loved to argue with me about benefit claimants or fat 
people, but she gets paid to have those rows every day.It was a revelation to 
discover that her opinions have a lot to do with the epilepsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/14/katie-hopkins-interview> 
she had suffered from for 20 years.

Of course there will be exceptions to everything I’ve said, and really there 
is only one golden rule: you have to listen.The only interviewee I’ve ever 
walked out on was Gordon Ramsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/08/gordon-ramsay-behind-bars>
, not because of anything he said, but because he couldn’t be bothered to hear 
the questions. It is impossible to have a good conversation if what you’re 
actually doing while the other person is talking is waiting for your turn. Bill 
Clinton said recently that the key to his success was “seeing people”; he 
always takes care to see the person pouring his coffee, or opening a door, and 
I think this explains why the world always found him so magnetising. We all 
need to be seen. But we all need to be heard, too.
 