
Name: James Woods.

Age: 69.

Appearance: Narrow.

Narrow of body or of mind? Both have been suggested.

Really? I rather enjoy his book reviews in the New Yorker. You are thinking of 
James Wood <http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/james-wood>. This is James 
Woods.

Oh, you mean the American character actor, best known during his heyday in the 
1980s and 90s for playing seedy antiheroes and under-villains?That’s right.

I remember him from such films as Videodrome, Once Upon a Time in America and 
Casino.And The Simpsons, where he briefly replaced Apu at the Kwik-E-Mart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5xA21Qoxaw>.

Indeed. He is also a collector’s item among Hollywood actors, in so far as he 
is an angry conservative instead of a liberal 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/james-woods-i-dont-expect-646351>.

How novel. Although he is rather cheerful at the moment.

How come? He has just won part of a lawsuit against a dead person 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/attorney-ordered-identify-dead-client-who-taunted-james-woods-twitter-960457>
 who tweeted about him 18 months ago.

Is that wise? Arguably not. But like so many of his characters, Woods is not 
really a moving-on kind of guy.

What did the tweet contain? In reply to a comment Woods made about the media, 
it said, “cocaine addict James Woods still sniffing and spouting”. Yet I should 
clarify at this point that Woods is not, and has never been, a cocaine addict.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fthe-curious-case-of-james-woods-a-dead-tweeter-and-a-10m-cocaine-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff02a2c0cc7f3392df1318558723ee2e9379dbb98%2F24_0_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20curious%20case%20of%20James%20Woods%2C%20a%20dead%20tweeter%20and%20a%20%2410m%20cocaine%20libel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fthe-curious-case-of-james-woods-a-dead-tweeter-and-a-10m-cocaine-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20curious%20case%20of%20James%20Woods%2C%20a%20dead%20tweeter%20and%20a%20%2410m%20cocaine%20libel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fthe-curious-case-of-james-woods-a-dead-tweeter-and-a-10m-cocaine-libel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff02a2c0cc7f3392df1318558723ee2e9379dbb98%2F24_0_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
 James Woods with Sean Young in the 1988 film Boost. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection/REX 
You certainly should. So his response was to sue for defamation, citing months 
of abuse from the same account, and demanding $10m (£8.15m) in damages.

Who was the tweeter? Well that’s the $10m question. The account holder called 
himselfAbe List or @abelisted <https://twitter.com/abelisted>, but no one 
really knows. He was defending the case anonymously until his attorney claimed 
that he had died. Despite this, a Los Angeles superior court judge has now 
ordered that the name must be revealed.

Isn’t this a bit petty? That depends on your point of view. Woods says that 
people wrongly believing he is a cocaine addict could make him uninsurable and 
finish his career. Others say that it is just a bit vindictive.

What gave them that impression? His own tweet saying, “If you die, I’ll follow 
you to the bowels of Hell” <> probably didn’t help.

Do say: “I am the calm blue ocean. I am the calm blue ocean. I am the calm 
blue ocean …”

Don’t say: [redacted].
 