
Book of Henry

Naomi Watts raises two boys – one (Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/room-review-brie-larson-shines-in-a-dark-dungeon>
’s Jacob Tremblay) pretty average, the other, Henry (herSt Vincent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/04/st-vincent-review-bill-murray> 
co-star Jaeden Lieberher), a child genius. Henry has a crush on the daughter of 
the police commissioner and writes down a plan to save her from harm, which 
Watts decides to enact. Sounds cutesy, even creepy, but we have a good feeling 
about this one.

Clash

A brilliant docudrama from Mohamed Diab, which premiered at Cannes last year 
and unfolds inside an Egyptian police van in 2013 as post-revolution tensions 
boil over. It’s taken a while to get a UK release –but it’s worth it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/clash-review-egyptian-revolution>.

The Dinner

Carnage <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/02/carnage-film-review> 
meetsCaché <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/hidden-cache-crime> in 
this claustrophobic drama about two couples who discuss what to do when their 
sons are shown, unidentified, to have committed a crime on the news. Richard 
Gere, Steve Coogan, Laura Linney and Rebecca Hall are the diners; Chloe Sevigny 
is also in the mix. Director Oren Moverman made underpraised homelessness drama
Time Out of Mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/time-out-of-mind-review-a-compassionate-look-at-life-on-the-street>
 with Gere a couple of years ago; perhaps this film – which premieres at Berlin 
in February – can gain more traction.

Gifted
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhqTSKqBCdf0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhqTSKqBCdf0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhqTSKqBCdf0&media=>
Meet child genius number two on our list: the cute blonde niece of lovely 
Chris Evans, scuzzing up a little with beard here and taking over parental 
duties following the death of his sister. He wants her to stay in Jenny Slate’s 
lovely regular school; Lindsey Duncan (the child’s grandmother) has more 
ambitious designs for her.Octavia Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/octavia-spencer> dishes out some hard truths 
to all.

The most exciting science-fiction films of 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/23/the-most-exciting-science-fiction-films-of-2017>
The Mountain Between Us

Kate Winslet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> and Idris Elba 
take the leads as a newly engaged writer and – handily – surgeon who survive a 
brutal plane crash in a snowy wilderness. Palestinian director Hany Abu-Assad, 
twice Oscar nominated, takes the reins.

The Party

More carnage, this time Sally Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sally-potter> style, as Timothy Spall, 
Patricia Clarkson, Bruno Ganz, Kristin Scott Thomas, Emily Mortimer and Cillian 
Murphy endure an awful knees-up. Not a lot is known of quite why, but Potter 
has called it “a comedy wrapped around a tragedy,” which “starts as a 
celebration and ends with blood on the floor”. Like The Dinner, it premieres in 
Berlin.

The Shack

More words of wisdom from Octavia Spencer, this time as God in the 
much-ballyhooed adaptation ofself-published religious sensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/17/news.booksforchildrenandteenagers>
 The Shack. Sam Worthington is the man grieving his daughter, who finds a 
letter which may or may not tell him where her remains are buried, as well as 
explaining the meaning of suffering.

Thank You for Your Service

This is an Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> 
movie, but it’s not a lost comedy searching for a genre. It’s a drama about how 
post-traumatic stress disorder affects three soldiers returning from Iraq and 
trying to readjust to civilian life. Schumer stars alongside Miles Teller and 
Haley Bennett.

The most exciting films of 2017: returning auteurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/22/the-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs>
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri

Five years since Seven Psychopaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/09/seven-psychopaths-review-french-mcdonagh>
,In Bruges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/18/my-favourite-film-in-bruges>
 director Martin McDonagh returns with the Fargo-esque story of a woman 
(Frances McDormand) who wages war against her local police force following the 
death of her daughter. Woody Harrelson and Sam Rockwell head up the dubious 
cops; Abbie Cornish is the wife of the former, while Peter Dinklage also has a 
part to play.
 