
The internet has gained an unfortunate reputation for being a hostile place 
for women. Research by the Guardian into abuse on its own comment threads 
earlier this year found that women writerswere far more likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>
 to be targeted by trolls than men. Plus negative responses to women online are 
more likely to stray from plain old dismissive criticism andbecome violent 
threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/26/threats-death-violence-common-for-women-in-politics-report-says>
.

But despite its bad rep, the online media world is providing ample 
opportunities for women. In the last few years digital media aimed at female 
audiences – from Lena Dunham’sLenny Letter <http://www.lennyletter.com/> blog to
Broadly <https://broadly.vice.com/en_us>, a website and digital video channel 
reflecting women’s experiences – have been such a success that the industry 
publication Advertising Age asked:“Is there such a thing as a men’s media 
company anymore?” 
<http://adage.com/article/media/a-men-s-media-company-2016/305970/>

In the UK, new female-led digital platforms tend to reject the usual women’s 
magazine fare. TakeStandard Issue <http://standardissuemagazine.com/>, an 
online magazine that was launched by comedian Sarah Millican in October 2014. 
Editor Mickey Noonan explains that the whole point was to do things 
differently: “We wanted to see what would happen if we made a magazine our way. 
No celebrity tittle-tattle, no Photoshopping, no calorie counting, no cellulite 
circling.”

“A lot of media is keen to put women into boxes but we need do our own thing 
and not be told that women are only interested in certain topics,” Noonan adds. 
It’s that set of standards and a mix of content that has proved a winning 
formula.


Women described being almost emotionally attached to their phones, but they 
also hated the internet a bit

Similarly The Pool <https://www.the-pool.com/>, set up in March 2015, began 
with co-founders Sam Baker and Lauren Laverne doing a huge amount of research 
to identify what their audience wanted and how they were consuming media, Baker 
says.


“We felt that the audience for women’s media was moving on, they weren’t 
watching TV, they weren’t buying magazines in the same numbers as they used to. 
We could see the audience was on mobile – you only have to stand in a queue in 
Pret to see that.”

But, Baker says, their research (they surveyed women aged 25-50) uncovered a 
love-hate relationship with the internet. “Women described being almost 
emotionally attached to their phones, they were spending a lot of time online – 
but they also kind of hated the internet a bit, there’s a deluge of information 
out there and a lot of it is just crap.”

In an effort to provide a more curated experience, they decided to launch 
content at specific times of the day, and provide a schedule you can view ahead 
of time, like you would for radio. This was one of the decisions they were 
advised not to go ahead with at the time, but ended up keeping. “People thought 
we were mad,” says Baker. Another was choosing not to have comments on below 
articles, which writers say helps them feel more comfortable.


Others have sought to cater to a woman’s audience in a typically 
male-dominated field of journalism. That’s why writer Holly Brockwell set up
Gadgette <http://www.gadgette.com/> – a site that reviews tech products for 
women and breaks tech stories – because she felt there was a “depressing lack 
of female voices in tech journalism”.


“There are heaps of female geeks, and while they do read the mainstream tech 
sites, it does get irritating hearing smartphones described as ‘supermodel 
thin’ and laptops as ‘sexy’. Besides, there are genuine differences in how the 
genders experience and use tech, especially wearables,” Brockwell adds. She 
explains that by setting up the site, they’ve brought some “brilliant female 
tech journos to prominence and showed that the public wants to see more women 
writing about technology”.


Likewise, Angelica Malin, a 25-year-old entrepreneur who launched the foodie 
magazineAbout Time <http://www.abouttimemagazine.co.uk/>, is a strong advocate 
for women in online media. “It’s a huge opportunity,” she says. “You can now 
start a business with a lot less capital, as we have so many free marketing 
tools like Twitter and Instagram to promote a brand, you can spread your 
message through word-of-mouth on the internet. Honestly, I think we’ve never 
had it better.” Her advice is “not to plan too much for too long, and just 
start” saying she learned on the job after setting out wanting to write after 
university.


Why so few women in tech? Your answer depends on your gender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/dec/12/why-so-few-women-in-tech-your-answer-depends-on-your-gender>
But setting up a digital platform, and generating income from it is tough – 
it’s a competitive world and advertising revenue is notoriously hard to 
generate – so should you try it? Noonan says that funding for Standard Issue 
has been a challenge, especially as they don’t want to compromise their 
integrity. But she still advises others to do it. “Be prepared to graft – it is 
hard but has always been rewarding.”


Baker and Laverne, along with other editors involved in the Pool’s launch, 
also faced obstacles. Baker said were often the only women in the room when 
meeting digital agencies and were even advised to bring a man with them to 
fundraising meetings so that investors would feel “safer”.


Baker’s top tip is to ask people for their advice, but remember that what they 
say is “just someone someone’s opinion and you don’t have to listen to it”. She 
adds that launching can be a lonely, stressful experience – so seek out other 
start-up founders to surround yourself with.


“It’s important women stake their claim to the internet,” says Noonan of the 
increasing number of female-founded or female audience-led online media. “It 
can be a hugely hopeful and transformative place, and the more women can see 
other women staking that claim, the more likely they are to do the same.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 