
The trade union bill <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tradeunions>, which 
the government advertised as its flagship at the start of the parliamentary 
session that ends next week,has been heavily amended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/26/no-10-makes-new-u-turn-over-trade-union-bill>
. But it is stilla nasty, vindictive piece of legislation 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2016/04/union-campaign-scores-win-big-changes-made-trade-union-bill/>
. There is no justification for it beyond a partisan desire to weaken trade 
unions, and indirectly to weaken the Labour party, to the point where it 
becomes almost impossible for workers to defend their rights. The intent of the 
bill sits uneasily with thejointly authored Guardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/27/david-cameron-brendan-barber-europe-british-workers-brexit>
 last Thursday in which David Cameron and the former TUC general secretary Sir 
Brendan Barber appealed for a remain vote in the EU referendum partly in order 
to shore up protections for workers, many of which rest on European legislation.

Many of the bill’s proposals are high on the agenda of the neoliberal 
Brexiteers. Last week, the leave campaigner Bernard Jenkin complained that the 
concessions were an unprincipled sale of government policy just to buy the 
left’s more active support for remain. Certainly, theTUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> was open about prioritising the 
fight against the legislation rather than for the remain campaign. As early as 
January, concessions were being trailed to a cross-party coalition of peers, 
some of whom held no brief for trade unions except as an important part of 
civil society.

This alliance of the unelected has fought hard but with only partial success 
to preserve the trade unions’ role in the processes of democracy. It has 
defeated the attempt to stop employers processing union dues – which is 
entirely voluntary – which could havecost some unions millions 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/article/2015/11/trade-union-bill-clears-commons/>
 in lost subs as they re-recruited their members and set up alternative ways of 
collecting their dues. That would have had a knock-on impact on the amount of 
cash unions could donate to Labour, but not nearly as much of an impact as 
making members opt in rather than out of the political levy. That will now 
apply only to new recruits, and will be phased in. The worst of the draconian 
rules on picketing, which the Conservative MP David Davis suggested would not 
have been out of place in Franco’s Spain, have also been dropped.

But the bill still includes clauses demanding that pickets have an 
identifiable and authorised supervisor. The double strike threshold in 
essential public services, a category that includes teachers, energy workers 
and border security, remains, imposing a turnout of 50% and then a “yes” vote 
of at least 40% of all eligible voters. The bill’s critics still want more 
concessions on e-balloting – something Tories deemed too vulnerable to fraud 
for unions, but used to select Zac Goldsmith as their candidate for London 
mayor – and on the right to take time in the week for union work.

This bill is unprincipled, unfair and unjustified. Fewer days than ever 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/timeseries/bbfw>
 are lost to industrial action. Trade unions do not just protect and promote 
rights at work, but in an increasingly disconnected world offer a route into 
political engagement. In the absence of a negotiated agreement on party 
funding, their contribution to Labour funds is essential if there is to be 
anything like equality of arms between the two major parties.

David Cameron has sometimes claimed that the Tories are the real party of the 
workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/25/conservatives-workers-party-rebrand>
. The proposals in the trade union bill show just how remote this claim is from 
what most working lives actually involve – and how casually he is prepared to 
disregard one of the very foundations of democracy.
 