
We hear you, poor people. That was the message that blared out from Washington 
last week. It came from Christine Lagarde of the International Monetary Fund. 
It came from Jim Kim of theWorld Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank>. It came from Roberto Azevêdo 
of the World Trade Organisation. It came from every finance minister and 
central bank governor.

The people who run the global economy wanted the world to know that they 
understood what hadcaused the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/divided-britain-brexit-money-class-inequality-westminster>
 and given Donald Trump ashot at the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support>
. They talked a lot about theneed for inclusive growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/mar/10/inclusive-economic-growth-involve-society>
 and a capitalism that worked for all. To those who have been left behind in 
the past three decades, they said: we get it, we feel your pain.

The recognition that there is a problem is progress. Lagarde means it when she 
says the growinggap between rich and poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
 is holding back the global economy. Kim genuinely wants to see the fruits of 
growth skewed towards the bottom 40% in every country. The World Bank, IMF and 
WTO can sense that they are sitting on the edge of a volcano that could blow at 
any time. They fear, rightly, that a second big crash within a decade would 
create abacklash leading to protectionism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/rein-in-protectionism-to-boost-global-growth-says-christine-lagarde-imf>
 and the rise of dark political forces that would be difficult, if not 
impossible, to control.

That there are ingredients for a fresh crisis became apparent at various 
stages last week. According to the IMF, global debt hasrisen to a record level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/world-debt-has-hit-record-high-of-152tn-says-imf>
 of $152tn (£122tn) – more than double global GDP – at a time when activity is 
sluggish.Collapsing commodity prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/10/poorer-countries-commodity-slump-stronger-dollar-debt-payments>
 and weak demand from the west has meant that growth in sub-Saharan Africa is 
running at half the level of population increases. Companies in the emerging 
world loaded up on debt during the commodity boom and are vulnerable to rising 
US interest rates and any softening of the world economy. China is the most 
egregious example of debt being used to boost activity artificially.

The argument that rising debt is fine, because on the other side of ledger is 
an asset increasing in value, is specious. The only reason the assets are 
rising in price is because investors are taking on more debt to buy them. At 
some point, the asset bubble bursts, leaving borrowers with a major problem. 
This was the lesson of the sub-prime crisis and it is remarkable that memories 
are so short.

The next big one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/global-economy-2017-financial-crisis-developing-economies-oecd-unctad-guardian-view>
 could come from anywhere and it is good that the World Bank and IMF are aware 
of the risks. Even so, there was an air of unreality about the discussions in 
Washington last week.

The reason was simple: there was not the slightest hint from the IMF or World 
Bank that the policies they advocated during the heyday of theso-called 
Washington consensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/oct/05/new-washington-consensus-time-fight-inequality>
 – austerity, privatisation and financial liberalisation – have contributed to 
weak and unequal growth, with all the political discontent that this has caused.

Even worse, Lagarde and Kim seemed oblivious to the fact that the Washington 
consensus approach is alive and well within their organisations. The IMF’s
remedy for Greece and Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/imf-watchdog-criticises-handling-eurozone-crisis>
 during the eurozone crisis has been straight out of the structural adjustment 
playbook: reduce public spending, cut salaries and benefits, insist that 
state-owned enterprises return to the private sector, reduce minimum wages and 
restrict collective bargaining. Between them, the IMF and the European 
authorities are turning Greece into a developing country. It would be 
fascinating to see what sort of response Lagarde would get if she tried talking 
about inclusive growth to homeless peoplehuddled on the streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/jun/12/homelessness-in-greece-in-pictures>
 of Athens.

The IMF is effectively two institutions. It has a research department that has 
broken with the Washington consensus and programme teams that operate in the 
field as if we were still in the 1990s. Lagarde sides with the research team, 
but the recent package prepared for Egypt was the familiar mix of subsidy 
reductions, the introduction of value added tax and cuts to red tape. There is 
not much evidence that those who put it together are on message.

As for the World Bank, research by Oxfam 
<https://www.oxfam.org/en/research/ifc-and-tax-havens> has shown that 51 of the 
68 companies lent money in 2015 by its private finance arm, the International 
Finance Corporation, to fund investments in sub-Saharan Africa, use tax havens. 
That doesn’t square with the idea of inclusive capitalism. It is not 
immediately obvious why the World Bank is supporting private schools in 
low-income countries when the evidence is that they exclude the poorest and, in 
particular, girls.

The Jubilee Debt Campaign (JDC) has been keeping a close eye  
<http://jubileedebt.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/The-fall-and-rise-of-Ghanas-debt_10.16.pdf>
on Ghana, which grew strongly after oil was discovered and commodity prices 
were rising,but was left exposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/26/ghana-success-gold-oil-cocoa-economic-downturn>
 by the subsequent crash. More money was then borrowed to blunt the impact of 
the commodity price fall, but the halving of the Ghanaian currency, the cedi, 
meant that debt-servicing costs increased. Almost one-third of Ghana’s budget 
is spent on external debt servicing.

In early 2015, the IMF and World Bank said Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> was at high risk of being unable to 
pay its debts. Seven months later, the World Bank guaranteed $400m of 
repayments on a £1bn bond sold to private investors. It had to waive its rules 
to do so, because the World Bank is not supposed to guarantee loans to 
countries at high risk of distress.

The World Bank said it was trying to help refinance expensive short-term debt 
and free up resources that could be used for investment, but the winners of 
this arrangement are the speculators getting a 10.75% return, who will make 
money even if Ghana can’t repay the loan, due to the World Bank guarantee. The 
losers will be the Ghanaian people, who will be subject to austerity under the 
terms of a new IMF programme. Ghana is planning spending cuts by 2017 of 20% 
per head on 2012 levels.

Sub-Saharan Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> is not a 
homogeneous region. Some countries are still growing strongly, helped by 
declining energy prices. But Ghana is not the only country to fall foul of the 
boom and bust cycle in commodities, and the JDC is highlighting the risk of a 
fresh debt crisis.

Neither the World Bank nor the IMF consider this a serious threat. Kim said 
last week: “I am not yet concerned that we’re reaching a debt level crisis, 
certainly not in most of sub-Saharan Africa. But we have to watch it.”

The World Bank and IMF also need to be watched. There’s nothing wrong with the 
rhetoric, but it is the performance that counts. Lagarde and Kim say the world 
needs to make abetter fist of tackling inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/13/half-world-wealth-in-hands-population-inequality-report>
 – hooray to that. The work starts with their own institutions.

 * This article was amended on 9 October. It had incorrectly converted $152tn 
to £1,223tn. This has been corrected.  