
Today you’ll notice a difference in how you see Guardian content on your 
mobile when you come to us from Google.

Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP) <https://www.ampproject.org/> is a Google-led 
initiative which aims to significantly speed up the mobile web. We’ll make our 
regular content available in parallel in the AMP format, which can be served 
very quickly in specific areas of Google products and other non-Google apps.

 Guardian content as seen on AMP 
We’ve been working with Google on the AMP project (born of the Digital News 
Initiative launched between the Guardian and seven other European publishers 
with Google) since its inception. Although launched, it’s still very much a 
test – from both Google’s point of view and ours.

The pages won’t look much different. Our editorial, UX, design and development 
teams have worked to implement AMP pages in such a way that they carry all of 
our distinctive brand and content elements.

You’ll see the AMP pages as thumbnails in the Google Search “carousel” on 
mobile only. When a thumbnail is clicked on, the article opens immediately in 
its AMP version. Other articles from the carousel are then accessible by 
swiping left or right.


Have a look: compare this article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/16/thomas-piketty-bernie-sanders-us-election-2016>
 to itsAMP version 
<https://amp.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/16/thomas-piketty-bernie-sanders-us-election-2016>
. On most articles you can just change www in the URL to amp.


We’ve also simplified our main navigation bar – creating a single version of 
the header which shows the different areas of our content. Clicking on any of 
these words – and of course our logo – takes you to the relevant page you were 
after.
 AMP navigation bar Photograph: Guardian 
At the moment we’re creating AMP pages for our regular articles only. We 
intend to extend this to liveblogs, galleries and other content types.


For more information you can read the official Google blog here 
<https://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2016/02/amping-up-in-mobile-search.html>.


As always, we’d like to know what you think. So comment below, or tweet us 
@guardianmobile <https://twitter.com/guardianmobile>

 