
Cadair Idris may not attract the vast crowds of Snowdon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/23/how-to-climb-mount-snowdon>, 
which sees more visitors every year than there are people living in Bristol, 
but it’s still not a mountain you get to yourself on a sunny September 
Saturday. In theMinffordd Path 
<http://www.eryri-npa.gov.uk/visiting/walking/mountain-walks/minffordd-path> 
car park, scores of people perch on car bumpers pulling on socks and stout 
footwear. A man with anEstuary English accent 
<http://universalteacher.org.uk/lang/estuary.htm> is ribbing his companions, 
who have voices from the Valleys. A jovial but slightly pointed argument over 
Welsh independence ensues.

My dad and I join the procession, which takes us up through a swath of relict 
woodland. Summer’s green lustre is going; oak leaves are crisping at the edges. 
But out on the open hillside, clusters of rowan berries shine lipstick-bright 
in the light, their ripe autumnal red contrasting withthe brooding volcanic 
sublimity of Craig Cau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/oct/01/walkingholidays.unitedkingdom.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
. Sleep on these slopes, goes the local legend, and you wake up either mad or a 
poet (it doesn’t specify which is worse).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhills-alive-sounds-visitors-wales-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F291ac51f2e338cb4279256c2f549bdca5e92a593%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Welsh%20hills%20are%20alive%20with%20the%20sounds%20of%20visitors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhills-alive-sounds-visitors-wales-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Welsh%20hills%20are%20alive%20with%20the%20sounds%20of%20visitors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhills-alive-sounds-visitors-wales-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F291ac51f2e338cb4279256c2f549bdca5e92a593%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 Cwm Cau on Cadair Idris. Photograph: Carey Davies 
With a Scottish tinge, a man remarks as he passes us: “Lovely day, isn’t it?” 
“Certainly is,” replies my dad as he labours upwards. “Shame we’ve got to climb 
this bloody hill.” He also betrays the trace of place in his voice. He has 
lived two-thirds of his life in Yorkshire, but while his sense of fealty has 
moved up north, his accent has stayed inWoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/26/classics.hgwells>.

The people's mountain – without the people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/06/country-diary-blencathra-peoples-mountain-lake-district>
Cadair Idris’s summit is only a few miles from the sea, but almost 3,000 feet 
(900 metres) above it. We can see maybe 70 miles of the blue-hazedCardigan Bay 
coastline <http://www.ceredigioncoastpath.org.uk/>, a vast curve scything 
across the horizon towards Pembrokeshire.


Around the crowning trigpoint, the crowd is a confusion of tongues; Hebrew, 
Dutch and Japanese join the variants of English, and for the first time today I 
catch snippets of Welsh.

This diverse aural geography perhaps reflects the transformation of the Welsh 
hills, like their Cumbrian and Scottish Gaelic counterparts, from a rural 
landscape into a recreational one, as much the preserve of urban escapees as 
the “indigenous” inhabitants. But looking north to therugged Rhinogydd 
<https://visitsnowdonia.info/rhinogydd-218.aspx>, or south into the hilly heart 
of Wales, you sense places where silence and stillness pervade.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 