
It is one of the world’s less lovely lotteries. Just under 12,000 people – the 
vast majority men – have registered for the chance to kill 16 wolves in the
Norwegian hunting season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/norwegian-hunters-line-up-for-licences-to-shoot-wolves>
, ostensibly to protect the nation’s livestock. Wild bears suffer the same 
onerous odds, with 10,000 humans going in pursuit of 18 animals. Meanwhile, on 
the other side of the world, the Japanese whaling fleet launches into its own 
new season, in an operationsubsidised 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/08/business/global/japanese-subsidies-keep-whaling-industry-afloat-report-says.html?_r=0>
 by its government. Today its whaling fleetsails for Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/japan-defies-un-to-send-research-whaling-mission-to-antarctic>
, defying a UN resolution that their “scientific research” is nothing of the 
kind.

More than 11,000 Norwegians line up to shoot 16 wolves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/norwegian-hunters-line-up-for-licences-to-shoot-wolves>
At least a Norwegian wolf or bear might die swiftly. In another telling and 
terrible formulation, the“time to death”  
<http://us.whales.org/wdc-in-action/hunted-dead-or-still-alive>rate for a whale 
into whose body explosive harpoons have been shot can exceed three hours in 
some cases. Norway also continues to hunt whales, as does Iceland where, 
according to Vanessa Williams-Grey of the Whale and Dolphin Conservation 
charity, nearly 1,000 endangered fin whales have been killed since the country 
resumed hunting them in 2006. This season’s hunt ended in October, with a total 
of184 fin and minke whales killed 
<http://us.whales.org/blog/2015/10/record-killing-and-trade-of-fin-whales-in-iceland-on-par-with-rhino-and-elephant>
. In the Faroe Islands, the cull of pilot whales continues. This summer, 250 
pilot whales were driven ashore andslaughtered 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3173617/Fishermen-chase-250-whales-beach-Faroe-Islands-locals-leap-water-glee-stab-death-slaughter-turns-sea-red-blood.html>
 on the islands’ shores.

The bare figures prove that there is no practical justification for this 
pursuit. Norway’s wolves, so paltry in number, stand little chance of 
re-establishing themselves with such a bounty over their heads. Whale 
populations, only just beginning to recover from 20th-century hunts that 
removed nearly 3m great whales from the world’s seas, may never regain the 
natural balance in which their species may even have helpedstabilise the 
world’s climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/08/whale-poo-reverse-climate-change>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2373c473d4b8491fb55d4885cc2d37ce71ca3931%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20bloodlust%20of%20modern-day%20hunters%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Philip%20Hoare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20bloodlust%20of%20modern-day%20hunters%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Philip%20Hoare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2373c473d4b8491fb55d4885cc2d37ce71ca3931%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 A minke whale on a Japanese whaling ship. ‘Today its whaling fleet sets sail, 
defying a resolution that its ‘scientific research’ is nothing of the kind.’ 
Photograph: Institute Of Cetacean Research/AFP/Getty Images 
The irony is that eating whales – precisely because of their place high in the 
marine food chain – is injurious to human health. People who eat whale in the 
Faroes, and in Japan, have been warned that the accumulation of toxins in their 
flesh can cause brain damage, liver failure, sterility and premature senility. 
Whale and DolphinConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> has also reported that 
whale meat from European waters ends up in Japan, where it appears in luxury 
dog food, canned for canines who no longer hunt their own food. The wonder lies 
in the scale: the hugeness of the whale, the cruelty of its cull, the dog 
licking its lips.

Meanwhile, the furore that greeted the killing of Cecil the lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/18/cecil-the-lion-zimbabwe-charges-landowner-honest-ndlovu>
 earlier this year continues as western hunters arrive in Africa, paying 
thousands of dollars for the privilege of making charismatic megafauna bite the 
dust. Norwegians, Icelanders, Japanese and American hunters argue that hunting 
is a cultural expression. Indigenous populations make the same argument, 
perhaps more convincingly. This notion speaks to a folk memory, a time when we 
did indeed subsist on what we could kill – an image bizarrely stirred up by a 
recent plan to handgrouse shot on Scottish estates to food banks 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/environment/12024056/Grouse-handed-out-at-food-banks-and-homeless-shelters.html>
, a latterday demonstration of noblesse oblige which is barely a step away from 
feudalism, with echoes of the Highland clearances that allowed the human and 
animal diversity of vast swaths of Scotland to be dedicated to hunting.

A moment that changed me – looking a sperm whale in the eye | Philip Hoare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/sperm-whale-azores-ocean-pod>
The New Forest, close to where I live, owes its picturesque, if managed, 
wilderness to the establishment of a barbaric royal hunting ground implemented 
by vicious laws. In the 21st century, hunters – and their opponents – rely on 
bureaucracy. In October, the Maltese government’s rejection of international 
calls to end theshooting of wild birds 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2010/07/26/emptying-the-skies> which have 
the misfortune to use the island’s airspace on their migratory routes was 
referred to theEuropean court of justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/malta-eu-court-spring-bird-hunt>.

Meanwhile, foxes resort to London streets in an opportunistic reversal of city 
and country (there was apopular uprising 
<http://www.hackneyhive.co.uk/index/2015/10/hackney-council-temporarily-backs-down-on-clissold-park-fox-cull/>
 in Hackney in October when plans were announced to take action against their 
predations in the borough’s Clissold Park), badgers escape government culls by 
appearing increasingly in the suburbs in cities such asSheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/apr/20/comment.comment>, and 
wolf packs have been seen in the outskirts ofBerlin 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/ist/?next=/smart-news/a-pack-of-wolves-turned-up-in-berlin-for-the-first-time-in-100-years-141928474/>
. Visiting a friend’s family in suburban Hamburg some time ago, I was amazed to 
be shown her father’s outhouse where he butchered the wild boar he regularly 
shot in the local woods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76c197fb514b9502257159f073a927d75ea3d258%2F0_0_3318_1990%2F3318.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20bloodlust%20of%20modern-day%20hunters%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Philip%20Hoare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20bloodlust%20of%20modern-day%20hunters%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Philip%20Hoare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhunters-norway-wolves-bears-japan-whale-hunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76c197fb514b9502257159f073a927d75ea3d258%2F0_0_3318_1990%2F3318.jpg>
 A London fox on the prowl Photograph: Jim Dyson/Getty Images 
We are now so accustomed to the notion of our dominion and manipulation of the 
natural world that almost every aspect of our interaction with it comes fraught 
with this other ratio of imbalance: the meeting of our devious brains with the 
fragility of the flora and fauna facing what conservationists call theGreat 
Acceleration 
<http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/01/15/can-humanitys-great-acceleration-be-managed-and-if-so-how/>
. Even as species decline, hunters argue that they are in fact noble 
protectors, contributing to local economies. Yet the moral precedent we set for 
ourselves is belied by other figures. Within this century, one-third of sharks 
and rays, a fifth of all reptiles, a quarter of all mammals anda sixth of all 
birds will become extinct 
<http://www.biologicaldiversity.org/programs/biodiversity/elements_of_biodiversity/extinction_crisis/>
. Our experience of nature may soon be relegated to reserves, as the dwindling 
wilderness is destined to become an extension of our entertainment industry.

In a world in which wild animals are reduced to economic formulas, it’s time 
for a new ratio and another rationality to prevail. Bloodlust isn’t a pretty 
phrase, but it’s difficult to find another to apply to the decadent modern 
hunters of our age.Henry Beston <http://www.henrybeston.com/about.html>, the 
early 20th-century New England naturalist, wrote that animals “are not 
brethren, they are not underlings”, but “other nations, caught with ourselves 
in the net of life and time, fellow prisoners of the splendour and travail of 
the earth”. Perhaps we need to look anew at that splendour, and weigh up its 
worth to our souls.
 