
Fast and Furious 8 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-fate-of-the-furious-trailer-the-rock-vin-diesel-and-charlize-theron-star-in-new-film-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fate%20of%20the%20Furious%20trailer%3A%20The%20Rock%2C%20Vin%20Diesel%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20star%20in%20new%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-fate-of-the-furious-trailer-the-rock-vin-diesel-and-charlize-theron-star-in-new-film-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fate%20of%20the%20Furious%20trailer%3A%20The%20Rock%2C%20Vin%20Diesel%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20star%20in%20new%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-fate-of-the-furious-trailer-the-rock-vin-diesel-and-charlize-theron-star-in-new-film-video&media=>
The Fate of the Furious trailer: The Rock, Vin Diesel and Charlize Theron star 
in new film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/12/the-fate-of-the-furious-trailer-the-rock-vin-diesel-and-charlize-theron-star-in-new-film-video>
Fast & Furious 8 trailer review: a reassuring, obscene platter of murder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/fast-furious-8-trailer-review> 
It’s not the telenova official title (The Fate of the Furious) that’s got us 
salivating. Nor the return of vested slapheadsVin Diesel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/vin-diesel> and Dwayne Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dwayne-johnson>. No: what makes this really 
exciting is the new additions to the metalhead crew.

No 1: Charlize Theron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlize-theron>, with 
dreadful hair. No 2:Helen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/15/helen-mirren-charlize-theron-fast-and-furious-8-cast>
, in an as yet unspecified role, but one that definitely will involve some 
driving (her condition for appearing). Diesel has a track record with grandes 
dames of the British screen (he and Judi Dench had red-hot chemistry inThe 
Chronicles of Riddick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/aug/27/2>) so 
we’re hoping for some proper fireworks come April.

Goon 2
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dch1_SliHPbE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dch1_SliHPbE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dch1_SliHPbE&media=>
Goon was a sweet, immensely violent hockey comedy starring American Pie’s 
Seann William Scott, Liev Schreiber in a rare funny turn, and its writer Jay 
Baruchel (best known as the skinny, hot one from Seth Rogen’s troupe). In its 
year of release, it topped the Canadian box office; it’s still the 
highest-grossing Canadian film in the UK ever. That a follow-up has been six 
years in the offing is sad, yes, but it makes us suspect this one could really 
be something special.

Guardians of the Galaxy 2
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2cv2ueYnKjg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2cv2ueYnKjg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2cv2ueYnKjg&media=>
Pre-orders on Baby Groot dolls are already through the roof, and Marvel’s big 
comedy hit still has six months until release. But few relatively original 
properties garnered quite so much instant affection as ragtag superhero 
ensemble movieGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
 in 2014. An antidote to po-faced space opera and over-mythologised teams of 
Earth-saving Lycra squads, that action comedy took $773m worldwide. Marvel will 
be hoping to hit the billion-dollar mark with Vol 2.

Justice League
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfIHH5-HVS9o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfIHH5-HVS9o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfIHH5-HVS9o&media=>
Warner Bros’s most recent DC outing did not go smoothly. Reception of Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
 was borderline catastrophic; but one sequence people did seem to like was the 
brief intros for other characters – such as Aquaman, the Flash and Cyborg – 
who’d doubtless get a little more airtime further down the line. And, come 
November, they will:Zack Snyder <https://www.theguardian.com/film/zack-snyder>
’s whopper of a flick sees those fellas teaming up withBen Affleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck>’s Batman, plus freshly 
resurrected Superman, to “face the catastrophic threat of Steppenwolf and his 
army of Parademons”. Many people really, really,really need this one to 
succeed, so perhaps the stops will be well and truly pulled out.

Kingsman: The Golden Circle

Forget the aforementioned Superman. Forget Peter Cushing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/rogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing>
. Surely the most surprising resurrection to be witnessed in the cinema over 
these 12 months is Colin Firth’s character in theKingsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service> sequel. Many of 
us saw him comprehensively killed after laying dapper waste to a congregation 
in an American church. Yetreturned he is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/11/colin-firth-back-from-the-dead-for-kingsman-2>
 for Matthew Vaughn’s sequel, and not just in flashback. All the old faithful 
are also present and correct; joining the throng this time areChanning Tatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/channing-tatum>, Julianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore>, Jeff Bridges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeff-bridges>, Halle Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/halle-berry>, Vinnie Jones 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005068/> and Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john>.

The Lego Batman Movie

The Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/13/the-lego-movie-review>, Phil Lord 
and Christopher Miller’s 2014 block comedy, was one of the most unexpectedly 
refreshing and subversive films that year. So parents, children and non-parents 
alike will be rejoicing at the prospect of this follow-up, which sees the 
return ofWill Arnett <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/will-arnett> as the 
Caped Crusader, alongside what looks like a dream team of voice talent:Michael 
Cera <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-cera> as Robin, Ralph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes> as Alfred Pennyworth, Rosario 
Dawson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rosario-dawson> as Batgirl and Jenny 
Slate <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2809577/> as Harley Quinn. 

Logan 

It’s rare that a sequel declares itself to be the final instalment – and 
really means it. Just one reason to already loveHugh Jackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman>’s final hairy outing as 
Wolverine. Fancy another one? Jackmantook a paycut 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/hugh-jackman-took-a-paycut-to-make-sure-logan-was-rated-r-a7470901.html>
 to ensure the film could preserve its ooh-er R-rating. And one more? Few 
superhero movies have a plot summary quite as glum as: “A past-his-prime Logan 
undertakes a final adventure in the post-apocalyptic future.” Whoop! Sign me up!

Thor 3: Ragnarok
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVnBBjjjAnY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVnBBjjjAnY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVnBBjjjAnY&media=>
The teaser trailer for the latest Avengers spin-off has racked up nearly 18m 
views. One suggestion appetite is keen for another movie foregrounding the 
mallet-flinging sweetie played byChris Hemsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-hemsworth>. Marketing has gone large on 
the Aussie hi-jinks of the homegrown star, as well as visiting cast membersTom 
Hiddleston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> and Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba>. The recruiting of Hunt for 
the Wilderpeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-review-sam-neill-misfit-kid-kiwi-hit>
 director Taika Waititi further whets anticipation this one will be big on the 
giggles, rather than the gung-ho stuff.

World War Z 2 

David Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher> takes the reins 
on this follow-up to the Brad Pittzombie flick from 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/20/world-war-z-review>. Worryingly 
little is known about it, but given public hunger for the undead shows no sign 
of abating asThe Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> draws to a close, 
prognosis for this one remains healthy.
 