
“Did you know that Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> earns less than 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2016/08/23/here-are-the-worlds-highest-paid-actresses-they-still-make-less-than-the-top-actors/?utm_term=.9c08780a2c5b>
Matt Damon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mattdamon>? Or that for every 
pound a man earns a women will earn only 80 pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/07/women-pay-gap-middle-earners>
?” In my ongoing research with 14-21 year olds – a generation I callGeneration K
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/think-millennials-have-it-tough-for-generation-k-life-is-even-harsher>
 – I am repeatedly reminded of how aware even the youngest are of the gender 
pay gap. And of how profoundly unjust they feel it to be. So I was very 
interested in the Resolution Foundation’s research published this week that 
revealed thata woman aged between 17-36 will now earn only 5% less than a man 
of similar age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/gender-pay-gap-down-to-5-among-uk-workers-in-their-20s-study-finds>
 through her 20s.

The news was reported as something of a Hallelujah moment. I’m more sceptical. 
Yes, it is better than it was.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> of my generation earned 9% 
less when we were a similar age; my mother’s generation, 16% less. But the 
stark reality is that right from the get-go women still earn less than men.

This is partly about career choice. Society undervalues those who care and 
more women than men choose teaching over engineering 
<http://www.engineeringuk.com/_resources/documents/Apr%202011%20An%20investigation%20into%20why%20the%20UK%20has%20the%20lowest%20proportion%20of%20female%20engineers%20in%20the%20EU.pdf>
, nursing over becoming an airline pilot. But there is more at play. Even when 
one compares male and female graduates who go into the same job upon 
graduation, a gap exists. Women graduating with a degree in engineering will
earn £1,500 less than men in their first job 
<http://www.thecompleteuniversityguide.co.uk/careers/what-do-graduates-do-and-earn/the-graduate-gender-pay-gap/>
. Outside of science and technology the gap remains pronounced. A woman with a 
degree in modern languages, classics or philosophy will earn on average £2,000 
less than her male counterpart.

Throw babies into the mix and for mothers (but not fathers) it is pay 
Armageddon. The gender pay gap explodes during one’s 30s and 40s. For my 
generation, it tripled by the time we reached 40. As the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies discovered last year, there arepenalties to be paid both for taking 
time off work and for working part-time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/23/gender-pay-gap-average-18-per-cent-less-uk-women>
. For mothers, this is a penalty that persists even if they subsequently return 
to full-time employment.

So what is to be done to close the gender pay gap? Should women just stop 
having babies? It is something an increasing number of Generation K females are 
contemplating. My research has found that 35% of 14-21 year old women are 
either unsure if they want to have children or definitely do not – seismic 
difference compared even to millennials. While 90% of Generation K girls think 
success in a high-paying career or profession is important many simply do not 
believe that this is attainable with a child in tow.

Looking purely through an economics lens (and without going into the other 
pros and cons of having children), a child-free existence only provides a 
partial solution. This is because women without children also earn less than 
men throughout their careers, albeit to a lesser extent.

So is this about women making different career choices? Potentially. More male 
than female students still choose to study subjects such as computing and 
physics at A level and the financial return on Stem (science, technology, 
engineering and maths) subjects is significant –Stem graduates can earn nearly 
more than 20% more than their peers 
<http://www.ri5.co.uk/site/news/article/stem-graduates-earn-nearly-20-more-than-their-peers/>
. Alternatively we could start a proper a conversation about why it is that we 
so undervalue those who choose to care as a career – and what role the state 
should play in mitigating this market failure. This question becomes even more 
pertinent now that we are entering a period of economic downturn. Typically at 
such times those who earn less are penalised more.

Thereis clearly also a role for the state to play in making it easier for 
mothers to re-enter full time work faster. Iceland, which instituted the most 
generous paternity pay in the world in 2000, has seen this strategy deliver, and
90% of fathers now leave the labour market for at least three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/24/iceland-best-place-to-be-women-equal-gender-maternity>
. As a result, their partners return to full-time work faster. Highly 
subsidised infant care and kindergarten care is another state intervention that 
makes a difference.

Men can play their part, too. Celebrate your partner if she earns more than 
you. Do your fair share of the housework –women still do 40% more than men 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-value-of-your-unpaid-work/>. And push your 
employer to be transparent about pay and to address differentials where they 
exist. Finally, there is undoubtedly a role for women themselves. I am 
frequently struck by how many smart, successful women I speak to have never 
initiated a pay-rise conversation at work. Most of my male friends have. If you 
do not ask, you will never get.

Noreena Hertz is economics editor at ITV News
 