
Ultimately, saving money in the NHS means cutting staff costs. The NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England spends roughly 40% of its 
£121bn budget on staff, and as local health economies try to stabilise their 
finances, options such as slashing agency spending and creating cheaper 
full-time roles are inevitably part of the mix.

Although clinical staff shortages are a global problem, the NHS exacerbates 
the difficulties of workforce planning by constant changes in policy.Nursing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nursing> posts – currently numbering 
around 300,000 – have borne the brunt of this.

Having been recruited in record numbers since the 2013 publication of the 
Francis report into the Mid Staffordshire scandal, nursing costs face being cut 
again as hospitals fight to contain deficits.

Once upskilling was in vogue; now the latest convulsion in the nursing 
profession is downskilling, with the introduction of the post of nursing 
associate as trusts across the country struggle to fill thousands of vacancies.

Health Education England <https://hee.nhs.uk/> is ramming this through with 
ill-considered haste. In January, around a thousand trainees will begin at 
pilot sites which were only announced in October, leaving far too little time 
to prepare adequately for a new discipline. A similar number of trainees 
follows in April, long before any meaningful evaluation of the first wave will 
be possible.

NHS nursing assistants could raise risk of death for patients, says study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/15/nhs-nursing-assistants-could-raise-risk-of-death-for-patients-says-study>
With just weeks to go, there have been alarming swerves in specifying what 
nurse associates will do. Crucially, a draft of the curriculum leaked to the
Health Service Journal <https://www.hsj.co.uk/> indicated they would be 
administering controlled drugs independently – a highly-controversial proposal 
that was dropped from thefinal version 
<https://www.hee.nhs.uk/our-work/developing-our-workforce/nursing/new-support-role-nursing/nursing-associate-national-curriculum-framework>
 published on Thursday.

The key issue is whether this new role will support or replace nurses. As a 
study published this week in the journalBMJ Quality and Safety 
<http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/content/early/2016/11/03/bmjqs-2016-005567.short?g=w_qs_ahead_tab>
 highlighted, replacing qualified nurses with assistantsincreases the risk of 
patients dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/15/nhs-nursing-assistants-could-raise-risk-of-death-for-patients-says-study>
.

The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> insists 
nursing associates will complement rather than replace nurses. That does not 
tally with the Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire and Berkshire West sustainability 
and transformation plan to cut staff costs by £34m, which requires a “reduction 
of nursing grade input” coupled with greater use of various forms of support 
workers across health and social care services. The plan says that if they “do 
nothing”, by 2020-21 the area will have a financial gap of almost £500m.

There is nothing inherently wrong with introducing new posts with less 
training than traditional doctors and nurses. There are some outstanding 
examples – notably in countries such as India – where new approaches cancut 
costs and improve quality 
<https://rctom.hbs.org/submission/aravind-eye-care-system-mcdonaldization-of-eye-care/>
. On the other hand, in different circumstancesreplacing low-skilled staff with 
high-skilled staff 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/media/jos-de-blok-buurtzorg-home-healthcare-nov13.pdf>
 has the same effect. The way to find the right solution is to test changes 
before rolling them out; rushing major changes through in the midst of a 
financial panic risks serious mistakes.

As well as the obvious dangers around patient safety, the NHS does not have 
the luxury of getting another workforce initiative wrong; it has too little 
money and too many nursing vacancies.

Diversity, devolution, innovation: building an NHS fit for the 21st century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/15/diversity-devolution-innovation-nhs-health-care-expo>
For example, this new post seems to have been created primarily to help 
hospital wards and budgets. It is far from clear how it will support the 
expansion of community-based nursing and the integration of care services, 
which is supposed to be at the heart of a transformed care service.

The Council of Deans of Health <http://www.councilofdeans.org.uk/> has raised 
concerns, such as how nursing associates will improve care quality, whether 
they are the right way to encourage service integration and whether their 
function could be met better through existing roles.

Since Health Education England was established four years ago it has pushed 
the need for “values-based recruitment” – in other words, appointing people who 
have the right temperament to care for people, not just the technical ability. 
In the rush to fill trainee positions and nursing vacancies, it must ensure 
that this progress is not undermined.

Constant changes in resources, technology and patient need coupled with 
training schemes that take years mean that maintaining the right workforce for 
the NHS is a near impossible task. But rushing through changes aimed primarily 
at cutting costs with a poor grasp of the implications for care will not help.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 