
Remember how people get more cynical as they get older? Not Jane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>. She was only 19 when she wrote 
Lady Susan, an epistolary novella, and though sharp social satire obviously 
remained a bit of a staple for her, Austen was never as drippingly bitchy as 
when young.

Even the spikiest of her later work contains some element of real romance: 
here, the concept is dead, replaced by naked backstabbing, cheerful infidelity, 
opportunist lust and cold, cold hearts.

Few people have read the book; we’re lucky that veteran director Whit Stillman 
was among them. The man whose own debut, Metropolitan, was an Austen-like 
comedy of manners set among Manhattan’s youthful upper class, has done wonders 
with our Jane’s youthful endeavour: punching up the dialogue, fully realising 
the characters, adding gags and asides and intertitles – and casting it 
perfectly.


Kate Beckinsale: ‘Our phones were tapped by spooks when we were growing up’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/kate-beckinsale-phones-tapped-jane-austen-love-friendship>
In reuniting Last Days of Disco duo Chloë Sevigny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/chloe-sevigny-now-total-disdain-directors>
 andKate Beckinsale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/kate-beckinsale-phones-tapped-jane-austen-love-friendship>
 18 years on, he tickles his old fans – and gives the latter the role of her 
life. Lady Susan would have Dynasty’s Joan Collins for breakfast. She’s a 
perfectly programmed femme fatale: a widow entirely confident in her 
superiority over both genders – and her devastating appeal for men. That 
everyone has at least an inkling she’s the devil incarnate is of little 
consequence.

Beckinsale’s radiant, frightening turn is one of complete command; the film 
works because the ensemble around her rotates with the smoothness of planets at 
an upscale observatory. The brightest star is Tom Bennett, whose affable but 
extraordinarily stupid Sir James Martin is a comic creation that makes you 
giggle even at the distant memory.

“Facts are horrid things,” declares Susan when they threaten to mildly scupper 
her plans. This fiction is a perfect delight.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 