
It’s been a great year for the Labour party … from a literary perspective 
anyway. The 2016 parliamentary book awards, which were handed out on Tuesday, 
all went to left of centre authors or subjects: Alan Johnson’sThe Long Winding 
Road  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/19/speaking-out-ed-balls-long-winding-road-alan-johnson-review>
won best memoir by a parliamentarian;Called to Account  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/called-to-account.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
by Margaret Hodge (right), about the government’s use of public money, was the 
best non-fiction; Melvyn Bragg’s novelNow is the Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/01/now-is-the-time-melvyn-bragg-peasants-revolt-history>
 was the best fiction; and John Bew’s biography of Clement Attlee,Citizen Clem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/01/citizen-clem-by-john-bew-review-labour-clement-atlee>
, won the title of best political book by a non-parliamentarian. The winners 
were voted for by parliamentarians and the ceremony presided over by Gisela 
Stuart MP, a former bookseller.

Ed Balls sadly didn’t score a 10 with these judges, but in September he proved 
to be popular with the book-buying public (though not as much as he was with 
the salsa-loving electorate ofStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>). His book 
Speaking Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/07/speaking-out-ed-balls-review-new-labour-gordon-brown-tony-blair-ed-miliband>
 was a bestseller, and is currently a fixture in books of the year lists. On 
the other hand, Ken Clarke’s memoirKind of Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/kind-of-blue-ken-clarke-review-conservative-maverick-sympathetic-tory>
 was expected to be a hit, but fell rather flat, and was described in a review 
in this newspaper as “clumsy”, “shallow”, “smug” and “boring”.

Perhaps Labour figures are just more appealing to the book trade. Back in the 
summer, Theresa May was rearranging the bookshelves in No 10 before publishers 
realised that nobody had yet commissioned a biography of her. “In the last 
Labour leadership contest we had biographies of Yvette Cooper, Andy Burnham and 
Jeremy Corbyn ready to go,” confided Iain Dale of the publisher Biteback, whose
Theresa May: The Path to Powerby Rosa Prince will be published in January 2017. 
Perhaps biographies of May will do well in next year’s parliamentary book 
awards. Assuming, in these turbulent political times, that she is still prime 
minister by then ...
 