
The murderous acts this week bring into sharp relief the threat in Europe and 
its neighbours from within and without. Within a few hours, three attacks 
splattered blood on the pavements of the region’s historic streets. Three men 
were shot and injured in an Islamic centre in Zurich.For the first time in 
almost 90 years, a Russian ambassador was shot dead 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/19/world/europe/andrey-karlov-wiki.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=span-ab-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
; Moscow’s man in Turkey was assassinated at an Ankara art gallery by a local 
police officer who cried “don’t forget Syria!”.Then a large truck in central 
Berlin ploughed through one of Germany’s most hallowed holiday institutions, 
the Christmas market, killing 12 and injuring dozens. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/20/berlin-christmas-market-attack-suspect-pakistan-live-coverage>
 The roots of such violence can be traced to many things: religious extremism; 
fanatical ideology; poverty; disaffection. None can be used to excuse homicidal 
atrocities. When terrorists, rather than criminals, perpetuate violence, 
governments often respond in extraordinary ways.

This is the worry in Germany, which thanks to its emphasis on personal privacy 
and its open attitude to refugees hasbeen seen as a liberal beacon in western 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-terror-angela-merkel>
. Its politicians however have responded with calm and restraint. There has 
been nothing like the decision of the French governmentto declare a state of 
emergency and launch air strikes in Syria in late 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/16/france-launches-massive-airstrike-on-isis-stronghold-in-syria-after-paris-attack>
 after terror attacks. Nor was Berlin closed down,like Brussels, which was in 
lockdown for three days during a terrorist manhunt last year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/12009678/Paris-attacks-rattle-nerves-throughout-Europe-in-pictures.html>
. There will be, however, fallout. The Berlin truck attack is the worst the 
country has seen in recent years. A suicide bombing at a summer music festival 
this year in southern Germany killed only the terrorist. A few days earlier 
five people were injured in a knife attack on a train in Bavaria. Only the 
attacker died – shot by police. Like the suspect in the Christmas market, both 
the earlier militants were refugees who had recently arrived in the country. 
After the Berlin terrorist strike, the MEP husband of the far-right Alternative 
for Germany party leader tweeted an absurdly macabre taunt:“These are Merkel’s 
dead!” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/berlin-attack-angela-merkel-german-mp-blames-chancellor-for-lorry-deaths-latest-a7485486.html>
 With a national election and a key regional poll looming in the country’s most 
populous state – one in which the truck bomber suspect stayed – the door is 
likely to be slammed shut on Berlin’s liberal asylum policy. The far-right 
across Europe are seeking to profit by stirring fears and insecurity. The Dutch 
rightwing populist Geert Wilders tweeted an image ofMrs Merkel covered in blood 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4052934/Far-right-Dutch-leader-Geert-Wilders-tweets-provocative-image-Angela-Merkel-blood-hands-blaming-cowardly-leaders-tsunami-Islamic-terror.html>
. Terror has impacted a continent’s capacity for altruism. The authoritarian 
populists want to unleash the state on their citizens, in the name of 
protecting their virtue. This is embodied by increasing snooping and social 
control. President-elect Donald Trump’s call for a Muslim database is 
disquieting for these reasons. Edward Snowden revealed America’s National 
Security Agency could collect 42bn internet records a month and 5bn 
mobile-phone location records a day in 2011. Yet terrorist outrages in the US 
continued.

In Germany, the worry is that the culture of privacy will be rolled back. The 
country’s strict data protection laws and restrictions on electronic 
surveillance are a historical legacy meant to deny the re-emergence of a 
powerful entity such as the Nazi Gestapo, or the East German Stasi. Yet two 
days after the Christmas market attack,Angela Merkel’s cabinet approved a bill 
which could herald a vast expansion of video surveillance cameras in public 
places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/germany-to-expand-cctv-network>. 
Thanks to its decentralised constitution, no one would be legally required to 
install them. The real issue, long acknowledged in Germany, is that policing – 
a function of local government – is often not a public spending priority 
<https://www.ft.com/content/aabefea4-c77a-11e6-8f29-9445cac8966f>. As Berlin’s 
Green party told the Guardian: “Increasing the number of police officers (is) 
much more important to help track down suspects.”

It helps to consider the sum of the facts rather than the sum of our fears. 
The University of Maryland calculates that 10,537 people were killed in 18,803 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/world/a-history-of-terrorism-in-europe/>
reported terror attacks between 1970 and the end of 2015.In western Europe, 
terrorist incidents were more common 40 years ago. 
<https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/search/Results.aspx?chart=overtime&casualties_type=&casualties_max=&region=8>
 But in a world of social media, panic and fright spreads faster, its velocity 
accelerated by the unhinged brutality of Islamic State. Protecting the public 
may mean greater intelligence sharing across Europe. It may mean some temporary 
restrictions on movement and public spaces. But expanding counterterrorism 
efforts should avoid casting Muslims, who are also often victims of terrorism 
and the target of hate crimes, as the enemy within. To shield us from an 
atomised, self-radicalised terrorist threat, we should not implement a strategy 
that will destroy a society it aims to protect.
 