
As we near Halloween night, there is a growing sense of foreboding about the 
economy’s prospects next year, even among Brexiters. The one word that is 
having a chilling effect – stagflation – is best known from its 1970s 
incarnation, when it wrought havoc throughout the land.

The combination of stagnant GDP growth and high inflation pushed the country 
to the edge of bankruptcy 
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/cabinetpapers/themes/world-recession-oil-crisis.htm>
 and forced the then chancellor,Denis Healey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/03/lord-healey>, to call the 
International Monetary Fund for a bailout loan. Its resurrection can only spell 
bad news.

The former Bank of England policymaker Adam Posen is past trick-or-treating 
and is not known for scaremongering,but he was doing his best Jack-Nicholson-in-
The-Shining impression last week 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2016-10-28/posen-nothing-good-can-come-from-brexit>
 when he said Britain would suffer “permanent damage” from the Brexit vote.

The economist, who is back in his native US running a thinktank, likened the 
UK to an athlete who injures an ankle and gets arthritis. They limp on. 
“They’re not dead,” he said, but can’t run with the major league players any 
more. What word summed up the nightmarish future? Stagflation, he sighed.

The increase in inflation is a global trend made worse by the 18% fall in the 
pound since the referendum

At the heart of this argument is a forecast for rising inflation and slowing 
wage rises in 2017 that will kill offtoday’s healthy GDP growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-shrugs-off-brexit-uncertainty-with-05-growth>
. The increase in inflation is a global trend driven by higher oil and 
commodity prices, made worse by the 18% fall in the pound since the referendum. 
Slowing wage rises follow the uncertainty that infects all business investment 
decisions in the UK, as firms delay or cancel the purchase of new equipment 
that enhances productivity.

This could all be set aside as a temporary situation, much as it was in 2011 
and 2012, when Posen was a member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee and 
inflation stood at 5%.

Back then the political situation was stable, and interest rates were not just 
at rock bottom, they were priced by the markets as being low for the next 30 
years.

To boost growth, the Bank began a second phase of quantitative easing, taking 
the total stimulus package to £375bn, safe in the knowledge that politicians 
and central bankers were aligned.

Vince Cable: assurances to Nissan means UK will stay in customs union
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/vince-cable-assurances-nissan-uk-customs-union-tariff>
The backdrop to the Brexit vote is different. For one thing, the political 
situation is full of uncertainties. Businesses rightly ask whether Theresa May 
wants to stay inside the European Union’s single market or the customs union or 
neither.

There was a clue in the deal with Nissan, which was widely interpreted as 
signalling that she wants to stay in the customs union. But it could be that 
she panicked when faced with the closure of a world-beating car factory and 
carved out a special package offsetting the impact of Brexit.

May has refused to shed any light on the details of her apparently cosy deal 
with the Japanese carmaker, and so speculation fills the void, emphasising the 
lack of coherent thinking at the top of her government. Worse, May and some 
former colleagues have painted Threadneedle Street as the enemy of good 
government, adding to the unease.

Investors are also concerned about the impact of rising yields on government 
bonds, which determine the rate at which nations can borrow. UK gilt yields 
have doubled since the vote, forcing the Treasury to pay more to finance its 
debts.

And there are more threats waiting in the wings. The US central bank is poised 
to raise interest rates in December afterthird-quarter growth beat expectations 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-usa-economy-idUKKCN12R1QF> to hit an 
annualised 2.9%.

Higher interest rates across the Atlantic will attract money away from the UK 
to US banks, pushing the pound down further. If this feeds into higher import 
prices and ratchets up inflation, disposable incomes will slump even more.

As we saw from the UK’s third-quarter GDP figures last week, the economy is 
currently buoyant, but almost entirely dependent on consumer spending and 
without it will probably begin to slowly contract.

If this all sounds overly gloomy, it doesn’t to Posen and many other 
economists in academia and the City. They’ve seen a ghost of Christmas future, 
and it scares them.

UK economy shrugs off Brexit uncertainty with 0.5% growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-shrugs-off-brexit-uncertainty-with-05-growth>
RBS can’t wind up the spinoffs

When the European Union was handing out punishments for the bailouts of 
Britain’s banks during the 2008 crisis, one of its wheezes was to force the two 
institutions which had been the recipients of most of the cash to spin off 
branch networks. The aim was to create new competitors on the high street and, 
no doubt, inflict a bit of pain on the way.

Roll on eight years from the drama of the bailouts, and one of those branch 
networks has emerged. Lloyds Banking Group stripped out TSB in 2013 and floated 
it on the stock market in 2014, before it was taken over bySabadell of Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/20/lloyds-sells-50-of-tsb-to-spains-sabadell>
. It is alive and kicking and grabbing market share in current accounts. It is 
still tied to its former parent by an IT system, but is trying to cut itself 
loose.

Contrast that with Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, which has now 
admitted it will not meet a deadline of the end of 2017 to carve out 300 
branches, focused more on small businesses. It has been a messy affair and 
costs have reached £1.7bn in attempting and failing to meet this deadline. A 
sale to Santander was aborted. Then there was to be an attempt to float the 
branches on the stock market – a bit like TSB – by reviving the old brand name 
of Williams & Glyn. That was abandoned in the summer. Now hopes are on a trade 
buyer who might be able to cherrypick the most attractive branches.

While this is a costly problem for RBS, which at one point deployed 7,500 on 
the task of creating a standalone branch network, it is one that has also 
deprived bank customers of an extra competitor on the high street. Ross McEwan, 
the RBS chief executive, has admitted that the UK’s departure from the EU is 
not a cue to give up on the process – and Brussels may not be in the mood to 
look kindly on Britain’s bailed-out bank during the exit negotiations. It is a 
mess, and one which could get dirtier if the EU decides to impose its own rules 
on the selloff process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fspectre-stagflation-uk-economy-scarier-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0b0ceaa4b4a2779e58f06030ee02eb8850f279b%2F385_484_1781_1068%2F1781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20spectre%20of%20stagflation%20looms%20over%20the%20economy.%20This%20time%20it%E2%80%99s%20scarier%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fspectre-stagflation-uk-economy-scarier-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20spectre%20of%20stagflation%20looms%20over%20the%20economy.%20This%20time%20it%E2%80%99s%20scarier%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fspectre-stagflation-uk-economy-scarier-than-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0b0ceaa4b4a2779e58f06030ee02eb8850f279b%2F385_484_1781_1068%2F1781.jpg>
 Paula Nickolds will have her work cut out at John Lewis. Photograph: Greg 
Funnell/PA 
John Lewis mustn’t become a soulless profit machine

She’s landed one of the most coveted jobs in retail, but when new John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> boss Paula Nickolds takes the 
helm in January she’ll have her hands full. Profits were already falling in the 
first half of this year, and the decline of the pound in the wake of the Brexit 
vote will only add pressure.

Some analysts believe Nickolds needs to do more ruthless cost-cutting than her 
predecessor, Andy Street. But it’s worth remembering that John Lewis navigated 
the last downturn successfully precisely because it invested when others cut 
back.

Cheery, knowledgeable staff in stores and a big step up in online capability 
proved winners. John Lewis’s partnership model, under which staff own the 
business, allows for long-term thinking. Staff and customers will thank 
Nickolds for nurturing its special feel, not turning John Lewis into a soulless 
profit machine.
 