
The Guardian and Observer charity appeal 2016 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 is supporting three charities working to help child refugees and migrants, 
both in Europe and the UK: Help Refugees, Safe Passage and the Children’s 
Society. Here is a guide to what they do, and why they do it.


Help Refugees 

Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/> was founded 16 months ago by a 
group of friends who were moved by the refugee crisis in Calais and wanted to 
help. Their original plan was to raise £1,000 to buy food and clothes. In a 
week they had collected £56,000 and tonnes of donated goods. Within a month, 
with the help of local partners, Help Refugees had become the largest supplier 
of aid to unofficial camps in northern France, and after a year it had raised 
£3m. It is now one of Europe’s largest distributors of emergency aid to 
refugees, supporting more than 50 projects in Greece, Turkey, France and Syria.

Please help us help child refugees survive the winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Projects funded by Help Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> 
have been feeding 20,000 people a day. Its volunteer-led programme built 1,500 
shelters in the Calais camp. It has funded a mobile medical clinic in Greece 
and ambulances in Syria, and flown volunteer doctors to Lesbos.

Mountains of shoes, tents, coats and sleeping bags have been distributed – 
needed more than ever now as winter bites. It has paid for makeshift schools, 
community centres, and safe spaces for women. As the Observerreported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/12/help-refugees-calais-accidental-activists>
 this year: “There are people living now thanks to [Help Refugees] who would 
otherwise be dead.”

Co-founder Josie Naughton says: “Over the last year we have been working 
tirelessly to fill the terrifying gaps in the provision of services left by 
governments and large NGOs. Our remit is expanding almost on a daily basis, 
funding everything from baby milk distribution to search and rescue. However we 
never lose sight of the long-term solutions needed for fairer treatment for 
displaced people. ”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F565c048478e33e7ac60cc6c2737dabc2efa3834c%2F0_255_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F565c048478e33e7ac60cc6c2737dabc2efa3834c%2F0_255_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Dani Lawrence, Lliana Bird and Josie Naughton of Help Refugees UK. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
Help Refugees works in partnership with an array of organisations, from 
Doctors of the World <http://www.doctorsoftheworld.org.uk/> to grassroots 
operations such asl’Auberge des Migrants <https://www.laubergedesmigrants.fr/>, 
Lighthouse Relief <http://www.lighthouserelief.org/> and the Refugee Youth 
Service <http://www.calaisjungleyouth.com/>. These alliances, says the charity, 
allow it to be both effective and agile, ensuring aid gets to where it is 
needed quickly without compromising the quality of service. It can respond to 
real-time needs, unencumbered by convention or bureaucracy.

Help Refugees runs its programmes as a charitable fund under the auspices of 
another charity,Prism the Gift Fund <http://prismthegiftfund.co.uk/>, which 
provides administration, finance and governance services. This partnership, it 
says, has helped it focus on helping refugees while keeping overheads 
incredibly low.


But it is the donors and volunteers who power Help Refugees. Naughton says: 
“Everything we do is only possible thanks to the compassion and humanity of the 
thousands of people who like us couldn’t stand by and do nothing in the face of 
the biggest humanitarian crisis since world war two.”

The Children’s Society

The UK may represent a haven for many child refugees after the hardships of 
their flight from home, especially for those who arrive unaccompanied by their 
families. But for those struggling with a new language and culture, adjusting 
to their new life is often lonely and stressful.

Everyday existence can be confusing and frightening. The youngsters may have 
no friends or possessions; it can be hard to get access to education or 
suitable housing; they must navigate complicated asylum legal processes and 
intimidating bureaucracies while coping with traumatic memories of violence, 
war and separation from family. Too often, there is no one to help guide them 
as they try to rebuild their lives.

The Children’s Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/donate/help-child-refugees-fleeing-war-and-violence>
 runs a network ofnine programmes 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/what-we-do/helping-children/our-programmes/young-refugees>
 across England that support young refugees, asylum seekers and migrants. They 
provide a range of services, including legal advice and housing support, 
advocacy, mentoring and befriending, help with language skills, therapeutic 
support, social and creative activities, and life skills, from money management 
to relationships counselling.

“Young people fleeing war, violence and persecution need both immediate 
protection and long-term help to recover from the unimaginable trauma they have 
been through. Sadly, we know that many young refugees arriving in the UK 
instead find themselves facing further uncertainty, isolation and challenges 
that can seem insurmountable,” explains Matthew Reed, chief executive of the 
Children’s Society.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dfc6e27b51ee76d1db53d08dcfffbb9e28a5e69%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dfc6e27b51ee76d1db53d08dcfffbb9e28a5e69%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A Syrian family finds shelter at a refugee camp on the Turkish-Syrian border. 
Photograph: Dona B/Pacific/Barcroft Images 
“Our specialist staff and volunteers are there to support them to overcome 
those challenges, make new friends and start to flourish in their new lives.”

Last year the society’s programmes in Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, London, 
Birmingham and Coventry worked with 674 children and young people. This is 
intensive, one-to-one work, with specialist staff spending six to eight weeks 
with a young person who may be facing multiple challenges. It ran 777 group 
work sessions on issues related to seeking asylum, including discrimination, 
housing and benefits.

Reed says: “Our projects are making a real difference for young refugees every 
day, but as increasing numbers of vulnerable young people seek safety in this 
country, our project workers aren’t able to help all those who desperately need 
them.

“The money raised by Guardian readers will be absolutely crucial, helping us 
reach more young refugees and migrants, giving them the support and the warm 
welcome they need to make sure they get the best possible start to their life 
in the UK.”

Safe Passage

“I can’t describe how I felt when I first saw my brother again, after two 
years. At that moment I felt hugely thankful toSafe Passage 
<http://safepassage.org.uk/> and everyone who had helped me.” Adnan was just 14 
when, after a perilous journey from Syria followed by a traumatic five months 
in the squalor of the migrant camp in Calais, he was reunited with his brother 
– his only surviving relative – in the UK.

Adnan is now happily living with his brother and attending school in 
Manchester, where he is learning to speak English. For Safe Passage, Adnan’s 
story marks another “proud moment”, giving a child fleeing war sanctuary from 
harm and an opportunity to rebuild his or her life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ef87ba8081e6d4d31a63f73e9680e2e2913dc8%2F311_429_2614_1568%2F2614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20charities%20supported%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20Observer%202016%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ef87ba8081e6d4d31a63f73e9680e2e2913dc8%2F311_429_2614_1568%2F2614.jpg>
 A child in the migrant camp in Calais. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
Safe Passage was set up in 2015 by the social action charity Citizens UK 
<http://www.citizensuk.org/> to help unaccompanied child refugees find safe and 
legal routes to sanctuary. “We believe every person, and particularly every 
child, fleeing persecution should be able to access a safe and legal route to a 
place they can live a full and dignified life,” says Citizens UK’s leader, 
Rabbi Janet Darley.

Safe Passage used a range of strategies to open new routes to safety for 
children, from community organising to working with parliamentarians from all 
major parties, such asLord Dubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
, and the MPs Yvette Cooper and Heidi Allen to amend theImmigration Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/immigration-bill-receives-royal-assent>, 
placing legal obligations on the UK to help unaccompanied child refugees in 
Europe.

To date Safe Passage has reunited more than 70 child refugees and vulnerable 
adults with their loved ones in the UK. Its work has also helped a further 500 
vulnerable unaccompanied refugee children come to Britain after the demolition 
of the Calais camp. Many have UK family, but dozens were brought under the 
terms of theDubs amendment 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/news/dubs-amendment-passes-your-help-needed-to-bring-unaccompanied-refugee-children-to-safety/>
, which allows very vulnerable children without family in the UK to legally 
find safety and care here.

Today Safe Passage works with partners, including the UNHCR and a number of 
smaller charities, to identify unaccompanied refugee children in Greece, Italy, 
northern France and beyond – often on the streets, in police cells, hostels or 
refugee camps. Once identified, Safe Passage lays the legal groundwork to help 
them reach safety.

In October, Safe Passage, along with another of the Guardian and Observer 
appeal charities, Help Refugees, received aLiberty Human Rights award 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/news/press-releases-and-statements/refugee-rights-take-centre-stage-liberty-human-rights-awards-2016>
 given in memory of the late MP Jo Cox, citing their “remarkable efforts” in 
safeguarding refugee children.

Neil Jameson, executive director of Citizens UK, says: “Guardian and Observer 
readers’ donations will help identify and protect unaccompanied refugee 
children in Europe who have a legal right to be safeguarded in the UK.

“We will fight legal cases for refugee children, and organise communities to 
challenge governments to set up a working system. Donations will also be used 
to enable our network of member organisations to provide vital support to 
children and families on their arrival in the UK.”


 * Support our three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
.  