
Just when we thought 2016 couldn’t do anything worse to us. The eerie 
accomplishments ofdigital CGI technology 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/21/14040916/darth-vader-rogue-one-final-lightsaber-scene-star-wars>
 had actually meant that the force had been strong withCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> this Christmas. 

Share your tributes and memories of Carrie Fisher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/share-tributes-and-memories-of-carrie-fisher>
Her digitally fabricated image is appearing as her younger twentysomething 
self in the iconic role of Princess Leia in Rogue One: AStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> Story. This is the movie set just 
before the time of the sci-fi classic that started it all – and the part that 
in 1977 made her a global star, a legend, a meme, and an imperishable part of 
pop culture at a time when pop culture itself was starting to become more and 
more important.

Fisher invaded the fantasies of boys and girls and adults with her white 
belted princess gown (like a Roman matron from TV’s I, Claudius), her open 
cheerleader prettiness, her French-bread hairdo and, in a later movie, her 
outrageous gold bikini.

And Fisher had only just revealed that, in the less-than-romantic environs of 
Elstree, Hertfordshire, where Star Wars was being shot,she had been having an 
affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/16/carrie-fisher-and-harrison-ford-does-it-matter-if-movie-romances-are-real>
with her married co-star, Harrison Ford.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-death-hollywood-actor-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3b85ff30090edab9a6d0891699d4e4745adcce%2F0_0_1936_2924%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20loss%20of%20Carrie%20Fisher%20is%20felt%20by%20all%20who%20love%20Hollywood%2C%20warmth%20and%20wit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-death-hollywood-actor-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20loss%20of%20Carrie%20Fisher%20is%20felt%20by%20all%20who%20love%20Hollywood%2C%20warmth%20and%20wit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-death-hollywood-actor-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3b85ff30090edab9a6d0891699d4e4745adcce%2F0_0_1936_2924%2F1936.jpg>
 Carrie Fisher in Return of the Jedi (1983). Photograph: Allstar/Lucasfilm 
To moviegoers of my generation, her hologrammed image is still mysteriously, 
compellingly powerful, reaching out to the great Jedi Master in the depths of 
her anguish: “Help me Obi-Wan Kenobi, you’re my only hope!” And yet, for me, 
her greatest acting role came 12 years later, inNora Ephron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron>’s classic romantic comedy, When 
Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/when-harry-met-sally-rerelease-film-review-nora-ephron>
.

Fisher’s desperately sad demise is a poignant reminder that never has a movie 
star looked more different in an older and younger self. And this was in some 
ways a conscious decision – a moving-on from the world of glamour.

Any fans of Rob Delaney and Sharon Horgan’s hit TV show Catastrophe 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/04/how-carrie-fisher-joined-catastrophe.html> – in 
which Fisher played Delaney’s crotchety mum, who somehow didn’t know about Star 
Wars – might struggle to connect Fisher’s witty, acid, cantankerous, 
grandmotherly figure with the dewy-eyed Leia of the Star Wars movies in the 70s 
and 80s. And her performance as General Leia Organa in The Force Awakens, the 
seventh in the Star Wars series, was in its way quite as stately, though her 
appearance opposite the now venerable Ford was gloriously romantic.

She was just 60, but with wit and style, she always showed that she was 
amiably unconcerned with the celebrity culture of which she would always be a 
focus – the semi-retired elder stateswoman of American cinema.

And yet for all the Star Wars hoopla, it was When Harry Met Sally that gave 
Fisher her most human, most accessible role. WhileBilly Crystal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/billy-crystal> and Meg Ryan are lengthily 
working their way from best-friend-dom to romance, their respective best 
friends – played by Fisher and that excellent character actor Bruno Kirby (who 
died in 2006) – are having their own spark. It is a lovely moment whenthe four 
go to a restaurant <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGw4fC_Dxo4>, and Kirby and 
Fisher obviously have the hots for each other. This was a great role for Fisher 
– a supporting character, yes, modestly conceived and proportioned in 
comparison to the Wagnerian greatness of Star Wars, but thoroughly beguiling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtj7MZE6y9K4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtj7MZE6y9K4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtj7MZE6y9K4&media=>
As for the rest of her movie career, it may not have made as much of an 
impression, although her autobiographical novelPostcards from the Edge  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/21/star-writer-carrie-fisher-shines-brightest-in-her-books>
(filmed in 1990 with Meryl Streep and Shirley MacLaine) was a brilliant insight 
into that celeb Hollywood circus about which she took a comically detached 
view, and was undoubtably an inspiration for David Cronenberg’s 2014 Hollywood 
satireMaps to the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/25/maps-to-the-stars-review-david-cronenberg>
, in which Fisher had a fascinating small role as herself.

Fisher was a one-off, the daughter of Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> and Eddie Fisher who found 
that the resulting minor Hollywood-royalty prestige was utterly superseded by 
her blue-blooded status in a gigantic modern movie franchise; she was elevated 
to mythic status while remaining very human and humorously detached from it 
all. Her loss is overwhelmingly sad.
 