
Crack! A stick snaps a little distance to my right. Too big a snap for a small 
animal. Probably deer-sized, I estimate. I wonder how close I can get to the 
originator before being detected in the wood’s growing afternoon gloom. I creep 
away from the muddy path, through snagging brambles and naked hazel. I have 
advanced 15 meters towards the target when I feel a stick give under my foot 
and an inevitable, and similar, “crack” resonates through the still hush. 
Instantly, three youngroe deer 
<https://www.bds.org.uk/index.php/advice-education/species/roe-deer> start from 
cover 20 metres away; I watch them through, and between, thickets of interwoven 
hazel and birch as they make their unswerving getaway with a stiff, springing 
gallop.

My tracking skills are good enough to know how rudimentary they are. As a 
young lad I would, entranced, read Jim Corbett’s accounts of years spent
pursuing man-eating leopards and tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/nov/09/last-chance-to-save-the-tiger>
 in the forests of India. Marvelling at how his corporeal self was absorbed 
into the forest. The meaning of every rustle, crack, bird call and grunt so 
familiar and significant that they keyed directly into his nervous system, and 
into that of the cat that was sometimes his quarry, sometimes his hunter, often 
both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsnap-twig-running-deer-country-diary-fermyn-woods-northamptonshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9eab891aa99e69c632b10dadc3159259e0ead5%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20snap%20of%20a%20twig%2C%20the%20running%20of%20the%20deer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsnap-twig-running-deer-country-diary-fermyn-woods-northamptonshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20snap%20of%20a%20twig%2C%20the%20running%20of%20the%20deer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsnap-twig-running-deer-country-diary-fermyn-woods-northamptonshire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9eab891aa99e69c632b10dadc3159259e0ead5%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
 ‘The sun sets and paints the western heavens.’ Photograph: Matt Shardlow 
Field skills in Northamptonshire are rarely likely to be lifesaving, but, for 
me at least, a constant glow of satisfaction arises from each stage of the 
building cycle of questioning, investigating, researching and understanding the 
natural world around me.

The previous day I had organised a Christmas treasure hunt for the children of 
local villages. To unpick the clues they had to seek out a hugeholm oak 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/common-non-native-trees/holm-oak/>
, a big yew, a beech and a key-laden ash. I was surprised that only one of the 
16 children (yes, my son) could name any of the trees correctly, although I 
hope that consequently the other children had added a tree or two to their 
memory banks.

Fermyn today is grey: grey sky, grey mud, grey bark. The soggiest, limpest, 
winter wood you can imagine. Then, at the last, the sun sets and paints the 
western heavens a gorgeous and delightful cerise.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>








 