Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-for-live-action-adaptation-starring-emma-watson-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beauty%20and%20the%20Beast%3A%20trailer%20for%20live-action%20adaptation%20starring%20Emma%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-for-live-action-adaptation-starring-emma-watson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beauty%20and%20the%20Beast%3A%20trailer%20for%20live-action%20adaptation%20starring%20Emma%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbeauty-and-the-beast-trailer-for-live-action-adaptation-starring-emma-watson-video&media=>
Beauty and the Beast: trailer for live-action adaptation starring Emma Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/16/beauty-and-the-beast-trailer-for-live-action-adaptation-starring-emma-watson-video>
Beauty and the Beast

Rumoured to be opening at February’s Berlin film festival, Bill Condon’s 
live-action fairytale benefits from a feminist revamp, Emma Watson in the lead 
and what looks like an absolute shedload of cash. Dan Stevens is her ugly 
crush; other roles, not all of them talking crockery, are taken by (deep 
breath) Ewan McGregor, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Luke Evans, Emma Thompson, Josh Gad, 
Stanley Tucci, Ian McKellen and Kevin Kline. The trailer hasalready whipped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/16/beauty-and-the-beast-trailer-beats-fifty-shades-as-most-viewed-in-24-hours>
 Fifty Shades Darker into second place as the most viewed in 24 hours.

A Christmas Carol 

Bennett Miller follows Foxcatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/08/foxcatcher-review-undoing-of-underdog-sports-movie>
, the intense story of a deeply creepy and disturbed billionaire wrestling fan 
who turns murderer with … a cheeryDickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> Yuletide classic. That said, 
it does feature ghost action and child mortality so perhaps Miller’s not gone 
too left-field after all. Details are sketchy, but Tom Stoppard is scripting.

Coco

Initially, Disney’s Moana looked sticky. Calls of cultural appropriation rang 
out at first sight of the Polynesian toon; the film has gone on to be the 
studio’s most successful, and best-loved, since Frozen. Which gives us renewed 
faith in the fate of Pixar’s Mexico effort, which ran into early difficulties 
when the Mouse House tried to copyright the phrase Día de los Muertos for 
merchandising purposes. A petition picked up more than 21,000 signatures and, 
since then, much of the movie has changed, including concerted efforts to bring 
on board people actually from the country. Anthony Gonzalez voices a 
12-year-old boy whose actions retrigger a century-old mystery; Benjamin Bratt 
and Gael García Bernal head up the support, while Toy Story 3’s Lee Unkrich 
directs.

Cruella

The internet suggests, variously, that this might not hit cinemas until 2018, 
and that it’ll be the big smash of next Christmas – and we’re banking on the 
latter. A live-action spin-off centring on the overcoat-loving crim from101 
Dalmatians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/29/pete-johnson-101-dalmatians-cast-such-a-spell-i-wrote-to-dodie-smith>
, our spirits are raised by the fact it a) stars Emma Stone and b) is scripted 
by Jez Butterworth.

Despicable Me 3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fthe-most-exciting-family-films-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12eb64a90dd28f71f82bae4a8ed3448d4876be6d%2F255_122_3032_1820%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20family%20films%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fthe-most-exciting-family-films-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20family%20films%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fthe-most-exciting-family-films-of-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12eb64a90dd28f71f82bae4a8ed3448d4876be6d%2F255_122_3032_1820%2F3032.jpg>
 Despicable Me’s supervillain Gru gets a third screen outing. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex 
Cuddly bad-guy Gru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/despicable-me-review> and those  
insufferable irrepressible little minions are back for a third box-office 
takeover. Plot details are thin, but you could pretty much write it yourself at 
this stage.

Paddington 2

How Paddington took Paul King from Mighty Boosh to almighty blockbuster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/23/paddington-mighty-boosh-paul-king-garth-marenghi>
Possibly the most charming children’s film ever made, 2014’s Paddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/27/paddington-review-michael-bond-film-adaptation>
 emerged from a glut of dubious pre-publicity to storm our hearts and the 
globe’s box office (it also did great things for marmalade sales). And the plot 
summary for this followup sounds reassuringly low-key:

Paddington <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paddington>, now happily settled 
with the Brown family and a popular member of the local community, picks up a 
series of odd jobs to buy the perfect present for his Aunt Lucy’s 100th 
birthday, only for the gift to be stolen.

We can’t see too much going awry with a story like that – and new cast 
additions Brendan Gleeson (as someone called “Knuckles” McGinty) and Hugh Grant 
(as a fabulously vain actor) only make us more in love with this one already.

Wonder Woman 

Is this really a family film? Despite oh-so-serious DC origins plus that 
skimpy cozzie? We think so, anyway. Gal Gadot returns from Batman v Superman: 
Dawn of Justice as the surprisingly elderly superhero; Chris Pine is her 
soldier squeeze (no bisexuality here, mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/30/wonder-woman-movies-first-gay-superhero-dc-comics>
).

Spider-Man: Homecoming
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNE0zRNyXuc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNE0zRNyXuc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNE0zRNyXuc&media=>
Watch the trailer for Spider-Man: Homecoming 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNE0zRNyXuc> 
Tom Holland’s extended cameo in the last Avengers film as a teenage boy with a 
very sticky secret went down a treat. So hopes are high for his first solo 
vehicle – plus Michael Keaton is top baddie the Vulture, and Zendaya possible 
love interest Michelle. One caveat: we don’t want too much perving over Maria 
Tomei’s Aunt May by Robert Downey Jr’s Tony Stark.

A Star is Born 

Few people anticipated Bradley Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper>’s directorial debut would be 
a wildly camp X Factor ancestor musical with Lady Gaga in the lead. But we’re 
happy he’s keeping things fresh and hoping for an all-ages knees-up from this 
weird sounding number (produced by – but, of course – Clint Eastwood).
 