
The summer saw three Football League teams ditch their old club crests in 
favour of flashy new ones.Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> Town swapped their old 
heraldic crest for one depicting a graphical robin:
 Cheltenham - goodbye 'Health and Knowledge', hello 'flying upwards and moving 
forward'. 
"This was our most contemporary idea. We wanted one that represented the 
optimism of the club," said Guy Douglas from the badge designers flb. "In the 
annals of history, most of the robins have been still, waiting. This is flying 
upwards and moving forward. We hope it's a catalyst."

Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> meanwhile 
matched the club's move to the new b2net stadium with a change of style:
 Chesterfield - goodbye old-fashioned circle, hello vaguely MLS-esque 
spire-themed effort. 
According to the club the new badge "retains the heritage of the football club 
by continuing to incorporate heraldic interlinked lettering set in a shield, 
which was originally displayed on the player's shirts in 1945".

And Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> scrapped their 
old design, complete with "Beauty Surrounds, Health Abounds" motto, for a 
bolder take on the club's nickname:
 Morecambe - goodbye heraldry, hello shrimp. 

"In the end they [the club's board] went for designer, Robin Zahler's very 
simple, clean shrimp crest," said designers Fat Creative, "one we all loved as 
it looks so bold and immediately identifiable and works on team shirts as well 
as across a range of the club's products."

Club crests have never been a static part of football – Morecambe, for 
example, have previously featured shrimps on their badge, before adopting the 
ship-and-red-rose design the best part of 20 years ago. Indeed the evolution of 
badges is, to those of us that way inclined, rather fascinating (a quick search 
brought up badge histories forChelsea 
<http://www.chelseafc.com/page/HistoryDetail/0,,10268~1328582,00.html>, Arsenal 
<http://www.arsenal.com/news/news-archive/the-arsenal-shirt-badge>, Leeds 
<http://www.wafll.com/leeds-united-badges.html> and Oxford 
<http://www.oxkits.co.uk/club_badges.htm>). The fear is that all those 
wonderful and varied badges may begin to become homogenised, losing their 
individuality and becoming shield-shaped disconnected brand logos that look 
nice on a pencil case or official £7.99 oversized mug but say nothing about a 
club's heritage. The bold graphical approach does seem to bethe style of the 
time <http://www.designfootball.com/logo-design>.

So new badges for Morecambe, Chesterfield and Cheltenham – a sad trend that 
distances football from its historical roots, or a necessary exercise for all 
forward-thinking modern clubs?
 