
Britain styles itself as a small island, punching well above its landmass in 
musical influence. Spare a thought, then, for Jamaica, whose culture of sound 
systems, and its singers and toasting MCs, can be heard in everything from the 
rawest of east London grime to Justin Bieber’s recent restyle into “tropical 
pop”.

Bieber is not on hand tonight to sing with the 20-piece drum’n’bass-inclined 
Outlook Orchestra 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/118696-outlook-orchestra-2017>, led 
byTommy Evans <http://tommyevansmusic.com/about>, who runs a brace of 
dub-themed organisations (Submotion Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/13/promotion-orchestra-colour-theory-cd-review>
,Gentlemen’s Dub Club <http://www.gentlemansdubclub.com/>). But a dizzying 
array of MCs and vocalists are, for a 100-minute, nonstop, genre-juggling 
performance that has people dancing in the aisles almost from the get-go.

It's often said that music now exists in a continuous, ahistorical flow… 
tonight puts skanking flesh on that phenomenon

Literally skipping to the top of the guest list is the spring-heeled Dawn Penn 
<http://www.dawnpenn.com/>, an ageless 65, whose track You Don’t Love Me (No No 
No) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4vjVetZPpM> is surely one of the most 
potent gateway drugs an uptight reggae neophyte could ever wish to sample. Clad 
tonight in a sparkly top and headscarf, she is backed by a frankly amazing 
ensemble of players: five people on blaring brass, half a dozen on strings, 
three on percussion. A solid core of guitar bass and keys provides backbone, 
plus the dons of UK dub – Mad Professor and On-U Sound’sAdrian Sherwood 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/06115-adrian-sherwood-interview> – issue 
“piao!” noises from banks of gear at the back. If it sounds like overkill for 
what is a calm and spacious song, it is not. The orchestra know when to ebb, 
and when to flow. “I’ll do anything you say, boy,” croons Penn, and the brass 
answer her lubriciously.

It has often been said that – thanks to the giant shuffle function that is the 
internet – music now exists in a continuous, ahistorical flow. No one cares 
overmuch when or where anything was made – it is all up for grabs, thanks to 
playlisting and the magpie plundering of era and genre. This 10th anniversary 
celebration of Outlook,an annual summer festival 
<https://www.festicket.com/packages/outlook-festival-2017> of bass music – 
normally held on the Istrian peninsula, on Croatia’s Adriatic coast – puts 
skanking flesh on that very phenomenon on this wintry London night. Here, New 
York hip-hop segues into an abundance of 90s jungle, while UK garage – Jenna G 
covering MJ Cole – segues into the now-ness of grime. Roll Deep founder Flowdan 
and Killa P reel off their standout track with The Bug –Skeng 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwmUOJR-GwA> – to a dramatic backdrop; east 
London’s Newham Generals remain impressively hard onHard 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MgKhmbwsd4w>, despite the presence of a 
conductor. Never mind what’s happening on stage; oh, to be a fly on the wall 
backstage at this rolling buffet that ends with Penn but begins with Queens 
rapper Pharoahe Monch, whose menacing blast from 1999,Simon Says 
<https://play.spotify.com/track/6EElYDYyvvohMNDbYnrvn4>, is divinely suited to 
trumpet, trombone and sax surges.


Parking an orchestra where it doesn’t belong is an all-too-desperate tendency 
in music, in the hope that a few violins will lift your pedestrian filler out 
of mediocrity. This is – emphatically – not one of those occasions. Any 
concerns that the stark appeal of dubstep would be diluted by a surfeit of 
musicality are mostly unfounded.
 The Outlook Orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall. Photograph: Nicola Antonazzo
Does it all go a bit jazz? Well, yes, occasionally. But what could be a very 
vanilla string section impress with their icy scything; they even stand up, 
carried away by the rhythm, and pluck ferociously at their instruments. The 
main drummer, Alastair Thynne, deserves a medal, playing faultless high-speed 
breakbeats for an hour and a half. TrumpeterMatt Roberts 
<http://www.mattrobertsmusic.co.uk/blog/2016/12/01/outlook-orchestra-royal-festival-hall-london-jazz-festival-pics/>
 apparently transcribed this often skeletal underground music into a score.

The atmosphere is definitely not one of competition, but on balance, the 
veteran junglists probably carry the night. The irrepressibleGeneral Levy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q4tKngdWlbw> rocks up in a big furry hat, a 
big furry coat and shades to sing his tune Pull Up, which interpolates plenty 
of his 90s hitIncredible 
<https://thump.vice.com/en_uk/article/the-jungles-still-massive-why-is-general-levys-incredible-so-popular-20-years-on>
. Congo Natty appears, unfurling a Haile Selassie banner, accompanied by reggae 
singersNãnci and Phoebe <https://www.facebook.com/NanciandPhoebeOfficial/>, and 
dedicates his pair of songs toTenor Fly 
<http://www.factmag.com/2016/06/19/british-mc-tenor-fly-has-passed-away/>, who 
died in 2016.

The night’s excitable MC, Jonathan Scratchley of Gentlemen’s Dub Club, notes 
that normally, a night like this would require years of planning and all sorts 
of Arts Council funding; but Evans “put this shit together in three months”. It 
honestly doesn’t sound, or feel, like it at all.
 