
Sitting in a refugee camp in northern Greece, Mohammad Mohammad, a Syrian taxi 
driver, holds up a picture of three-year-oldAlan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi>. It is nearly a year since the 
same photograph of the dead toddler sparked a wave of outrage across Europe, 
and heightened calls for the west to do more for refugees. Twelve months later, 
Mohammad uses it to highlight how little has changed.

Shocking images of drowned Syrian boy show tragic plight of refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
Alan may have died at sea, he says, “but really there is no difference between 
him and the thousands of children now dying [metaphorically] here in Greece”.

Tens of thousands have been stranded in squalid conditions in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> since March, when Balkan leaders 
shut their borders. “It is,” says Mohammad, “a human disaster.”

A year ago, Alan’s tragic death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
 seemed to have shifted the political discourse on refugees. European leaders 
appeared to have been shocked into forming more compassionate policies, while 
previously hostile media outlets took a more conciliatory tone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f9a43bd0a18cd0e9ef15d726f54c0a3bf4105f6%2F0_0_3500_2079%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f9a43bd0a18cd0e9ef15d726f54c0a3bf4105f6%2F0_0_3500_2079%2F3500.jpg>
 A huge graffiti artwork of Alan Kurdi by German artists Justus Becker and Oguz 
Sen on the banks of Main river near European Central Bank HQ in Frankfurt. 
Photograph: Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters 
Two days after Alan’s death, Germany agreed to admit thousands of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/05/refugees-travelling-from-hungary-can-enter-germany-and-austria>
 who had been stranded in Hungary. The move encouraged the leaders of central 
and eastern Europeto create a humanitarian corridor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/balkan-countries-refugee-route-more-pragmatic-tactics>
 from northern Greece to southern Bavaria, while Canada promised to resettle 
25,000 Syrians.

In the UK David Cameron agreed to accept 4,000 refugees a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/uk-will-accept-up-to-20000-syrian-refugees-david-cameron-confirms>
 until 2020. It was less than the number landing each day on the Greek islands 
at that point, but far more than Cameron had previously dared to offer. He was 
cheered on by the Sun, whose opinion pages hadpreviously described migrants as 
cockroaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/katie-hopkins-cockroach-migrants-denounced-united-nations-human-rights-commissioner>
, but now mounteda front-page campaign 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/archives/news/36107/for-aylan/> in Kurdi’s name: “For 
Aylan [sic]”.
graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-01T15:30:02/embed.html>
More significantly, it was in the aftermath of Alan’s death that most European 
leaders finally promised to share responsibility for at least some of the 
refugees landing on Greek and Italian shores. In late September 2015, they 
created a system that would nominally see 120,000 refugeesrelocated from Greece 
and Italy to other European countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/22/eu-governments-divisive-quotas-deal-share-120000-refugees>
 – a relatively modest number that was nevertheless hailed as a watershed 
moment for European migration policy.

“The principle is so important and reflects such a change of thinking that in 
itself this is a very significant development,” an optimistic Peter Sutherland, 
the UN’s special representative for international migration,told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/22/eu-governments-divisive-quotas-deal-share-120000-refugees>
 on the night of the decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94db424e61bc2d17dd5b7b3b5feb7184fd60eb0c%2F0_0_3100_2077%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94db424e61bc2d17dd5b7b3b5feb7184fd60eb0c%2F0_0_3100_2077%2F3100.jpg>
 Afghan refugees swim ashore as their dinghy with a broken engine drifts off 
the Greek island of Lesbos during a crossing of the Aegean Sea from Turkey. 
Photograph: Yannis Behrakis/Reuters 
But a year later, these small shifts in policy and discourse have proved to be 
temporary.

In September 2015, just four countries voted against the relocation deal, and 
only one of them – Hungary – lay on the path of the Balkans migration trail. 
When Hungary shut its border on 15 September,Croatia and Slovenia simply picked 
up the slack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/croatia-overwhelmed-by-volume-of-refugees-crossing-from-serbia>
, allowing hundreds of thousands of migrants to cross their territory instead. 
That month, Donald Tusk, the European council president, stood next to Viktor 
Orbán, the Hungarian prime minister, and said that he fundamentallydisagreed 
with Orbán’s vision of Christianity 
<http://budapestbeacon.com/politics/tusk-gives-orban-lesson-on-christianity/26746>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3cf4ec1c71410d2c9245e63c033b826400d8b1f%2F0_0_3419_2929%2F3419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3cf4ec1c71410d2c9245e63c033b826400d8b1f%2F0_0_3419_2929%2F3419.jpg>
 The front pages of six British national newspapers featuring the picture of 
Alan Kurdi. Photograph: PA Wire/PA 
But on the anniversary of Alan’s death, Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> believes it has all but won the 
argument on European migration policy. “Most of the countries have come to the 
same conclusions that we came to last year,” says Zoltan Kovacs, the Hungarian 
government spokesman. “They didn’t see it as we saw it last year, and there are 
still people in Brussels who don’t. But common sense has prevailed.”

With rightwing populists on the rise across the continent, and a perceived 
connection between migration and terrorism, Europe has gradually abandoned the 
humanitarian approach of last winter. Austria, which was once a key German ally 
on migration policy,now wants an Australian-style approach 
<https://www.euractiv.com/section/justice-home-affairs/news/austrian-minister-wants-to-replicate-australian-model-for-migrants/>
 that could see Greece formally used as a giant holding bay for asylum seekers, 
just as Canberra controversially uses the island state of Nauru to detain 
people trying to reach Australia. Even Sweden, which previously gave Syrians 
indefinite asylum, hasreined in its generosity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/sweden-asylum-seekers-refugees-policy-reversal>
.

The Balkan humanitarian corridor has shut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/balkans-refugee-route-closed-say-european-leaders>
: Tusk was the man who declared it closed. The relocation scheme has proved 
dysfunctional: the rest of Europe has acceptedjust 5,142 people from Greece 
<http://data.unhcr.org/mediterranean/download.php?id=1833>, instead of the 
66,400 promised. And if the EU had its way, most of the few people still 
arriving on the Greek islands – the weekly numbers are now in the hundreds, 
rather than the tens of thousands – would now be deported back to Turkeyunder 
the EU-Turkey migration deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-deal-turkey-migrants-refugees-q-and-a>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F810edff70921f3814ba2b1414bc0ccbe0bb2576a%2F269_250_3823_2487%2F3823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F810edff70921f3814ba2b1414bc0ccbe0bb2576a%2F269_250_3823_2487%2F3823.jpg>
 Migrants walk to Hegyeshalom on the Hungarian-Austrian border in September 
2015. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
But with both deportations and relocations having stalled, 57,000 people are 
trapped in squalid conditions in Greece with no word on their future, prompting 
Syrians such as Mohammad to despair.

“In September, Orbán was the bad guy,” summarises Gerald Knaus, head of the 
European Stability Initiative, the thinktank that first floated the idea of the 
EU-Turkey deal. “Yet by the end of the year he was the leader of a coalition of 
states. And with Austria now taking the lead on arguing for an Australian-style 
system, it’s now Germany that is isolated.”

Even the EU-Turkey deal is not, in practice, what Knaus envisaged when he 
proposed it in the fortnight that followed Alan’s death 
<http://www.esiweb.org/index.php?lang=en&id=156&document_ID=168>. As Knaus saw 
it, the deportation of refugees back to Turkey can be justified if their cases 
are assessed swiftly and efficiently in Greece; if Turkey improves its asylum 
system; and if Europe creates the legal means of mass-resettlement from Turkey. 
None of this, however, has happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4bfd79ec98f91d1b7a2ccc1094852ab5c5da42e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4bfd79ec98f91d1b7a2ccc1094852ab5c5da42e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Turkey’s then-prime minister, Ahmet Davutoğlu (R), the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel (L), and the EU council president, Donald Tusk (behind), meet 
children at a refugee camp in Turkey in April. Photograph: Hakan Goktepe/AP 
“On paper, the deal is more or less what was recommended,” says Knaus. “But in 
reality these three key elements have not been made to work.”

For campaigners, last year’s events have nevertheless had one lasting and 
positive result. In the year since Alan’s death, a wave of grassroots aid 
groups have been set up to respond to the crisis – founded by the public, and 
funded by thousands. Many of these groups are working on the ground in Greece, 
Calais and the Balkans – and many of their volunteers werefirst inspired to get 
involved by the events of last August and September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/12/help-refugees-calais-accidental-activists>
.

Accidental activists: the British women on the front line of the refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/12/help-refugees-calais-accidental-activists>
One of the most prominent is Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, 
a London-based group that did not exist last year. Nearly 12 months later, it 
funds refugee-focused projects in 68 sites across Europe. In many of these 
places, the group answers a humanitarian need that larger and 
better-established agencies have not been quick enough to meet – building, 
among other things, infrastructure and water facilities in Greek camps where
major NGOs received EU aid to operate 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-1447_en.htm>, but were too slow to 
arrive.

In the space of a single year, argues Nico Stevens, head of projects at Help 
Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> and one of just three 
full-time employees at the group, “the whole model of humanitarian work has 
been challenged and adapted and improved by a group of individuals who are 
passionate and care”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ada2611dc794c5898808b427d1547bee1728b09%2F0_0_4252_2835%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20Alan%20Kurdi%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20compassion%20towards%20refugees%20fades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Falan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ada2611dc794c5898808b427d1547bee1728b09%2F0_0_4252_2835%2F4252.jpg>
 A Syrian refugee prays after arriving on Lesbos in September 2015. Photograph: 
Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images  