
Now that another Halloween has come and gone, most people won’t be expecting 
to exert any mental energy over the concept of ghosts until next year’s 
festivities. However, there are still some places where communiques with ghosts 
are an everyday presence – where the spirit world and ours are in contact 
regularly. The most famous is called Lily Dale, a place that is one of the 
centers for a thriving population of the living who speak with the dead.


The psychology of spiritualism: science and seances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/20/seances-and-science> 
Nestled on the banks of the jewel-toned Cassadaga Lake in south-western New 
York,the world’s largest spiritualist community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/oct/30/science-of-the-seance-why-speaking-to-spirits-is-talking-to-yourself>
 was first established back in 1879. Since then, the tiny wooded hamlet has 
served as a sanctuary for those who wish to take part in the community’s stated 
mission to “further the science, philosophy, and religion of spiritualism”. 
While many cultures spanning many time periods have engaged in practices and 
rituals with the aim of communicating with the dead, spiritualism itself is a 
uniquely American religion.


Its roots dig deep into the same New York soil that nourishes Lily Dale, and 
some of its leading lights lived and died along north-eastern shores.The Fox 
sisters 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/ist/?next=/history/the-fox-sisters-and-the-rap-on-spiritualism-99663697/>
 – a pair of teenage girls based outside Rochester, New York – set the wheels 
of spiritualism in motion in 1848 when they claimed to hear spirits “rapping” 
on tables and on the walls of their purportedly haunted house. (They used a 
code of one tap for yes, two taps for no). The girls held public seances in 
front of captivated audiences and became famous as a bonafide spiritualist 
movement took hold and spread.

Despite their later admission that their “spirits” had been a hoax, it was too 
late to put the genie back in the bottle; spiritualism continued growing in 
popularity even as the Fox sisters faded from view, and the religious 
significance of their “rappings” became the centerpiece of the movement, as 
bereaved flocked to mediums across the country to assuage their grief (or their 
guilt). Spiritualism – with its combination of theatrical performances, eerie 
rituals and raw human emotions – was a certified craze during the Victorian era 
and onwards into the first world war, when the desperate parents of fallen 
soldiers sought solace from mediums.

A typical seance was a theatrical event, held in pitch darkness by a medium 
who sat mute in a trancelike state, and often featuring disembodied voices, 
flying furniture, or the appearance of ectoplasm, a diaphanous white substance 
that appears in many “spirit photographs 
<http://www.photographymuseum.com/believe1.html>”, which were purported to 
depict the physical manifestations of ghosts or spirits. Examining these 
photographs now show examples of crude paper mache masks and“floating” 
cheesecloth 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/12824/12-weird-vintage-pictures-s%C3%A9ances> 
produced by charlatans with a variety of tricks up their billowing sleeves (or 
hidden within their “spirit cabinets,” constructed spaces used to contain the 
medium during her spiritual trance). It all looks so obviously fake that one 
wonders how our ancestors were so readily fooled, but that rather uncharitable 
view doesn’t take into account things like the absolute darkness required 
during a seance, or the role that sincere religious belief played, or even the 
bare fact that sometimes grieving, heartbroken people will see what they want 
to see.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Famerican-spiritualists-lily-dale-seance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be47bb98f665c87023f57791fec443c2e2a536c%2F0_187_1917_1150%2F1917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20medium%20is%20the%20messenger%3A%20meet%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20American%20spiritualists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Famerican-spiritualists-lily-dale-seance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20medium%20is%20the%20messenger%3A%20meet%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20American%20spiritualists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Famerican-spiritualists-lily-dale-seance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be47bb98f665c87023f57791fec443c2e2a536c%2F0_187_1917_1150%2F1917.jpg>
 A portrait of the Fox Sisters at Lily Dale Photograph: Shannon Taggart 
Despite its popularity (and support from such lionized figures as Sir Arthur 
Conan Doyle, a devout and ardent spiritualist) the religion’s cultural 
significance petered out as the Victorian era passed. It lives on in several 
different branches – some that take a more New Age “spiritual” focus that 
incorporate elements of Eastern religions, and others, like the residents of 
Lily Dale, who take a more traditional Christianity-based route. The Assembly 
defines a spiritualist as, “one who believes, as the basis of his or her 
religion, in the continuity of life and in individual responsibility,” and 
profess to be “dedicated to the service of God, Spirit and Mankind”. There is 
no mention of ectoplasm or spirit cabinets on theLily Dale website 
<http://www.lilydaleassembly.com/>, but it’s not exactly a Christian summer 
camp; the Assembly does offers a multitude of spiritualist services, and 
visitors are encouraged to walk along the community’s Fairy Trail or commune 
with its Inspiration Stump.

Photographer Shannon Taggart 
<http://www.shannontaggart.com/photography/spiritualism/> has been documenting 
life in Lily Dale since 2001, and is currently spearheading an effort to bring 
two of its resident mediums – Sue Barnes and Lauren Thibodeau – toBrooklyn’s 
Morbid Anatomy Museum <http://morbidanatomymuseum.org/events/list/>(where 
Taggart serves as Artist and Scholar in Residence). Last week the museum hosted 
several spiritualist lectures (including one on early feminist firebrand, 
stockbroker and spiritualistVictoria Woodhull) 
<http://morbidanatomymuseum.org/event/spiritualist-medium-free-love-advocate-and-presidential-candidate-the-revolutionary-feminism-of-victoria-woodhull-illustrated-presentation-with-dr-cristina-zaccarini/>
, and Barnes and Thibodeau held workshops on automatic drawing, auragraphs and 
spirit portraits.

New age of new age music: 'It used to just be for hippies and unassuming types'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/new-age-music-revival-california-new-york>
I attended Sunday’s spiritualist service, and left feeling more convinced than 
I’d expected. The mediums has quite different styles, which they traded off as 
they gave readings to various members of the assemblage – Thibodeu seemed to 
pluck spirits from the air, channeling them as she twirled, while Barnes 
utilized a more complex card-based methodology that combined the spiritualist 
connection with psychic reading. Said readings seemed hit or miss (with far 
more hits), but for every muted, “Yeah, that kind of sounds like him?” 
response, there was someone who ended up having a deeply emotional reaction to 
an accurate description of someone they’d lost.

Taggart’s own experiences at Lily Dale have ranged from the mysterious to the 
meaningful, and occasionally, the absurd. “These events have kept me in a 
constant state of questioning. These range from receiving Broadway-style 
singing messages, having a medium’s spirit guide direct my photography, and 
hearing a Lily Dale medium correctly predict the birthdate of my son two years 
before he was born,” she says. “Just being in Lily Dale feels otherworldly, and 
that’s what drew me in initially – it’s unlike any place I’ve ever been. It is 
a space that invites contemplation on the eternal questions surrounding the 
line between life and death.”


I ask Taggart her thoughts on why some people still cling to that age-old 
desire to lift the veil and touch base with their dearly deceased, and she 
chalked it up to a matter of perspective. “Contact with the dead has been part 
of virtually every culture throughout history. Modern western culture is unique 
in its dismissal of the practice,” she tells me. She also sees parallels 
between spiritualism and ancient shamanic traditions which also relied on a 
potent blend of religion, medicine, psychiatry and entertainment – showing just 
one more way in which history (and human nature) are wont to repeat themselves.

“The roots of all magical tradition and performance lead back to the shaman – 
the healer/medicine man or woman of pre-modern cultures. The shaman’s mastery 
of spectacle lies at the heart of his power. His ritual acts blurred the line 
between fantasy and reality in order to heal the body and the mind.”

Now, spiritualism most turbulent days are well behind it, and its future is 
being kept safe by its devoted keepers in spiritualist churches and 
communities. For Taggart the space between the real and the fantastic is where 
spiritualism always explores. This use of artifice points to the paradox at the 
heart of all spectacle – how can something false bring about something real?” 
she asks. “The shaman’s magic raises questions about why deception enchants and 
what it means to deceive.”
 