
Battle of the Sexes

The husband-and-wife team behind Little Miss Sunshine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/08/comedy> tackle the 1977 gender 
war between Bobby Riggs, washed-up 55-year-old tennis pro, and Billie Jean 
King, the young ace (then No 2 in the world) he challenged to a match.Steve 
Carell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevecarell> (whose breakthrough was 
in Sunshine) plays the old pretender,Emma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> his rackety opponent. 

Dunkirk
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdunkirk-first-teaser-for-christopher-nolans-second-world-war-epic-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dunkirk%3A%20first%20teaser%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20second%20world%20war%20epic%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdunkirk-first-teaser-for-christopher-nolans-second-world-war-epic-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dunkirk%3A%20first%20teaser%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20second%20world%20war%20epic%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdunkirk-first-teaser-for-christopher-nolans-second-world-war-epic-video&media=>
Dunkirk: first teaser for Christopher Nolan’s second world war epic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/05/dunkirk-first-teaser-for-christopher-nolans-second-world-war-epic-video>
This means war: Christopher Nolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-nolan>’s second film not set in 
the present (or future) is an epic tableau about the rescue of hundreds of 
thousands of troops from the French coast. Tom Hardy, Mark Rylance, Kenneth 
Branagh, Cillian Murphy and, er,Harry Styles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles>, star. Think Saving Private 
Ryan, but saltier.

Flying Horse

Gary Oldman’s first film as director in 20 years, and only his second ever, is 
a biopic of the pioneering 19th-century photographerEadweard Muybridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/eadweard-muybridge>, focusing on the 
affair between his wife, Flora, and Harry Larkyns, the theatre critic he kills. 
No casting confirmed, but Oldman had been chasing Ralph Fiennes and Benedict 
Cumberbatch. The man himself will play Muybridge’s prosecutor.

HHhH

Remember Anthropoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/anthropoid-review-second-world-war-czech-resistant-cillian-murphy>
? A rather overlooked drama from earlier this year, it starred Jamie Dornan and 
Cillian Murphy in the story of a failed assassination attempt on Hitler’s third 
in command, SS General Reinhard Heydrich. Another crack at this story is being 
attempted with HHhH, this time round with Jacks Reynor and O’Connell as the 
plotting soldiers, plus Rosamund Pike and Mia Wasikowska as the objects of 
their affections, and Jason Clarke the target of their anger.

Sunset

Frankly, this is unlikely to be ready in time for next year, but we’ll include 
it just in case. The second film from Laszlo Nemes, who won the foreign 
language Oscar earlier this year forSon of Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/son-of-saul-review-an-outstanding-excoriating-look-at-evil-in-auchwitz>
, is a coming-of-age drama set in Budapest just before the first world war.

Untitled Detroit Riots film

Kathryn Bigelow and regular screenwriter Mark Boal have been working for a 
while on a drama about the 1967 police raid in Detroit, which led toone of the 
largest citizen uprisings in US history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/sep/05/detroit-riots-1967-lessons-uk>. 
Kaitlyn Dever, John Krasinski, Will Poulter, John Boyega and Jack Reynor star.

Viceroy’s House
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Did_ZyNdvXKQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Did_ZyNdvXKQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Did_ZyNdvXKQ&media=>
Gurinder Chadha <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gurinder-chadha> goes 
colonial with a tale of the 1947 handover and its fallout, when Lord and Lady 
Mountbatten lived in a mansion also containing 500 Hindu, Muslim and Sikh 
servants. Hugh Bonneville and Gillian Anderson are our central couple, with 
Simon Callow and Michael Gambon on hand for sherry and stereotypical views 
about India.

Victoria and Abdul

The killer combo of Judi Dench and Stephen Frears team up again, four years on 
fromPhilomena <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/31/philomena-review>, 
with a Lee Hall-scripted look at the friendship between Queen Vic and a young 
Indian clerk.Eddie Izzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/28/eddie-izzard-interview-love-of-life-mother-marathons>
 looks like inspired casting as Bertie, the Prince of Wales; filling out the 
rest of the cast are Olivia Williams, Tim Pigott-Smith and, once again, Simon 
Callow and Michael Gambon.
 