
The mysterious relationship between actors who play on-screen lovers has long 
been conversational catnip. For audiences, the believability of attraction is a 
topic that approaches almost academic analysis. Such chemistry tends to be 
viewed as an absolute. By common agreement, a couple either have it (Humphrey 
Bogart and Lauren Bacall in, say,To Have and Have Not 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9Ay727EYzw>) or they don’t (Brad Pitt and 
Angelina Jolie inBy the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
).

La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, a frontrunner for next year’s best picture Oscar, reunitesRyan Gosling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> and Emma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> as lovers for the third time, 
followingCrazy Stupid Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review> and
Gangster Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/10/gangster-squad-review>. Here, 
they sling fiery one-liners at each other, break into song, and dance along a 
Hollywood avenue. They, it seems, have it.

The whole film nods to the past; the Golden Age ancestors of their pairing are 
enthusiastically invoked both by the movie itself and its publicity. Director 
Damien Chazellehas said 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/08/30/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land>: 
“They feel like the closest thing that we have right now to an old Hollywood 
couple,” comparing them to Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, Ginger Rogers 
and Fred Astaire.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
But what are the elements that enhance or undermine the apparent spark of two 
actors Velcro-ed together because of a casting director, an offer too lucrative 
or career-enhancing to resist, or even a well-written script? And can these 
celluloid relationships really be viewed objectively? It’s … complicated.

As a young actor <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0827298/>, I experienced 
professional kissy-face moments that were supposed to be hot, and were 
surprisingly convincing on-screen despite never getting past lukewarm. There 
were others that were supposed to be more contained than natural, 
hormone-driven lust would allow, and disappointed in the finished product; and 
(most regrettably) some that – whether or not they worked on screen – made me 
feel as if I had eaten a dirt sandwich.

As the spouse of an actor, Billy Connolly 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0175262/?ref_=nm_ov_bio_lk4>, I confess I have 
slammed the odd door on discovering that my husband’s locationfilm work 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0200472/> included a bedroom scene with (to name 
just one)Sharon Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sharon-stone>. As a 
director, I have noticed the insidious way in which my own alchemical 
manipulation of two porous beings can influence the quality of their on-screen 
coupling, and as an audience member (and, OK, psychologist) I am well aware of 
the way my own projected fantasies can create the illusion of passion or puke.

Actors are trained to open themselves up to instant intimacy with strangers. 
Depending on their type of training, they often take highly personal aspects of 
themselves, such as their individual courting style, their own erotic response, 
and perhaps even their physical nakedness, bestow those qualities on the 
character they are playing, and try to engage in a heightened connection with a 
stranger who is attempting the same process in relation to them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc288efb84d28d5748e2369fee2c17a4282f457e7%2F0_0_3248_2087%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc288efb84d28d5748e2369fee2c17a4282f457e7%2F0_0_3248_2087%2F3248.jpg>
 Forbidden and hot love: Keanu Reeves and Aitana Sánchez-Gijón in A Walk in the 
Clouds, 1995. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
It is never easy, but such psyche-bending can be a lot easier if there is a 
natural attraction. For this reason, during casting readings, directors and 
casting directors will look for physical signs of natural attraction between 
actors, such as enlarged pupils, open body language, giggling, skin flushes, or 
heightened awareness of each other. If some of these basic signs are present, 
one may only have to add the proximity of weeks or months on set together, and 
the willingness to have a creative success, to cause a spark that transcends 
the workplace.

Since one of the most compelling elements of erotic attraction is the taboo of 
illicitness (any work situation qualifies), it is little wonder that it is hard 
to put the genie back in the bottle when the shoot is over. It is even more 
difficult when truly intimate scenes are required in the filming. Some actors 
lack the training, personal boundaries, or psychological health to avoid being 
lost in the mire of a celluloid love bubble. Frankly, Hollywood insiders regard 
it as a cliche – creating the kind of real/artificial relationship that will 
make an audience suspend their belief that the two people moaning in the shower 
are just jobbing actors, can be psychically, psychologically, even sexually 
dangerous – and frequently damages real-life liaisons.

In fact, there are many different workplace hazards for romantic leads. The 
ordeal of courting or making love in front of just a piece of machinery – a 
camera – might be a lot easier, but these days even a closed set or “skeleton 
crew” probably involves 15 people, whose attitude to the scene might range from 
overreaching voyeurism to wondering when lunch will be served.

So which of cinema’s couples are considered the most sizzling? Common answers 
to that have often been tainted by the machinery of hype and promotion, and do 
not necessarily tally with audiences’ real feelings. TakeCleopatra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYUvXz48cww>. If you had seen that movie just 
after waking from a 20-year coma, lacking knowledge of the massive publicity 
surrounding the personal illicit romance between lead actors Elizabeth Taylor 
and Richard Burton, you surely would have been unconvinced by their on-screen 
connection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2ca01ea3690a3cdda34322c2d7ffd76e693e97c%2F0_0_2864_2185%2F2864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2ca01ea3690a3cdda34322c2d7ffd76e693e97c%2F0_0_2864_2185%2F2864.jpg>
 Dancing partnership but no kisses: Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers in Top Hat. 
Photograph: Moviestore Collection/Rex Features 
Astaire and Rogers? OK, that was a marvellous dancing partnership 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MsS7B8nyw5Y>, but what about romantic 
interest? At their exceptional level of dance, personal affection between 
partners is often forfeited amid the pressure of perfecting steps, dealing with 
pain and injury, and surmounting creative differences. According to 
post-partnership interviews, Fred and Ginger were no different. And Mrs Astaire 
reportedly made sure a “no kissing” clause was always in Fred’s contract.

What about Patrick Swayze and Jennifer Grey in Dirty Dancing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l9BbUqHrWFI>? There is the same sense of, 
“it’s more about the dancing” and “young, rebellious triumph over authority and 
adversity” than a believable love connection.

Of course, these are simply subjective impressions. But I would argue that 
on-screen chemistry can never be regarded as objective or absolute: the real 
nature of it is always very much in the eye of the beholder. Yes, the audience 
can generally read subtle physical signs of genuine attraction between two 
actors, and appreciate the truth of their whispered admiration, but whether or 
not it really grabs them depends on their own attraction and relationship 
“maps”. Likewise, whether or not one identifies closely with one of the actors 
is also an important factor (demographics such as race, age and education play 
a part), as are one’s feelings about the pair’s situation, one’s judgment about 
whether or not they are well-matched, one’s perception of their physical 
beauty, and so on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff720bd063d64615a1b5b0fbbcd07b3a189fb2e3e%2F260_0_3171_1903%2F3171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff720bd063d64615a1b5b0fbbcd07b3a189fb2e3e%2F260_0_3171_1903%2F3171.jpg>
 More dancing than love: Patrick Swayze and Jennifer Grey in the 1987 film 
Dirty Dancing. Photograph: Allstar/Vestron Pictures 
Whether or not one is personally swept up in the story and the power of the 
dialogue will have an enormous effect, too. It is not really about them; it’s 
about us. Which couple grabbed you more, and why: Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks in
Sleepless in Seattle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qeY1mkXqKgk> (“It was a 
million tiny little things that, when you added them all up, they meant we were 
supposed to be together”); Tom Cruise and Kelly McGillis inTop Gun 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAfbp3YX9F0> (“I don’t date students”); Heath 
Ledger and Jake Gyllenhaal inBrokeback Mountain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tf2ftEnWzDQ> (“I wish I knew how to quit 
you”)? Your demographic is one of the key predictors of whom you will enjoy 
most. NotRobert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sErxx48yON4> in Twilight? How about Will Smith 
and Eva Mendes inHitch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMaq_pfxs-0> (“Life is 
not the amount of breaths you take, it’s the moments that take your breath 
away”)? Target audiences vary from movie to movie, and some couples are 
considered more successful simply because they are more likely to engage a 
wider demographic than others.

An especially compelling kind of on-screen relationship is one in which 
physical attraction is masked by the tension of mock-hatred, and expressed 
through witty banter. Witnessed perfectly in the coupling of Hepburn and Tracy, 
inAdam’s Rib <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wlcVXP4V00> and eight other 
classic movies in which they were paired, this style has been recreated in La 
La Land. Barbed dialogue is a means of being inviting and rejecting at the same 
time, of maintaining decorum appropriate to the movies of the 40s, of setting 
boundaries against overt sexuality via tone. It is strange to see this executed 
by young, contemporary actors such as Gosling and Stone; yet they do it so well 
that they almost convince you it is new and cool. Personally, I find this style 
of connection somewhat alienating, except in the case of Harrison Ford and Anne 
Heche inSix Days, Seven Nights <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C84amEercRc>, 
where the protagonists managed to balance witty one-liners with down-and-dirty, 
despite-themselves lust. (“Aren’t you one of … those guys? ... You send them 
into the wilderness with a pocket knife and a Q-tip and they build you a 
shopping mall.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab81dd31ed2e7f5f24326c8f6c65982c530b7a2b%2F0_0_1392_915%2F1392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sizzling%20secrets%20of%20on-screen%20chemistry%3A%20from%20Dirty%20Dancing%20to%20La%20La%20Land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ffrom-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab81dd31ed2e7f5f24326c8f6c65982c530b7a2b%2F0_0_1392_915%2F1392.jpg>
 Man to man: Jake Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger in Brokeback Mountain. 
Photograph: Focus/Everett/Rex Features 
I like my movie romances raw. So, Hugh Grant and Martine McCutcheon in Love, 
Actually <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zcgxBHBsl-4> – low buzzer. Kate 
Winslet and Leonardo DiCaprio inTitanic 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3duln4>? Also low buzzer (they seem more 
like siblings to me). George Clooney and Michelle Pfeiffer inOne Fine Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v9SZO5lkYGk>? Well-matched, mature lovers – 
score! Keanu Reeves and Aitana Sánchez-Gijón inA Walk in the Clouds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cULvtpaIK9I>? Forbidden, hot. Ditto Russell 
Crowe and Meg Ryan inProof of Life <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kY7qGRhWcCo>
. But that’s just me. The truth is, each audience member projects their own, 
particular, deep-seated longing, lust, and love-aspirations on to whichever 
couple displays the right character, appearance, behaviour, situation, and 
relating style for their individual tastes. They are part of a three-way 
relationship: in a triangle with the two actors.

Hollywood knows what it is doing. It is a science now. There is far less 
guesswork than there used to be. The endless focus groups tell the big studios 
which actor couplings appeal to which demographic; they are looking at who is 
likely to play best with the majority of people in target audiences. What they 
capture during the shoot is not overly important – they can tweak the film in 
post-production. Thirty different cuts can be graded by discerning previewers. 
A low score on a particular line heralds a fast reshoot, while marks for two or 
three different endings point the way to the final cut. So let’s not be naive. 
Creating chemistry is a massive job shared by hundreds of smart people, some of 
them utterly cynical about how to compel an audience with a thrilling, romantic 
tale told directly to your pocket.

But we need entertainment and escape. So don’t let me ruin it for you. Go 
ahead. Suspend belief. Get lost in a magical movie romance and don’t fret that 
it’s really a mini Rorschach-type test for your own longing and desire. 
Although, a touch of cynicism is a healthy thing. As Nicolas Cage says to Cher 
inMoonstruck <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rz5se4M41ZU>: “We are here to 
ruin ourselves and to break our hearts and love the wrong people and die. The 
storybooks are bullshit. Now I want you to come upstairs and get in my bed.”

• La La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is released in the 
UK on 13 January 2017.
 