
As the saying goes, he had one job. When Jeremy Corbyn appeared on the TV and 
radio on Tuesday morning, he was supposed to focus on his upcoming speech on 
immigration in the wake of Britain leaving the EU. That was the subject on 
which his aides had briefed journalists, and which newspapers and social media 
were already talking about. Except when the Labour leader did come face to face 
with the formidable John Humphrys, he blurted out not one, not two, but three 
big stories. First, there was the expected admission (through what sounded like 
gritted teeth) that Labour was willing to restrict freedom of movement for 
people. Then the declaration that Mr Corbyn would be happy to stand on a picket 
line with the striking staff of Southern Rail. Finally, there was a call for “
some kind of high earnings cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
”.

Each of these statements raises its own issues. Perhaps the largest of all is 
why – inwhat is clearly a momentous week for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-nhs-labour-immigration>
 – the Labour leader felt it necessary to deviate from that subject. Still,it 
was the talk of a maximum wage that caught most attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/10/maximum-pay-cap-needed-to-tackle-inequality-says-jeremy-corbyn-video>
 and which compelled party aides to keep on fleshing out the proposal. By the 
end of the day, it was no longer an earnings cap, but a commitment for pay 
ratios, so that no firm bidding for a government contract would be allowed to 
pay its chief executive more than 20 times more than the lowest-paid employee. 
Such a policy would cause huge ructions, not least with the multinationals that 
take so much business from Whitehall. At Serco, for instance,chief executive 
Rupert Soames last year took home a total pay package of £2.2m 
<https://www.serco.com/files/IR/Serco%20Group%20plc%20Annual%20Report%20and%20Accounts%202015.pdf>
. Still, the Conservatives were billing it “Jeremy Corbyn’s Day of Chaos”.

Certainly Mr Corbyn could have picked a better time and more effective means 
to toss out such an idea. Nevertheless, pay for those running FTSE companies is 
too high. Put another way: “The market for top people isn’t working; it needs 
to be sorted out.” No revolutionary socialist said that,but the former 
Conservative prime minister David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/07/david-cameron-fat-cat-pay>. 
It just so happens that neither he nor Vince Cable nor Theresa May – all avowed 
critics of fat-cat pay – have sorted it out. By last Wednesday lunchtime, the 
heads of Britain’s biggest businesses had earned more than the average worker 
will make in all of 2017.There is a “material disconnect” between executive pay 
and corporate performance at Britain’s 350 largest companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
, according to a study commissioned by the CFA global association of investment 
professionals.

Faced with a malfunctioning market, Britain’s politicians have waited for the 
market to sort itself out. Mr Corbyn is at least showing greater realism. An 
arbitrary maximum pay level is not sensible, but neither are arbitrary pay 
packages – even if they have been signed off by a remuneration committee 
stuffed with the chief executive’s chums.Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> ratios are already in place at 
organisations such as John Lewis, while a study commissioned by Mr Cameron 
suggested one for public sector bosses.

The minimum wage was once branded by the Conservatives as a job-destroyer 
<https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/sites/default/files/the_mimimum_wage.pdf>
. It wasn’t. The living wage took decades to attain the acceptance it enjoys 
today. There’s no reason pay ratios can’t do the same. But it will take time, 
well-ordered evidence and political strategy. Having got the ball rolling, Mr 
Corbyn should run with it.
 