
It’s been a rollercoaster of a year. In the world of sustainability alone, we 
sawthe landmark Paris climate change agreement come into  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
; learned howrising temperatures in the Arctic are negatively impacting local 
residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/climate-change-alaska-ice-melt-weather-resistant-housing>
; and watched as the world’s top conservationists mournedthe declining state of 
Australia’s Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
.

And then, a bombshell: a certain “short-fingered vulgarian” 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/03/how-donald-trump-became-the-short-fingered-vulgarian>
 won the US presidential race and called into question everything from America’s
basic environmental protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
 toNasa’s ongoing climate change research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
. Corporate America took evasive action,signing a letter telling Donald Trump 
it is serious about sustainability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/23/trump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21>
, while others began unpackingTrump’s emphasis on “clean coal” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/04/trump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future>
 and what it really means for the future of energy in the US.

But it hasn’t all been doom and gloom. While the rest of the world struggled 
to come to terms with the aforementioned craziness, innovators, scientists and 
tech heads worked quietly from the sidelines to come up with solutions. And 
some succeeded: from a trashcan that sucks up ocean garbage to a drone that 
delivers vaccines to endangered ferrets, here are our top picks for this year’s 
best sustainable tech.

A trashcan for the ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/30/seabin-ocean-pollution-epa-marina-miami-garbage>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ccdb85a3b9fc703043b3bb524b11af467649ad0%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ccdb85a3b9fc703043b3bb524b11af467649ad0%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Peter Ceglinski, left, and Andrew Turton invented the Seabin device, which 
traps garbage floating around marinas and docks. Photograph: Seabin 
It’s no secret that our oceans are turning into swirling garbage dumps. There 
are some5.25tn pieces of floating plastic debris in the oceans 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2015/01/150109-oceans-plastic-sea-trash-science-marine-debris/>
 right now, and it’sestimated 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/science/earth/plastic-ocean-waste-levels-going-up-study-says.html?_r=1>
 that some 8m metric tons of plastic waste enter global waters every year.

Earlier this year, Peter Ceglinski and Andrew Turton, two surfers from 
Australia, came up with a device they’re callingthe Seabin 
<http://www.seabinproject.com/> – a kind of submersible garbage can that 
captures floating trash. Picture a cylinder, with the upper opening just below 
the surface of the water. An electric pump draws water through the bottom of 
the cylinder, creating a vortex around the upper edge that pulls in water and 
floating trash. A bag filter, made of natural material, collects the trash and 
allows water to pass through.

After raising more than $267,000 in an Indiegogo campaign 
<https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/cleaning-the-oceans-one-marina-at-a-time%23/>
 to help build the device, Ceglinski and Turton are keen to start selling the 
Seabin to marinas around the world. First stop: Miami, Florida, where Miami 
Beach’s marinas manager wants to start using the Seabin in 2017 to counter the 
bags, bottles, paper plates and forks found daily in the water.

A handheld cancer-detecting device 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/21/quantumdx-cancer-diagnostics-medicine-africa-tuberculosis>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d57e3e94e9c8f84efabf925e457e2e54577be7%2F0_0_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d57e3e94e9c8f84efabf925e457e2e54577be7%2F0_0_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 A startup has invented a DNA analyzer that could potentially revolutionize 
healthcare in the developing world. Photograph: QuantuMDx 
Earlier this year, British-based tech firm QuantuMDx 
<http://www.quantumdx.com/> developed a new, low-cost diagnostic DNA analyzer 
the size of a smartphone which is being billed as a “handheld lab”. The device 
– called Q-Poc – can accurately diagnose everything from cancers to infectious 
diseases in minutes. Although it is currently in alpha testing stage, the 
company hopes to get the product in the hands of doctors by early 2018.

Q-Poc runs on a solar-powered battery and it’s designed to read biological 
samples submitted via a credit card-size cartridge. It can work with a range of 
sample types: swabs can be used to detect sexually-transmitted infections, 
while saliva is used to detect tuberculosis. (Tests for other diseases will be 
added at a later date.) The device uses mobile technology, enabling the test 
results to be geo-stamped and shared in real time.

The prospect of a speedy diagnosis at a patient’s side is exciting, 
particularly in countries where access to medical care is a challenge. Subject 
to regulatory approval by the World Health Organization (WHO), QuantuMDx hopes 
to initially roll out the Q-Poc unit in SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, before expanding to other markets.

Stuff you can eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/13/edible-cutlery-company-eat-plastic-pollution-oceans>
 (instead ofthrowing it away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/29/florida-brewery-creates-edible-beer-holders-save-marine-life-saltwater>
)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de4fb20ffe1313adeaa5b4d5ad3609bdc18eefb%2F17_0_667_400%2F667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de4fb20ffe1313adeaa5b4d5ad3609bdc18eefb%2F17_0_667_400%2F667.jpg>
 Even if the spoons aren’t eaten, once used, they can decompose in a few days. 
Photograph: Bakeys 
It was a big year for edible everyday items, like cutlery and beer cans. First 
up, an Indian cutlery company, Bakeys, invented cutlery that you can eat as a 
way to tackle plastic waste inoceans and landfill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/20/from-oil-use-to-ocean-pollution-five-facts-about-the-plastics-industry>
. (Welcome to a new geological epoch of trash – scientists are calling it the
manmade Anthropocene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/07/human-impact-has-pushed-earth-into-the-anthropocene-scientists-say>
.)

Plastic cutlery significantly contributes to this problem – estimates suggest 
<http://www.reuseit.com/facts-and-myths/learn-more-disposable-lunch-facts-items-carried-in-work-and-school-lunches.htm>
 the US alone uses 40bn plastic utensils a year. Hence the need for edible 
versions. Bakeys makes vegan-friendly cutlery from rice, wheat and an ancient 
grain called sorghum, which was picked because it doesn’t go soggy when 
immersed in liquid.

The cutlery comes in three flavors: savory (salt and cumin); sweet (sugar); 
and plain. And, if you’re wondering – it kind of tastes like a dry cracker.

Why not wash down the cutlery with an edible beer holder? Americans are 
consuming more beer it seems –67bn beer cans 
<http://www.statisticbrain.com/beer-industry-statistics/> each year, 
apparently. According to theBrewers Association 
<https://www.brewersassociation.org/insights/craft-brewers-and-cans/>, this 
number is expected to grow significantly as craft breweries get more popular.

The problem is that plastic beer can holders pose a threat to fish and marine 
wildlife when they end up in the ocean. Saltwater Brewery, based in Florida, 
has come up with a solution: biodegradable, edible beer pack rings made from 
wheat and barley waste. The rings disintegrate within two hours of being in the 
ocean, which prevents fish or other sea animals getting stuck. They’re also 
harmless if ingested by curious fish.

More than 50 craft breweries have already contacted Saltwater expressing an 
interest in using the edible rings. The brewery is now developing metal molds 
capable of making 400,000 rings per month and hopes to build a centralized 
production facility by 2017.

A drone that helps endangered species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/us-government-black-footed-ferret-mandm-vaccines>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1971f47b9b9bc5b2ef0661592fdd881bb22abfcb%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1971f47b9b9bc5b2ef0661592fdd881bb22abfcb%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 The US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) hope to bombard a ferret habitat in 
Montana with a vaccine administered via specially designed drones. Photograph: 
Will Singleton/AP 
One of 2016’s most heartwarming stories revolved around a cunning plan by the 
US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) to bombard a ferret habitat in Montana with 
a vaccine administered via specially designed drones that can “shoot” pellets 
in three directions at the same time.

All this in a bid to save the endangered black-footed ferret. The vaccine 
pellets are actually intended for the prairie dog population inside the habitat 
at theUL Bend National Wildlife Refuge <https://www.fws.gov/refuge/ul_bend/>. 
The ferrets are dependent upon prairie dogs for food and shelter, but a 
flea-borne disease called sylvatic plague has slowly been killing the prairie 
dogs off.

The FWS came up with a “glorified gumball machine” to spit out the vaccine 
pellets. The machine which can be attached to a drone which uses GPS to drop 
the pellets throughout the habitat. Oh, and if you’re wondering: the FWS said 
lab tests show that prairie dogs find the bait in the vaccines “delicious”.

Using 3D printers to eliminate plastic waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/06/3d-printing-plastic-waste-poverty-development-protoprint-reflow-techfortrade>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49771d94bea415ab38608b37e179c72f1f73e4e%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20innovations%20that%20shaped%20sustainability%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsustainable-technology-2016-climate-change-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49771d94bea415ab38608b37e179c72f1f73e4e%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Areport 
<http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/3d-printing-materials.asp> by a 
leading markets analyst predicted the 3D printing materials market would grow 
by nearly 266% over the next five years. Photograph: Alamy 
As we’ve established, humans produce a lot of trash – apparently of the more 
than300m tons of plastic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/plastic-new-epoch-human-damage>
 produced globally every year, onerefuse truck’s worth ends up in our waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/more-plastic-than-fish-in-the-sea-by-2050-warns-ellen-macarthur>
, landfills and streets every minute.

One of our favorite stories this year came from India, where a local 
entrepreneur has set up a production facility at a local rubbish dump, where 
waste pickers convert high-density polyethylene (HPDE) – mostly used for 
plastic bottles – into 3D printing filament to eventually be sold to 3D 
printing companies.

The market for 3D printing filament – the majority of which is made from 
virgin plastic – is growing rapidly. A recentreport 
<http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/3d-printing-materials.asp> 
predicted the 3D printing materials market will grow by nearly 266% in the next 
five years.

And, while the market for ethical filament is still relatively small, the 
greatest potential 3D printing seems to be offering the developing world is 
employment – there are an estimated15 million people 
<http://www.innovationseeds.eu/Network-Library/Core-Articles/Global-Alliance-Of-Waste-Pickers.kl>
 globally who currently make their living from waste picking, for example.
 