
If mental health is the Cinderella service of the NHS, then child and 
adolescent mental health services (Camhs 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/for_parents/services_children_young_people/camhs>
) is the Cinderella service of the Cinderella service. It’s a cliche that bears 
repeating, because the reality of children’s mental health services in this 
country still falls woefully short of the vision set by the Liberal Democrats 
and Conservatives during the coalition government.

One in 10 children suffers from depression, anxiety or another diagnosable 
mental health problem, and 75% of mental illness starts before the age of 18. 
Intervening early with effective, evidence-based support can not only stop a 
child’s condition deteriorating to crisis point, but also have a transformative 
effect on long-term recovery and life prospects in adulthood.

'I left to save myself': the reality of working in children's mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/06/reality-working-child-mental-health-services>
When mental ill health costs the economy an estimated £105bn every year 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/mentalhealth/2016/02/15/fyfv-mh/>, the economic as 
well as the moral case for prioritising children’s mental health is 
unanswerable. But when I became minister, I was horrified by what I witnessed.

For too many people, help is not available when they need it. Nearly a quarter 
of young people referred to specialist Camhs services are turned away, often 
because they fail to meet outrageous eligibility thresholds. The anorexic 
teenager is denied treatment until she becomes dangerously thin. The boy with 
OCD is told there is no specialist support until he has experienced repeated 
suicidal thoughts. And those who do get treatment are often faced with 
excruciating waiting times, which can vary dramatically across the country.


As well as being morally indefensible, it is the antithesis of the important 
principle of early intervention. We have ended up with a grossly inefficient 
system designed to treat rather than prevent mental ill health in children. 
Fragmented, tiered services are complex and dysfunctional, while the perverse 
financial incentives in the system fail to encourage a focus on prevention and 
instead push children into specialist acute settings whereNHS England 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/> picks up the bill, rather than local clinical 
commissioning groups.

It's hardly surprising that we've not seen the progress many had hoped for

Determined to address this appalling situation, I set up a task force. The 
result wasFuture in mind 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/414024/Childrens_Mental_Health.pdf>
: a blueprint for the modernisation of child and adolescent mental health 
services, backed byextra funding of £250m each year until 2020 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/deputy-pm-announces-billion-pound-boost-over-5-years-for-childrens-mental-health-services>
.

At its heart is a significant shift towards the prevention of ill health, 
working with schools to strengthen resilience and improve support before health 
deteriorates. Attracting support from across the political spectrum, it was 
subsequently endorsed byNHS England’s own five-year plan for mental health 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
.

The Conservative government, however, has shown little drive to deliver on 
this golden opportunity. In the first year of the promised investment,only 
£143m was released <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-33740709> instead of the £250m 
expected. Mental health providers have reported that the money failed to reach 
frontline services, with many still seeing cuts to their budgets.

Worse still, the government chose not to make up this £107m shortfall in the 
second year of the programme. Nor was the money that was allocated to clinical 
commissioning groups ringfenced, so there is a real risk that it will leak out 
to other local priorities such as A&E waiting times.

It’s hardly surprising that we’ve not seen the progress many had hoped for. 
The Education Policy Institute’s commission on children’s mental health, which 
I chair, recently published itsfinal report 
<http://epi.org.uk/report/time_to_deliver/#>, highlighting that excessive 
waiting times and treatment thresholds are still commonplace. There also 
remains a dreadful cliff edge at the age of 18 when young people make the 
transition from Camhs to adult services.

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, recently pledged his commitment to Camhs, 
which he rightly identified asthe “biggest single area of weakness” in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/20/jeremy-hunt-promises-better-mental-health-services-children-adolescents>
. But rhetoric is not enough. It’s now time for a bold statement of intent, 
otherwise all momentum will be lost.

I almost lost my daughter because of her mental health problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/dec/05/almost-lost-daughter-mental-health-problems-camhs>
We need to see a bold programme of reform – implementing the principles of 
Future in mind – with an ambitious focus on schools and prevention, early 
intervention, and improving access to high-quality services. The EPI commission 
called for the government to use the additional £250m a year as a lever to 
drive continued change, making receipt of the money conditional on areas 
demonstrating that all the money is being spent on children and that there is 
an ambitious programme to shift resources to prevention. Each area should also 
be expected to demonstrate that they have delivered on their plans.

The chronic underfunding of children’s mental health services must be 
consigned to history. Despite receiving a paltry 0.7% of the total NHS budget, 
Camhs is too often at the front of the queue when there are cuts or 
“efficiencies” to be made. The health secretary should make it his priority to 
reverse this scandalous disinvestment, pushing and cajoling theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to ensure that every last penny of 
the extra money secured by the Liberal Democrats is spent as intended.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and young people have 
been let down for too long. We know what an effective and modern children’s 
mental health service looks like, and we have a roadmap for how to get there. 
Responsibility now lies with the government to deliver on it so that all young 
people receive the support they need to flourish and achieve their full 
potential.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 