
On the face of it there was nothing particularly memorable about Birmingham 
City’s 1-1 draw at relegation-bound Portsmouth in March 1959 but for the sense 
of disappointment the visitors took from it. “Blues did themselves no credit in 
this so-casual stroll in the sun,” wrote Dennis Shaw in Birmingham’s Sports 
Argus. “Portsmouth did all they could to show why they have not won a league 
game since November. Blues were little better. After shooting into the lead 
shortly before the interval they just hadn’t the skill, and the drive, nor the 
determination to run up a hefty total. On a pitch like concrete the ball was 
ballooned back and forth over the halfway line like a ping-pong game.”

At right-back for City, making his 227th league appearance for the club, was 
28-year-old Jeff Hall. Two days later he was diagnosed with polio, and within a 
fortnight he was dead.

“I’m amazed,” said Ron Newman, Portsmouth’s outside-left, when told of Hall’s 
illness. “Jeff played well and I didn’t notice anything different about him at 
all. He was very quiet all through the game but then he usually is. I shook 
hands with him as we left the field and said: ‘Well done.’ He just said: ‘Hard 
luck – I guess you needed those points pretty badly.’”

The forgotten story of ... the Pie and Pints match | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/the-forgotten-story-of-the-pie-and-pints-match>
The previous night, while with his team-mates in a Southsea hotel, Hall had 
complained of having difficulty swallowing, and doctors decided he had a cold. 
The following day he played as normal. “After the match we were hanging about 
outside the dressing rooms when Jeff joined us, looking terrible, pale-faced, 
watery-eyed, exhausted,” wrote Shaw in his autobiography A Game of Three Halves 
published in 2014. “Having been told we were travelling in a private car he 
begged a lift with us, because he’d apparently got the flu, and we could get 
him home quicker than the team coach.”

The following morning Hall went to watch a youth team he and West Brom’s Ray 
Barlow had been coaching play in a televised five-a-side tournament against a 
side representing Leeds United and coached by their strikers Don Revie and 
Wilbur Cush. “I stood next to him, roaring on our team,” recalled Barlow, who 
had suffered from polio a decade earlier, eventually making a complete 
recovery. “Jeff had dashed back from Portsmouth so he could be at West Bromwich 
the next day to watch our team. He seemed quite normal then, yet the next day 
he was whipped off to hospital.”

A vaccination against polio existed but although strenuous exercise helped 
spread the disease around the host’s body, making attacks significantly more 
serious, no club had thought to inoculate their team. This reflected a wider 
reticence: Jonas Salk’s vaccine, administered in a series of normally three 
injections, had been introduced to the UK in 1956, initially being offered only 
to children, but the take-up had been slow. An early scare in America, where 
the vaccine had been rushed to market so hastily in some cases it still 
contained enough live virus to cause polio, had not helped build enthusiasm. By 
1958 only 53% of children in England and Wales who were eligible for 
inoculation had received the vaccine. In the middle of that year the vaccine 
was for the first time offered to those aged between 18 and 26; in the first 
three months of eligibility, of the 6,250,000 British adults suddenly able to 
get vaccinated, only 13,324 had received two injections, and 26,947 had 
received one.

After Hall’s diagnosis the club was immediately locked down. In the hours 
after he was admitted to hospital the Birmingham trainer, Ken Fish, travelled 
by taxi round the players’ homes breaking the news and telling them to stay at 
home and rest. Barlow, Cush and Revie were told to stay away from their clubs, 
Portsmouth’s players were put into isolation and those of Birmingham’s other 
recent opponents, Nottingham Forest, Wolves and Leicester, plus staff at the 
team hotel near Porstmouth, two club directors who had also been in the car 
back from the south coast, a television outside broadcast unit and the Luton 
and Norwich teams who had played an FA Cup semi-final replay at St Andrew’s a 
couple of weeks earlier were all advised to see their doctors.

Meanwhile Hall lay in ward 22 of Little Bromwich hospital, his condition 
critical. Within 24 hours of his diagnosis he had three operations and was 
relying on an iron lung to breathe. Newspapers nationwide carried daily updates 
on the player’s condition on their front pages. 25 March: “There has possibly 
been some slight improvement though his condition still gives rise to acute 
anxiety.” 26 March: “He has had a better day and his strength is being 
maintained.” 27 March: “He is putting up a good fight and appears quite 
cheerful.” 29 March: “He has had another restful night but his general 
condition is critical.” 30 March: “The slight improvement in his condition has 
not been maintained. His temperature has risen again and his general condition 
is weaker.” 31 March: “He has had a restful day. His condition is unchanged.” 1 
April: “He has had a fair day and is maintaining his strength.” And then, they 
ceased. Hall died at 9.20am on 4 April.

The picture painted in the testimonials that followed was of a humble, 
likeable man and, despite his lack of height, an extremely able player. Cyril 
Chapman, his obituarist in the Birmingham Post, described him as “one of Blues’ 
most skilful and popular players … who harnessed a keen intelligence to natural 
footballing ability to make a mark of considerable distinction on the game. His 
style of play, which tried to ensure any defensive move was turned smoothly and 
quickly to attack, and his demeanour on and off the field were classic examples 
to young devotees of the game.”

“The Jeff Halls of soccer do not often pass this way,” wrote the Telegraph. 
“Like his friend, Billy Wright, he met the physical challenge on the field 
without flinching and with a fair tackle. Few defenders ever mastered the 
handicap of lack of height so competently.”

Hall had played 17 consecutive games for England after making his debut 
against Denmark in 1955, on each occasion occupying the right-back berth with 
Manchester United’s Roger Byrne on the left. Neither player lived to see his 
29th birthday, Byrne having died in theMunich air disaster in 1958 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/munich-air-crash-chapecoense-brazil-colombia-painful-memories-harry-gregg>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ffogotten-story-jeff-hall-death-polio-birmingham-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28bab57b7521a1b05c66b0671ce97368481b8d63%2F0_0_2224_1832%2F2224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Jeff%20Hall%2C%20the%20footballer%20whose%20death%20turned%20tide%20against%20polio%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ffogotten-story-jeff-hall-death-polio-birmingham-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Jeff%20Hall%2C%20the%20footballer%20whose%20death%20turned%20tide%20against%20polio%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ffogotten-story-jeff-hall-death-polio-birmingham-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28bab57b7521a1b05c66b0671ce97368481b8d63%2F0_0_2224_1832%2F2224.jpg>
 Don Revie (left) and Jeff Hall in the 1956 FA Cup Final between Manchester 
City and Birmingham. Photograph: Colorsport/REX/Shutterstock 
“Not only Birmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc> but the whole of 
English football will be the poorer now that Jeff has left us,” Wright said. 
“After playing with him for England on numerous occasions and being associated 
with him off the field, I know just what a wonderful player and person he was.”

Hall had been born in Scunthorpe but raised in the village of Wilsden, not far 
from Bradford. He played the euphonium in the village band, and helped his 
father, a newsagent, with his morning deliveries – a job he continued to 
perform on his visits home even as an England international. He was spotted by 
the Birmingham scout Walter Taylor while playing in an army game in 1950. “The 
player I went to watch didn’t shine but I was taken with the play of the 
right-half,” Taylor said.

Hall was approached after the match, but informed Taylor that he could not 
possibly be of professional standard. “At first he didn’t think he was good 
enough and it took me hours to persuade him to sign amateur forms,” Taylor said.

He made his debut for the club the following year, and established himself in 
the first team in 1953. Birmingham had been relegated from the top flight in 
1950 but with Hall in a defence marshalled by the great goalkeeper Gil Merrick 
they returned five seasons later and continued to improve. In a report on a 3-1 
win over Manchester United in December 1956 the Sunday Times described “a 
superb defence … Clearly if Merrick is an emperor among goalkeepers, then Hall 
and Green, Birmingham’s backs, and Linacre, Smith and Warhurst, their 
half-backs, are very worthy paladins.”

The forgotten story of … Leicester City winning the 1971 Charity Shield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/04/leicester-city-charity-shield-1971-forgotten-story>
Hall’s death had inevitable sporting consequences. Sixth in the league after 
the Portsmouth match, one point away from fifth – the squads of the top five 
teams received reward in the way of “talent money”, ranging from £220 for fifth 
place to £1,100 for first – Birmingham did not play again for three weeks, had 
to cope with fixture congestion thereafter and ended up ninth.

“Jeff was one of those likeable types very rare to find,” said Joe Richards, 
the president of the Football League. “He had been with me on tours abroad a 
number of times and was one of those professional footballers to whom everyone 
takes an instant and lasting liking. His death was a tragedy and his place in 
the game will be difficult to fill.”

Hall was buried in Wilsden on 9 April, while a memorial service was held at St 
Andrew’s Church, around the corner from Birmingham City’s ground. There, the 
Rev H B Marlow told a packed congregation of his hope that Hall’s death might 
raise awareness of the disease. “It may well be that his death will save many 
other lives,” he said.

And so it proved. The Birmingham Post had been first to report the effect. 
“Soon after the first reports of Hall’s illness appeared yesterday,” they wrote 
on 25 March, “an official of the Public Health Department at West Bromwich 
received telephone calls at his home during the lunch hour from young people 
enquiring about the facilities for receiving the polio vaccination. ‘The 
vaccine is here for anyone under 26 years of age. We can only advise those 
eligible to avail themselves of this precautionary measure as soon as 
possible,’ the official said.”

And, for the first time, they did so in numbers. In the days after Hall’s 
death clinics nationwide started to report lengthy queues. Responding to 
demand, large employers in and around Birmingham offered workers on-site 
vaccinations, while youth clubs and dance halls were given records containing 
breaks during which young attendees could receive mid-jive injections. Before 
play got under way on Saturday 11 April a message from the minister of health, 
Derek Walker-Smith, was read or played at 400 football clubs around the 
country. “Hall’s death brings home to us sharply and sadly that polio can 
strike down even the fittest among us,” he said. “Even when not fatal, it can 
cripple for life. So I appeal to all under 26, strongly and sincerely, be sure 
to get your polio vaccination. Don’t delay, do it soon.”

By 16 April local authorities across the country were reporting a shortage of 
vaccine, with a ministry of health spokesman describing “an unprecedented 
demand”. On 20 April clinics in Birmingham were closed because they had no 
vaccinations left and Manchester followed two days later, while emergency 
supplies were flown in from the US. As the Express put it the following day: 
“In the past 10 years over 3,000 people have died of polio in England and 
Wales. But it took the death of one footballer to get the typists and 
secretaries, clerks, schoolboys and the rock’n’roll generation pouring into the 
clinics.”

Soon the fight against polio was joined by another willing footsoldier, as 
Hall’s widow Dawn dedicated herself to increasing awareness of polio 
vaccinations. “I didn’t want Jeff’s death to be in vain and I certainly didn’t 
want anyone else to go through the same ordeal,” she said. “I went on 
television to talk about my experience and to tell everybody in the country how 
important it was to be immunised. I also made a record which was translated 
into several different languages and sent all over the world. The response to 
my appeal was absolutely amazing; I can remember seeing hundreds of people in 
queues waiting for their vaccination.” Dawn continued to help victims of polio 
and to prevent others joining their number until her death in May this year at 
the age of 79, and was posthumously awarded the British Empire Medal.

“It was I think, at the time, actually the deciding factor in Britain’s battle 
with polio,” says Gareth Williams, emeritus professor of medicine at Bristol 
University and author of the 2013 book Paralysed with Fear: The Story of Polio. 
“After Jeff died his widow Dawn did this amazing job. She became a crusader, 
basically saying she had watched her husband die over a fortnight, losing the 
power of speech and fading in front of her eyes, and she wouldn’t want this to 
happen to anyone else, so get your kids vaccinated. I think it was a genuine 
damascene moment, and public perceptions of the risks and the benefits changed.”

In February 1959 500,000 doses of vaccine were administered and at the month’s 
end only one in 12 people under 26 had been inoculated. In December 2.5m doses 
were administered, 50% had taken the vaccine and the queues were still forming. 
In 1958 5% of people in their 20s and 3% of those in their 30s had been 
protected; by 1961 those figures were 63% and 53% and when oral vaccination 
replaced injections in 1962 take-up increased further. In 1955, the worst year 
on record, there were 3,712 cases of paralytic poliomyelitis in England and 
Wales, the ninth of 12 successive years in which the number suffering the most 
acute form of the disease reached four figures. But then, as the effect of 
vaccinations kicked in, the numbers started to plummet: 257 cases in 1960, 707 
in 1961, 212 in 1962, 39 in 1963. Only twice since 1968 have numbers reached 
double figures, and the last confirmed case of polio contracted in the UK was 
in 1984. Globally however it is a continuing battle: in 1988 there were an 
estimated 350,000 cases of polio globally; last year there were 74, this year 
so far 34 have been confirmed, mostly in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

For most of the last 57 years the Main Stand at St Andrew’s has featured a 
clock – they are on their third – dedicated to Hall. Elsewhere he is rarely 
remembered now for anything other than his remarkable if unwitting contribution 
to the battle against polio in Britain but there at least they have not 
forgotten his qualities as a footballer. As Harry Morris, their former captain 
and then chairman, said in the days after his death: “He was one of the 
adornments of the game, a model player and a grand club man. We have had 
players as good but never one better.”
 