
What is the best way to knacker a child’s education? Force him or her to spend 
too long in the classroom. An overview of research into outdoor education by 
King’s College London found that children who spend time learning in natural 
environments “perform better in reading, mathematics, science and social 
studies”. Exploring the natural world “makes other school subjects rich and 
relevant and gets apathetic students excited about learning”.

Fieldwork in the countryside, a British study finds, improves long-term 
memory. Dozens of papers report sharp improvements in attention when children 
are exposed to wildlife and the great outdoors. Teenage girls taken on a 
three-week canoeing trip in the United States remained, even 18 months later, 
more determined, more prepared to speak out and show leadership, and more 
inclined to challenge conventional notions of femininity.
 A child from south-east London holding some acorns she found on a forest 
trail in Wales. Photograph: John Russell 
Studies of the programmes run by The Wilderness Foundation UK, which takes 
troubled teenagers into the mountains, found that their self-control, 
self-awareness and behaviour all improved. Ofsted, the schools inspection 
service, reports that getting children out of the classroom raises “standards, 
motivation, personal development and behaviour.”

Last week I saw the evidence myself. With the adventure learning charity 
WideHorizons, I spent two days taking a group of 10-year-olds 
<http://www.widehorizons.org.uk/tag/george-monbiot/> from a deprived borough in 
London rockpooling, and roaming the woods in mid-Wales. Many had never been to 
the countryside before and had never seen the sea.

I was nervous before I met them. I feared that our differences might set us 
apart. I thought they might be bored and indifferent. But my fears evaporated 
as soon as we reached the rockpools.

Within a few minutes, I had them picking up crabs and poking anenomes. When I 
showed that they could eat live prawns out of the net they were horrified, but 
curiosity and bravado conquered disgust, and one after another they tried them. 
Raw prawns are as sweet as grapes: some of the children were soon shovelling 
them into their mouths. I don’t think there was anyone in the group who managed 
not to fall into the water. But no one complained.

In the woods the next day we paddled in a stream, rolled down a hill, ate 
blackberries, tasted mushrooms, had helicopter races with sycamore keys, 
explored an ant’s nest, broke sticks and collected acorns. Most had never done 
any of these things before, but they needed no encouragement: the exhilaration 
with which they explored the living world seemed instinctive. I realised just 
how little contact they’d had when I discovered that none of them had seen a 
nettle or knew what happens if you touch it.

But what hit me hardest was this. One boy stood out: he had remarkable powers 
of observation and intuition. When I mentioned this to his teacher, her reply 
astonished me: “I must tell him. It’s not something he will have heard before.” 
When a child as bright and engaged as this is struggling at school, the problem 
lies not with the child but with the education system. We foster and reward a 
narrow set of skills.

The governments of this country accept the case for outdoor learning. In 2006 
the Departments for Children and Schools, Culture, and the Environment signed a 
manifesto which says the following: “We strongly support the educational case 
for learning outside the classroom 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.thegrowingschoolsgarden.org.uk%2Fdownloads%2Flotc-manifesto.pdf&ei=luBSUvuuHLL50gX6qoG4CQ&usg=AFQjCNEdo6HE4ke9FfsNaQRRUwNp7Ysb8Q&sig2=E44DvSp1AL2fRIDAnaPdTA&bvm=bv.53537100,d.d2k>
. If all young people were given these opportunities we believe it would make a 
significant contribution to raising achievement.” In 2011 the current 
government published a white paper proposing “action to get more children 
learning outdoors, removing barriers and increasing schools’ abilities to teach 
outdoors”.

So what happened? Massive cuts. The BBC reports that 95% of all outdoor 
education centres have had their entire local-authority funding cut 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-13715804>. Instead of being encouraged to observe 
and explore and think and develop, children are being treated like geese in a 
foie gras farm. Confined to the classroom, stuffed with rules and facts, 
dragooned into endless tests: there could scarcely be a better formula for 
ensuring that they become bored and disaffected.
 George Monbiot rockpooling with children from south-east London. Photograph: 
John Russell 
When children are demonised by the newspapers, they are often described as 
feral. But feral is what children should be: it means released from captivity 
or domestication. Those who live in crowded flats, surrounded by concrete, mown 
grass and other people’s property, cannot escape their captivity without 
breaking the law. Games and explorations that are seen as healthy in the 
countryside are criminalised in the cities.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who have never visited the 
countryside – 50% in the UK, according to WideHorizons – live under constant 
restraint.

Why shouldn’t every child spend a week in the countryside every term? Why 
shouldn’t everyone be allowed to develop the kind of skills the children I met 
were learning: rock climbing, gorge scrambling, caving, night walking, ropework 
and natural history? Getting wet and tired and filthy and cold, immersing 
yourself, metaphorically and literally, in the natural world: surely by these 
means you discover more about yourself and the world around you than you do 
during three months in a classroom. What kind of government would deprive 
children of this experience?

Twitter: @georgemonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>. A fully 
referenced version of this article can be found atMonbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/> 

• When this article was first published George Monbiot was under an 
obligation, to a third party unrelated to the Guardian, to assist the charity 
Widehorizons. This note was added on 1 September 2016.

 