
As I watched the tape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> joking about 
sexually assaulting women, there were multiple moments that disgusted me, but 
only one that literally turned my stomach. It wasn’t when the Republican 
presidential nominee talked about trying to “fuck” a woman who wasn’t 
interested, or made a joke about her “big phony tits”. It wasn’t when he said 
that famous men can do anything to women, even “grab them by the pussy”. The 
moment that literally nauseated me came later, when Trump knew he was being 
taped.

Jill Harth, woman who sued Trump over alleged sexual assault, breaks silence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
After Access Hollywood host Billy Bush and Trump spend a few minutes making 
lascivious comments about actor Arianne Zucker, they meet the woman they were 
just objectifying. The woman that Trump – who has just taken some Tic Tacs 
“just in case I start kissing her” – called “it”.

“How about a little hug for the Donald?” Bush says, smiling. He then asks for 
his own embrace.

In that moment, Bush and Trump are in on a joke and Zucker is the punchline.

It’s painful to watch not just because Zucker doesn’t know what was said about 
her, but because this is what women are afraid of. That the men we know, the 
men we work with – or even love – say horrible things about us. That despite 
assurances that they respect us and consider us equals, men are secretly 
winking behind our back. That we are not really people to them, but things.

When women watch that interaction between Trump, Bush and Zucker, they’ll 
think of the countless times they walked up to a group of jovial men in 
mid-conversation and felt something in the pit of their stomach. They’ll wonder 
if their sneaking suspicion was right all along – that they were on the 
outside, that they were the joke.

Trump says that this is “locker room banter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-forced-into-apology-as-sex-boast-tape-horrifies-republicans>
”. Claiming that all men talk like this behind closed doors is his way of 
normalizing what he did and what he said. It’s a sentiment I’ve heard used in 
Trump’s defense quite a bit since yesterday. But whatever happened to “not all 
men”?

If we want to believe – as we should – that sexism is aberrant behavior in 
men, then we can’t excuse what’s on this tape as commonplace. Sexually 
assaulting women is not normal, if even if it is routine. And as familiar as 
that stomach-churning interaction is to women, it’s also one we won’t accept as 
our lot in life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20sex%20boasts%3A%20'When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20sex%20boasts%3A%20%27When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s sex boasts: ‘When you are a star they let you do anything’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/08/donald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
That’s why Trump won’t recover from this tape. Too many of us have been groped 
and commented on, joked about and made to feel small. Even Trump’s non-apology 
is something we’ve seen before – we know the look of someone who has gotten 
caught doing something that they don’t at all feel badly about. We know the 
look of someone who has little regard for women. We’ve seen that look, we’ve 
heard these insults, our entire lives. They’re a part of who we are.

And on 8 November, Trump will find out just how tired we are of it.
 