
In the tech-utopia of the on-demand economy it is said all can have prizes. 
Those providing the services in this brave new world supposedly hail the 
freedom of flexible hours and benefit from the surge-pricing that allows them 
to hike charges as demand rises. Customers, say the futurologists, love the 
convenience. There’s no doubt of the popularity of such apps as Uber, now the 
world’s most valuable startup. More than 30,000Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> drivers whizz around London 
alone. The rise of such “gig” jobs, where you start work by opening an app on a 
smartphone and end when you swipe out, has disrupted traditional patterns of 
employment.

What today’s landmark employment tribunal has done is challenge the business 
logic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 that suggests Uber drivers are not toiling for the firm but entrepreneurs 
working for themselves. In Uberworld its drivers are customers who pay to 
access an app that links them with rides. Uber just takes a cut. Why, reckons 
the company, would it pay drivers wages or benefits when they are its clients? 
The judges have rightly refuted this key premise of the “gig economy”. Instead 
they ruled that Uber drivers are “workers” who are entitled to the national 
minimum wage and holiday pay. The central question was one of control: the more 
autonomous a person is in how they do the job, the more likely they are to be 
self-employed. The drivers’ testimony in the case was pretty damning. One said 
he was put under “tremendous pressure” to work long hours and accept jobs, 
adding there were “repercussions” from the company if he cancelled a pickup. He 
claimed that some months he earned as little as £5 an hour, well below the 
national living wage. In aruling that quotes Shakespeare and Milton 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/judgments/mr-y-aslam-mr-j-farrar-and-others-v-uber/>
, the pithiest point was lifted from a Californian ruling: “Uber does not 
simply sell software; it sells rides.”

This is not the last word. The company has said it will appeal – and there are 
another three rounds to get through. Nonetheless the judgment clearly makes the 
case that Uber is in charge of its drivers’ working lives and conditions. While 
the findings apply to just the two drivers who brought the case, it will 
embolden other Uber drivers to bring similar claims, as well as others working 
in the “gig economy”. In America new technology companies – such as online 
grocery store Instacart – have decided to change their workers’ employment 
status 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-22/instacart-reclassifies-part-of-its-workforce-amid-regulatory-pressure-on-uber>
 before being forced to.

In Britain the backdrop to Uber’s rise is the growth in self-employed workers 
– whose ranks are swelling while their incomes are shrinking. They account for 
more than one in seven of the workforce but earnless on average than they did 
in 1995 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37678065>. It cannot be right that 
a ever-larger slice of the labour market is without holiday pay or maternity 
leave. This moral sentiment will be tested next month when a slew of cases 
involving cycle couriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/job-pay-workers-gig-economy> in 
London dispute their status as self-employed contractors. Like the Uber drivers 
they want to be classified as workers, which would bring employment rights, 
including holiday pay. What is clear is that ducking out of paying benefits is 
not a fair route to profits. The lawsuits also raise questions over whether the 
tax incentive is right: at present a company pays 13.8% national insurance on 
employees’ wages but none for the self-employed. That’s why it’s good that MPs 
and thegovernment will look at this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/mps-inquiry-uk-working-conditions-pay-exploitation-gig-economy>
. As a first step we need to measure,like the US authorities 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/labor-department-releases-guidance-on-classification-of-workers-1436954401>
, how big the gig economy really is.An estimated 6% of Brits are earning income 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/sharing-economy-87-brits-see-gig-economy-taking-over-9-5-working-days-10-years-1519860>
 from gig-jobs. Once we know the scale of the problem elected representatives 
can design laws that account for the world in which the public works.
 