
A baby ibex on a precipitous cliff edge. The hyenas of Harar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/11/planet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough>
 eating from a human hand. Leopards in Mumbai, whales breaching and baby 
turtles heading blindly away from the sea. We are amazed by images of wildlife 
seen inever more beautifully filmed natural history documentaries 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td>. They raise awareness, entertain, 
inform and amuse. We weep when we hear there are fewer birds in the sky, or 
that thousands of species are critically endangered. But there are some 
metaphorical megafauna that the BBC and we in the media really do not want 
everyone to see.

After half a lifetime writing for the Guardian about the decline of the 
natural world, I have to report that there is a herd of enormous elephants in 
the forest that are trashing the place. We avert our eyes and pretend they are 
not there. We hope they will go away, but they appear to be breeding. But it is 
now clear that they are doing so much damage that unless confronted, there is 
little chance that the rest of the animals, including us, will survive very 
long.

New map reveals shattering effect of roads on nature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/new-map-reveals-shattering-effect-of-roads-on-nature>
Embracing hyper-consumerism

Hyper-consumerism is the dominant matriarch of this destructive herd and the 
dysfunctional economic model that supports it, generating waste and ecological 
damage on a massive scale. The average US supermarket offers nearly 50,000 
products;in the UK we throw away millions of tonnes of food a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/04/food-standards-agency-uk-freezer-waste>
; mobile phones have an average lifespan of just over a year; computers and 
cars just a few years more. The free market economy that has been built around 
it celebrates speed, obsolescence and quantity over longevity and efficiency. 
But we know that hyper-consumerism leads directly to deforestation, 
over-extraction of minerals, the waste of natural resources and pollution. We 
simply have too much stuff that no one possibly needs. To avoid ecological 
disaster, it must be culled.

Letting corporate power off the leash

Corporate power is the adult male of the herd. The biggest 200 corporations 
<https://www.globalpolicy.org/component/content/article/221/47211.html> now 
rule the world, and are economically greater than the combined economies of 
nearly 180 countries. They employ just a few million people but they wield 
power over governments and global bodies and have more economic influence 
than 80% of humanity. Together they set the world’s technological and economic 
direction, govern trade and industry, the burning of fossil fuels, and the sale 
and distribution of much of what we eat and grow. Together they must bear most 
responsibility for the deterioration of nature. They have been directly linked 
to devastating ecological and financial crimes, they avoid tax, and they mostly 
have their own way with national governments. Their plastic pollutes the 
remotest seas, their oil leads to climate change and their electronic waste 
continues to mount inexorably. Corporate power must be reined in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fseven-deadly-things-trash-planet-human-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdce1d43256c165804818ca9d2897a6faf3bd7bb%2F0_202_5996_3598%2F5996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20seven%20deadly%20things%20we%E2%80%99re%20doing%20to%20trash%20the%20planet%20(and%20human%20life%20with%20it)%20%7C%20John%20Vidal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fseven-deadly-things-trash-planet-human-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20seven%20deadly%20things%20we%E2%80%99re%20doing%20to%20trash%20the%20planet%20%28and%20human%20life%20with%20it%29%20%7C%20John%20Vidal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fseven-deadly-things-trash-planet-human-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdce1d43256c165804818ca9d2897a6faf3bd7bb%2F0_202_5996_3598%2F5996.jpg>
 ‘Wayward youngster of the herd is thecar.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Driving dangerously

The car is the wayward youngster of the herd. There will soon be two billion 
vehicles on the world’s roads 
<http://www.greencarreports.com/news/1093560_1-2-billion-vehicles-on-worlds-roads-now-2-billion-by-2035-report>
, of which fewer than about a tenth of half of 1% could possibly be called 
green. But it is not just the air that they poison, or the greenhouse gases 
that are emitted when they are being built or driven. Doing just as much damage 
to nature and wildlife are the roads themselves – which, in under a century, 
have been driven deep into every area on Earth, destroying forest and coast and 
opening up and fragmenting habitat. The car has come to dominate the way cities 
grow, but now cars determine where people live, and how they travel and even 
die. In 20 years the number of cars on the roads is expected to double. But 
cars have no absolute right to pollute or proliferate like this. They, too, 
must be culled.

The one nobody wants to talk about

Human population. No one wants to talk about this, but between 1960 and 1999, 
almost unnoticed, numbersdoubled from three to six billion people (pdf) 
<http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/sixbillion/sixbilpart1.pdf>. 
They now stand at nearly 7.5 billion, and by 2050 there will be nine 
or possibly 10 billion people on Earth 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/un-report-world-population-projected-to-reach-9-6-billion-by-2050.html>
, all wanting cars, computers and other stuff. The ecological problem this 
causes is both from the sheer numbers and from how much each human consumes. 
One billion people living in absolute poverty may not have a vast impact on the 
natural world; but the same number living the lifestyle of an American or a 
European is very damaging. Because people everywhere are encouraged to aspire 
to consume more and more, there is little hope that the pressure on resources 
and the environment can be relieved soon. Population pressure is barely on the 
political or economic agenda of any rich country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%2C%20warn%20experts%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%2C%20warn%20experts%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report&media=>
Giraffes facing extinction, warn experts – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/dec/08/giraffes-facing-extinction-warn-experts-video-report>
Losing soil

Soil is another ecological elephant in the room that no one wants to talk 
about. It teems with life, yet because of bad farming and forestry practices, 
it is being washed away very many times faster than it is being replenished. On 
soil’s health depends much of the world’s food and water supplies, the growth 
of most plant and insect life and therefore the food of life itself. According 
tosome studies <https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2006/03/060322141021.htm>
, its accelerating loss is now second only to population growth as the biggest 
environmental problem the world faces. As a direct result of soil erosion, 
possibly 30% of the world’s arable land has become unproductive in just 40 
years, leading to severe declines in bird and animal life. Soil is the most 
precious of all resources, yet in one country after another it is being 
allowed to wash or blow away. History shows thatcivilisations founder 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1747-0765.2009.00401.x> when 
farm productivity declines – usually as a result of soil mismanagement. It must 
be conserved.

Fostering inequality

Inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/feb/20/inequality-threat-to-world-needs-tackling>
, which now impacts on the natural world, may be the little sister of them all. 
Aside from fostering resentment between rich and poor people, there is mounting 
evidence that it causes environmental degradation. The greater the income 
difference between groups, or countries, the greater the waste, the meat and 
water consumption, and the biodiversity loss. People in the most unequal 
societies are more stressed and anxious, and under greater pressure to consume 
more. Hyper-consumption by the few reduces the satisfaction of the many with 
what they have, by showing it up as inferior. It may also undermine the 
collective action required to protect nature.

'I was so hungry I ate water lilies': southern Africa's food crisis in a dozen 
dishes | John Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/17/hungry-ate-water-lilies-southern-africa-food-crisis-dozen-dishes-crop-failure-drought-john-vidal>
 … and poverty

Poverty in developing countries and the rampant illegal wildlife trade is the 
progeny of the lot. This is now the largest single threat to many species. The 
trade, which is worth several hundred billion dollars a year, is not just from 
the poaching of horn or tusks from charismatic megafauna such as rhino and 
elephants, but the systematic denuding of wild places on an industrial scale. 
According to the global monitoring networkTraffic <http://www.traffic.org/>, 
some 88m wild orchids, 6.2m wild-caught live birds, and 7.5m 
live-caught reptiles were traded globally between 1996 and 2001. Other records 
show more than 100m tonnes of fish, 1.5m live birds and 440,000 tonnes of 
medicinal plants beingtraded illegally 
<http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/species/problems/illegal_trade/> every 
year. Driving the trade are rich consumers who desire products of animals, 
trees, flowers and fish for medicine, souvenirs, status symbols, building 
materials and food.

We do not have to live with these beasts. They can be ejected from the forest, 
culled or trained.Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> 
documentaries never point the finger at them and this makes us forget that 
we humans, too, are living in nature. Either we can wring our hands and 
carry on watching ever more gorgeous images of wildlife and see nature carry on 
declining, or we can intervene.
 