
• Since posting this article, the band have revealed that they will not 
release this album. The music was created as part of an April Fools prank with 
the website Funny or Die and corroborated by a news release from Warner Bros. 
The music remains available on Soundcloud.

The Flaming Lips <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-flaming-lips> continue 
to defy conventions with a full-length companion album that they claim is 
designed to be played at the same time as Pink Floyd’s The Dark Side of the 
Moon.

In a statement, the psych-rock band say their new album, Flaming Side of the 
Moon, is “carefully crafted to sync perfectly with the 1939 film, The Wizard of 
Oz”. The Flaming Lips appear to subscribe tothe Dark Side of the Rainbow 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_Side_of_the_Rainbow> theory, which claims 
the pioneering album corresponds to moments in the 1939 film – even though 
people who worked on Pink Floyd's famous recording dispute this claim.

"For ideal listening conditions," the Flaming Lips say, "fans are encouraged 
to seek out the original Alan Parsons-engineered quadraphonic LP mix of Dark 
Side, but it will work with the album on any format.” The band are no stranger 
to pursuing audio experiments, having released a four-disc album, Zaireeka, 
that is intended to be played on four stereos simultaneously.

This isn't the first time the Lips have paid homage to Pink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd>. In 2009, they teamed up with the 
experimental rock band Stardeath and White Dwarfs and the singer Peaches to 
cover The Dark Side of the Moon.

Flaming Lips are also working with Tame Impala and Miley Cyrus  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/mar/17/pop-rock-collide-collaborations-miley-cyrus-wayne-coyne>
on a remake of the Beatles’ Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.

Flaming Side of the Moon will be released digitally and in a limited vinyl 
pressing of 100, which they say "will be distributed on vinyl to the band's 
friends and family".

Reading on mobile? Click here to listen to Flaming Side of the Moon  
<https://soundcloud.com/theflaminglipsofficial/flaming-side-of-the-moon>  