
Something about the fencepost grabbed my attention, and instead of watching 
the path winding through dark trees against the orchestral sweep of a January 
sky, I picked out small visual notes: moss, water, tree rings on the post.

I’d passed this way 100 times; each time was different and each time I’d been 
looking elsewhere. What brought the fencepost into focus this time? Perhaps it 
was the dissimilitude of small birds in the trees: blue tits, great tits, 
chaffinches,robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/11/country-diary-robin-songbirds-wenlock-edge>
, so different from each other yet similar in their size and movement, their 
little mutterings under breath made me notice smaller details.

Related: Toadstools in a Shrewsbury graveyard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/toadstools-in-a-shrewsbury-graveyard>

This was a post the spotted flycatchers made joyous by flitting from in summer;
one the wren made ominous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/12/praise-wren-resilient-winter-king-country-diary>
by watching from in winter.

The fence caused local anger when it was erected 15 years ago; few remember 
why now. When the saw went through the trunk of larch or spruce, the post was 
turned from it, cut across about 20 years of growth according to the annual 
rings. So, tree and timber, this post was about 35 years old.

Maybe this one was not properly treated and began to decay earlier than others 
in the row, but the weather, fungi and micro-organisms 
<http://microbiologyonline.org/about-microbiology/introducing-microbes/fungi> 
had made a rot-hole filled with rainwater.

In this miniature pool had fallen the purply gunk of seeds and leaves, and 
around it lawns of glassy green algae spread. A cushion of moss the size of a 
computer mouse looked like a wood seen from above, perhaps how a passenger in 
that silver jet might see this land glancing idly from a window.

What is this tiny post-top place, with its own natural history, its own sense 
of “where”? Not a microcosm or a metaphor but a real place. It may represent 
enclosure, whatthe poet John Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-clare> called “owners’ little bounds … 
In little parcels little minds to please” (The Mores 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/john-clare/the-mores/>). 

But it raised a conundrum – the tiny return of lost commons, a place of 
freedom of which Clare wrote: “Its only bondage was the circling sky.”

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 