
A major overhaul of the state pension system that comes into effect on 6 April 
will mean thousands of people who do not have enough national insurance 
contributions to their name will get nothing. The government has pledged that 
the new deal for pensioners will be fairer and simpler – yet many are in for a 
very unpleasant shock.

Among those set to lose out are 50,000 women and 20,000 men in their 50s and 
60s, according to figures today from charity Age UK. Because they have fewer 
than 10 years’ of contributions they won’t receive a penny in state pension 
when they retire. Under the current system people are entitled to some state 
pension even if they have only paid national insurance contributions for a few 
years.

Pensions fairness to next generation demands that we adapt to new realities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/mar/02/pensions-fairness-to-the-next-generation-demands-that-we-adapt-to-new-circumstances>
At present the full state pension is £115.95 a week. Someone who has five 
years’ worth of contributions – perhaps because they worked part-time or for 
low pay – would get about £19.30 a week. But under the new rules they will not 
get anything.

Caroline Abrahams, charity director of Age UK, says: “Big changes are about to 
come in to simplify the state pension system, yet we know that many people in 
their fifties and sixties are completely unaware of how they will be affected. 
Some people in this age group are so worried about what their finances will be 
once they retire that they are reluctant to think about it at all, but our 
strong advice is to take action now to find out exactly where you stand.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82cd6771757ee0c9705504a3c710ce608a9af976%2F0_1489_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sweeping%20pension%20shake-up%20that%20could%20leave%20you%20with%20nothing%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sweeping%20pension%20shake-up%20that%20could%20leave%20you%20with%20nothing%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82cd6771757ee0c9705504a3c710ce608a9af976%2F0_1489_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Set to lose out are 50,000 women and 20,000 men in their 50s and 60s, 
according to Age UK. Photograph: colinspics/Alamy Stock Photo 
What is changing?

There are two parts of the UK state pension: the flat-rate basic state 
pension, and the additional state pension, which is partly earnings-related. 
Under the current scheme you can build up contributions to the basic and second 
additional pension. However, from April you will contribute to a single flat 
rate pension. The new scheme is only for people who reach state pension age on 
or after 6 April. So that is men born on or after 6 April 1951 and women born 
on or after 6 April 1953.

To obtain the full rate you will need to have made at least 35 years’ of 
contributions. Under the existing system you receive the full amount once you 
have made 30 years’ contributions. From April, if you have fewer than 10 years’ 
contributions you will get nothing.

How much is the new pension worth?

The full flat-rate pension will be introduced at around £155 a week for those 
who have reached pension age. However, many will receive far less. This is 
because some will not have paid enough in national insurance contributions, and 
others will have contracted out of the state earnings related schemes for some 
of their working life. This is when you choose for some of your national 
insurance contributions to be channelled into a private pension. These diverted 
contributions mean you will receive a smaller state pension.

How many people will lose out? 

The government has admitted that 63% of those reaching state pension age in 
2016-17 will receive less than the full rate when the new scheme starts in 
April. The average shortfall is expected to be around £25 a week, or £1,300 a 
year, according to actuaries Hymans Robertson.

Any other drawbacks? 

Savers are currently able to pay into the second additional pension over their 
whole working lifetime. It is possible to build up entitlement to £160 a week 
in second pension, which could significantly boost the basic pension to as much 
as £275 a week. However, with the new system contributions will be capped at 35 
years with no additional pension. The abolition of the second state pension 
means savers will continue paying the same rates of national insurance after 
they have qualified for the new pension in full, but will no longer get any 
extra benefit.

What can you do to improve your pension? 

You can fill in up to six years’ worth of gaps in your national insurance 
contribution record. If, say, you had nine years’ of national insurance 
contributions you can boost this to 10 or more to get some entitlement under 
the new state pension. “Potentially this is definitely worth doing – rather 
than not getting any money it makes sense to benefit from those years of 
contributions already made,” says Tom McPhail, pensions expert at Hargreaves 
Lansdown.

Pensions Isa: what is the chancellor considering?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/pensions-isa-what-is-the-chancellor-considering>
You can do this even after state pension age. “However, there are exceptions 
to the rule,” says Alan Higham from retirement advice websitePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Champ. Men born before April 1950 
and women born before April 1952 have up to six years after state pension age 
to buy additional years. People reaching state pension age after 6 April 2016 
have until 2023 to make up any missing years. Beware, however, that you cannot 
buy back entitlement lost through time contracted out. “But check with the 
Pension Service that paying for the gap will actually increase your state 
pension. People with 30 years or more of contributions may find that filling in 
missing years before 6 April 2016 does not actually increase their pension,” 
says Higham. It is worth exploring whether deferring drawing your state pension 
will provide you with a bigger increase for lower cost than buying the extra 
pension, he adds.

Use the online calculator at gov.uk/state-pension-topup 
<https://www.gov.uk/state-pension-topup> to find out how much you would need to 
pay for extra state pension income.

Get your pension forecast by going to gov.uk/future-pension-centre 
<http://www.gov.uk/future-pension-centre> or calling 0345 300 0168.

Women’s woes

Millions of older women have seen their retirement hopes dashed by changes to 
the state pension system. They have been caught out both by an increase in the 
age at which they can claim, plus a change in the way payouts are calculated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161774555ab47b2810b67dc3e7d858e6a77e4eb9%2F0_237_5130_3078%2F5130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sweeping%20pension%20shake-up%20that%20could%20leave%20you%20with%20nothing%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sweeping%20pension%20shake-up%20that%20could%20leave%20you%20with%20nothing%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fstate-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F161774555ab47b2810b67dc3e7d858e6a77e4eb9%2F0_237_5130_3078%2F5130.jpg>
 Many women born in the 1950s are unable to receive their state pension when 
they turn 60. Photograph: Marc Romanelli/Getty Images/Blend Images 
Many born in the 1950s are now unable to receive their state pension when they 
turn 60. The government announced changes back in 1995, designed to bring the 
qualifying age for woman into line with that of men by 2020. The rise in the 
state pension age for women from 60 to 65 was further revised in the 2011 
Pensions Act, making it age 65 by 2018. In coming years up to November 2020 
there will be a further rise to 66 – and 67 by 2028.

Alan Higham from advice website Pensions Champ says: “The changes in 1995 were 
reasonable, but for the fact that the government waited 14 years before 
starting to contact the women affected.

“The 2011 act further compounded the problem so that women were finding out 
for the first time after age 58 that they were not going to retire at 60, but 
instead at 66. Women entirely dependent on the state for their pension found a 
hole worth £48,000 in their plans. It is an appalling way to treat people.”

Changes from April also mean that women who gave up work to raise a family are 
unable to claim a state pension based on their husbands’ national insurance 
records. In the past these women would have been able to receive a payout. For 
those retiring under the new system this is no longer guaranteed.

From April women will be responsible for building up their own national 
insurance record. They must have 35 years’ worth of contributions to qualify 
for the full amount, and a minimum of 10 years to receive anything at all.

There is a reprieve for some women affected by this change, who are entitled 
to receive up to 60% of their husbands’ record. This is provided they have paid 
at least one year of lower-rate national insurance contributions - known as the 
“married woman’s stamp” - in the 35 years leading up to retirement.
 