
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> or any other part of the UK 
presents an obvious target for Islamic terrorists, more so than Germany given 
the UK’s high-profile involvement as the closest military ally of the US.

UK intelligence agencies repeatedly warn that it is just a matter of time 
before a British target is hit.In a rare speech earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/hostile-states-pose-fundamental-threat-to-europe-says-mi6-chief>
, Alex Younger, the head of the UK’s overseas intelligence agency MI6, 
described the threat posed by groups such as Islamic State or its sympathisers 
as “unprecedented”.

One of the most alarming warnings came last year from Hamish de 
Bretton-Gordon, a former British army officer and chemical weapons expert,who 
raised the risk 
<http://2paragraphs.com/2015/03/could-isis-replicate-tokyo-chemical-attack-in-new-york-or-london-subway/>
 of Isis mounting a chlorine attack in the London Underground, similar to the 
sarin attack on the Tokyo subway in 1995.

In spite of such warnings, the UK has seen only one death from Islamic 
terrorism since the2005 London bombings that killed 56 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/07/77-london-july-bombings-memories-10-years-on>
, including the four perpetrators. The solitary death wasFusilier Lee Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/19/lee-rigby-murder-michael-adebolajo-adebowale-guilty>
, murdered in an al-Qaida-inspired attack in London in 2013. There have been 
two deaths –Mohammed Saleem in Birmingham in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/25/ukranian-white-supremacist-murder-mosque-bombs-pavlo-lapshyn>
 andMP Jo Cox this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
 – inspired by white supremacism. Republican dissidents have killed soldiers 
and prison officers in Northern Ireland.

So how has the UK managed to avoid the kind of terror witnessed in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/paris-attacks-shootings-explosions-hostages>
,Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/15/three-killed-belgium-counter-terror-raids-reports-verviers>
 andGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/berlin-truck-crashes-into-christmas-market>
? The UK agencies will seldom engage in such discussions, wary of accusations 
of complacency and well aware that words spoken today could look foolish if 
there was to be an attack tomorrow.

But the UK enjoys several advantages. One of the first is that the security 
services, especially MI5, learned a lot of lessons during theIRA bombing 
campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jul/29/northernireland.northernireland5> 
of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. Although Italy had to cope for much of this time 
with its Red Brigades and Germany with theRed Army Faction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/former-red-army-faction-members-linked-to-botched-robbery>
 (Baader-Meinhof group), the UK faced a much more sustained and relentless 
bombing campaign. The intelligence agencies and the Royal Ulster Constabulary 
proved adept at penetrating the IRA, establishing agents – for money or through 
blackmail or some other means – in the highest ranks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-uk-is-at-high-risk-of-a-terror-attack-but-how-has-it-avoided-one-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e56c4cbaa682b990be924d86f659bca051e583d%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%20is%20at%20high%20risk%20of%20a%20terror%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20but%20how%20has%20it%20avoided%20one%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-uk-is-at-high-risk-of-a-terror-attack-but-how-has-it-avoided-one-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%20is%20at%20high%20risk%20of%20a%20terror%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20but%20how%20has%20it%20avoided%20one%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-uk-is-at-high-risk-of-a-terror-attack-but-how-has-it-avoided-one-so-far%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e56c4cbaa682b990be924d86f659bca051e583d%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Alex Younger, the head of MI6, described the threat posed by groups such as 
Isis as ‘unprecedented’. Photograph: Foreign and Commonwealth Office/PA 
Also, it is harder to acquire guns in the UK compared with continental Europe. 
The Polish driver of the hijacked truck used in the Berlin attack was shot. The 
killers in Paris and Brussels were heavily armed. It is riskier for would-be 
jihadists to try to enter Britain compared with the relative ease of movement 
on continentalEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Perhaps most significant of all is the drastic reorganisation that the police 
and UK intelligence agencies underwent after the London bombings. Instead of 
being so London-centric,MI5 officers were dispersed throughout the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/nov/08/terrorism.uksecurity>: to the 
Midlands, the north of England, Scotland and Wales. Networks of contacts and 
informers were established.

In the aftermath of the London bombings, traditional rivalry between the 
agencies also began to be broken down and today teams from MI5 can be found at 
the headquarters of MI6 orGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> and 
vice-versa.

All three of the UK intelligence agencies – MI5, MI6 and GCHQ – have been 
expanded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/23/shoreditch-spies-why-does-gchq-want-to-hire-hipsters>
 and are undergoing further recruitment. MI5 is expanding from 4,000 to 5,000 
and MI6 from 2,500 to 3,500.

MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> hints that it has penetrated Isis, 
with Younger talking in his speech about taking the fight to the enemy 
“upstream”.

The most powerful intelligence-gathering organisation in the world is the US’s 
National Security Agency.GCHQ is a junior partner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/02/gchq-spy-agency-nsa-snowden>, 
benefitting from a lot of the data acquired about Isis and other extremist 
groups.


Shiraz Maher, deputy director of the International Centre for the Study of 
Radicalisation at King’s College, London, who monitors Isis, sees the US and UK 
as superior to continental intelligence agencies.

“The US and the UK do it better,” Maher said. “It is one of the things that 
keeps us safe in the UK: so far, so good. If you look at disrupted plots here 
in the UK, it is down to good tradescraft and that does not seem to be 
happening elsewhere.”

In an interview with the Guardian in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-parker-increasingly-aggressive-russia-a-growing-threat-to-uk-says-mi5-head>
, MI5 chief Andrew Parker said the UK security services had stopped 12 
terrorist plots since 2013. In 33 years with MI5, Parker said had never seen 
the tempo as fast as it is now.

The constant fear of the intelligence agencies is they will not stop the next 
plot. Thecurrent threat level in the UK was raised to “severe” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/29/uk-terror-threat-raised-severe>
 – one short of the highest “critical” – in 2014. As Parker put in the 
interview, with no equivocation or caveats: “There will be terrorist attacks in 
this country.”
 