
It’s (nearly) Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
time, there’s no need to be afraid. Except, of course, there is. Forced festive 
fun is staggering towards us in its paper hat and comedy jumper, complete with 
flashing lights, reindeer noses and knowing irony. And then there’s the 
alcohol. Lots and lots of alcohol.

We do a lot of drinking during December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/dec/10/violence-booze-bus-christmas>. 
According to Public Health England (who you really don’t want to be stuck 
talking to at a party), Brits spend more than £2bn just on the booze we drink 
in our 165m December pub outings, never mind what we cart home from the shops. 
In many ways, this can be a good thing. In social situations, hooch can be a 
wonderful wingman – it’s a camaraderie catalyst, rounding off the edges of 
unease and making music sound better, conversations more absorbing and 
colleagues more compelling – even that odd guy with the ponytail.

Yet alcohol is a capricious character, flipping from faithful sidekick to 
spiteful psychopath in the space of a few small sips – and its unpredictability 
is particularly acute at Christmas. The party season is a potential 
professional and personal minefield strewn with embarrassment, ridicule and 
final written warnings and, if you drink too much, you’ll be plodding through 
it in a pair of clown shoes and a blindfold. But after 2016, which has ushered 
in Trump and Brexit and bid farewell to Bowie, Prince … and Father Jack, feck 
knows we could do with a drink. The secret, as teetotal Trump will tell you,is 
to not drink too bigly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/dec/12/healthandwellbeing.health>
. Instead, follow our discerning drinking guide to surviving the festive season.

Drink beer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43f1091a2bf12ae83da68225afa72465598b6458%2F0_0_6193_4912%2F6193.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43f1091a2bf12ae83da68225afa72465598b6458%2F0_0_6193_4912%2F6193.jpg>
 In the beginning there was beer … Photograph: Jack Andersen/Getty Images 
It’s what Jesus would have wanted – and it’s his birthday, for chrissake. If 
you’ve blown the dust from the original Bible like we have, you’ll know full 
well that Jesus Christ didn’t turn water into wine. No, he turned it into beer. 
The earliest scriptures state that Jesus, the lead character, turns water into
shekhar, a Hebrew word meaning strong drink and, crucially, a derivative of the 
ancient Semitic wordsikaru – which means barley beer. The reason beer was 
banished from subsequent versions of the Bible was that, in an astonishing 
display of academic arrogance, 17th-century English translators believed beer 
to be beneath the son of God. So they took it upon themselves to transform 
Jesus Christ into a cork-sniffing, cravat-wearing wine-drinker, draped 
insouciantly on a banquette of an All Bar One. He wasn’t. He was a beer guy. 
With a beard. Where do you think the word Hebrew comes from?

Don’t shoot
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea72fc55887330cbb4e1d15d45417359d10d0a4e%2F0_30_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea72fc55887330cbb4e1d15d45417359d10d0a4e%2F0_30_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Go for an extra añejo tequila. Photograph: Anthony Tumminello / EyeEm/Getty 
Images/EyeEm 
Don’t down tequila in one with lemon and salt. It’s better than that. What you 
want is an extra añejo tequila, aged for a minimum of three years in oak casks, 
and just as complex and costly as a fine cognac. Serve it alongside a sangrita 
made with lime, orange juice, pomegranate juice and chilli. Jägerbomb? No. 
Gently sip Jägermeister as a digestif. Meaning “master hunter”, it was 
originally designed by a German huntsman, Curt Mast, who wanted to get things 
moving after great big dollops of freshly killed deer or enormous sausages. 
They were the wurst.

Sit down
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555febe9b14ce7e7bac6d0c9a5bd0efcb998802%2F0_235_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20six%20rules%20of%20Christmas%20boozing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Frule-christmas-boozing-sit-down-dont-do-shots-drink-like-winston-churchill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555febe9b14ce7e7bac6d0c9a5bd0efcb998802%2F0_235_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Take a seat when you can. Photograph: Roy Mehta/Getty Images 
In the 1990s, when people were doing pills instead of drinking lager in their 
local town centre, pub companies devised a rather devious way of getting us all 
to drink more – by removing a lot of the furniture. Termed “vertical drinking”, 
cosy snugs and intimate alcoves were replaced with wide-open spaces bereft of 
tables and chairs on which you could perch your pint. With glasses constantly 
in hand, people drank a lot quicker, pubs made more money and the number of 
drunken idiots, come the end of the night, rose considerably. Don’t be that 
person; take the weight off when you can.

Drink like Winston Churchill
 Churchill: partial to a ‘papa cocktail’ – Johnnie Walker. Photograph: IWM via 
Getty Images 
Winston Churchill was, contrary to common perception, a very deft drinker and 
certainly not a drunk – his secret being the watering down of his spirits, 
especially whisky. Churchill was dismayed by those who drank whisky neat: “You 
are not likely to live a long life,” he quipped, “if you drink it like that.” 
Instead, he would kickstart his morning with the “papa cocktail” – one glass of 
Johnnie Walker that would be topped up with water throughout the day. Do the 
same by ordering a mizuwari, a Japanese long drink consisting of whisky cut 
with water to a ratio of 1:4, served over ice. It’s what all the cool daddios 
are drinking these days, and it’s a lot nicer than a snowball, which is 
essentially alcoholic custard. With a sparkler.

Be nice to bar staff

Smile. Tip bartenders. It’s a nice thing to do and it will see them through 
January when you’re at home righteously sipping kale smoothies. Stand next to 
the till where you will be more likely to establish eye contact; don’t order an 
old fashioned or a mojito when it’s a dozen deep behind you; if you’re getting 
a Guinness, order it first; and, whatever you do, don’t shout, click your 
fingers or, unless it’s going in the tip jar, wave £20 notes – everyone around 
you is paying for their drinks with money as well. Alternatively, go to the pub 
dressed as Santa Claus. No one has ever had to buy their own drink while 
dressed as Santa. Ever.

Own your hangover

If you wake with your head pounding, your liver whimpering in the corner with 
a snot bubble protruding from its nose, and what Kingsley Amis describes as 
that “ineffable compound of depression, sadness (these two are not the same), 
anxiety, self-hatred, sense of failure and fear for the future”, then you have 
two options. You can either drink lots of water or, if that doesn’t work, and 
it probably won’t, you can make yourself a corpse reviver No 2 – a cocktail 
created in the 1930s by the legendary Savoy bartender Harry Craddock to “raise 
the dead”.

(Makes 1)

25ml Plymouth gin
25ml Cointreau
25ml Lillet blanc
25ml fresh lemon juice
Dash of absinthe

Shake with ice and strain in to a coupe glass. Garnish with lemon zest.

Ben McFarland and Tom Sandham are drinks writers and comedians the Thinking 
Drinkers. They will be performing their award-winning drinking show Around the 
World in 80 Drinks at Museum of Comedy, London WC1 from 23 Nov - 23 Dec. 
Tickets available atmuseumofcomedy.com <http://www.museumofcomedy.com/>.
 