
Shakespeare did not coin phrases such as “it’s Greek to me” and “a wild goose 
chase”, according to an Australian academic.

In an article for the University of Melbourne 
<https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/to-be-or-not-to-be-original>, Dr David 
McInnis, a Shakespeare lecturer at the institution, accuses the Oxford English 
Dictionary of “bias” over its citation of Shakespeare as the originator of 
hundreds of words in English. The OED, which saw its original volumes published 
between 1884 and 1928, includes more than 33,000 Shakespeare quotations, 
according to McInnis, with around 1,500 of those “the first evidence of a 
word’s existence in English”, and around 7,500 “the first evidence of a 
particular usage of meaning”.

“But the OED is biased: especially in the early days, it preferred literary 
examples, and famous ones at that,” writes McInnis. “The Complete Works of 
Shakespeare was frequently raided for early examples of word use, even though 
words or phrases might have been used earlier, by less famous or less literary 
people.”

His audiences had to understand at least the gist of what he meant, so his 
words were mostly in circulation already

Shakespeare himself, according to McInnis, didn’t really invent all the words 
and phrases which are attributed to him. “His audiences had to understand at 
least the gist of what he meant, so his words were mostly in circulation 
already or were logical combinations of pre-existing concepts.”

The phrase “it’s Greek to me”, for example, referring to unintelligible 
speech, is used in Julius Caesar, when Casca says of Cicero that: “Those that 
understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads; but, for mine own 
part, it was Greek to me.” The play, which McInnis dates to 1599, is the 
earliest example of the phrase given in the OED, but the academic points out 
that searching for it in the digital resource Early English Books Online throws 
up its usage in Robert Greene’s The Scottish History of James the Fourth, 
printed in 1598 but possibly written in 1590. “In it, a lord asks a lady if 
she’ll love him, and she replies ambiguously: ‘I cannot hate.’” wriest McInnis. 
“He presses the point and asks if she’ll ‘wed’ him, at which point she pretends 
not to understand him at all: ‘Tis Greek to me, my Lord’ is her final reply.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf6e16ee1c65b65f518e43103d9cffb8d99abc32%2F0_445_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20game%20is%20up%3A%20Shakespeare's%20language%20not%20as%20original%20as%20dictionaries%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20game%20is%20up%3A%20Shakespeare%27s%20language%20not%20as%20original%20as%20dictionaries%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf6e16ee1c65b65f518e43103d9cffb8d99abc32%2F0_445_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
 ‘Wild goose chase’ … Romeo and Juliet. Photograph: Johan Persson 
Romeo and Juliet, meanwhile, is cited by the OED as the earliest example of 
the phrase wild goose chase, in 1595. “Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose 
chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, 
I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?” 
Mercutio says to Romeo.

But McInnis points to the 1593 use of the phrase in the English poet Gervase 
Markham’s book about horsemanship. “In this context it is clear that at some 
point, people understood the ‘wild goose chase’ to be a complicated type of 
horse riding challenge or competition – another kind of difficult quest or 
task,” he writes.

McInnis does note that Shakespeare’s words are sometimes both “memorable and 
original”, as in the case of the phrase “to make an ass of oneself”, which the 
playwright “seems to have genuinely invented”.

“In A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Bottom the weaver is magically turned into an 
ass. Other characters remark upon Bottom’s transformation, but he thinks 
they’re just mocking him: ‘This is to make an ass of me, to fright me, if they 
could’,” writes the academic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08329a1894140f10a5f4606120e530fc51b06dd5%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20game%20is%20up%3A%20Shakespeare's%20language%20not%20as%20original%20as%20dictionaries%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20game%20is%20up%3A%20Shakespeare%27s%20language%20not%20as%20original%20as%20dictionaries%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fshakespeare-language-not-original-david-mcinnis-claim-oed-bias%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08329a1894140f10a5f4606120e530fc51b06dd5%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘This is to make an ass of me’ … Bottom transformed in A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream. Photograph: Robert Workman Photographer 
“So, did Shakespeare really invent all those words? No, not really. He 
invented some; more usually he came up with the most memorable combinations or 
uses; and frequently we can find earlier uses that the Oxford English 
Dictionary simply hasn’t cited yet. Shakespeare’s talent lies in his insights 
into human nature, his ability to tell great tales, his creation of wonderful 
characters – not just in any ability he may or may not have to coin new words.”

Shakespeare's talent lies in his insights into human nature and ability to 
tell great tales – not just coining new words

A spokesperson for the OED said it had an “ongoing full-scale revision 
programme” <http://public.oed.com/the-oed-today/rewriting-the-oed/> currently 
under way, which is seeing every word in the dictionary reviewed “to improve 
the accuracy of definitions, derivations, pronunciations, and the historical 
quotations … A significant part of the work is new research, drawing on a vast 
array of resources and digital archives. These reveal a wealth of evidence 
unseen by the dictionary’s original editors (who from the outset accepted any 
kind of text, literary or not, as valid evidence),” said the spokesperson. “As 
part of the process, we have uncovered earlier evidence for many words and 
phrases previously attributed to Shakespeare.”

In 2011, the OED’s then-chief editor John Simpson highlighted a decline in the 
number of items 
<http://public.oed.com/the-oed-today/recent-updates-to-the-oed/previous-updates/june-2011/auto-suggestion-gender-politics-and-the-north-south-divide/>
 for which Shakespeare had previously been credited as the first quotation, and 
in April, in a pieceon the OUP blog 
<http://blog.oup.com/2016/04/shakespeare-linguistic-legacy/>, the academic 
linguist Edwin Battistella “suggested that something like half of the items 
formerly believed to be Shakespeare coinages are now shown in the OED as having 
been used earlier”, said the spokesperson.

“However, many entries have not yet been updated. The OED team is always 
pleased to receive evidence 
<http://public.oed.com/the-oed-today/contribute-to-the-oed/> which reveals 
usage earlier than previously recorded.”
 