
So, is $3bn a lot of money? Of course it is. Is $3bn enough to banish or 
manage all disease in the world within the next 84 years? Of course it isn’t. 
Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan have announced a plan to invest £3bn in 
medical research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/mark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-end-disease>
 over the next 10 years. They claim this sum will enable them to play a key 
role in curing, preventing or managing all disease by the end of this century.

No Such Thing As a Free Gift: The Gates Foundation and the Price of 
Philanthropy by Linsey McGoey – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/24/no-such-thing-free-gift-gates-foundation-philanthropy-review>
In comparison to what governments spend on basic medical research, $3bn is, of 
course, a negligible amount. From 2015 to 2016, the UK government is investing
£5.8bn in science and research funding 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/278326/bis-14-p200-science-and-research-budget-allocations-for-2015-to-2016.pdf>
. Making a conservative assumption – that this amount stays broadly stable for 
a decade – the government will have contributed £58bn (or $75bn) towards 
science and medical research during the same time-span that Zuckerberg and Chan 
have pledged $3bn.

Then there’s the US government. Most of its basic medical research is 
channelled through theNational Institutes of Health 
<http://www.hhs.gov/about/budget/budget-in-brief/nih/index.html> (NIH), 
federally funded health institutes that have been responsible for some of the 
biggest medical breakthroughs in history. The NIH’s budget from 2014 to 2016 
was more than $30bn annually – $90bn in three years. Assuming this stays fixed, 
the US government will direct more than $300bn towards medical research and 
science over the next 10 years.

Zuckerberg and Chan’s hearts might be in the right place. They may genuinely 
believe that their money is exceptional, that their pledged $3bn is imbued with 
some sort of entrepreneurial elixir that will magically transform the figure 
from what it represents in reality – less than 1% of the US government’s budget 
for health research – to what they proclaim their money will do: render disease 
obsolete by 2100.

But there are justifiable reasons to treat their proclamations with 
scepticism. Not from a place of resentment or a Scrooge-like dislike of 
charity, but because the refusal to examine the plausibility of their claims 
risks a disservice to the millions whose charitable donations amount to a sum 
that is far greater than what US tech billionaires contribute.

The vast majority of charitable expenditure in the US comes from the millions 
of poor and middle-income citizens scrimping and saving and putting aside 
proportionally more money from their take-home salaries than the US rich 
contribute as a ratio of their incomes.

The first reason to temper the hype around Zuckerberg and Chan’s gift is the 
obvious: it hasn’t been spent yet. It’s a mere pledge. And there are precedents 
for not taking philanthropists at their word when they vow to surrender their 
fortunes.

The last 10 years have been littered with examples of philanthropists reneging 
on promised billions. Richard Branson made a much-publicised pledge in 2006 to 
spend $3bn on clean energy technologies over 10 years . By 2014, asNaomi Klein 
reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/13/greenwashing-sticky-business-naomi-klein>
, his outlay was less than $300m.

Chan and Zuckerberg may well be acting in good faith. They seem sincere. And 
it’s touching the way they speak about their daughter’s life and the way she 
inspires them.

But there’s also reason to worry we’ll never know how much money they’re 
actually contributing to charitable causes, regardless of how many press 
conferences or TED talks we’re treated to over the next decade.

The entity they have established to disburse their wealth – the Chan 
Zuckerberg Initiative – is legally insulated from the disclosure requirements 
that traditional US philanthropic foundations face. We may never know – and we 
have no legal right to know – whether any of the promised money is actually 
going to charity at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-bill-gates-charity-philanthropy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F283f549cf95107590f17c8a3dbdbf7686a30c67c%2F0_94_2253_1352%2F2253.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tech%20titans%20won%E2%80%99t%20beat%20disease%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99ll%20be%20the%20little%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-bill-gates-charity-philanthropy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tech%20titans%20won%E2%80%99t%20beat%20disease%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99ll%20be%20the%20little%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-bill-gates-charity-philanthropy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F283f549cf95107590f17c8a3dbdbf7686a30c67c%2F0_94_2253_1352%2F2253.jpg>
 Bill Gates, the Microsoft co-founder, with his wife, Melinda, at a meeting in 
2011 with villagers in Jamsot, near Patna, India. Photograph: Aftab Alam 
Siddiqui/AP 
How is this possible? Because the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative is a for-profit 
limited liability company 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/how-mark-zuckerbergs-altruism-helps-himself>
. By establishing such a vehicle for their giving, the couple are legally able 
to direct all of their so-called philanthropic gifts towards for-profit 
investment ventures. They could legally offer an unknown amount to, say, a golf 
buddy to set up a string of fast-food franchises – and then brand this venture 
as charitable even when it’s not.

This might seem outlandish, but there are plenty of precedents to suggest that 
it could happen. The last 20 years have seen the philanthropic landscape shift 
in strange ways, permitting the unfathomable to become commonplace – with 
unclear benefits for the most impoverished people living in wealthy nations and 
for those in poor countries.

The biggest change in philanthropy has been the emergence of something that 
the sociologist Darren Thiel and I term “rich-to-rich giving”. Increasingly, 
philanthropists such as Bill andMelinda Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melinda-gates> are choosing to offer 
massive, non-repayable charitable grants to some of the world’s wealthiest 
corporations, driven by the assumption that enriching already rich companies 
will lead to trickle-down benefits for the poor.

Scholastic, Mastercard, Sanofi – these are just three companies picked at 
random from the Gates Foundation’s public registers of grants disbursed over 
its 16-year existence. In Scholastic’s case, the Gates Foundation offered 
millions to the company, positioning it to profit handsomely from providing 
educational materials to high schools; when it comes toMastercard 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt/2014/12/09/why-the-gates-foundation-is-funding-a-mastercard-lab/#6dabc7c587e7>
, the money is aimed at helping the credit card company to expand its business 
operations in Nairobi; in Sanofi’s case, on medical research towards 
underfunded diseases.

Money isn't enough. Medical research needs a cultural revolution | Celine 
Goudner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/medical-research-money-zuckerberg-chan-foundation>
Pharmaceutical R&D, education materials, expansion in Nairobi – these are just 
causes, but are the recipients worthy of the gifts, given how little financial 
risk they’re actually assuming? In each of these cases, the money was a direct 
grant – with no onus on the companies to repay the donations, regardless of how 
profitable the grants become.

Even as corporate America shirks from its tax obligations, lobbying for ever 
greater tax exemptions across the world, corporate populists like the Gateses 
seem determined to reward highly lucrative pharmaceutical and credit card 
companies with free money.

The economist JK Galbraith used to scornfully compare trickle-down economic 
policies to what he described as the “horse and sparrow” theory of economic 
growth: the idea that “if you feed the horses enough oats, something will pass 
through to the road for the sparrows”.

The new philanthropist kings are generous with their oats. The horses are 
certainly well fed. But what about the sparrows? Remarkably, even as wealth 
gaps between the rich and the poor grow more alarming, even as average wages 
stagnate, the unsung multitude of everyday citizens manage mini-miracles of 
giving every day.

In 2014, Americans gave more than $350bn to charity. It was the highest total 
amount in 60 years. Of that amount, foundations such as the Gates Foundation 
cumulatively offered only 15%. The vast majority – 72%, more than $258bn in 
total – came from individual donations. And of those individuals donations, a 
great deal came from those who could afford to give the least. For decades, 
study after study has “shown that lower-income Americans give proportionally 
more of their incomes to charity than do upper-income Americans”, asJudith 
Warner has pointed out in theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/22/magazine/22FOB-wwln-t.html?_r=0>.

And that’s on top of what citizens already contribute through simply paying 
their tax. It’s the struggling sparrows bolstering the budgets of bodies such 
as the National Institutes for Health, leading to impressive gains in life 
expectancy, in drops in global maternal mortality, in major breakthroughs in
HIV/Aids research 
<https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/hiv-study-named-2011-breakthrough-year-science>
, in improvements in cutting malaria and polio deaths.

Yes, wealthy philanthropists have contributed. But if you look at what 
governments spend on medical research, gifts from individual philanthropists 
stack up in only the tiniest way.
 