
In a fascinating account <http://www.polity.co.uk/book.asp?ref=9780745650272> 
of work-addiction by Melissa Gregg, we meet Miranda, a pricing manager in a 
telecommunications firm.

Miranda is seriously injured in a motorcycle accident. When her husband 
arrives at the hospital, she is barely conscious and only able to whisper a few 
words. Sadly it isn’t the kids she calls for. The first thing Miranda wants is 
to phone the office because her presentation might not be happening tomorrow – 
but if they send a laptop to the emergency ward she will see what can be done 
to salvage the situation. This anecdote is shocking, but not that surprising.

We are gripped by an ideology of work. If you’re not doing superhuman stints 
at the office, something is wrong with you

Overwork has become an epidemic 
<https://behavioralpolicy.org/article/workplace-stressors-health-outcomes/> in 
the western world; health officials put it in the same league as cigarette 
smoking regarding the damage it does to people’s health. The social damage 
incurred by loved ones and friends can be just as bad. What can we do about it?

It is important to realise that the problem of having a mismatched work-life 
relationship is not new. When work and private life was separated during the 
industrial revolution, the first struggle fought by employees was to reduce the 
length of the official working day. Life trapped inside a factory for 17 hours 
a day, six days a week was no life at all.According to Karl Marx 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm>, the battle over 
exactly when one was checked in (or not) would come to define the capitalist 
system, and he wasn’t wrong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fway-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a3c1ef64b6a403bd55844605cf7e74a477bd4a%2F765_0_1398_1747%2F1398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20way%20to%20a%20better%20work-life%20balance%3F%20Unions%2C%20not%20self-help&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fway-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20way%20to%20a%20better%20work-life%20balance%3F%20Unions%2C%20not%20self-help&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fway-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a3c1ef64b6a403bd55844605cf7e74a477bd4a%2F765_0_1398_1747%2F1398.jpg>
 According to Karl Marx, the battle over when one checked in would come to 
define the capitalist system. Photograph: Roger-Viollet/Rex/Shutterstock 
Certain trends are emerging which are starting to unofficially lengthen the 
working day once again. Now it’s often impossible to distinguish between work 
and non-work. Take the case of spending Sunday night preparing for Monday 
morning. Is it work? Kind of, but I’m not being paid for it and there are no 
bosses around. So who knows?

With this ambiguity we see the rise of 24/7 capitalism, in which some people 
even find themselves working in their dreams 
<https://newleftreview.org/II/62/rob-lucas-dreaming-in-code>. No, not simply 
dreaming about work but actually figuring out code and algorithms while asleep.

We often think that everyone works so much because we need the money. This may 
well be true, given how incomes have stagnated and living costs skyrocketed in 
much of the western world. But several other changes have also aided this 
creeping colonisation of life by our jobs.

First, it must be noted that not everybody is participating in the paid 
workforce, since there are still high levels of unemployment in many countries. 
What appears to have happened is that jobs are very unevenly distributed across 
society, meaning fewer people are doing more work. Those caught in the 
inevitable bottleneck are starting to feel the heat.

Second, mobile technology certainly plays a role since we are always connected 
– sometimes obsessively so, checking emails even when unnecessary. Studies have 
calculated the unpaid overtime as a result, discovering thatsome employees 
cancel out their entire annual leave 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/12094025/Workers-after-hours-emails-cancel-out-entire-annual-leave-allowance.html>
 given the extra work done online at home.

Third, the popular trend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/self-employed-freedom-underpaid-contractors>
 of reclassifying people as self-employed and contractors encourages overwork, 
because you only get paid for the direct hours you put in. Since that income is 
typically lower than regular jobs (which is the main objective of the 
reclassification) people find themselves working non-stop to make ends meet. 
Flexible employment systems were once sold to us as a path to more time off and 
greater autonomy. We would all become wealthy entrepreneurs like Richard 
Branson. What a cruel joke that turned out to be.


And fourth, our society is currently gripped by a pervasive ideology of work. 
It is continuously preached to us as the pinnacle of human virtue. If you’re 
not doing superhuman stints at the office then something is wrong with you. And 
don’t even mention the word unemployed … that’s blasphemy.

The most worrying facet about the ideology of work is this: we are obliged to 
toil even when it’s not really necessary in concrete, economic terms. Appearing 
super-busy becomes more about fulfilling a societal expectation than doing 
something useful to society. This can result in major dysfunctions.

Work less, do more: seven ways to improve your work-life balance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jan/26/seven-ways-improve-work-life-balance>
People encouraged to look as if they are always doing something ironically 
become less productive. Recent researchhas convincingly demonstrated 
<http://www.deliberate.rest/?page_id=2> that rest and shorter work-days can 
allow us to work much faster and smarter compared with the excruciating and 
ultimately needless marathons that are currently the norm.

What’s more, some employees invariably begin to fake these long hours given 
how difficult it is to pull off in reality.A study of management consultants 
<https://hbr.org/2015/04/why-some-men-pretend-to-work-80-hour-weeks> in the US 
discovered that some workers devised ingenious ways to give the impression that 
they were following the 80-hour rule.

Sure, this corporate camouflage allowed the consultants to pick up their kids 
from football and eat a meal. But maybe it also helped get the work done 
successfully and on time. Here we see productivity (performing a task well) and 
the culture of work (staying in the office till late) strangely diverge.

Most employers realise that something is amiss, but the ideology of work seems 
stronger now than ever. Some people have even convinced themselves that they 
love being wedded to their job 24/7, what researchers label“enthusiastic 
workaholics” 
<https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-24/edition-10/workaholism-%E2%80%93-21st-century-addiction>
. They’re the most difficult self-harmers to reason with. They can’t even think 
about a vacationwithout having a panic attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/07/america-vacation-workaholic-culture-labor-day>
.

The trouble with much work-life balance advice is that it’s been captured by 
the self-help movement. It all centres on the individual. If you want to 
rekindle your wellbeing and discover your inner potential, then take control of 
your choices, find a job that better fits your temperament, erect firm 
boundaries between work and leisure and learn to say no.

Confronting work-mania as an individual is pointless. We need to come together

This gives an unrealistic picture of what is possible in most jobs, and would 
probably end with an untimely trip to the Jobcentre if taken seriously. In 
other words, work-life balance gurus assume that everyone is a middle-aged 
creative type, living in London with family money to fall back on, and firmly 
within their rights to tell the boss to bother off. Yeah, right.

The trick is to see the ritual of overwork as a societal pressure, not an 
individual fault. And much of this pressure stems from the disempowerment of 
the workforce that has occurred over the last 20 years. Insecurity – real or 
imagined – naturally makes it more likely that people will sacrifice everything 
for their job. That’s why confronting work-mania as an individual is pointless. 
We need to come together as a group to voice these concerns if progressive 
policy and legislation are to be forged. Otherwise little will change.

Want a heathier work-life balance? Join a union. Or better still, create your 
own. But steer clear of that self-help section at the airport bookshop. It 
pretends the ideology of work might still be tamed by individual willpower. But 
it can’t.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice.
 