
Our report that a well-qualified academic once earned so little 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/nottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman>
 on his casual contract that he had to supplement it with a job as a refuse 
collector is confirmation that precarious work has metastasised from unskilled 
or elementary-level jobs to reach parts of the economy once considered the 
epitome of security. According toanalysis of the official figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/universities-accused-of-importing-sports-direct-model-for-lecturers-pay>
 by the University and College Union, more than half of academics in Britain’s 
universities, where students are paying £9,000 a year in fees, are employed on 
temporary or insecure contracts. They are recruits toa burgeoning class of 
workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
, many of them described as self-employed, that make up the “just about 
managing”. Ranging from agency workers in warehouses and care assistants to the 
top-grade professions, these are the people who Theresa May has pledged to put 
at the heart of her response to the Brexit revolt.

Universities accused of 'importing Sports Direct model' for lecturers' pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/universities-accused-of-importing-sports-direct-model-for-lecturers-pay>
As the prime minister acknowledged again in her Guildhall speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/uk-must-become-global-leader-in-free-trade-theresa-may-brexit-vote-donald-trump-election>
 on Monday, getting it right for people on middle to low incomes is a 
precondition of the defence of liberalism. The shape of Britain’s workforcehas 
been transformed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/series/the-new-world-of-work> in the past 
decade. What was once genuinely welcomed by employers and employees as flexible 
employment now looks much more like exploitation, made all too easy by an 
under-regulated jobs market. Nearly a quarter of the 32 million people in work 
fit this description of precarious employment; the biggest group among them are 
the self-employed, a definition that once suggested the budding entrepreneur or 
the local builder but now might also mean the Uber driver who picks you up at 
2am on a Sunday morning. This is the kind of work that is undermining 100 years 
of confidence that children will do better than their parents, the belief that 
underpins social democracy.

As today’s state of the nation report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2016> on social 
mobility shows, people who start out in these low-paid jobs – where young 
workers have experienced a 15% fall in hourly rates since 2008 – struggle to 
escape them. Funding is scarce for “second chance” education for older workers 
looking to improve skills or learn new ones; further education colleges that 
might provide post-16 education to students who don’t go to university are 
losing out to apprenticeship schemes.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is under pressure from No 10 to introduce 
measures in next week’s autumn statement to tackle this exploitation. He wants 
to raise income tax thresholds, a costly move that helps higher earners more 
than those at the bottom. Instead, he should abandon universal credit cuts and
resist calls to slow the increase in the rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/10/next-chief-says-national-living-wage-could-drive-up-inflation>
 of the “national living wage”. He should slash fees for employment tribunals, 
whichhave led to a two-thirds reduction 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/justice-committee/news-parliament-20151/courts-and-tribunals-fees-report-published-16-17/>
 in the number of cases. And, after our report on employment agencies, he 
should make sure that HMRC really is making the people behind tax avoidance 
schemes feel its inspectors’ hot breath on their necks. He might start work on 
simplifying tax law too.

In fact, a major overhaul of employment law is overdue. It is no longer fit 
for purpose. Ministers must recognise the impact of the transformation in the 
way people work, and the laws designed for a world when most people had 
permanent jobs don’t work properly. Matthew Taylor, who has been asked toreview 
workers’ rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
, is likely to want to look at this area when he starts his investigative 
roadshow round the country. But here is a short list of small changes backed by 
the TUC that might start to restore workers’ protection.

More than 7m Britons now in precarious employment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
At the moment, there are three categories of employment – people on permanent 
contracts, people on zero-hours or agency contracts, and the self-employed. 
Only the first category is entitled to full employment protection including 
redundancy payments, unfair dismissal and parental leave. If casual workers had 
stronger rights, then the claim that zero-hours contracts are perfect for 
parents with caring responsibilities could be turned from a fiction – where the 
choice can lie all with the employer – to fact, and pregnant women could get 
paid leave for antenatal appointments. If, in addition, the so-called 
self-employed were assumed to be employed unless the employer, rather than the 
employee, could prove they weren’t, then workers would be protected from the 
kind of forced self-employment that Uber drivers are complaining about. Mrs May 
is right to identify the problem. Tackling this shopping list of rights would 
go to the heart of the disadvantage that contributed to the millions of protest 
voteson 23 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
.
 