
There are plenty of reasons why Theresa May’s press conference in Hangzhou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/no-10-theresa-may-rules-out-points-based-immigration-system-for-britain-brexit>
, while perfectly competent in most ways, was not the most assured performance 
of her two-month premiership. She was, after all, attending her first top-level 
international summit with a group of more practised peers. She had arrived to 
find many of the G20 leaders in hostile and sceptical mood over Britain’s 
Brexit vote. She was about to have a sticky encounter over nuclear power with 
China’s president, Xi Jinping. She had not faced the British press since 
becoming prime minister. It would have taken someone with the rhinoceros hide 
of aKeith Vaz <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/keithvaz> not to display a 
few nerves in such circumstances.

Yet the main reason why Mrs May found herself on the back foot on Monday was 
wholly political not personal. On her way toChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> she had told the travelling press 
that the points-based immigration system promoted by the Vote Leave campaign 
during the EU referendum might not work. On Monday in Hangzhou, speaking from 
bitter experience from her time as home secretary, she amplified her sceptical 
view, saying that the trouble with points-based systems is that they take away 
migration control from governments by allowing people who meet the criteria to 
have automatic rights of entry.

This stance was important for two reasons. First, it marked a clear break from 
the position adopted by the Vote Leave campaign, which had put a points-based 
system at the core of its immigration argument. This therefore puts Mrs May 
potentially at odds with Leavers in her own cabinet and party, including the 
trade secretary, Liam Fox, and Brexit secretary, David Davis, who campaigned 
for such a system. It also drew Nigel Farage back in front of the radio 
microphones and TV cameras – hasn’t he retired to get his life back? – to 
accuse her of betraying Brexit voters.

Second, it marked the conclusive arrival in the Brexit argument of a phrase 
that will soon start to haunt Mrs May unless and until she can deliver on it. 
The electorate voted to leave the EU, she said, because they wanted “some 
control” over migration from within the EU into the UK. Later, she varied it a 
little: “an element of control” which could be delivered in “various ways”. 
Faraway in the House of Commons on Monday, Mr Davis,in a generally anodyne 
statement on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/05/david-davis-brexit-commons-statement-leaving-uk-since-brexit-vote-poll-suggests-politics-live>
, confirmed it yet again.

If politics was a respectful process in which voters allowed a government the 
luxury of honing its positions on big issues over time, a phrase like this 
might not matter too much. Since politics does not work like that, however, and 
since immigration is a toxic issue, the phrase matters. By rejecting the points 
system Mrs May puts pressure on herselfto define the alternative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/uk-immigration-what-are-the-alternatives-to-a-point-based-system>
. This will matter to Brexit voters, many of whom cast their votes because of 
immigration, real and imaginary. Their wish was for a lot of control, not some. 
And it will matter to pro-Brexit press campaigners, full of self-confidence 
now, who know weasel words when they hear them. They will press the issue until 
Mrs May reveals how much control is some.

Mrs May has made her own luck this year, with spectacular rewards. She had 
another piece of luck on Monday, whenjunior doctors called off the first of 
their new waves of industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/05/junior-doctors-suspend-planned-five-day-strike-in-september>
, in a dispute on which Mrs May has been unbending. But she will need to tell a 
lot of people very soonwhat she means by “some control” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37277412> if she is not to become a 
hostage to the ambiguity of the phrase. Mrs May said she would look at all 
forms of immigration, presumably including non-EU, before reaching a decision, 
while Mr Davis hinted that existing EU nationals in the UK would be able to 
stay. Nevertheless, a government that has staked its credibility on delivering 
Brexit, and that has put migration control at the top of its Brexit goals, is 
running a serious political risk if it does not come up pretty quickly with a 
solution that will satisfy its voters and activists.

Important though it is, immigration is not the only issue here. Brexit is not 
a tactical issue. It is as large a strategic issue for the country as can be 
imagined in peacetime. As Mr Davis told MPs on Monday, even remain supporters 
have an interest in the government doing as good a job as circumstances permit. 
The increasing worry now, from both sides of the Brexit argument, is that Mrs 
May doesn’t actually have a plan at all, and that she is pressing forward into 
the fog without a clear enough idea of her detailed goals. “You don’t know what 
you’re doing” is a chant from the political terraces that would spell bad news 
for Mrs May.
 