
Who could quibble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/02/mark-zuckerberg-chan-45bn-facebook-baby-world-problems>
 with the decision by Facebook founderMark Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla 
Chan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
 to celebrate the birth of their daughter by donating almost all of their 
private fortune – $45bn – to a new philanthropic foundation? Quite a lot of 
people, it turns out, are not quite dazzled by what, in the global league of 
success, amounts to voluntary impoverishment. There is some justice to the 
criticism: the ambition and scale of contemporary philanthropy can raise some 
very particular problems of transparency, accountability and unintended 
consequences.

Mark Zuckerberg – who has already given away more than $1bn – knows that from 
experience. Five years ago,he pledged $100m 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/05/19/schooled> to the 
StartUp:Education foundation. It was in support of a cross-party alliance to 
transform Newark’s dire public schools. After five tumultuous years, theproject 
is still going <https://www.facebook.com/startupeducation/>, but it is smaller 
in its purpose and wider in its focus. The possibilities of a top-down 
revolution were more or less defeated by Newark’s disfiguring poverty. Now it 
embraces social workers, physical and mental health and even the quality of 
school meals. It was an object lesson in the limitations of philanthropy. Doing 
good is not the same as doing business.

The Bill and Melinda Gates foundation (a partner with the Guardian’s global 
development website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>), has been 
down this road already. They too want to transform life chances through 
education for inner-city children; they too have found that you cannot take the 
politics out of social reform programmes. Their “Common Core” project has 
successfully established what amounts to a national curriculum across the US, 
but in many states it has happened with scant democratic accountability: now a 
backlashis building on both right and left 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-bill-gates-pulled-off-the-swift-common-core-revolution/2014/06/07/a830e32e-ec34-11e3-9f5c-9075d5508f0a_story.html>
 of the political spectrum. Getting education right involves working in 
existing systems, with voters, real people and – as the Newark experiment 
confirmed – much more challenging problems than those of, say, endowing an 
institution or funding a research programme. The same is true in the world of 
global development where the Gates Foundation makes an extraordinary 
contribution. Yet it is also the case that private passions can skew priorities 
and do harm as well as good. So the focus oneradicating polio 
<http://www.humanosphere.org/global-health/2014/11/how-the-focus-on-polio-eradication-in-nigeria-undermines-itself/>
 appears, at least in Nigeria, to have weakened the country’s wider 
immunisation effort.

In their letter to their new daughter 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/a-letter-to-our-daughter/10153375081581634>
, the Zuckerbergs tell her they want to advance human potential and promote 
equality. Individual philanthropy can do some of the things that will help: it 
can fund medical research, build universities, endow institutions. But 
philanthropy will always be limited by the human institutions that are too 
often the barriers to the fulfilment of human potential and greater equality 
and which are also necessary to sustain them. Changing society takes politics.

Yet some of the greatest glories of human achievement – from scientific 
research to national parks, concert halls to art galleries – began with 
individual acts of generosity intended to benefit the wider community. Once, 
the church commanded a tythe. Priscilla Chan andMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> are giving away not a 
tenth but 99% of their wealth, resigning from the lists of the super-rich, 
foregoing the status of billionairedom to make the world a better place. Good 
for them.
 