
“This is a very positive day for the people of this community and indeed for 
all communities segregated by physical barriers. The residents who live here 
have decided to reject the fear and negativity that epitomise peace walls and 
to embrace hope and a better way of life.” Those werethe words of a community 
activist <http://www.nihe.gov.uk/news-community-celebrates-peace-wall-removal> 
in north Belfast earlier this year as the first “peace line” – an eight-foot 
brick wall that had stood for 30 years - was demolished.

There are still a total of 109 peace walls - the border barriers between 
Catholic and Protestant neighbourhoods - acrossNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. More than half of the 
remaining peace calls in Belfast are in north Belfast, which suffered some of 
the worst violence during the Troubles.

Housing organisations have been, and remain, a major influence within our 
divided communities. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive (NIHE), which owned 
the peace wall demolished in August, as well as20 other peace walls 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/one-peace-wall-down-109-across-northern-ireland-still-to-go-34486822.html>
, was instrumental in brokering the deal with local communities. In 2013, the 
Northern Ireland assembly pledged that it would remove all peace walls within 
10 years. This is ambitious, but the first example of a wall being demolished 
will hopefully lead to more of these physical barriers being removed, with 
housing organisations continuing to play a big role.

This Brexit plan will divide Britain and Ireland once more | Diarmaid Ferriter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/brexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border>


The current housing selection scheme in Northern Ireland was established in 
1974, not long after the NIHE was set up, as a result of the civil rights 
grievances in the late 1960s over allegations of religious discrimination in 
housing allocations.

The scheme, operated by the NIHE and housing associations, has had a few 
tweaks since then but still operates on a points system that allows applicants 
to choose specific areas and, inevitably, choose one community or another.

Arguably, this system has sustained division, with most people choosing to 
remain within their own communities. A review in 2012 called for choice-based 
lettings, which would, in effect encourage people to bid for properties outside 
their immediate neighbourhoods and perhaps encourage communities to live 
together by choice.

One of the main criticisms of the current scheme has been the way it 
encourages people to “chase points”, with 200 points awarded to people who can 
provethey have been intimidated 
<http://www.housingadviceni.org/intimidated-your-home>. Since the review was 
published three years ago little has changed, although the assembly hasrecently 
been debating 
<http://housingrights.org.uk/news/assembly-debates-housing-selection-scheme> 
the need to change the scheme.


There has also been disagreement about what will happen to the NIHE. In 2013 
the then minister for social development announced a social housing reform 
programme to be implemented by 2015. A media frenzy ensued, with declarations 
that the NIHE would be abolished. But it still exists. The organisation owns 
and manages nearly 90,000 dwellings across the province and still retains many 
powers that local authorities have in other parts of the UK, including 
responsibility for homelessness. But it stopped building new social housing in 
2002, with housing associations taking on this task, and it faces major 
problems. According to Savills, existing NIHE stock needs investment of £7bn 
over the next 30 years and nearly half its stock needs immediate attention. But 
there is still reluctance to change to status of the NIHE to enable it to 
borrow against its considerable assets.



Will Belfast ever have a Berlin Wall moment and tear down its 'peace walls'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/29/belfast-berlin-wall-moment-permanent-peace-walls>
Recent estimates suggest that if we build at the present rate – 5,700 houses a 
year, across all sectors – it will take 20 years to accommodate the 40,000 
households on the current waiting list. Things move slowly in Northern Ireland, 
and with every policy development caution prevails.

However, the removal of one wall is a significant step in the right direction 
and mechanisms may now be in place to further the objective of removing all of 
the peace lines by 2023. This example proves that a sensitive approach 
involving intense negotiations with local communities living on the interfaces 
has worked in this instance.



Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 