
Xiao Fang thinks she’s one of the luckier workers making Barbie dolls for the 
Christmas market at the Mattel toy factory in Chang’an.

True, she says, she works 11-hour days, six days a week, and shares a 
dormitory with nine other women and gets to see her husband only once a week. 
She had to leave her three-year-old daughter back home in Sichuan. And there is 
only a communal bathroom, and if they want hot water they must fetch it from 
another floor. But at least she has a job, she says. And others have it worse.

Xiao is one of thousands of workers in Chinese factories making some of this 
year’s must-have Christmas toys.

An investigation with the US-based NGO China Labor Watch 
<http://chinalaborwatch.org/home.aspx> reveals that toys including Barbie, 
Thomas the Tank Engine and Hot Wheels were made by staff earning as little as 
86p an hour.

Overtime can run to nearly three times the legal limit. In some factories – 
including one producing Happy Meal toys for McDonald’s from the new DreamWorks 
movieTrolls – that means some are on 12-hour shifts and have to work with 
hazardous chemicals.

According to China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Labor Watch, the 
world of toys may be heaven for children, but it is a world of misery for toy 
factory workers.

The group’s founder and executive director, Li Qiang, said: “We can’t tolerate 
that children’s dreams are based on workers’ nightmares, and we must fight 
against the unfair oppression of workers who manufacture toys.”

Undercover investigators infiltrated four factories, and the group shared wage 
slips and pictures with theObserver to support their findings.

The investigators said that they found workers making toys in factories 
supplying Disney, Mattel, Fisher-Price and McDonald’s who reported having to do 
more than 100 hours of overtime a month – nearly three times the legal limit in 
China.

But the toy industry’s own watchdog, the ICTI Care Foundation, says it is 
powerless to stop many Chinese factories breaking the law on overtime.

“The reality is, across the board, most factories, or the vast majority at 
least, work way beyond legal limits in China, and legal limits are almost 
universally ignored,” said Mark Robertson, ICTI Care’s director of 
communications. “Our position is, we want transparency. We want to know how 
many hours are worked in the factories, so we can make sure workers are paid 
for every minute that they work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-grim-truth-of-chinese-factories-producing-the-wests-christmas-toys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a5c35b6ee2f1c65efdfc061a2cded15af173ed0%2F132_0_3945_2368%2F3945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20grim%20truth%20of%20Chinese%20factories%20producing%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20Christmas%20toys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-grim-truth-of-chinese-factories-producing-the-wests-christmas-toys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20grim%20truth%20of%20Chinese%20factories%20producing%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20Christmas%20toys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-grim-truth-of-chinese-factories-producing-the-wests-christmas-toys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a5c35b6ee2f1c65efdfc061a2cded15af173ed0%2F132_0_3945_2368%2F3945.jpg>
 Dormitory-style accommodation for workers at the Foshan Nanhai Diecast 
Company, which makes toys for Mattel. Photograph: Gethin Chamberlain/China 
Labor Watch 
Some of this year’s must-have brands were made in the factories visited by the 
undercover team. At the Foshan Nanhai Diecast Company factory the basic salary 
for workers was just 86p an hour.Toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/toys> photographed inside the factory 
included Thomas the Tank Engine Minis and Hot Wheels Guardians of the Galaxy, 
as well as the Cars Piston Cup racing garage and the Fisher-Price Learn with Me 
Zebra Walker. Fisher-Price is owned by Mattel.

Working all available overtime and with all allowances and deductions applied, 
a worker takes home far less than the average wage in Chinese cities of £715 a 
month.

An undercover investigator who joined the company as a worker described having 
to work with isoamyl acetate – commonly know as banana oil – which can soften 
and dissolve plastics. The investigator worked on a production line and came 
into direct contact with the substance, reporting that some workers had 
complained to management about the strong odour.

Staff also claimed that the company offered prizes for the three most 
productive workers every day. The prize was a pack of paper towels.

At the Chang’an Toy factory, investigators photographed toys from Mattel’s 
Monster High range of dolls and spoke to workers who said that they made the 
company’s Barbie dolls. A large pink Barbie banner hangs on the outside of the 
building.

The factory employs about 4,200 people, and workers again claimed they worked 
more than 100 hours a month overtime at peak periods, starting on a base wage 
of £1.08 an hour. The basic monthly wage was £188 and the maximum take-home pay 
after overtime, allowances and deductions was £337.

The investigators said that the average working week was 68.3 hours. Chinese 
labour law allows a maximum of only 36 overtime hours a month. A worker 
averaging 68.3 hours a week would be working an average 88 hours of overtime a 
month – but workers claimed the figure was higher during peak production 
periods over the summer.

At the Combine Will factory in Dongguang, which employs about 2,700 people, 
investigators photographed toys being manufactured for McDonald’s Happy Meals, 
including Hello Kitty toys andTrolls pencil toppers based on characters from 
the DreamWorks film.

The investigators interviewed workers in the cutting section, who said they 
sometimes clocked up 100 hours of overtime a month. They also found that the 
inside of the building could get as hot as 31C. Wages started at £1.08 an hour 
and some workers say they were expected to work with banana oil and isopropyl 
alcohol, which can cause dizziness and even death in high concentrations. The 
basic wage for a five-day week was £189 a month, with the upper limit of 
take-home pay about £337. However, some workers on piece rate were able to earn 
as much as £482 a month.

In the Shenzhen Wei Lee Fung Plastic Products Co factory, investigators 
photographed Fisher-Price Imaginext DC Super Friends toys – including Batman – 
along with Disney Princess dolls and toys from the Fisher-Price Little People 
range.

The factory employs about 2,000 workers, who reported that they started on a 
basic wage of £1.16 an hour and claimed they were expected to work more than 
100 hours of overtime.

An investigator joining the company undercover was required to sign a 
statement promising to accept any punishment handed out.

China Labor Watch’s Li Qiang accused the toy companies of exploiting Chinese 
workers. He said: “Workers in toy factories face heavy workloads every day, but 
only earn an extremely low wage. They have children as well.

“Those who earn high profits from toys have done so by oppressing the 
interests of workers, and as such their negligence should be subject to public 
and moral condemnation.”

A spokesman for McDonald’s said: “As purchasers of toys from Combine Will, we 
take these allegations very seriously. We are committed to ensuring fair and 
ethical workplace standards in every corner of our supply chain.

“We are working closely with ICTI Care in its investigation as well as 
overseeing a thorough review of these allegations, and will swiftly and 
effectively address any issues that are identified.”

A Mattel spokesman said: “Mattel is committed to ensuring every single person 
making our toys and products is treated fairly, with respect and is able to 
work in a safe and healthy environment. Our labour standards, environmental, 
health and safety programmes and oversight processes reflect this commitment, 
and we stand behind our record of ethical labour practices and environmental 
stewardship.

“We are devoted to ensuring that our manufacturing facilities throughout the 
world are safe and ethical places to work, and we reject any suggestion to the 
contrary.”

Disney referred requests for comment to ICTI Care. Its director, Mark 
Robertson, said the organisation took the accusations “extremely seriously” and 
promised a “robust investigation”. He said standards in the industry were 
improving and the wellbeing of factory workers was the “core priority”.

The Toy Retailers Association said it would work with the industry to tackle 
the issues raised by the investigation. A spokesman said: “The Toy Retailers 
Association views the China Labor Watch report with concern, which we know is 
shared throughout the industry.

“Our members are conscientious retailers who abide by a code of ethics with 
regard to where and how they purchase toys, which includes compliance with all 
UK, European and wider standards.”
 