
This is the year that virtual reality (VR) is expected to move into the 
mainstream. New headsets backed by all the major tech players are coming to the 
market, encompassing everything from high end headsets with laser tracking to 
cardboard. Now more people than ever can have a go for themselves and 
experience a multitude of different worlds.

The launch of Daydream, Google’s platform for high quality mobile VR, is 
another milestone for virtual reality. As these technologies move forward they 
bring with them more potential for journalism and storytelling.


The Guardian is dedicated to digital innovation - we work with the best 
digital and editorial talent to create world class Guardian journalism. When 
new platforms emerge we work ahead of the curve, considering how these 
technologies will work for our journalism and readers and experimenting with 
them to bring Guardian journalism to life. In whatever we do, it’s our mission 
to create impactful and meaningful journalism that provokes action and thought. 
There are always risks in investing in new technologies, but for me the risk is 
not doing this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fthe-guardian-and-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ea31d0e5f0066d8bd1711fba8c987c38f715940%2F0_0_2030_2810%2F2030.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20and%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fthe-guardian-and-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20and%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fthe-guardian-and-virtual-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ea31d0e5f0066d8bd1711fba8c987c38f715940%2F0_0_2030_2810%2F2030.png>
 Guardian VR 
We released our first VR piece, 6x9 <http://theguardian.com/solitarty-vr> in 
April this year. It placed the audience in a solitary confinement prison cell 
and illustrated some of the psychological effects of sensory deprivation that 
incarcerated prisoners can experience - from hallucinations to disembodiment. 
It was an experiment in what our journalism could look like in VR.


We undertook that project with the explicit goal of pushing the boundaries of 
this new medium technically, journalistically and commercially. I now lead the 
newly createdGuardian VR  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2016/oct/04/the-guardian-announces-virtual-reality-project-team>
team which is testament to our investment into virtual reality journalism. Our 
studio operates cross-functionally incorporating journalists, designers, 
project manager and a commercial lead. At the heart of everything we do in the 
studio are the questions - ‘what can this do for our journalism?’, and ‘how can 
we make this the most compelling experience for our audience?’ Much of our 
conversation revolves around story ideas: should it be VR piece and if so how 
does that story translate into a virtual world?

There are two things I think make VR different from other storytelling forms: 
embodiment and perspective. We ask ourselves why is it important that you are 
in that place. Almost all news stories are located somewhere so the location 
can’t be the only prerequisite. We also have to establish why it is essential 
you are there, and what the role of the user is in the experience or story we 
are telling. I’m particularly interested in first person storytelling where you 
are the protagonist - 6x9 was designed around this proposition and placed the 
user in the shoes of an inmate in a solitary confinement cell. The Guardian has 
delivered some strong in-depth reporting on solitary confinement already, but 
through VR we were able to give the user an embodied sense of being in the 
cell. This has a very different impact and creates a whole new dimension for 
journalism.


Our next VR project will be launched on Daydream and is the first in a series 
of a diverse set of stories - we hope you enjoy it.



To be kept updated on our virtual reality projects please email: 
vr@theguardian.com <mailto:virtual@theguardian.com>
 