
Many, perhaps most, Guardian readers have long looked askance at the British 
honours system. Rather than honouring the best among us, it seems to reinforce 
the worst about us: class, snobbery, flummery. And that’s before you even think 
about the apparent awarding of honours in return for political services or 
cash. Or indeed the prospect of a knighthood for a figure as divisive as the 
Tory strategist Lynton Crosby. It’s tempting to cast an envious eye across 
either the Atlantic or the Channel, where citizens’ highest achievements are 
applauded without resorting to titles of imperial pomposity. Today, in that 
spirit, we list those to whom we would offer thanks, and our own Guardian medal 
of honour.

The volunteer

This was the year of the volunteer. The men and women in hi-vis bibs who stood 
on the shore to greet the migrant children washed up on the island of Lesbos. 
The businessman who abandoned his desk to hand water bottles to refugees as 
they walked across Hungary. The Parisians who on a grim November night opened 
their homes to harbour those wounded or shaken by a massacre on the streets of 
their city.

They are the unseen army of anonymous people who emerge at moments of crisis 
and dire need. And this year, more than ever, they have been needed. They have 
given their time, their sweat and their kindness. They have done it for no 
reward – just to answer the call of those in desperate trouble.

We salute all those who give in any way they can, including by donating money. 
But special respect is reserved for those who break from the convenience of 
their own lives, who submit themselves to hardship and exhaustion, just to 
provide food or water or simple human comfort to others. At the end of this 
dark year we honour those who brought light. We honour the volunteer.

Khaled al-Asaad

Beheaded Syrian scholar refused to lead Isis to hidden Palmyra antiquities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/isis-beheads-archaeologist-syria>
Many people devote their lives to art and culture. Khaled al-Asaad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/isis-beheads-archaeologist-syria>
 was one of the very few prepared to die for it, and in a horrifying manner. 
The 82-year-old Syrian archaeologist was beheaded in August by Islamic State 
extremists because he refused to lead them to the treasures ofPalmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/ng-interactive/2015/oct/05/palmyra-what-the-world-has-lost>
 he had helped to hide. Asaad could have fled when Isis advanced towards the 
ancient Semitic city, but he had spent most of his life there looking after its 
pillared temples, becoming its greatest scholar, and would not abandon it. In 
the end, he could save neither the city nor himself, but his sacrifice is 
likely to be remembered long after Isis is gone.

John German


John German 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/26/volkswagen-scandal-emissions-tests-john-german-research>
 is modest. He describes himself as “just a simple engineer from Michigan”. But 
his simple engineering helped expose theVolkswagen emissions cheating scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/30/vw-scandal-the-winners-and-losers-from-carmakers-to-car-owners>
, which has thrown the German car maker into the worst crisis in its 69-year 
history. More than 12m cars are being recalled, more than €20bn has been wiped 
off VW’s market value and its CEO has been ousted. German hadn’t expected to 
find anything when, on a hunch, he started looking into VW cars’ surprisingly 
high emissions. But he found the company had installed “defeat device” software 
that reduced nitrogen oxide emissions, but only during strict tests, not when 
the cars were out on the road.

The repercussions have been wide. The company is under pressure to compensate 
millions of customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/vw-customers-demand-answers-and-compensation-over-emissions-scandal>
 and there aremoves towards a new emissions test in Europe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-34324772>. Many believe the scandal could 
spell the beginning of the end for diesel vehicles in cities. The simple 
engineer made his mark.

Eva Carneiro 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35398dcde433f01839fdd93f0ed692c6d0b7020c%2F0_0_3952_2373%2F3952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35398dcde433f01839fdd93f0ed692c6d0b7020c%2F0_0_3952_2373%2F3952.jpg>
 Chelsea’s former team doctor Eva Carneiro was publicly criticised by former 
manager Jose Mourinho. Photograph: BPI/REX Shutterstock 
Chelsea’s doctor can look after herself. It’s poor José Mourinho I worry about 
| Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/jose-mourinho-eva-carneiro-chelsea-doctor>
The former Chelsea team doctor, Carneiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/22/chelsea-eva-carneiro-jose-mourinho>
 was just about the only person to emerge with her dignity intact from a sorry 
affair thatreflected badly on José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/jose-mourinho-eva-carneiro-chelsea-doctor>
, then team manager, the FA and the game in general. When Mourinho launched a 
furious tirade and demoted Carneiro for doing her job by going on to the field 
to treat Eden Hazard, he set in motion events that are still playing out. Under 
intense scrutiny and provocation, and with a debate raging about sexism in the 
game, Carneiro kept her dignity beforespeaking out against bullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/12/eva-carneiro-chelsea-doctor-facebook-jose-mourinho>
 with quiet power. When the FA did come to investigate, it did not approach her 
for her side of the story. Mourinho, sacked a fortnight ago, is Chelsea history 
now. Carneiro’s employment tribunal against Chelsea FC, which months earlier 
had been promoting its commitment to diversity, is due in January.

David Pocock 


To many, Australian flanker David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/16/unique-david-pocock-pivotal-to-wallabies-rugby-world-cup-assault>
 was the player of the Rugby World Cup. But it was his commitment to issues off 
the field that won him respect far beyond the game. “People say that sport and 
politics shouldn’t mix, but I think it is important that sports people are 
interested in stuff outside of sport and talk about it,” he said before the 
tournament. He and his wife Emma have refused to sign their marriage documents 
in Australia until gay marriage is made legal, he has campaigned against new 
coal mines by physically chaining himself to a digger in New South Wales, and 
regularly takes a stand on everything from rhino horn poaching to fair trade 
issues.

Nadiya Hussain 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fnadiya-hussain-great-british-bake-off-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tearful%20Nadiya%20Hussain%20reacts%20to%20winning%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fnadiya-hussain-great-british-bake-off-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tearful%20Nadiya%20Hussain%20reacts%20to%20winning%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fnadiya-hussain-great-british-bake-off-video&media=>
Tearful Nadiya Hussain reacts to winning Great British Bake Off – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2015/oct/08/nadiya-hussain-great-british-bake-off-video>
It’s been a bleak year for British Muslims: terrorist atrocities abroad have 
led to increased suspicion and attacks on Muslim communities at home. But at 
least there wasNadiya Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/12/bake-off-winner-nadiya-hussain-muslims-britain>
, the new queen of cakes. From her cheeky asides and girl-next-door charm to 
her union flag, sari wedding cake showstopper, she was the perfect riposte to 
those suggesting British Muslims are insufficiently patriotic or integrated. 
Winning our hearts through our stomachs (and an impressive set of eyebrows), 
her presence on the Great British Bake Off was as soothing as a cup of tea.

Christiana Figueres

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1194516c38c2853705e65b7de84dc9a1a91f6cdd%2F109_233_2243_1345%2F2243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1194516c38c2853705e65b7de84dc9a1a91f6cdd%2F109_233_2243_1345%2F2243.jpg>
 The UN’s Christiana Figueres helped to seal a groundbreaking climate change 
deal. Photograph: Stephane Mahe/Reuters 
A new global agreement on climate change, agreed by 196 countries, joining 
developed and developing nations together and pledging them to limit warming in 
line with scientific advice: just a year ago, only the brave would have 
predicted it possible. It took more than four years of tense talks, culminating 
in two weeks of gruelling negotiating sessions, running through the night in 
Paris. Costa Rican diplomat Christiana Figueres, UN climate chief since 2010, 
must take most of the credit. She worked tirelessly to iron out differences 
among nations, and willnow step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/27/christiana-figueres-the-woman-tasked-with-saving-the-world-from-global-warming>
 with this accord as her lasting legacy.

Angela Merkel

After her finest hour, Merkel now needs help from all Europe | Timothy Garton 
Ash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/merkel-europe-germany-migrants-integration>
Germans thought they knew Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/angela-merkel-time-magazine-person-of-the-year-2015>
. She was cautious and sensible –Mutti (Mummy) knew best. But it turned out the 
world didn’t really know Merkel. When Europe faced its greatest humanitarian 
crisis since the second world war, with the arrival of hundreds of thousands of 
refugees from Syria and other conflict zones, another side of Merkel emerged. 
Appalled at the huge scale of the suffering and outraged by the 
narrow-mindedness of Germany’s southern neighbours, she declared the moment 
represented “a historic test <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35091960>” 
for Europe and threw Germany’s gates open. One million refugees later, the buzz 
of moral wellbeing is fading among Germans and Merkel’s political future is 
clouded. But there is no doubting her courage, and it’s hard to deny she spared 
Europe at least some of its shame.

Mhairi Black
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsnp-mhairi-black-britain-youngest-mp-maiden-speech-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437833147564%2FMhairi-Black-023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mhairi%20Black%2C%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20youngest%20MP%2C%20gives%20maiden%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsnp-mhairi-black-britain-youngest-mp-maiden-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mhairi%20Black%2C%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20youngest%20MP%2C%20gives%20maiden%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsnp-mhairi-black-britain-youngest-mp-maiden-speech-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437833147564%2FMhairi-Black-023.jpg>
Mhairi Black, Britain’s youngest MP, gives maiden speech - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/jul/14/snp-mhairi-black-britain-youngest-mp-maiden-speech-video>
Her maiden speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/14/mhairi-black-first-commons-speech-snp>
 in the House of Commons was fearless, angry, passionate and undaunted by the 
circumstance of being the youngest MP for 300 years. The 20-year-old SNP MP has 
brought style, youth and heart to Westminster. The best description of her 
nomination: for services to the future.

Brian Harrison 


A former Red Cross volunteer, Brian Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/heroic-uk-couple-gave-first-aid-to-tunisia-victims-brian-harrison>
 was on holiday in June at the Imperial Marhaba hotel in the Tunisian resort of 
Sousse when an Isis-inspired gunmanlaunched a murderous assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
, killing 30 Britons. Harrison had travelled with his wife, a nurse, from 
Aberdeen and together they were among the first responders on the scene. He 
grabbed tablecloths and napkins from the restaurant to bandage the wounds of 
the injured and dying, tended to those who had seen loved ones killed just 
minutes earlier and accompanied the seriously injured to hospital.

Feidin Santana

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fsantana-captured-shooting-of-walter-scott-i-will-never-get-over-it&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20will%20never%20get%20over%20it'%3A%20Feidin%20Santana%20on%20filming%20the%20police%20shooting%20of%20Walter%20Scott%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fsantana-captured-shooting-of-walter-scott-i-will-never-get-over-it>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20will%20never%20get%20over%20it%27%3A%20Feidin%20Santana%20on%20filming%20the%20police%20shooting%20of%20Walter%20Scott%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fsantana-captured-shooting-of-walter-scott-i-will-never-get-over-it&media=>
‘I will never get over it’: Feidin Santana on filming the police shooting of 
Walter Scott – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/aug/15/santana-captured-shooting-of-walter-scott-i-will-never-get-over-it>
The 23-year-old Dominican-born immigrant filmed the police shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/aug/15/santana-captured-shooting-of-walter-scott-i-will-never-get-over-it>
 of Walter Scott in Charleston, South Carolina, on his mobile phone and then, 
fearing for his life, decided to share it with Scott’s family. His bravery 
ensured justice for Scott and provided yet more irrefutable evidence of the 
brutality African-Americans suffer at the hands of law enforcement.

Ione Wells


When 20-year-old student Ione Wells decided to speak publicly about her sexual 
assault, she never imagined the movement that it would start. But as the
powerful open letter 
<http://www.cherwell.org/lifestyle/features/2015/04/24/not-guilty-a-letter-to-my-assaulter>
 she wrote to her attacker went viral so the#notguilty campaign 
<http://notguiltycampaign.co.uk/> was born, with people all over the world 
compelled toshare their own experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/06/ione-wells-notguilty-speaking-out-sexual-assault-victims>
. In Wells’s determination not to let her own attack change her life, she has 
inspired much-needed openness about how widespread rape culture is.

Phaedra Almajid

Among those cheering this year’s collapse of Sepp Blatter’s Fifa regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/21/sepp-blatter-fifa-power-politics>
 wasPhaedra Almajid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/16/whistleblower-phaedra-almajid-hits-back-fifa-confidentiality-complaint>
, one of a small cadre of brave sporting whistleblowers who helped bring the 
pompous, self-appointed captains of world sport crashing down this year. 
Vindication was long coming. Having previously made a series of claims about 
impropriety during Qatar’s 2022 World Cup bid, for which she was a marketing 
executive, Almajid was forced into a retraction by those she accused. Having 
fled to the US, she then had to suffer being outed by Fifa’s own ethics 
committee despite being promised anonymity. The world’s favourite sport is 
cleaner today, thanks to her.

Marlon James
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmarlon-james-man-booker-prize-caribbean-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444815556410%2FKP_541011_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marlon%20James%20hopes%20winning%20Man%20Booker%20prize%20will%20bring%20recognition%20to%20more%20Caribbean%20writers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmarlon-james-man-booker-prize-caribbean-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marlon%20James%20hopes%20winning%20Man%20Booker%20prize%20will%20bring%20recognition%20to%20more%20Caribbean%20writers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmarlon-james-man-booker-prize-caribbean-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444815556410%2FKP_541011_crop_640x360.jpg>
Marlon James hopes winning Man Booker prize will bring recognition to more 
Caribbean writers – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2015/oct/14/marlon-james-man-booker-prize-caribbean-video>
The Man Booker prize-winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/13/marlon-james-wins-the-man-booker-prize-2015>
 habitually brings more to the literary world than literature, and Marlon James 
is no exception. The success of his third novel,A Brief History of Seven 
Killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
, catapulted him and Caribbean writing into a welcome spotlight. He is the 
first Jamaican writer to win. The bestseller represents an opportunity forother 
Caribbean writers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/14/marlon-james-vanguard-caribbean-literary-style>
, but also a timely challenge. James, who is openly gay, left the island for 
America, having long been the victim of homophobia. His book, hailed as 
“extraordinary”, explores homosexuality and homophobia against the backdrop of 
an assassination attempt on Bob Marley in his homeland. There were easier paths 
to success. James eschewed them. By confronting taboos head on, he set an 
example for others to follow.

Elena Ferrante

How refreshing in such fame-hungry times that the novelist of the moment, 
Elena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
, has chosen to hide behind a pen name. The translation of the final novel in 
her Neapolitan quartet, My Brilliant Friend, elevated her to new heights, yet 
her identity remains secret. AsFerrante explains 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1f019b5c-9d18-11e5-b45d-4812f209f861.html>: “I 
simply believe that it’s wrong to let one’s person become better known than 
one’s work.” Aside from her incredible books, there is a great deal to admire 
about Ferrante – whoever she really is.

Sam Bain, Jesse Armstrong
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-end-of-peep-show-superhands-took-the-sofa-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20Peep%20Show%3A%20'Super%20Hans%20took%20the%20sofa'%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-end-of-peep-show-superhands-took-the-sofa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20Peep%20Show%3A%20%27Super%20Hans%20took%20the%20sofa%27%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fthe-end-of-peep-show-superhands-took-the-sofa-video&media=>
The end of Peep Show: ‘Super Hans took the sofa’ - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2015/nov/10/the-end-of-peep-show-superhands-took-the-sofa-video>
Peep Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/01/david-mitchell-robert-webb-on-peep-show-we-just-wanted-to-milk-it-interview>
 is in the best traditions of British television comedy – farcical and 
poignant, wildly absurd and cruelly realistic, driven by flawed characters who 
test the boundary where unlikable is redeemed by vulnerable. The picaresque 
adventures in cohabitation of Mark and Jeremy (played by David Mitchell and 
Robert Webb) belong in the pantheon of dysfunctional comedy situations: the 
Steptoes, the Trotters, Basil and Sybil Fawlty. And like all the greats, Peep 
Show is also discreetly satirical, holding a warped mirror up to an 
infantilised generation that was supposed to land in adulthood at the turn of 
the millennium but missed. To sustain this quality over nine seasons is the 
achievement of writers Sam Bain and Jesse Armstrong and, at the end of the 
final series, for that we honour them.

Naz Shah

Bradford West Labour candidate Naz Shah: 'I lost my childhood'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/09/bradford-west-labour-candidate-naz-shah-childhood>
On a grim general election night for Labour, the ousting of the Respect MP 
George Galloway was one of its few bright spots. But this was no ordinary win.
Labour’s candidate in Bradford West, Naz Shah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/george-galloway-loses-bradford-west-seat-labour-naz-shah-respect>
, had endured achildhood of poverty and fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/09/bradford-west-labour-candidate-naz-shah-childhood>
, overshadowed by her mother’s coerced relationship with an abusive man. She 
herself was forced into an arranged marriage at 15; she was still a teenager 
when her mother was jailed for murder, after finally snapping and killing her 
abuser. When Shah overcame an ugly, bitterly personalised election campaign 
against her in Bradford to win a thumping majority, even Tory MPs were secretly 
thrilled.

Abi Morgan


Why did it take so long for the story of women’s campaign for the vote to 
reach the big screen – a campaign complete with extraordinary leaders, 
brilliant activists, widespread imprisonment, force-feedings, iconoclasm, 
flights in runaway dirigible balloons and martyrdom? Whatever the reason, 
almost a century after those campaigners won the first stage of their battle, 
it was writer Abi Morgan who brought them to life in herscreenplay for the film 
Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/11/suffragette-review-carey-mulligan-meryl-streep>
. Morgan has explored women’s rights before, but this year she went further, 
committing herself to work that focuses on women for the next four or five 
years. The Pankhursts would certainly have approved.

Andrea Accomazzo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2ec3f91242fc7aa896e84d6beeb6a2b1682fb38%2F0_61_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2ec3f91242fc7aa896e84d6beeb6a2b1682fb38%2F0_61_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
 A computer-generated image of the European space probe Rosetta with its 
landing robot Philae. Photograph: ESA/EPA 
Space missions are so routine that we are in danger of losing sight of the 
achievements that make them happen. Take the European Space Agency’sRosetta 
mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/15/rosetta-spacecraft-to-change-orbit-in-bid-to-strengthen-philae-communication>
. The spacecraft and its lander,Philae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/14/rosetta-mission-hibernating-philae-lander-spacecraft-wakes-up>
, have enriched our knowledge of comets no end. To gather the scientific data 
has taken some of the most exquisite flying in the solar system. The lander was 
dropped from twice the height of a cruising airliner on to a spinning comet 
travelling at 54,000km per hour 510 million kilometres from Earth. To hit the 
target, Rosetta’s speed was controlled to 1.7mm per second. Since then, Andrea 
Accomazzo 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Operations/Spacecraft_Operations_Manager_An_interview_with_Andrea_Accomazzo>
’s team has flown Rosetta through dust storms, past flying boulders, and close 
enough to film its shadow on the comet’s surface. A very giant leap.

The women who exposed
the Met’s undercover cops

For four years the Metropolitan police fiercely resisted a legal action 
initiated by Helen Steel, Belinda Harvey and six other anonymous women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/20/met-police-apologise-women-had-relationships-with-undercover-officers>
, who discovered that their one-time boyfriends had been undercover police 
officers. Then in November, the Met gave seven of them a comprehensive apology 
and substantial compensation (the eighth did not accept the settlement and is 
continuing her legal fight), admitting that the long-term relationships their 
officers had formed with the women were “abusive, deceitful, manipulative and 
wrong”. The force has also paid out to a woman who discovered the father of her 
son was an undercover officer. Even the Met has been forced to applaud the 
“courage and tenacity of these women”. Rightly so.

Barack Obama

Americans overall tend not to cut Barack Obama much slack. So he is not likely 
to get as much credit as he deserves in America for two stunning foreign policy 
successes this year. He ended the oddity – some would say insanity – of thelack 
of diplomatic ties with Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/13/us-and-cuba-to-reopen-embassies-and-restore-full-ties-in-early-july-reports-say>
. Ties were restored this summer, ending a policy that began with the closure 
of the US embassy in Havana in 1961. And the US followed this diplomatic coup 
with an even greater one,bringing to a successful conclusion protracted 
negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/iran-nuclear-deal-congress-34th-senator>
. A US or Israeli attack on Iran was a real possibility and that has now 
receded, as has – at least in the short term – the prospect of nuclear 
proliferation.

Baroness Warsi


Because loyalty is a given, it takes nerve and a thick skin to challenge the 
Conservative party. But this year Sayeeda Warsi, Tory peer, former party chair, 
has thrice felt duty bound to challenge her colleagues to behave better. In 
January she spoke out about theapproach of the Conservative/Lib Dem coalition 
towards Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/24/baroness-warsi-coalition-assault-muslims>
. In February she sounded the alarm that her party was doing too little to 
attract minority Britons. Last month, with her party in denial about the 
gravity of bullying allegations, Warsi intervened to show that senior officials 
had received fair warning and had a duty to act. Many Tories may be aggrieved. 
The public will think differently.

Steph Houghton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b46963e0f25eb0b82db3ff8ca291c11c77204d5%2F0_0_2896_1739%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b46963e0f25eb0b82db3ff8ca291c11c77204d5%2F0_0_2896_1739%2F2896.jpg>
 Steph Houghton captained England to third place in the women’s World Cup. 
Photograph: Lars Baron - Fifa 
As England’s men continued to disappoint on the world stage, it was left to 
Steph Houghton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/20/england-euro-2017-steph-houghton>
 to lead England to third place in the women’s World Cup in Canada. It was the 
most successful World Cup campaign by a British football team of either gender 
since 1966 and all that. Following a typically slow start, England’s campaign 
took in tears (Laura Bassett’s heartbreaking injury-time own goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/womens-world-cup-heartbreaking-own-goal-kills-englands-dreams>
 in the semi-final against Japan) and triumph (victory over Germany to finish 
third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/04/germany-england-womens-world-cup-third-place-match-report>
) in equal measure. It also provided the recently professionalised women’s 
domestic game in England with a welcome fillip and a base from which to build.

Edward Snowden

As senators in Washington voted 67-32 this summer to pass the USA Freedom Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/02/congress-surveillance-reform-edward-snowden>
 – ending the bulk collection of millions of Americans’ phone records and 
ushering in the country’s most significant surveillance reform for a generation 
– the impetus for this far-reaching change sat thousands of miles away, 
vindicated but with freedom still curtailed. It was two years ago that Snowden 
first revealed, via the Guardian, that the US National Security Agency was 
collecting the phone records of citizens there and overseas, in bulk and 
indiscriminately. Progress has been won at great cost to Snowden himself. No 
longer as isolated as he was, he alsoentered the world of Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/29/edward-snowden-joins-twitter>, 
and now has 1.71 million followers. “I feel very good about the sense of 
contribution,” he says. He should.

Emma Watson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff509981e1870298c389f36dbe8100cea89cf3633%2F20_8_4813_2888%2F4813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff509981e1870298c389f36dbe8100cea89cf3633%2F20_8_4813_2888%2F4813.jpg>
 Emma Watson appeared at the UN to raise awareness of feminism and gender 
inequality. Photograph: IBL/Rex 
Watson’s views on the subject of gender equality may not be at the cutting 
edge of radical thought. And the UN goodwill ambassador’s other identity as a 
high-fashion wearing, photocall-posing, red-carpet glamour icon troubles some. 
But for the cause of mainstreaming feminism and enlightened attitudes to 
gender, she has achieved far more than anyone would have expected of a former 
child star. “I think it is right that women be involved, on my behalf, in the 
policies and the decisions that will affect my life,” the25-year-old actor told 
the UN 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/29308459/emma-watson-feminism-too-often-linked-with-man-hating>
 last year. “It is time that we all perceive gender on a spectrum, not as two 
opposing sets of ideals.”

Aziz Ansari

When Rupert Murdoch called via Twitter for the 1.6 billion Muslims in the 
world tomake themselves accountable for the “growing jihadist cancer” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rupert-murdoch-muslims-must-be-held-responsible-for-france-terror-attacks>
, someone had to take him down. Step forward Aziz Ansari, the Indian-American 
comedian known for his role in the much feted US seriesParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/02/parks-and-recreation-sarah-dempster>
 and his own massively popular Netflix series Master of None. “Rups, can we get 
a step-by-step guide? How can my 60-year-old parents in [North Carolina] help 
destroy terrorist groups? Plz advise,” was his opening gambit. Under 
unrelenting pressure, Murdoch apologised. We know Ansari can conjure laughs. He 
cyber heckles to good effect too.

Lassana Bathily
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a65e3406ecc3cdbb1533970b0635c841b5eaac9%2F265_4_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20alternative%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20honours%3A%20we%20salute%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fguardian-new-year-honours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a65e3406ecc3cdbb1533970b0635c841b5eaac9%2F265_4_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
 Lassana Bathily helped Jewish shoppers hide in a cold storage room during a 
terrorist attack on a supermarket in Paris. Photograph: 
Revelli-Beaumont/Sipa/Rex 
During a bloody standoff between police and a jihadi gunman at a kosher 
supermarket in Paris in January,Lassana Bathily, a 24-year-old Muslim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/paris-supermarket-kosher-hero-attack>
 shop assistant, risked his life to hide terrified customers – including one 
with a baby – in a basement cold store. Bathily, originally from Mali, led the 
customers into the cold room afterAmedy Coulibaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/11/paris-gunman-amedy-coulibaly-allegiance-isis>
 – one of the three heavily armed extremists who killed 17 people in January, 
most of them at the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo – burst into the 
supermarket, shot dead four people and took 15 more hostage. “I would do the 
same again, because I was following my heart,” Bathily said. “Yes, I helped 
Jews get out. We’re brothers. We’re all in the same boat.”

Yvonne Hall 


A government adviser on helping victims of modern-day slavery, Hall was the 
first person togreet “Fran” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/04/cult-leader-aravindan-balakrishnan-daughter-non-person-to-freedom>
, the daughter of Maoist cult leaderAravindan Balakrishnan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/12/cult-leader-sexually-assaulted-and-brainwashed-followers-court-told>
, after his conviction in December on charges of false imprisonment and child 
cruelty. “Fran”, now 30, had been kept in “Comrade Bala’s” collective since 
birth and Hall assisted when she finally plucked up the courage to flee. Hall 
and her husband Gerard Stocks run safe houses in Yorkshire for victims of 
domestic violence, human trafficking and forced marriage. “Fran” is one of many 
in their debt.

Claire Wilcox

Wilcox, the senior curator of fashion at the Victoria and Albert Museum, 
curated the year’s smash hitAlexander McQueen: Savage Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/03/alexander-mcqueen-show-savage-beauty-most-popular-victoria-and-albert-history>
, the V&A’s most popular show ever. In the 16 years since Wilcox first 
introduced live models to the V&A for the innovativeFashion in Motion 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/page/f/fashion-in-motion/> series, she has been 
instrumental in a renaissance for fashion as a compelling subject with which 
museums can reach new and different audiences, and a tireless champion of the 
wealth of creativity and talent in British fashion design.

Benjamin Clementine
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fbenjamin-clementine-live-at-londons-barbican-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413455140853%2FBenjamin-Clementine-live--017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Clementine%20live%20at%20London's%20Barbican%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fbenjamin-clementine-live-at-londons-barbican-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Clementine%20live%20at%20London%27s%20Barbican%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fbenjamin-clementine-live-at-londons-barbican-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413455140853%2FBenjamin-Clementine-live--017.jpg>
Benjamin Clementine live at London’s Barbican - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/video/2014/oct/16/benjamin-clementine-live-at-londons-barbican-video>
It is impossible to say what the future holds for Benjamin Clementine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/09/benjamin-clementine-barefoot-troubadour-singer-songwriter-interview>
, but if things flatline the singer-songwriter-poet will still look back on a 
year of years. The former busker came to wide attention last month after 
beating off competition from such as Gaz Coombes and Florence and the Machine to
land the prestigious Mercury music prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/20/mercury-prize-2015-benjamin-clementine-win>
. Thereafter emerged the back story of how he moved penniless to Paris six 
years ago with a suitcase filled with uncooked spaghetti. He ended up sleeping 
rough before being discovered by two music producers. Marking his greatest 
triumph, Clementine dedicated the award to those killed in the terrorist attack 
on Paris. Then he earmarked a portion of the winner’s cheque for the purchase 
of pianos for his home area of Edmonton, north London. Gifted, thoughtful, 
what’s not to like?

Bryony Kimmings

When performance artist Bryony Kimmings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/09/bryonny-kimmings-and-tim-grayburn-special-romance-fake-it-til-you-make-it>
 discovered that her boyfriend Tim Grayburn was secretly taking 
antidepressants, she did what any devoted partner would do. She read up about 
mental health issues, talked to him about the shame he felt and – going a step 
further – encouraged him to co-create and appear in a stage show about male 
depression.Fake It ’Til You Make It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/08/fake-it-til-you-make-it-edinburgh-festival-review-traverse-bryony-kimmings-tim-grayburn-depression>
 sold out at the Edinburgh festival and in London, by which time Kimmings was 
heavily pregnant. The story is an urgent call to all of us to recognise that 
suicide is the biggest cause of death among men under 50.

Malala Yousafzai

It would be understandable for the winner of a Nobel peace prize to see the 
honour as the culmination of a life’s work, but Malala Yousafzai, still just 
18, is too young for that and seems disinclined to rest on her laurels. The 
teenager, now Midlands-based,is determined to use her recognition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/16/malala-yousafzai-donald-trumps-muslim-views-tragic-and-full-of-hatred>
 to its full extent. Inthe film of her life He Named Me Malala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/04/i-am-malala-review-awed-documentary-captures-extraordinary-subject>
, she is typically outspoken, castigating Barack Obama for flying drones and 
assailing the Nigerian president for his failure to do more for the girls 
abducted by Boko Haram. She waded with grace into the continuing row over the 
anti-Muslim comments of Donald Trump (“tragic and so full of hatred”). And all 
the while she studied, to good effect. Six A*s, four As.

Michael Sheen
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-slams-cuts-nhs-passionate-speech-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425299920311%2Fcrop_KP_109453_640x480.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Actor%20Michael%20Sheen%20slams%20cuts%20to%20NHS%20in%20passionate%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-slams-cuts-nhs-passionate-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Actor%20Michael%20Sheen%20slams%20cuts%20to%20NHS%20in%20passionate%20speech%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fmichael-sheen-slams-cuts-nhs-passionate-speech-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425299920311%2Fcrop_KP_109453_640x480.jpeg>
Actor Michael Sheen slams cuts to NHS in passionate speech - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-slams-cuts-nhs-passionate-speech-video>
When Michael Sheen spoke at a St David’s Day march to celebrate the NHS  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians>
this year, he did so not just with passion, but with substance. Quoting Aneurin 
Bevan, Sheen railed against creeping privatisation within the health service. 
“You must stand up for what you believe,” he said. “But first of all – by God, 
believe in something.” Let’s hear more from Sheen in 2016.

Judith Kerr

Judith Kerr's Creatures: a celebration of her 90th birthday - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2013/jun/14/judith-kerr-celebration-90th-birthday>
To publish two books at the age of 92 is awesome enough, but for one to top 
the British book charts is unprecedented. The author and illustrator of 
classics such as When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit and The Tiger Who Came to Tea 
has now charmed a new generation withMister Cleghorn’s Seal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/oct/21/judith-kerr-mister-cleghorns-seal>
, her first novel in 37 years. Butthe news that Kerr was to resurrect Mog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/21/judith-kerr-this-much-i-know>
, the disaster-prone cat, for a festive adventure in aid of Save the Children, 
was kept secret until the surprise launch ofMog’s Christmas Calamity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/raiding-the-kitty-sainsburys-resurrects-mog-the-cat-for-christmas-advert>
. It sold more than 74,000 copies in its first week.

Oliver Johnson

Johnson was a young, idealistic doctor who wanted to make a difference in 
Africa when heflew to Freetown in January 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/30/ebola-sierra-leone-fight-who-disease-fight>
 to head thepartnership between King’s College London and three big London NHS 
trusts 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/aboutkings/worldwide/impact/International-Activity/Leading-the-Ebola-response-in-Sierra-Leone.aspx>
 with Sierra Leone. He was quickly thrust into the middle of the largest Ebola 
outbreak ever known. Johnson’s small team worked closely with the Sierra 
Leonean government and others to slow the disease and treat those infected, 
including doctor colleagues who died. Last month, Sierra Leone was officially 
declared Ebola free.

Alan Watson Featherstone

For 30 years, Alan Watson Featherstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2002/mar/13/guardiansocietysupplement5> 
has been campaigning to bring back the lost Caledonian forest and the species 
that inhabited it. Through the group he founded,Trees for Life 
<http://treesforlife.org.uk/>, he raised the money to buy a 10,000-acre estate. 
He has persuaded other landowners to adopt his vision, and, using only 
volunteers, the group has now planted well over a million trees. Thewet deserts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2004/aug/23/biodiversity.research> of the 
Highlands are, in these places, springing back to life.

• Have we missed anyone? Let us know who else you’d like to honour in the 
thread below.

• When this article was first published George Monbiot, who nominated Alan 
Watson Featherstone, was under an obligation, to a third party unrelated to the 
Guardian, to assist the charity Trees for Life. This note was added on 1 
September 2016.
 