
Every so often – against all its better instincts – the film industry turns 
out a movie that essentially eulogises the act of film-making, and asserting 
its primacy in the collective imagination and fantasy. Correctly, Hollywood 
tends to police all this stuff rigorously, and only the high-end examples make 
it out to the wider world. Though its origins weren’t actual Hollywood,The 
Artist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/the-artist-film-review> 
was the last film to really pull it off, and was rewarded with a bunch of 
Oscars for its troubles. And it’s looking increasingly likely that La La Land, 
a devout worshipper at the altar of the Hollywood musical, will go down the 
same path.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Suffused with a distinctive orange-purplish glow, La La Land self-consciously 
stakes out its place in the land of the waking dream. (Its title, too, is a 
hat-tip to the addled mindscape of the denizens of the city that houses 
Hollywood.) Writer-director Damien Chazelle deploys familiar elements from a 
wide variety of sources to create a sweet-sour confection. We all know Emma 
Stone and Ryan Gosling have that oh-so-precious spark of screen chemistry, so 
here they are as putative lovers in the city of angels. Everyone loves to see 
well-known actors showing off their singing and dancing chops, so here are 
Stone and Gosling hoofing and crooning up a storm. That bit in Woody Allen’s 
Everyone Says I Love Youwhen Goldie Hawn floats up in the sky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S9UhvpxP1I8> is universally beloved, so 
Chazelle engineers something similar in La La Land. The cumulative effect is 
intoxicating, as we follow the life paths of Gosling’s self-undermining jazz 
musician and Stone’s eager but tentative actor.

Can it be a coincidence that this fever dream of a film, with one foot in a 
fondly imagined past and another in a nervously awaited future, has emerged in 
the era of Trump, and America’s confrontation with its own darkest impulses? 
The hold that La La Land is currently exerting over audiences is at least 
partly to do with its function as a comfort blanket of yearning romanticism, 
inward-looking nostalgia and mournful retreat from the present. Whichever way 
you cut it,La La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is a 
remarkable, distinctive film, and one that may come to define our era.
 