
1) Liverpool: You’ll Never Walk Alone

When the jubilant, vindicated and visibly relieved families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
, friends and supporters of the 96 Liverpool fans recently emerged from the 
inquest that confirmed what they’d all known for 27 years,there was only ever 
one song they were likely to sing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-victims-families-sing-youll-never-walk-alone-after-verdict-video>
. There can scarcely have been a more sincere and heartfelt performance of a 
football chant that is always capable of prompting goosebumps regardless of 
one’s football allegiances.

While Liverpool supporters are widely credited with having been the first body 
of fans to replace random shouting and rattle-waving with the singing of actual 
songs at football matches,there seems to be some debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/sep/17/you-ll-never-walk-alone-liverpool>
 over whether their signature tune, one of the first to be included in their 
repertoire,was first sung by them or Celtic fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/mar/12/theknowledge.sport>. 
Originally written by Rodgers and Hammersteinfor the climax of their musical 
Carousel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GB7PGPg6b94>, the song was covered by 
the Liverpool band Gerry and The Pacemakers in 1963.

In his autobiography, Anfield Iron, Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> legend Tommy Smith wrote that 
Gerry Marsden, the band’s lead singer, had presented Bill Shankly with a tape 
recording of the song. Smith recalls that hearing the song for the first time 
on the team bus during a pre-season tour was akin to a religious experience for 
Shankly, who promptly told his players that the club would have to adopt it. 
“Football writers from the local papers were travelling with our party and, 
thirsty for a story of any kind between games, filed copy back to their editors 
to the effect that we had adopted Gerry Marsden’s forthcoming single as the 
club song,” wrote Smith. “The rest is history.”

In 1964, on the day Liverpool sealed their first title for 17 years with a 5-0 
win over Arsenal, Panorama sent plummy-toned reporter John Morgan to the game 
for a now infamous special they were doing about the city’s contribution to the 
cultural zeitgeist. In the subsequent broadcast,he could be seen standing in 
front of <https://youtu.be/XNboU_PbZMY?t=53s> the heaving, swaying mass of 
humanity that was the Kop, looking slightly scared as he marvelled at their 
version of She Loves You and Anyone Who Had A Heart by local turns the Beatles 
and Cilla Black.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DctbNzW9gc_A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DctbNzW9gc_A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DctbNzW9gc_A&media=>
“I’ve never seen anything like this Liverpool crowd,” he said. “The 28,000 
people on the Kop begin singing together; they seem to know intuitively when to 
begin. Throughout the match they invent new words, usually within the framework 
of old Liverpool songs, to express adoratory, cruel or bawdy comments about the 
players or the police. But even then, they begin singing these new words with 
one immediate huge voice. They seem, mysteriously, to be in touch with one 
another, with ‘wacker’, the spirit of scouse.”

While Morgan’s foray into the field of music criticism is unlikely to have 
given Lester Bangs any sleepless nights, his dispatch from Anfield did expose 
the phenomenon of the Kop to a wider audience and prompted supporters of other 
clubs to begin aping their Scouse counterparts. It seems Liverpool fans can 
rightfully lay claim to having been the creators of terrace chanting. In a 
football culture increasingly soundtracked by raucous rage, they remain 
synonymous with the uplifting and optimistic standard to solidarity You’ll 
Never Walk Alone. Half a century after appearing on Panorama, their poignant 
commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Hillsborough earned them a spot on 
another high-browed BBC current affairs programme 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2YXkd8WqZiA>. BG
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2YXkd8WqZiA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2YXkd8WqZiA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2YXkd8WqZiA&media=>



2) Leeds United: Marching on Together

The Righteous Brothers’ Unchained Melody was originally released as a B-side 
and so was one of the greatest love songs of all time:Marching on Together 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DuMyUh26twQ>, a rousing, almost arousing, 
paean to Leeds United. It first appeared as the flip side to the single (
cunningly entitled Leeds United <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OkcoCka5fuQ>) 
that was released before the club’s ultimately triumphant appearance in the 
1972 FA Cup final and was written jointly by Les Reed (yes, that one 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6rfVcsC3weU>! If by ‘that one’ you mean the 
chap who penned a string of hits in the 1960s and 70s, not the one who managed 
Charlton Athletic and is now Southampton’s director of football) and Barry 
Mason, who belongs in a football music hall of fame, or at the very least a 
rowdy football-themed pub, having also composed Delilah, the murder ballad at 
which Tom Jones had a stabbefore Stoke City fans made it famous 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCpavz0uL88>.

Since its release Marching on Together has become the Leeds anthem, its blend 
of jauntiness and faux militaristic bombast melodically capturing the power of 
a crowd mobilised in the name of fun and communal pride. Lots of rivals fans 
won’t admit it but nearly every club looks forward to a visit byLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> fans and not simply because 
it means a cash bonanza for the hosts: it also generally means an uplifting 
experience for all, especially when Marching on Together gets its inevitable 
airing. Mind you, Peterborough United fans who admire spontaneity preferred one 
of the other songs that the visiting fans came up with on the spot back in 
2008, when Gary McAllister was the Leeds manager and Peterborough local council 
chose match day as the perfect opportunity to stage a campaign to raise 
awareness of the importance of sexual health screening. Leeds fans, always 
happy to help promote a worthy campaign, chanted during the game: “We’ve got 
McAllister, you’ve got chlamydia”. Not as enduringly catchy as Marching on 
Together, however.PD
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oJdvc2MQMU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oJdvc2MQMU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oJdvc2MQMU&media=>
3) Norwich: On the Ball City

What are the wittiest chants you have heard at a football match?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/what-are-the-wittiest-chants-you-have-heard-at-a-football-match>
Norwich fans have a fight for survival on their minds right now and we’re not 
only talking about the team’s attempt to avoid relegation. A campaign is under 
way to restore the club’s anthem,On The Ball City 
<https://youtu.be/rWb_ZIgI7rQ?t=16s>, to its original form lest the uniqueness 
of the track be blurred by rash or slapdash singing. It’s not that the tune has 
been altered or the words tampered with it, the problem, as some fans see it, 
is that the song is now being sung so quickly that the words cannot be 
distinguished. And the words are lovely. This, after all,is regarded as the 
oldest recorded football chant <http://www.canaries.co.uk/club/history/> in the 
world, having been written in the 1890s by one Albert T Smith, as far as anyone 
can tell. Smith went on to become a director Norwich City when it was founded 
in 1902 and the club adopted the song, which had been originally written for a 
local team, possibly Norwich Teachers. As Jon Punt and Andrew Lawn, who set up 
the #slowdownOTBC campaign, wrote in the programme before Norwich’s recent 
defeat by Sunderland: “On The Ball City sounds like no other chant you’re 
likely to hear on the terraces elsewhere … the song features none of the 
tub-thumping one-upmanship which characterises many chants and instead focuses 
fully on the club.” Nowadays the Carrow Road crowd tends to only sing the 
chorus and too often reduce the words to indecipherable hollering. Which is a 
shame because who wouldn’t want to hear a full clear rendition of this song at 
the correct tempo?PD

In the days to call, which we’ve left behind,

Our boyhood’s glorious game,

And our youthful vigour has declined

With its mirth and its lonesome end;

You will think of the time, the happy time,

Its memories fond recall

When in the bloom of your youthful prime

We’ve kept upon the ball

Kick off, throw in, have a little scrimmage,

Keep it low, a splendid rush, bravo, win or die;

On the ball, City, never mind the danger,

Steady on, now’s your chance,

Hurrah! We’ve scored a goal.

Let all tonight then drink with me,

To the football game we love

And wish it may successful be

As other games of old,

And in one grand united toast

Join player, game and song

And fondly pledge your pride and toast

Success to the City club.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrWb_ZIgI7rQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrWb_ZIgI7rQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrWb_ZIgI7rQ&media=>
4) Various: celebrating being on the road to nowhere

As noted by the Norwich fans above, the leitmotif of most chants involves 
one-upmanship. Oft-times opposition supporters shun tit-for-tat song duelling 
because they know they can’t win. So a different retort is needed, a defusing 
one to which the only sensible response is a chuckle: “we lose every week, we 
lose every weee-eek, you’re nothing special, we lose every week” or the always 
diverting: “Let’s pretend we’ve scored a goal … ”. And then there are the fans 
of teams who are so boringly mediocre that even gallows humour seems 
inappropriate – instead, unity in glorious nihilism is strength. Let’s choose 
Barnsley as an example, although the following chant has also been belted out 
by fans of Sheffield United, Bristol Rovers and many others in recent years: 
“We’re not going down, we’re not going up, we’reBarnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> FC, we don’t give a fuck.” PD
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9QKEc-fRrLk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9QKEc-fRrLk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9QKEc-fRrLk&media=>
5) AFC Wimbledon: Where were you when you were us? 


It was the draw everybody wanted and nobody wanted: MK Dons v AFC Wimbledon in 
the second round of the 2012 FA Cup. Founded in 2002 by Wimbledon supporters 
enraged by a proposal to rip their club away from them and relocate it to 
Milton Keynes,AFC Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>
 were enjoying their second season as a Football League club when fate and the 
Football Association tombola conspired to pair them against their estranged 
former selves in an FA Cup tie.

AFC Wimbledon fans find FA Cup tie at MK Dons too hard to stomach | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/14/afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-mk-dons>
Far from viewing it as an excellent opportunity to bloody the nose of a club 
they refer to as Franchise FC,many AFC Wimbledon fans were appalled when news 
of the fixture broke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/14/afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-mk-dons>
. Two members of the Football Association-appointed panel that sanctioned the 
grab and relocation of their former club had infamously warned Wimbledon fans 
that “resurrecting the club from it’s ashes” and renaming it was “not in the 
best interests of football”, but they had gone ahead and done it anyway, 
earning many plaudits as they played their way from the Combined Counties 
League to the Football League in under a decade. Now these were confronted by 
the prospect of having to muddy their spats on a visit to the ground of a club 
most held in contempt and whose existence many of them refuse to acknowledge.

Plenty of tension surrounded a game that was always likely to struggle to 
match the hype surrounding it, but it passed off fairly peacefully. Unable to 
contain themselves, a crowd of AFC Wimbledon did pour on to the pitch when Jack 
Midson cancelled out Stephen Gleeson’s excellent opener for the League One 
side. On a day when AFC Wimbledon fans had clubbed together to pay for a plane 
to fly over Stadium MK trailing a banner reading: “We are Wimbledon”,the 
visiting supporters were left desolated by Jon Otsemobor’s late, late winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/02/mk-dons-afc-wimbledon-match-report>
 but did provide one moment of high comedy. Surveying the home fans who had 
turned up to support the club that had been stolen from them, they struck up a 
decidedly existentialist chant of, “Where were you when you were us?”BG
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsOqwC9DwS0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsOqwC9DwS0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsOqwC9DwS0&media=>
6) Various: Seven Nation Army

In 2001, while sound-checking prior to a White Stripes gig in Melbourne, Jack 
White stumbled across a seven-note guitar riff he liked the sound of and 
enhanced by playing it through an effects pedal to give it a growling bass 
feel. “I thought if I ever got asked to write the next James Bond theme, that 
would be the riff for it,” he would later reveal. When no invitation from Eon 
Productions was forthcoming, White’s simple composition provided the foundation 
for the White Stripes’ 2003 single Seven Nation Army, which became seared on 
the consciousness of a wider sporting public as it was played in sports venues 
all over the world. Depending on your point of view, it eventually reached its 
pinnacle or nadir by becoming theofficial Uefa-approved goal music for Euro 2012
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6jUmLWT9Ad8>. So how exactly did the music 
from a song about one angry young man’s sense of isolation become so ubiquitous 
a tribute to triumph?

Seven Nation Army: the indiest football anthem ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/jun/18/issevennationarmytheindie>
The supporters of Club Brugge <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h8xyew07o1g> 
and Roma seem to have a fair claim to being responsible. In a Milan bar before 
a Champions League game, supporters of the Belgian side heard Seven Nation Army 
and enjoyed the signature riff as much as its composer had two years 
previously. Roaring along in lager-fuelled accompaniment, they brought it along 
with them to San Siro, before exporting it back to Bruges in the wake of their 
surprise 1-0 win. It quickly became a staple standard at the Jan Breydel 
Stadium, where it was soon introduced as the club’s goal music.

The following year, Brugge hosted Roma in the Uefa Cup. Impressed by their 
hosts’ use of Seven Nation Army, Roma fans adopted it themselves. Their club’s 
captain was also smitten. “I had never heard the song before we stepped on the 
field in Brussels,” Francesco Totti later told Dutch newspaper Het Nieuwsblad. 
“It sounded fantastic and the crowd was totally into it. I quickly went out and 
bought one of the band’s albums.” Praise indeed.

Having been embraced by various Serie A terraces, Seven Nation Army became the 
Italian side’s unofficial anthem at World Cup 2006 and at a Rolling Stones gig 
in Milan that July,Alessandro del Piero and Marco Materazzi were invited on 
stage and led an audience singalong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWJBqDODank>. The chant quickly went viral, 
the riff behind it becoming a staple at all kinds of arenas in various 
continents, where it was occasionally adapted to pay homage to particular 
players whose names contained the requisite number of syllables. Then Uefa gave 
it their seal of approval, the football equivalent of that time David Cameron 
announced he likes The Smiths. Thanks Uefa.

And Jack White’s take on this cultural phenomenon? “Nothing is more beautiful 
than when people embrace a melody and allow it to enter the pantheon of folk 
music,” he said. “As a songwriter it is something impossible to plan. 
Especially in modern times.” In short: it’s not ‘The Referee’s A Wanker’ but it 
pays the rent.BG
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrNNTmBc6bKE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrNNTmBc6bKE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrNNTmBc6bKE&media=> 