
Here, in alphabetical order, are the films about which we’re most excited this 
year, but haven’t yet seen. So it doesn’t include the likes ofThe Falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/10/the-falling-review-london-film-festival-carol-morley>
, Carol Morley’s latest, nor the Joshua Oppenheimer’s excellentThe Look of 
Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence>, Roy Andersson’s 
A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Contemplating Existence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence>
 or Noah Baumbach’sWhile We’re Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/while-were-young>, which had festival 
premieres last year and are due to be released this. Nor, even does it include 
those movies which madethis piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/31/-sp-150-arts-essentials-for-2015>
, which covers the big premieres out this spring in the UK (some of which are 
out in 2015 in the US, too). And there’sstill 88 of them. 2015’s shaping up to 
be a great year.

45 Years

Andrew (Weekend) Haigh follows up his low-budget success with this complex 
marital drama, in which decades-old secrets are disinterred as a couple 
(Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtney) celebrate their 45th wedding anniversary. 
Due for unveiling at Berlin, with a summer release in the UK.

American Honey

Andrea Arnold’s first film shot on foreign soil is a US-set story about a 
teenage girl who joins a “travelling magazine sales crew”. Hard-partying, 
law-breaking and young love ensue.

Ant-Man
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Edgar Wright was, apparently, wrong for Marvel’s big-screen adaptation of a 
superhero story about a scientist (Paul Rudd) who can decrease in stature and 
increase in strength. Let’s see if new director Peyton Reed (Yes Man) can make 
something of the down-sizing. Out in the US and UK on 17 July.

Avengers: Age of Ultron

Joss Whedon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon> calls another 
assembly, with cool kids Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr), Thor (Chris Hemsworth), 
Black Widow (Scarlett Johansson) and Captain America (Chris Evans) jostling 
with sinister robot Ultron (voiced by James Spader) for the best seat. Out in 
the UK on 24 April and US on 1 May.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421157574891%2Fcrop_KP-67536_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Joss%20Whedan's%20Marvel%20sequel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Avengers%3A%20Age%20of%20Ultron%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Joss%20Whedan%27s%20Marvel%20sequel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Favengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-joss-whedan-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421157574891%2Fcrop_KP-67536_640.jpeg>
Black Mass

Long-gestating gangster yarn, with Johnny Depp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnnydepp> as Whitey Bulger, the 
Irish-American crime boss who was given a free hand for decades by the FBI due 
to his value as an informer. Kevin Bacon plays the Fed who eventually takes him 
down. US release is set for September, with Toronto festival slot possible 
beforehand.


Brooklyn

Directed by John Crowley – and adapted by Nick Hornby from the book by Colm 
Tóibín – this is set in 1950s Ireland and featuresJim Broadbent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent>. But it’s not as grim as 
that might suggest: it’s billed as a romcom, and stars Saoirse Ronan, Domhnall 
Gleeson and Emory Cohen (Bradley Cooper and Rose Byrne’s son from The Place 
Beyond the Pines). Premieres at Sundance.

Carol

Todd (I’m Not There) Haynes adapts Patricia Highsmith’s lesbian romance, The 
Price of Salt, withRooney Mara <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rooney-mara> 
as the young shopgirl who falls in love with Cate Blanchett’s sophisticated 
older woman in 1950s New York. Autumn release planned, so Venice/Toronto 
premiere likely.

Child 44

Tom Rob Smith’s thriller about a Soviet secret policeman gets a screen 
makeover withTom Hardy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy> as Leo 
Demidov, charged with investigating a string of gruesome child murders. US 
release is set for April.


Crimson Peak

Guillermo del Toro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro> creaks 
open the door to another haunted house horror. Tom Hiddleston is the husband of 
questionable morality who is starting to scare his innocent young bride (Mia 
Wasikowska). Out everywhere in October.

The D Train
 Hot ticket ... James Marsden and Jack Black in D-Train Photograph: Sundance 
Institute 
Jack Black <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jack-black> and James Marsden 
are high school acquiantances who become buddies at their 20th reunion. Kathryn 
Hahn and Jeffrey Tambor also feature. Premieres at Sundance.

The Death and Life of John F Donovan


Prolific French-Canadian wonderkid Xavier Dolan (he’s on to his sixth feature, 
at only 25 years old) excavates the life of an actor who is accused of 
paedophilia, in his English language debut. Kit Harington andJessica Chastain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jessica-chastain> star. It’s shooting early 
2015, so there’s a chance it may be finished for the end of the year.


Demolition 

Dark comedy. Jean-Marc Vallée (Dallas Buyers Club, Wild) puts Jake Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> through hell as an 
investment banker who goes to bits after the tragic death of his wife. Naomi 
Watts and Chris Cooper are there to help pick up the pieces.

Digging for Fire

Joe Swanberg, Jake Johnson and Anna Kendrick reunite a couple of years after 
Drinking Buddies for another relationship tale. Also features post-mumblecore 
cohorts Rosemarie DeWitt, Brie Larson, Sam Rockwell – and Orlando Bloom. 
Premieres at Sundance.

Don Verdean

A faith comedy from Napoleon Dynamite’s Jared and Jerusha Hess in which Sam 
Rockwell plays a biblical archeologist. Also features Jemaine Clement, Amy 
Ryan, Danny McBride, Leslie Bibb and Will Forte. Premieres at Sundance.

The Early Years 

Michael Caine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine> plays an aging 
conductor asked to perform for the queen in Paolo Sorrentino’s follow-up to the 
Oscar-winning The Great Beauty. Rachel Weisz will play Caine’s daughter, who’s 
holidaying with him in Switzerland when he gets the call from Her Maj. The 21 
May Italian release date suggests a Cannes premiere. A word of caution: this is 
only Sorrentino’s second English-language movie, and the first was This Must Be 
The Place.

Elle

Isabelle Huppert <https://www.theguardian.com/film/isabelle-huppert> and Paul 
Verhohen make a weirdly heavenly match, and the plot of this thriller - about 
the CEO of a computer gaming company with a sex kitten mother, serial killer 
con father, plus assorted lovers and a stalker who she handles with “icy 
equanimity” sounds lots of fun.

The End of the Tour
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420734092233%2Fa84c45c2-ca54-42e7-bf4f-81d43fcb88df-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2088%20movies%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2088%20movies%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420734092233%2Fa84c45c2-ca54-42e7-bf4f-81d43fcb88df-1020x612.jpeg>
 Jesse Eisenberg and Jason Segel in The End of the Tour 
Jason Segel is David Foster Wallace and Jesse Eisenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg> the Rolling Stone journalist 
following him on a five-day book tour in this eagerly-anticipated drama about 
the late novelist. Premieres at Sundance.

Equals

Drake Doremus won Sundance’s audience and jury prizes with Like Crazy, but 
that film didn’t have the same legs as, say, Whiplash, and sexual tension muso 
drama Breathe In also failed to score long-term. This one co-starsNicholas Hoult
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nicholas-hoult> and Kirsten Stewart and 
is set in a future in which emotions have been eradicated. Guy Pearce and Jacki 
Weaver are the chief support, which bodes well.

Everest

Baltasar Kormákur’s film is based on a disastrous 1996 expedition on which 
several climbers died. Up the mountain they go: Jake Gyllenhaal,Keira Knightley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley> and Sam Worthington. Icy 
misadventure awaits them at the top. Out early October.

Every Thing Will Be Fine


German auteur Wim Wenders returns to drama after a string of documentaries, 
castingJames Franco <https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-franco> as a man 
spending years agonising over the death of a small girl he accidentally hits 
with his car. No word on release, but Wenders will no doubt command a 
high-profile festival slot.

Far From the Madding Crowd
 Cannes contender? Thomas Vinterberg’s Far From the Madding Crowd Photograph: 
Fox Searchlight 
It’s been a while in the edit suite, but Thomas Vinterberg’s Thomas Hardy is 
finally barelling down the tracks (presumably towards the Croisette), with a 
cast including Juno Temple, Michael Sheen,Carey Mulligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan> and Matthias Schoenaerts.

Ferryman

Wong Kar Wai and Tony Leung reunite once more for The Ferryman, in which he 
plays a married painter who has an affair with a younger woman. Jiajia Zhang 
has adapted her own short story from the collection I Belonged to You, much of 
which was first released on a Chinese social media site.

Flashmob

A Cannes debut hopefully awaits Michael Haneke’s first film since Amour, about 
a group of people who meet online and explore “the fragile relationship between 
media and reality”. Yet last summer the film’s shoot was delayed because Haneke 
was waiting on the availability of one specific (though unnamed) female actor. 
The film is partially set in the US, so that may not necessarily be Juliette 
Binoche.

The Good Dinosaur


Pixar’s latest is a what-if dinosaur toon (ie, what if they never became 
extinct?) Expect the usual smarts and all-ages shenanigans, with Peter Sohn 
(storyboard artist on Up) making his feature debut as director. A late November 
release is already nailed down.

Going Clear


Alex Gibney’s new documentary, backed by HBO, is billed as an exposé of 
Scientology <https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology> “and the things 
they do in the name of religion”. Not much else is being detailed, for obvious 
reasons, and all will be revealed at Sundance, when it has its world premiere.

Grimsby

Louis Leterrier looks an increasingly weird choice to direct this football 
hooligan comedy co-written by starSacha Baron Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen> also featuring Isla Fisher, 
Rebel Wilson, Penelope Cruz, Ian McShane, and – together at last - Johnny Vegas 
and Gabourey Sidibe. Those with long-ish memories will recall its shoot managed 
to anger both residents of Grimsby itself and Telford, the town which stands in 
for it.

Hail Caesar!


The Coen brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/coenbrothers> return to 
Barton Fink territory with a Hollywood set tale of an actor who disappears 
during the filming of a 1950s sword and sandals epic (Hail Caesar!). It’s set 
for a February 2016 theatrical release, but there’s every chance it’ll show up 
in Venice or Toronto in autumn – or, even, Cannes.

The Hateful Eight
 Posse in effect ... Amber Tamblyn, Kurt Russell and Samuel L Jackson in a 
live read of Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight. Photograph: Amanda 
Edwards/WireImage 

Quentin Tarantino rounds up a new posse to once again revamp the old west. A 
group of bounty hunters get caught up in vicious goings-on after seeking 
shelter from a storm. QT got into a hissy when plot details were leaked earlier 
this year. The dust has since settled. Let the carnage begin. Out in the US 13 
November, maybe with a Cannes debut.

High-Rise

Excitement mounts for Ben Wheatley’s adaptation of the JG Ballard novel set 
inside an out-of-control tower block.Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> stars; Jeremy Irons, Sienna 
Miller and Elisabeth Moss are also rattling round the building. Fingers crossed 
for a Cannes debut.

A Hologram for the King

Dave Eggers’s 2012 novel gets a quick cinema transfer, courtesy of director 
Tom “Cloud Atlas” Tykwer.Tom Hanks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomhanks> 
is down to play the salesman looking to sell IT to the Saudis, as well as 
taking on producer duties. A possible awards contender, so autumn festival and 
late-year release planned.


The Hunger Games: Mockingjay - Part 2

 Katniss (Jennifer Lawrence) is out of the Arena, into the fire. The people’s 
champion must lead her raggedy army against the might of the Capital and its 
villainous despot President Snow (Donald Sutherland). Can she fight when the 
cameras aren’t rolling? Out in the UK and US on 20 November.

I Am Michael 

James Franco plays a gay activist who rejects his homosexuality and becomes a 
Christian pastor. Zachary Quinto is his boyfriend. Premieres at Sundance.

I Smile Back

Sarah Silverman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sarah-silverman> is a 
horny mum off her meds in the suburbs. But this isn’t a comedy: it’s an 
adaptation of Amy Koppleman’s Sylvia Plath-ish second novel. Premieres at 
Sundance.

Inside Out
 Personaility crisis ... Disney Pixar’s Inside Out Photograph: Disney Pixar 
Impeccable voice credentials add to the anticipation about Pete Docter’s first 
feature since Up - and, fingers crossed, a return to Pixar’s glory days. It’s 
set inside a little girl’s head and told from the perspective of her emotions. 
Mindy Kaling is Disgust,Amy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> Joy, Bill Hader Fear, Kyle 
MacLachlan Dad.

The Intern


Romcom specialist Nancy Meyers directs a generation-clash comedy, with Robert 
de Niro as a crotchety widower who bags a position as an intern at Anne 
Hathaway’s online fashion firm. Sparks, you assume, will fly. US release is set 
for September.

In the Heart of the Sea

Like Rush, but on the seas, and with a sperm whale as the other car: Ron 
Howard’s latest is based on the real-life 1820 tale of a fishing crew stranded 
in a briny wasteland for 90 days. Our crew includes Chris Hemsworth, Cillian 
Murphy, Ben Whishaw andBrendan Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>. Out globally in mid March.


Jane Got a Gun

A widowed homesteader (Natalie Portman) seeks the help on an ex (Joel 
Edgerton) after her husband is murdered by a ruthless wrong’un (Ewan McGregor). 
Director Lynne Ramsay left the production after rowing with the producers. 
Let’s see if new director Gavin O’Connor (Warriors) made the on-screen sparks 
fly. Autumn release suggests Venice/Toronto premiere.

Joy

Jennifer Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> and 
David O Russell pair up for the third time for a biopic of Joy Mangano, the 
real-life inventor of the Miracle Mop. No doubt another prime role for 
Lawrence, and already an Oscar contender, with a Christmas day release set in 
the US.


Knight of Cups
 Coming ashore ... Christian Bale and Nathalie Portman in a still from the 
Terence Malick film Knight of Cups Photograph: PR 

Christian Bale stars in the increasingly prolific Terrence Malick’s 
closely-guarded latest, apparently a fable about Hollywood lifestyles a la The 
Great Beauty. World premiere set for Berlin in February.

Last Days of the Devil

Ewan McGregor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ewanmcgregor> is Jesus and the 
devil in an imagined chapter from the Bible’s desert-set bit. Premieres at 
Sundance.

Life

James Dean’s friendship with Life photographer Dennis Stock is the subject of 
the new film from Anton Corbijn (himself a photographer). Dane DeHaan plays 
Dean, andRobert Pattinson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robert-pattinson> 
is the snapper; a September release is planned for the UK.

The Lobster

Greek oddity Yorgos Lanthimos (Dogtooth, Alps) directs his first 
English-language film, a romantic drama where lonely people must find a mate 
within 45 days, or get turned into animals. Colin Farrell, Rachel Weisz, Ben 
Whishaw andOlivia Colman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman> are in the pot.

Louder than Bombs

Jesse Eisenberg plays the son of war photographer Isabelle Huppert in a New 
York-set family drama directed by Joachim Trier, making his English language 
debut.

Love

Arch-controversialist Gaspar Noé is back with his first feature since 2009’s 
Enter the Void. Described as “a sexual melodrama about a boy and a girl and 
another girl”, there will be plenty for everyone to get stuck into, as it were. 
Likely to show up at Cannes.


Love in Kohn Kaen

More spiritual noodling from 2010 Palme d’Or winner Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul>. A soldier 
contracts sleeping sickness and falls into a hallucination of mystery, wonder 
and romance. Unlikely to be short.

Macbeth

Michael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> and 
Marion Cotillard play Lord and Lady M in Shakespeare’s gothic, gore-soaked 
tragedy, with Justin Kurzel, director of Australian serial-killer drama 
Snowtown, behind the camera. The Weinstein Company have taken US rights, so 
expect an awards run and an end-of-year release.

Mad Max: Fury Road
 Tetchy … Tom Hardy as Max Rockatansky in Mad Max: Fury Road. Photograph: 
Jasin Boland/AP 
Tom Hardy hits the Australian outback in a reboot of the post-apocalyptic 
thriller franchise that starred - gulp - Mel Gibson. Hardy’s Max must escort a 
mysterious woman (Charlize Theron) across the desert. He could get tetchy. 
Released 14 and 15 May worldwide.

The Martian

Ridley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> heads for the red 
planet as the dust settles on Exodus: Matt Damon plays an astronaut stranded on 
Mars, in what is billed as realistic depiction of survival in space. Already 
pegged for a November release in US and UK.


Midnight Special

Jeff Nichols (Take Shelter, Mud) sets Michael Shannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-shannon> running in a sci-fi chase 
thriller. Shannon’s protecting his gifted son, Alton (Jaeden Lieberher) as he’s 
chased by a religious sect AND a relentless government toady (Adam Driver).

Mission Impossible 5

Ghost Protocol’s surprise global success put lots of gas in the tank for a 
fifth bite at theTom Cruise <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> spy 
series. The plot is still under wraps, but Jack Reacher director Chris 
McQuarrie steps behind the camera, with London the main shooting base. It 
snagged Christmas Day for its US release, and Boxing Day for the UK.


Mistress America

While We’re Young has only just premiered (at Toronto last year) and already 
Noah Baumbach <https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah-baumbach> has another 
movie out. This looks to further regress Greta Gerwig from the post-grad of 
Greenberg and Frances Ha; here she plays a lonely New York freshman. Premieres 
at Sundance.

Mountains May Depart

Chinese director Jia Zhangke had his highest-profile success with the Cannes 
award-winner A Touch of Sin; his new one is a fable about a man revisiting his 
former lover. A slot at Cannes has no doubt already been reserved.

Mr Holmes

Ian McKellen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ian-mckellen> is old 
Sherlock in Bill Condon’s non-kosher yet very interesting imagining of the 
sleuth in his final years. We detect Laura Linney, Roger Allam and Frances de 
la Tour in the supporting cast.

Nina
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420544468218%2Fa6456cfb-5128-45c2-bfe6-e43e7d33dccb-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2088%20movies%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2088%20movies%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2F2015-key-movies-films-year-ahead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420544468218%2Fa6456cfb-5128-45c2-bfe6-e43e7d33dccb-1020x612.jpeg>
 Chasing Nina ... Zoe Saldana Photograph: Steve Granitz/WireImage 
Nina Simone biopic. Zoe Saldana plays the singer and civil rights activist, 
feeling good about the music and angry about injustice. Simone’s daughter has 
already called the project into question. She claims that Clifton Henderson, 
the love interest played by Selma’s David Oyelowo, was actually gay.

Our Brand Is Crisis

George Clooney produces and Sandra Bullock stars in an unlikely sounding 
political comedy about an American campaign director hired by a Bolivian 
presidential candidate, drawing on a documentary of the same title.David Gordon 
Green <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-gordon-green> directs. Aiming at 
a year-end release.

Queen of the Desert

Nicole Kidman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolekidman> is Gertrude 
Bell, Robert Pattinson TE Lawrence, Damien Lewis and James Franco bring up the 
rear; Werner Herzog’s first biopic since Grizzly Man looks set for a 
Telluride/Toronto debut.

Racing Extinction

The new documentary from Louie (The Cove) Psihoyos examines animal extinction 
by means of grisly and traumatic undercover footage. Premieres at Sundance.

The Revenant

Alejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> is following 
Birdman with a western starring Leonardo DiCaprio, playing a fur trapper left 
for dead who somehow survives to wreak vengeance. Seeming like a real 
powerhouse already, this is due for release on Christmas Day in the US.

Ricki and the Flash

Meryl Streep <https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> plays a rocker 
attempting to reunite the family she abandoned years earlier in search of fame, 
with Streep’s real-life daughter Mamie Gummer playing one of her children. 
Diablo Cody scripts, and the US release is set for August.


The Sea of Trees

Matthew McConaughey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/matthew-mcconaughey> 
walks to despair and back again in Gus Van Sant’s story of two suicidal men 
saved by a random encounter in Japan’s “suicide forest”. Ken Watanabe is his 
companion on the path to redemption.

Silence

Scorsese returns to religious themes with this adaptation of Shusaku Endo’s 
1966 novel, following the travails of Jesuit missionaries in 17th century 
Japan. Liam Neeson andAndrew Garfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> lead the way. An awards run 
is in the air, so end of year release likely.

Sisters

The awards-show dream team of Tina Fey and Amy Poehler get back to the serious 
business of big screen comedy, with a laffer about two estranged sisters 
throwing a final shindig at the family home which is about to be sold off. 
Formerly called The Nest, this is looking at a Christmas release in the US.

Spectre
 Bond’s buds ... Naomie Harris, Léa Seydoux, Daniel Craig, Monica Bellucci and 
Christoph Waltz at a Spectre photocall Photograph: Jonathan Hordle/Rex Features 

Bond for the reload. Daniel Craig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig> + cars + “girls” (Lea Seydoux, 
Monica Bellucci) + gadgets + baddie (Christoph Waltz) + director (Sam Mendes) = 
the British film industry’s profits for the next 12 months. A licence to fill 
the plexes. Released late October in the UK and a week or two later round the 
rest of the world.

Slow West

Michael Fassbender is mysterious traveller who joins Kodi Smit-McPhee trekking 
across America in end of 19th century. Along the way they encounter Ben 
Mendelsohn. It’s also been shot in New Zealand and Scotland. Premieres at 
Sundance.

Spy

A housecat CIA analyst (Melissa McCarthy) heads into the wild after her 
partner goes missing on a mission. Bridesmaids’s Paul Feig directs.Jason Statham
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jason-statham>, Jude Law and Rose Byrne are 
enlisted as support. Out early June.

St James Place

Steven Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> and Tom 
Hanks play spy games in a Coen brothers scripted cold war thriller that has a 
lawyer tasked with negotiating the release of a pilot shot down over the Soviet 
Union. Out early October.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
 Watch the teaser for Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
Having captained the Star Trek franchise JJ Abrams jumps ship for a galaxy 
far, far away. The cast includes original stars Mark Hamill,Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> and Harrison Ford alongside 
new additions John Boyega, Oscar Isaac and Domhnall Gleeson. Will have to be a 
forceful reminder of the power of George Lucas’s original vision to match the 
galactic hype. Out throughout the universe in mid December.

Stockholm Pennsylvania

Saoirse Ronan returns home to parents Cynthia Nixon and Jason Isaacs after 17 
years living with her abductor. Premieres at Sundance.

Straight Outta Compton

F Gary Gray (Law Abiding Citizen) directs a NWA biopic set on the mean streets 
of south LA, chronicling the influential rap act’s rise to fame.Ice Cube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/icecube> and Dr Dre are on board as 
producers (the former’s son stars as his dad). US release set for August.

Strangerland

Nicole Kidman and Joseph Fiennes’s kids disappear in the Australian desert. 
Local copHugo Weaving <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugo-weaving> isn’t 
much help. Premieres at Sundance.

Suffragette

Meryl Streep plays Emmeline Pankhurst in this timely dramatisation of the 
struggle for women’s voting rights in the UK, backed up by a starry cast 
including Carey Mulligan,Helena Bonham Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> and Ben Whishaw. Prime 
awards fodder, with autumn festival run and September release in the UK planned.

Sunset Song

Long-gestating adaptation of the classic Scottish novel, directed by Terence 
Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/film/terence-davies>, with Agyness Deyn as 
Chris Guthrie, the young woman nearly crushed by her tough upbringing in 
northeast Scotland before the first world war. A prime festival slot looks 
likely.


Tale of Tales

Gomorrah director Mateo Garrone returns with an English-language fantasy 
horror adapted from a collection of fairy tales by 17th century Italian author 
Giambattista Basile and featuring some of the earliest incarnations of the 
likes of Rapunzel and Cinderella. Given Reality, his last film, a radical 
change of pace seems like a good plan.

Ted 2
 Bearing all ... Ted Photograph: Allstar/UNIVERSAL PICTURES/Sportsphoto 
Ltd./Allstar 
Ted (Seth Macfarlane) and Johnny (Mark Wahlberg) head back to the sofa in 
Macfarlane’s sequel to the crudely hysterical stoner comedy. Ted’s an 
anthropomorphic bear who must find a place in a world that doesn’t understand 
him. Like Paddington, with wanking. Out early July.

Ten Thousand Saints

The latest from American Splendor’s Robert Pulcini and Shari Springer Berman, 
this again has Ethan Hawke as the father to a teenage son; in this case Asa 
Butterfield, growing up alongside Hailee Steinfeld in 1980s New York.Emily 
Mortimer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-mortimer> is mum. Premieres at 
Sundance.

Terminator: Genysis

Back back back. Arnie materialises, nude and smouldering - in the middle of a 
reboot that will have John Connor (Jason Clarke) hopping timelines in an 
attempt to avert Judgement Day. Out worldwide at the start of July.

(T)error

A documentary following a covert counterterrorism sting as it unfolds and 
offering “an unprecedented glimpse of the government’s counterterrorism 
tactics, and the murky justifications behind them”. Premieres at Sundance.

That’s What I’m Talking About

Back to Bad News Bears territory for Richard (Boyhood) Linklater, with an 
80s-set comedy about college baseball that’s posited as a sequel to his 
fondly-recalled high-school yarn Dazed and Confused. Glee’s Blake Jenner stars.


Tomorrowland

A world of endless possibility awaits Frank (George Clooney) and Casey (Britt 
Robertson) who touch a magical badge and are whisked to a land free of rules, 
restrictions and nasty journalists who say horrible things about The Monuments 
Men. Released in the US and UK on 22 May.

Trainwreck

Judd Apatow follows navel-gazing snoozer This is 40 with a comedy about a 
woman (stand-up and sketch star Amy Schumer in her feature debut) recovering 
from a breakdown. Little else is known other than it also starsTilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>, Bill Hader and Brie Larson. 
Released late August.

Triple Nine

Lawless’s John Hillcoat directs a tough corrupt-cop thriller, with a bunch of 
renegade policemen aiming to murder a rookie (999 being code for “officer 
down”) to distract from a heist they are planning. US release is set for 
September.

True Story

British theatre director Rupert Goold’s debut movie is a headline grabber. 
DisgracedNew York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> 
reporter Michael Finkel (Jonah Hill) meets Christian Longo (James Franco) – an 
accused killer who’s also taken on Finkel’s identity. Felicity Jones co-stars. 
Premieres at Sundance.

Untitled Cameron Crowe


Crowe’s long dormant rom-com was sparked back into life with the casting of 
Emma Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> as an Air Force 
officer who falls for the military contractor (Bradley Cooper) she’s been 
tasked with escorting around a Honolulu military base. The working titles - 
“Deep Tiki”, “Volcano Romance” - are worth the price of admission alone.

Untitled Woody Allen

Magic in the Moonlight was a considerable comedown following Blue Jasmine, and 
Emma Stone – who’s also in this new one – wasn’t immune from blame. But Woody’s 
50th directorial credit also featuresJoaquin Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/joaquin-phoenix> as a philosophy professor 
having an existential crisis. And Parker Posey.


The Walk
 High-wire act ... Charlotte Le Bon and Joseph Gordon Levitt in The Walk 
Photograph: PR 

Philippe Petit decided to spend August 7 1974 walking unharnessed on a wire 
strung up between the twin towers. Robert Zemickis’s film, which starsJoseph 
Gordon-Levitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joseph-gordon-levitt> as the 
French daredevil, dramatises the story. As if it needed it. Released early 
October.

A Walk in the Woods 

This comedy road movie unfolds Wild style (ie: on foot). Robert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford> plays Bill Bryson in an 
adaptation of his memoir about hiking the Appalachian Trail with his best pal 
(Nick Nolte). Emma Thompson and Mary Steenburgen are the love interests. 
Premieres at Sundance.

The Visit

Another chance for M Night Shyamalan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mnightshyamalan> after the thudding failure 
of the Will and Jaden Smith puff-piece After Earth. Kathryn Hahn plays a single 
mum who sends her two kids to their grandparents only to have them returned ... 
changed in this low-budget thriller. Spoiler: they were dead THE WHOLE TIME. 
Out 11 September.

Z for Zachariah

Chris Pine once starred in This Means War, in which he battled Tom Hardy for 
the hand of Reese Witherspoon. This is pretty much the same, except that his 
co-stars areChiwetel Ejiofor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chiwetel-ejiofor> and Margot Robbie and 
they’re they last people left on post-apocalyptic Earth. Premieres at Sundance.
 