
The rather patronising English joke used to be that whenever the Irish 
question was about to be solved, the Irish would change the question. And now, 
when the Irish question seemed indeed to have been solved, at least for a 
generation, it is the English who have changed the question.

Recklessly, casually, with barely a thought, English nationalists have planted 
a bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-fear-brexit-conflict-good-friday-agreement-eu>
 under the settlement that brought peace toNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and close cordiality to 
relations between Britain and Ireland. To do this seriously and soberly would 
have been bad. To do it so carelessly, with nothing more than a pat on the head 
and a reassurance that everything will be all right, is frankly insulting.

Northern Ireland’s greatest fear from a Brexit is the return to conflict | 
Kathryn Gaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-fear-brexit-conflict-good-friday-agreement-eu>
Just five years ago, when Queen Elizabeth became the first reigning British 
monarch tovisit southern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/18/queen-ireland-apology-britains-actions>
 in a century, there was a massive sense of relief. It was not just relief that 
the visit went off peacefully and well. It was much deeper than that: it was 
relief from centuries of both British condescension and Irish Anglophobia. A 
long story – often nasty, sometimes merely tediously wasteful – was over. There 
was a dignified, decent, democratic settlement that allowed the natural warmth 
of a neighbourly relationship to come fully to the surface.

I never imagined then that I would ever feel bitter about England again. But I 
do feel bitter now, because England has done a very bad day’s work forIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. It is dragging Irish history along 
in its triumphal wake, like tin cans tied to a wedding car.

All but a few diehards had learned to live with the partition of the island of 
Ireland. Why? Because the border betweenNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Republic had become so 
soft as to be barely noticeable. If you crossed it, you had to change 
currencies, and if you were driving you had to remember that the speed limits 
were changing from kilometres per hour to miles. But these are just banal 
details. They do not impinge on the simple, ordinary experience of people 
sharing an island without having to be deeply conscious of division.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnorthern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe92e99811aa7f39b1962d97c1862617f336d7d32%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20English%20have%20placed%20a%20bomb%20under%20the%20Irish%20peace%20process%20%7C%20Fintan%20O%E2%80%99Toole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnorthern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20English%20have%20placed%20a%20bomb%20under%20the%20Irish%20peace%20process%20%7C%20Fintan%20O%E2%80%99Toole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnorthern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe92e99811aa7f39b1962d97c1862617f336d7d32%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A ‘money exchanged’ sign at the border between Newry in Northern Ireland and 
Dundalk in the Republic of Ireland. Photograph: Paul Faith/AFP/Getty Images 
What will now happen is not that the old border will come back. It’s much 
worse than that. The old border marked the line between neighbouring polities 
that had a common travel area and an intimate, if often fraught, relationship. 
It was a customs barrier. The new border will be the most westerly land 
frontier of a vast entity of more than 400 million people, and it will be an 
immigration (as well as a customs) barrier.

It will, if the Brexiters’ demands to take back control of immigration to the 
UK are meant seriously, have to be heavily policed to keep EU migrants who have 
lawfully entered the Republic from moving into the UK. And it will run between 
Newry and Dundalk, between Letterkenny and Derry. The Dublin-Belfast train will 
have to stop for passport controls. (Given that the border could not be secured 
with army watchtowers during the Troubles, it is not at all clear how this 
policing operation will work.)

Meanwhile, the cornerstone of the peace settlement, the Belfast agreement of 
1998 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/apr/11/northernireland.northernireland>
, is being undermined. One of the key provisions of the agreement is that 
anyone born in Northern Ireland has the right to be a citizen of the UK or 
Ireland or both. What does that mean in the new dispensation? Can someone be 
both an EU citizen and not an EU citizen? Likewise, the agreement underpins 
human rights through the “complete incorporation into Northern Ireland law of 
the European Convention on Human Rights”. Though not strictly required by 
Brexit, the leave leadership is committed to removing the convention from UK 
law – in other words to ripping out a core part of the peace settlement.

Brexit threat causes alarm among Northern Irish border communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/brexit-threat-northern-ireland-border-communities>
But the Belfast agreement isn’t some minor memorandum. It is an international 
treaty, registered with the United Nations. It is also arguably the greatest 
modern achievement of British diplomacy, partly crafted by public servants and 
made possible by British politicians, especially John Major and Tony Blair. It 
is one of the most successful models for conflict resolution around the world. 
Messing around with it is an insult, not just to Ireland, but to Britain’s 
international standing.

This fecklessness in turn is deeply unsettling for unionists in Northern 
Ireland. It suggests that the new English nationalism is completely indifferent 
to their fate. During the referendum debates, a few pro-remain voices, such as 
the TUC general secretary,Frances O’Grady 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/international-issues/europe/eu-referendum/brexit-would-be-%E2%80%9Chuge-gamble%E2%80%9D-northern-ireland%E2%80%99s-future>
 (herself of Irish descent), tried to make a gentle plea to voters to think 
about Ireland and the Belfast agreement. They went unheard. English 
nationalists, it turns out, wouldn’t give the froth off a pint of real ale for 
the Irish peace process.

And if they don’t care enough even to talk in any serious way about the 
consequences of Brexit for Northern Ireland, what grounds are there to believe 
that when they come to power in their own little England they will care about 
(or pay for) a province they clearly regard as a closer, wetter Gibraltar, an 
irrelevant appendage of the motherland?

Northern Ireland desperately needed a generation of relative political 
boredom, in which ordinary issues such as taxation and the health service – 
rather than the unanswerable questions of national identity – could become the 
stuff of partisan debate. Brexit has made that impossible. Sinn Féin’simmediate 
call for a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/24/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-martin-mcguinness-border-poll-wont-happen>
 on a united Ireland may be reckless and opportunistic, but no more so than the 
Democratic Unionist party’s failure to understand that Brexit is the best gift 
to Irish nationalists. It is the beginning of the breakup of the union and the 
rise of an independent England for which Northern Ireland will be no more than 
a distant nuisance.

When they take power, the Brexiters have a moral duty to think deeply and 
speak honestly about these effects of their victory. But the signs are that 
they will pay as much attention to them as gung-ho warriors typically give to 
any other kind of collateral damage.
 