
Remember those few days in June when Labour MPs couldn’t stop resigning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/hilary-benn-revolt-jeremy-corbyn>
? That long Sunday after the country had voted for Brexit, when every time you 
turned on the radio another shadow cabinet minister had stood down, calling for 
Jeremy Corbyn to do likewise? Or the next day, when the only thing you wanted 
to quit was the non-stop news, just for a few hours, but there was Angela Eagle 
in tears at her own resignation? Before June, the mass resignation of 44 
frontbench politicians in as many hours, all citing a loss of confidence in 
their leader, would have led to said leader being turfed out of office. But we 
didn’t count on Corbyn.

Since Corbyn’s second victory in September, Labour has suffered a trio of 
miserable byelection results,including a lost deposit in Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/01/richmond-park-byelection-results-counting-starts-live>
. The party lags behind the Tories by 17 points, according to a recent YouGov 
poll. Yet the Labour rebels have been very quiet about Corbyn’s leadership. 
This is all part of a concerted plan to do nothing, allowing Corbyn to fail on 
his own. Just don’t call it a plot …

The coup’s ringleader was Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/30/hilary-benn-labour-speech-syria-dont-seek-conflict>
, sacked after midnight before he could be the first to resign. After a 
powerful intervention as shadow foreign secretary in a debate on Syria months 
earlier, Benn had won many admirers and his call for Corbyn to step down was 
seen by MPs as characteristically brave. While the coup ultimately failed, 
Benn’s elevated profile led to him winning the chairmanship of the Brexit 
select committee, scrutinising Theresa May’s woeful policy of “Brexit means 
Brexit”. And he can make jokes: “When Moses came down from the mountain bearing 
the tablets, they did not contain the Ten Hints,” Benn told the Commons this 
month.

As the coup unfolded, Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/29/angela-eagle-theres-no-point-being-sore-labour-leadership>
 was tipped as a leadership contender. Yet the day after launching her bid,a 
brick was thrown through a window in the building that houses her constituency 
office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/21/angela-eagle-stops-walk-in-surgeries-amid-security-concerns>
 and she received death threats. Within a week she had withdrawn, leaving Owen 
Smith alone to run against Corbyn. Along with Benn, she has been at the 
forefront of Labour’s shadow cabinet in exile on the backbenches, challenging 
the government on Brexit.

Our negotiations to leave the EU are fertile ground for the former rebels: 
Heidi Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/heidi-alexander-corbyn-resign-shadow-cabinet>
, the first shadow cabinet minister to resign during the coup, made an 
impassioned defence of immigration during the Commons debate on Brexit earlier 
this month, saying: “I am a 41-year-old woman without children. Babies grow up 
to become taxpayers. Who will be contributing to my pension and my care? The 
answer is migrants and their children.”

The post-Brexit landscape presents a different challenge to Gloria De Piero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/23/labour-mp-gloria-de-piero-interview>
, whose Ashfield constituency is among those northern seats targeted by new 
Ukip leader Paul Nuttall. Ukip came a close third in Ashfield in 2015 and at 
the referendum, 70% voted leave, meaning De Piero will have to fight off 
Nuttall’s party at the next election as he attempts to rebrand Ukip as an 
alternative to Labour in the north.

As deputy leader, Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/tom-watson-interview-jeremy-corbyn-labour-rifts-hug-shout>
 was unable to fully join the coup, but his failure to back Corbyn was supposed 
to help ease the leader out of office. What was extraordinary was that the 
architect of the 2006 plot to unseat Tony Blair used his 2016 Labour conference 
speech to urge the party to stop “trashing the record” of the former prime 
minister. Watson was later given the extra job of shadow culture secretary by 
Corbyn. Now he is taking on an old foe even more immovable than the Labour 
leader: Rupert Murdoch, and his attempted takeover of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/20/ed-miliband-slams-sky-bid-murdoch-has-learned-nothing>
.

Although he had no frontbench job to quit, Wes Streeting was one of Corbyn’s 
most prominent critics during and after the coup, including condemning the 
peerage for Shami Chakrabarti just weeks after she had conducted an inquiry 
clearingLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> of antisemitism. 
Streeting’s stance has led to Momentum activists – so far unsuccessfully – 
targeting his local party in Ilford North.

Luciana Berger quit as shadow minister for mental health during the coup, but 
from the backbenches she has continued to fight for parity of esteem in the 
NHS, as well as better social care provision. Earlier this month, she gave 
evidence at the Old Bailey about the antisemitic abuse she received from 
rightwing troll Joshua Bonehill-Paine, who was sentenced to two years in jail.

If the point of the coup was to get rid of a leader who was pushing Labour too 
far to the left, then no one toldOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/aug/03/owen-smith-owen-jones-labour-party-leadership-video-interview>
: his leadership pitch was to argue for the same leftwing policies, only 
without the cultish, idiosyncratic appeal of Corbyn. Funnily enough, this 
didn’t work. Since his defeat, Smith has pressed Labour’s case for the“just 
about managing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>
, as well as getting into abizarre row on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/OwenSmith_MP/status/800667899866255360> with BuzzFeed over 
fake news.

 * This article was corrected on 21 December 2016. An earlier version stated a 
brick was thrown through the window of Angela Eagle’s constituency office; it 
was in fact thrown through a window of the building that houses her office.
 