
Poor American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>. The 
super-perms, the jumpsuits, the plunging necklines. Christian Bale's carefully 
cultivated combover. If nothing else, director David O Russell surely expected 
his film to usurp all other Oscar contenders when it came to style. And yet 
that accolade may well go to The Wolf of Wall Street.

 The story of stock-broking fraudster Jordan Belfort is a saga of greed for 
greed's sake, of Quaaludes, orgies and ankle tags. What's unnerving is not so 
much the lack of interest in moral redemption in the film (which is based on a 
true story), but the pervasive popularity of the banker look. It's more than a 
revival of 1980s pastels and enormous spectacles, the ironic style single 
handedly keeping American Apparel afloat. It's the Gucci slip-ons with no 
socks, the two-tone collars and the hair gel. And, as Esquire says, the suits,
"really, really, good suits." 
<http://www.esquire.co.uk/style/article/5573/the-wolf-of-wall-street-suit-guide/>

Men's fashion will inevitably always pivot around four or five key items, and 
this limitation explains why boldly colourful socks or flashy suits are 
popular, whether in spite of or because of their association with banker style. 
"We've certainly seen men adopting a greater sense of panache with their 
working wardrobes – using bolder pieces to add personality to their suits," 
Damien Paul, menswear buying manager forMatches Fashion 
<http://matchesfashion.com> told the Guardian. "Michael Bastian's striped 
contrast-collar shirts are proving popular as a contemporary take on the 'power 
dressing' look."
 Matt Smith as Patrick Bateman in American Psycho at the Almeida Theatre. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
When American Psycho: the Musical  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review>
opened at the end of 2013,Mr Porter ran a Q&A with Matt Smith 
<http://www.mrporter.com/journal/journal_issue142/2#1>, playing Patrick Bateman 
on stage. Accompanying the photoshoot of him and the rest of the cast was the 
tongue-in-cheek observation that "despite his fastidious attention to detail, 
unarguable hygiene, and superior style knowledge, there is obviously a downside 
to Mr Bateman: his tendency to viciously kill people, his unabashed misogyny, 
and his unerring devotion to the entire Whitney Houston oeuvre".
 Scott Disick in Las Vegas. Photograph: Broadimage/REX 
A few months earlier, Kanye West orchestrated another American Psycho revival 
to publicise his album Yeezus, this time featuring Scott Disick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3tzFyicKikc>, best known as the boyfriend of 
one of the Kardashian sisters, oras Vice brillaintly described him 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/scott-disick-american-psycho>:

"a seer … who gleefully adopts symbols of opulence and privilege: suspenders, 
canes, cigars, sweaters tied around the neck, contrast-collar shirts. It is not 
hedonism; Scott is a walking affectation. When he slicks his hair back, he 
refers to it as 'the Michael Douglas in Wall Street.'"
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3tzFyicKikc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3tzFyicKikc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3tzFyicKikc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Fashion often looks to invigorate things that are unappealing, even unethical –
fur, for example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/aug/01/fur-back-fashion-designers-wear>
. In The Wolf of Wall Street it has found an entire cultural movement that 
makes most people balk (even if,if some are to be believed 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/how-to-dress-the-part-on-wall-street-2013-8>, 
bankers themselves are keen to distance themselves from the look). And yet,
whether the braces are red or beige 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/news-features/TMG10223640/Gordon-Gekko-red-braces-out-of-City-fashion.html>
, Wall Street style, like its birthplace, refuses to die.
 