
There was barely a flicker of resistance or a whisper of a protest when the FA 
announced that there willno more replays at the quarter-final stage 
<http://www.thefa.com/news/2016/May/26/quarter-final-sudden-death-replays> of 
the FA Cup from this season. As time had also been called on replays at both 
the semi-final stage and the final many years ago, this latest move was viewed 
as almost inevitable. But a look back at some of the glorious and memorable FA 
Cup replays suggests that more fuss should have been made about the loss of 
this quintessential element of knockout football.

Whittling down the congested fixture list seems to have taken precedence over 
any sense of tradition or history and the removal of all replays from the whole 
competition does not feel too far away. There is something distinctive being 
swept away as there have been some truly wonderful matches that possessed a 
certain quality that is now being eroded. We still retain replays for the 
earlier rounds but, just to prove how much we are going to miss them for their 
heightened sense of drama and significance, it is an opportune moment to look 
back at the last of their kind.

What turned out to be the last quarter-final replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/13/west-ham-v-manchester-united-fa-cup-quarter-final-replay-live>
 was appropriately enough the last FA Cup tie to be played at Upton Park. 
Having been denied victory at Old Trafford in the original game by a late 
Anthony Martial equaliser, West Ham were expecting to sign off in style from 
the Boleyn Ground. Louis van Gaal’s faltering side showed resilience and a 
touch of class in ruining the Hammers’ farewell FA Cup party, which took place 
a full month after the first game. Once again teenager Marcus Rashford showed 
how his maturity is well-suited to the big stage by curling in a sumptuous 
opener – an impudent and delightful piece of finishing from a player who meets 
every new challenge with commendable aplomb.

Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
seemed to have wrapped up the match when Marouane Fellaini bundled home the 
second, but West Ham fought back with a James Tomkins goal to set up a frantic 
finale as David De Gea resisted everything thrown at him in the United goal 
with a string of fine saves. Ultimately, this hard-earned victory gave Van Gaal 
the chance to deliver a trophy from his tempestuous and generally underwhelming 
two-year reign so at least the irascible Dutchman will look back at this replay 
with a certain fondness as will a young man who is steadily building an 
impressive reputation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxMPhPmlPE0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxMPhPmlPE0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxMPhPmlPE0&media=>
 West Ham 1-2 Manchester United. 
Manchester United were also involved in the last semi-final replay back in 
1999 when Van Gaal’s erstwhile assistant was responsible for one of the most 
iconic moments in FA Cup history. Ryan Giggs not only scored a memorable goal 
but also indulged himself in such a wild celebration that it has almost 
overshadowed the goal and the game itself. This was the year of the treble and 
the FA Cup would prove to be the middle element of that extraordinary trio. 
Appropriately enough their opponents were their closest domestic challengers,
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>.

The previous season had been Arsène Wenger’s first full season in charge and 
had ended pretty well when they emulated United by securing their second 
double. Going into this semi-final both sides were on long undefeated runs and 
were battling it out at the top of the league, so this was very much the clash 
of the titans. However, the original semi-final was an anti-climax: a dull, 
goalless affair that proffered very little prospect of the intense, 
intoxicating excitement that lay ahead in the replay three days later at Villa 
Park. David Beckham’s opening goal was a characteristically spectacular strike 
from 25 yards that flew past David Seaman’s outstretched right hand as it 
arrowed into the far corner.

While Denis Bergkamp’s equaliser was from a similar distance it was not as 
clean a strike, taking a deflection en route. Then, when Roy Keane was sent off 
for a second yellow card in 75th minute, the pendulum seemed to have swung to 
the Gunners. The penalty awarded to Arsenal in added time gave Bergkamp the 
chance to wrap it up but his kick was thwarted by Peter Schmeichel, whose 
excellent save was then embellished by his swaggering celebration.

The momentum had shifted again and, despite the one-man advantage, Arsenal did 
not put Schmeichel under any concerted pressure during the first period of 
extra time. The prospect of penalties was looming until that moment of genius 
from Giggs. The goal has been replayed countless times since but is worth 
watching again and again to marvel at the slalom past the Arsenal defence. 
Giggs bamboozled Martin Keown, Lee Dixon and Tony Adams along the way, which 
was just the prelude to as emphatic a finish as Seaman is ever likely to have 
witnessed from close range. It flew over his head into the roof of the net. In 
fact, emphatic does not really cover it.

This was one of those rare goals, which leaves the audience slightly stunned 
and in need of a moment’s reflection to fully absorb then comprehend what has 
just happened. We were all shaken out of our collective reveries by the sight 
of Giggs removing his shirt and whirling it above his head like a demented 
banshee as he sprinted back to the halfway line, leaving his team-mates in his 
wake – much like he had done with his opponents a few seconds before. The image 
of the bare-chested hirsute Welshman has been firmly imprinted in our minds 
ever since. It was a fitting epitaph and as the last ever goal to be scored in 
a semi-final replay could hardly be bettered for quality, significance or 
impact. Not bad for a second-half substitute.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm_CCoi44kM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm_CCoi44kM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm_CCoi44kM&media=>
The last FA Cup final replay in 1993 also involved Arsenal. It did not quite 
match the heady heights of that evening at Villa Park but it was notable for 
being the only time that the same clubs contested both domestic cup finals.
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
had already lost the League Cup final in a game that was remembered mostly for 
Steve Morrow’s misfortune at having his arm broken when Tony Adams dropped him 
over his shoulder during the post-match celebrations. When the FA Cup final 
ended in a 1-1 draw, a third meeting at Wembley in the space of a month 
beckoned.

Having scored in the original game, Ian Wright continued his run of scoring in 
FA Cups, adding a fourth to his personal tally (he scored two for Palace in 
1990) before Chris Waddle equalised and the game went to extra time. It was 
going to be a late night as the kick-off had been put back by 30 minutes 
already because of traffic problems and it was close to 11pm when Andy Linighan 
popped up in the 119th minute to nod in the winner, broken nose and all. It may 
well have been one of the latest ends to a match at Wembley but in terms of 
action on the pitch it was mere chicken feed to the marathon Arsenal and 
Wednesday endured during the third round in 1979.

How the 1990 FA Cup changed Crystal Palace, Manchester United and Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/may/20/crystal-palace-wembley-fa-cup-final-1990-manchester-united-liverpool>
After a couple of 1-1 draws at Hillsborough and Highbury respectively, 
Leicester’s Filbert Street hosted the next instalments in this long-running 
saga. Following a 2-2 draw, the third replay ended in a pulsating 3-3 draw as 
unusually the games were increasing in intensity and drama as the series 
continued. And so they played a fourth replay, which Arsenal won 2-0. 
Amazingly, all five games were squeezed into less than three weeks in the days 
before fixture congestion was an issue.

After playing five times against the same opposition in January, Arsenal faced 
a handful of teams in the rest of the competition, eventually beating 
Manchester United 3-2 in the final. With another replay against Southampton in 
the quarter-final, Arsenal racked up a total of 1 matches – a record for 
post-warFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> winners.

Eventually the FA had had enough of this nonsense. Within a decade the 
multiple replay was consigned to the dustbin marked “quaint but rather 
old-fashioned practices” and the penalty shoot-out was introduced. Although 
they had been used in various competitions both in the UK and internationally 
for a while, the honour of being the first FA Cup match decided by a penalty 
shoot-out fell to Rotherham, who overcame Scunthorpe on 29 November 1991 after 
their first-round replay ended in a 3-3 draw after extra time. Those lucky 
4,829 souls present at Millmoor on that Tuesday night then witnessed the 
historic drama of Rotherham’s 7-6 victory.

How a German football club inspired fans in Yorkshire to unite and help 
refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/oct/27/yorkshire-st-pauli-germany-football-club-refugees-leeds>
It is worth remembering that without replays we would never have had the 
chance to revel inRonnie Radford’s muddy moment of glory against Newcastle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-ze42I6NEo> at Edgar Street in 1972, Ricky 
Villa’s mesmerising, mazy run <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BT7IvpxhA3Q> 
that illuminated the 1981 Cup final or thefrantic 4-4 draw between Everton and 
Liverpool <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jt616hEtp38> that prompted Kenny 
Dalglish’s departure in 1991. If the chances for similar momentous games being 
swept away is not bad enough, there were discussions at a recent Uefa managers 
get-together about the prospect ofskipping extra time and moving straight to 
penalties 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/football/2016/09/01/uefa-ready-to-scrap-extra-time-in-champions-league-and-europa-le/>
 if games is still undecided after 90 minutes.

There is a danger that with so much emphasis on filleting the fixture list and 
paring it back to the bare minimum that there will be less room for the 
extraneous games such as replays – these unusual oddities that have provided us 
with so much entertainment and have carved out their own niche in our 
collective memories.

• This article is from the author of The Agony and the Ecstasy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Agony-Ecstasy-Comprehensive-Play-Offs/dp/191090600X>
• Follow Richard Foster <https://twitter.com/rcfoster> on Twitter
 