
"Serie A is a tournament in which various teams compete," noted the Gazzetta 
dello Sport's Alessandra Bocci asMilan stood on the verge of their 18th Scudetto
 earlier this month. "And then at the end Zlatan Ibrahimovic wins."

Milan's first Scudetto since 2004 will not be remembered as Ibra's triumph – 
although he was the club's joint-top scorer and leading provider of assists, 
this was a success for the collective, rather than of any individual – yet his 
arrival did fundamentally alter theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> scenery. Adriano 
Galliani, the Milan vice-president, had joked when he travelled to Barcelona in 
late August that he had as much chance of returning with "a young Brigitte 
Bardot" as with the Swede. With Ibra's subsequent capture came the belief that 
anything was possible.

Such belief was required to overhaul an Internazionale team whose hegemony 
over Serie A was unbroken since the Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. So were a 
number of further astute signings, from Robinho to Kevin-Prince Boateng and 
Mark van Bommel. The cynic, of course, may argue that having Rafael Benítez in 
charge of theNerazzurri did not hurt, either.

The Spaniard's reign already feels a distant memory, a foggy haze of injuries 
and rows over transfer policy, but while Benítez does not deserve to carry the 
can for all that went wrong in the early part of the season, it is clear with 
hindsight that he was the wrong appointment. Inter's champions needed a 
motivator but instead got a scholar. His previous with José Mourinho didn't 
help either, as club officials must have known deep down as they removed 
pictures of the Portuguese from the club's training base so as not to offend 
their new appointment.

Inter would be rejuvenated under Leonardo – closing from 13 points behind Milan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> at Christmas to within two by 
the end of March, before a resounding derby defeat – but this was a season in 
which others also had the chance to dream.Napoli's eventual third-place finish 
was unlikely enough for a side whose wage bill is less than one-fifth the size 
of Inter's, but for a few, heady, weeks this spring the stunning form of 
Edinson Cavani, Ezequiel Lavezzi and company looked as though it might be 
enough to carry them to their third-everScudetto.

Indeed, the two Milan clubs aside, this was a season for the underdog. Udinese
, playing some of the most entertaining football anywhere in Europe and stole 
fourth, and last season's relegation candidatesLazio finished behind them only 
on goal difference. By contrast aJuventus side that had invested heavily once 
again in the summer finished outside the European places in seventh.Roma, 
Inter's most consistent competition since Calciopoli, found new owners at last, 
but could only limp to sixth.

At the bottom it was a similar tale, newly promoted Cesena clawing their way 
away to 15th despite their first-team squad that combined earned less than 
Ibrahimovic alone. MeanwhileSampdoria, who had begun the season in the 
Champions League preliminaries, wound up going down.

The drama in Italy was not restricted to the pitch, either, with the early 
part of the season dominated by threats of strike action – eventually avoided 
with a new collective bargaining agreement – and the latter part by a TV rights 
negotiation that at one point sawJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> threaten (admittedly not very 
convincingly) to withdraw from Serie A altogether. That argument is still 
ongoing, but should, in the end, lead to a deal that will increase the overall 
TV revenue brought in by the league.

There will, of course, be less money flowing into Serie A from the Champions 
League in future, as Italy's dwindling coefficient cost the league its fourth 
spot in Europe's top club competition for 2012-13. The road back from here will 
not be swift, but after the upheaval of Calciopoli the most important thing for 
the long-term health of Serie A has been the re-emergence of a domestic league 
that is both entertaining and competitive.

Indeed, in at least one sense Italian fans got more bang for their buck than 
followers of any of Europe's other top leagues, since the average game had the 
ball in play for 65.15 minutes – significantly higher than the corresponding 
figures for the Premier League (62.39), La Liga (61.48), or the Bundesliga 
(61.22).

With more than half of clubs expected to change manager this summer and a 
particularly busy transfer window anticipated, there is much uncertainty over 
the year to come. But before we put the year just gone to bed, we have some 
rather more important business to attend to: the second annual Bandini awards.

Player of the season

You could make a very strong case for Cavani, who has not only scored 26 
league goals but also shown a rather handy knack for doing so at decisive 
moments late in matches, or indeed Antonio Di Natale, the league's top scorer 
for the second season running. But the award goes to Di Natale'sUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> team-mate Alexis Sánchez, whose 
pace, vision, movement and footwork have played a huge part in the 
transformation of theFriuliani from relegation battlers last season to 
fourth-placed finishers this time around.

Goal of the season

This was a relatively dry year for Serie A – with a modest average of 2.51 
goals per game – yet at times it felt like every one that did go in was a 
viable contender for this award. With that in mind I have expanded the 
shortlist from three to five – and have still left out someabsolute belters 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c5S3bpLDuKw>.

5 OK, so he wasn't quite as far from goal as Michele Marcolini was when he 
struckfor Chievo against Bologna 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DMkpstd_ZA4&feature=related>, but Andrea Pirlo 
did manage to puthis effort against Parma  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUFrcvB34_I>in the very top corner from the 
best part of 40 yards.

4 If you had to summarise Napoli's season in one goal, it would have to be 
Cavani's strike against Lecce. One second thePartenopei are on the back foot, 
defending on the edge of their area with the score 0-0 deep in injury time. The 
next they are celebratinga winner of breathtaking quality 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tNKOM3CCIYY&playnext=1&list=PL0E37192BCC3211C8>.

3 You will rarely see a more technically accomplished volley than that scored 
by Juan Manuel Vargasfor Fiorentina against Udinese 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_ztX2lwagA>.

2 Catania's Ciro Capuano didn't feel the need to take a touch as the ball 
dropped out of the heavens andon to his left-boot 30 yards from goal 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7AMGWeYlKq0>...

1 You're on the floor, surrounded by three defenders, on the corner of the 
six-yard box. The keeper, less than a yard away, has perfect position between 
you and the goal. Chance lost?Not if you're Ezequiel Lavezzi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=usZY5n3oHGA>.

Miss of the season

Cesena's Emmanuele Giaccherini's incredible effort against Juventus 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ikvx_yBZZkI>.

Best assist

It didn't even lead to a goal, but Josip Ilicic's backheel flick  
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/skill-the-week-josip-ilicic-palermo-chievo-8116150/>
for Javier Pastore against Chievo was devilishly brilliant.

Game of the season

It might not have proved the springboard to a Scudetto that some hoped it 
would be, but Napoli's 4-3 win over Lazio really did have it all: seven goals, 
a hat-trick, a penalty, an own goal, red cards for both a player and a manager, 
and even a "ghost goal" – the referee Luca Banti waving away Lazio's appeals 
after Cristian Brocchi's shot had clearly crossed the line at 2-2. Several of 
the goals that did stand were really rather good, too (take your pick between 
Stefano Mauri'sweave and outside-of-the-boot finish 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HqR4zfwGwMk> or Cavani's expertly judged lob 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qp-mMy_cEVI&feature=related#t=5m05s>. Oh, and 
in case that wasn't enough drama, the two team's owners had been involved in a 
punch-up during a league meeting just days earlier.

Honourable mention: Still recovering from their woeful start to the season, 
Udinese's improving form had not garnered too much national attention by the 
time they travelled to play Milan in early January. That changed rather rapidly 
aftera 4-4 draw in which they led three times 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhNnWD2nA1A&feature=related>.

Team of the season (4-3-1-2)

Emiliano Viviano (Bologna); Christian Maggio (Napoli), Federico Balzaretti 
(Palermo), Thiago Silva (Milan), Alessandro Nesta (Milan); Stefano Mauri 
(Lazio), Gokhan Inler (Udinese), Cristian Ledesma (Lazio); Alexis Sánchez 
(Udinese), Edinson Cavani (Napoli); Antonio Di Natale (Udinese).Subs: Christian 
Abbiati (Milan), Mauricio Isla (Udinese), Domenico Criscito (Genoa), Javier 
Pastore (Palermo), Ezequiel Lavezzi (Napoli), Zlatan Ibrahimovic (Milan), Marco 
Di Vaio (Bologna)

Manager of the season 

A close call indeed, this one, but the award goes to Massimiliano Allegri – 
for ending Inter's run ofScudetti, for silencing those who questioned the 
appointment of a manager with no experience at such a big club, and most of all 
for doing things his way. WhenSilvio Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/silvio-berlusconi> joked that his manager 
looked too scruffy in post-match interviews Allegri quickly smartened up, but 
when the owner tried to meddle in team selection, calling for the team to use 
all their attacking talents at once, he resisted – and was fully vindicated.

Very honourable mention: The work done by Francesco Guidolin at Udinese has 
been truly remarkable, and especially his handling of Sánchez. The Chilean was 
deeply sceptical at first about the manager's plan to convert him from winger 
into atrequartista, yet that move would prove possibly the greatest single 
managerial decision 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/footyblog/2011/01/18/bandini-sanchez-thrives-in-central-role/>
of the campaign.

Best touchline advice

"Boss, every time I try to slow down the muscle hurts," lamented Marco 
Borriello to his then manager Claudio Ranieri during Roma's 5-3 defeat away to 
Inter in February. Ranieri's response? "Don't slow down then."

Best gift

So angry was the Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> 
president, Maurizio Zamparini, with his team's 7-0 thrashing by Udinese in 
February, he gave each of his players a handkerchief with the scoreline 
embroidered into it. "When the blow their nose, they'll remember," he parped.

The Celeb! magazine award for most charming love affair

If you thought Alexandre Pato and Barbara Berlusconi  
<http://video.corriere.it/barbara-berlusconi-pato-prime-foto/049d0394-3f69-11e0-ad3f-823f69a8e285>
had this one sewn up, think again. "In the days before games there is no sex, 
we play PlayStation," announced Mauro Zárate's other half, Natalie Weber, 
recently. "Then afterwards we make up for it." If that was more information 
than you really needed, you might want to look away now: "I use skin creams, 
perfumes and conditioners," declared Zárate as he explained his preparations 
for their forthcoming nuptials. "I will shave every hair off my body. I will 
look fantastic."

The Graham Poll award for most innovative use of cards

Gianluca Rocchi is our deserving winner, after he gave Cesena's Giuseppe 
Colucci his second booking during a game against Lecce in September ... for a 
foul committed by his team-mate Yuto Nagatomo (who, unlike Colucci, was not 
already on a yellow).

The Graham Taylor  
<http://www.lancashiretelegraph.co.uk/sport/8744592.Taylor_boycotts_poultry_over_Allardyce_sacking/?ref=rss>
award for the most rubbish protest

Scandalised by the decision to start scheduling TV games at 12.30pm on a 
Sunday, Parma's supporters decided to take direct action. At their lunchtime 
kick-off againstRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> in October, 
just as the game was set to begin, thousands of fans all vented their 
displeasure by ... simultaneously beginning to eat the sandwiches they had 
brought with them to the game. Suddenly marching from a pub you were drinking 
in anyway to a match you were going to anyway sounded positively revolutionary.

Worst investigative journalism

Yuto Nagatomo dealt remarkably well with the spectacular number of silly and 
patronising questions thrown his way after he joinedCesena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena> from Tokyo in the summer, but 
even he was a little taken aback when one hack opened an interview by asking: 
"Do you like football?"

Most curious promise

"If we qualify for the Champions League I'll put on a miniskirt and dye my 
hair blonde," announced Lavezzi this month. For the record, we're still waiting.

Best newspaper illustration

Full marks to Gazzetta dello Sport for their magnificent visualisation of 
Rafael Benítez clutching a panettone 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_Dmh_aiZkPXo/TOZhS2S298I/AAAAAAAAAe8/CCa-8qEJ_Hk/s1600/gazz.jpg>
 – as they speculated as to whether he would keep his job long enough to enjoy 
the Milanese Christmas cake.

Worst signing

Adriano, who collected his third Bidone D'Oro (Golden Dustbin), awarded by Rai 
radio to the worst Serie A player of the year. To put that into context, nobody 
else has won the award more than once.

Best career move

After winning his first Scudetto, Antonio Cassano will be glad that he decided 
to stick with football after all. "Three years ago I told myself it was time to 
start taking this job seriously," he noted back in September. "Or else go home 
and sell salami"

Best Michael Jackson impersonation

Milos Krasic lived up to his nickname with some fancy in-game footwork during 
the early part of the season, while Kevin-Prince Boateng wowed with his really 
rather good Moonwalk at San Siro after Milan sealed theScudetto. But even 
better wasTiziano Crudeli's interpretation 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XdSWNhoBslc> back in the TV studio.

The Marco Materazzi award for best team mascot

Massimo Oddo played only seven games for Milan this season, yet managed to 
steal the show this year with hisalcohol-impaired lap of the running track 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GptEib6rI1Q&feature=youtu.be> at Rome's Stadio 
Olimpico.

Worst supporters

Yes, yes, so these are supposed to be Serie A awards, and Triestina were 
technically playing in Serie B this season, but this year's awards would be 
incomplete without at least some mention of the "virtual" fans at the Stadio 
Nereo Rocco. With a 32,000-seat home stadium and average attendances of fewer 
than 8,000 per game, the team's president, Stefano Fantinel, took the infamous 
decision to close down the Colaussi stand and cover the seats with a series of 
giant posters depicting supporters. Among the defences put forward for the 
decision was the suggestion that Fantinel's players liked the new arrangement. 
"The people who were in the Colaussi stand used to be the most critical ones," 
he observed. "Now they don't make a noise."

Honourable mention: "We did well to win in a hostile environment," noted the 
Juventus manager, Gigi Del Neri, after his team's 2-1 win over Brescia in 
March. Juventus had been playing at home.

The Ariston award for going on and on and on

Javier Zanetti played the 1,000th game of his career this month, when he 
turned out for Inter during their Coppa Italia semi-final second leg against 
Roma. There haven't been many bad ones along the way.

Honourable mentions: Francesco Totti deserves to be recognised here, too, 
after moving up to fifth in Serie A's all-time top scoring charts, as does 
Alessandro Del Piero after breaking Giampiero Boniperti's record to become 
Juventus's all-time leading scorer in Serie A. Indeed, Boniperti also deserves 
credit for his admirable honesty in receiving the news. "I am not a liar and I 
will tell you straight away that it annoyed me a little bit," he wrote in an 
open letter to Del Piero.

Chuck Norris One-Man army award

Marco Di Vaio kept Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> 
afloat pretty much single-handed this year, whether it was scoring the goals 
that led to most of their wins, organising meetings with local businessmen to 
discuss a possible takeover as the team lurched towards bankruptcy, or keeping 
the players united through sheer force of personality at a time when they 
hadn't been paid for six months. No wonder the fans nominated him as the team's 
unofficial president.

Worst explanation for a defeat

"The team didn't play badly," grumbled Silvio Berlusconi after watching Milan 
lose to newly promoted Cesena at the start of the campaign. "The problem is 
that Milan often run into left-leaning referees." His whine might at least have 
sounded a touch more convincing if the referee in question, Carmine Russo, 
hadn't awarded his team a penalty – which Zlatan Ibrahimovic missed.

Best banner

Juventus's supporters stuck the boot into their own team with extraordinary 
relish at times this season, but at least some of them had a sense of humour 
about it. "No Ruby tonight Silvio," read one of thestriscioni on show at their 
game against Milan in February. "This is just an Old Lady."

Honourable mention: Genoa's own protest piece against the lunchtime kick-offs 
raised a chuckle. "You wanted to take away our passion," the banner declared. 
"Instead you took away our minestrone."

The Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau Odd Couple Memorial award

"[Cassano and I] got on immediately," noted Rodney Strasser after Fantantonio 
joined Milan in January "Even if I don't understand what he's saying when he 
speaks. And I speak three languages." Cassano's retort? "The next time you say 
you don't understand when I speak I am going to give you a punch," he joked, 
before being photographed inthis rather unusual pose <http://twitpic.com/3nlmz4>
.

And finally … Most Shameless

Oh come on, who else was it going to be? "I hope the Scudetto arrives," 
pondered Berlusconi earlier this month. "It could push some of our fans who 
weren't sure about voting [for me] to go out and do it."
 