
The Scotsman called the 1880 match between Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> and England at Hampden Park 
“one of the fastest and best contested which has yet taken place between the 
two countries”, which given that it was just the ninth was perhaps faint 
praise. Still, the bar had been set pretty high: it was the third successive 
meeting to feature nine goals, and the second in a row to end 5-4 to the home 
team, the Scots avenging their defeat at Kennington Oval the previous year 
though the win, the paper declared, was “mainly due to some very hard luck 
which befell the visitors”. “The spectators were afforded a rare treat from 
first to last,” it enthused, “and the many bits of brilliant play were 
impartially applauded, while hissing greeted other bits.”

Perhaps one of the latter occasions came towards the end of the match, and is 
only vaguely alluded to by the Scotsman, which mentions that “[John] Campbell 
got badly hurt during the last 15 minutes, and the Scotch played one short”. In 
the Athletic News a few years later Tityrus – pseudonym of the groundbreaking 
football writer James Catton – detailed the moment when Campbell and England’s 
Sam Weller Widdowson “rose to head the ball and Sam’s cranium struck his 
opponent’s face”. The Scot’s jaw was shattered, though Catton insistsays 
Widdowson “did not know what he had accidentally done”.

The forgotten story of … Willem ‘the Cannon’ Hesselink, Bayern's 
player-manager-president | John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/12/the-forgotten-story-of-willem-the-cannon-hesselink-bayern-munich-player-manager-president>
That may well be true, though if Widdowson, who spent his entire playing 
career atNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest>, had less innocent 
intent it would not be entirely out of character. The Nottingham Evening Post 
once described him as the side’s “big, weighty captain” who was “tough, no 
doubt about that, and his rugged, wholehearted play was a by-word”. Blackburn’s 
Jimmy Brown, who made the first of his five England appearances the following 
year, was interviewed by the Lancashire Evening Post in 1902 and described 
Widdowson as “a very terror”. “He was playing for the Forest against the Rovers 
in a Cup tie about 1880,” Brown recalled. “The Reds beat us 6-0 and Widdowson 
didn’t bother to go round our backs; he went through them.” The interviewer 
described this as “a statement which those of us who knew the jovial old sport 
can readily believe”.

But Widdowson offered so much more than just violence. For a start, he was an 
unusually fine athlete. As Brown continued: “I am tempted to introduce another 
point about Widdowson. In one afternoon he once won 100 yards, 200 yards, 
quarter-mile and steeplechase events at some of the best sports in the 
country.” He ran 100 yards on grass in 10.25sec, just a quarter of a second off 
the world record at the time, and his best time over a mile was four minutes 50 
seconds, about 20 seconds off world record pace for amateurs, but the 
steeplechase was his best event. When his death was announced in the Guardian 
he was considered notable most of all for his running, his obituary describing 
him as “a former well-known amateur on the running track, who secured many 
international honours as a hurdler and took part with distinction in football 
and cricket”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fforgotten-story-sam-weller-widdowson-nottingham-forest-england-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc968e5132a0b83fd9e9366cb3d2fc47a8e01fe63%2F0_163_1540_924%2F1540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Sam%20Weller%20Widdowson%3A%20footballer%2C%20cricketer%2C%20innovator&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fforgotten-story-sam-weller-widdowson-nottingham-forest-england-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Sam%20Weller%20Widdowson%3A%20footballer%2C%20cricketer%2C%20innovator&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fforgotten-story-sam-weller-widdowson-nottingham-forest-england-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc968e5132a0b83fd9e9366cb3d2fc47a8e01fe63%2F0_163_1540_924%2F1540.jpg>
 Sam Weller Widdowson’s unusual name arose from his father’s favourite Dickens 
character Sam Weller from the Pickwick Papers. Photograph: Culture Club/Getty 
Images 
The Guardian’s brief report on the 1880 match mentions “a magnificent run by 
Widdowson down the whole length of the field”, while the Scotsman describes 
England’s first goal, scored after Widdowson and Sheffield Wednesday’s William 
Mosforth “came magnificently up the left wing, the Yorkshire player’s shot 
gliding off McPherson’s leg and scoring a goal forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> amid cheering which lasted fully 
a minute”. One of his most famous goals came during a Cup tie against 
Sheffield, also in 1880. “Two minutes from time Sheffield were leading 2-1,” 
the Nottingham Evening Post reported. “Then Widdowson revealed his genius by 
dribbling the ball almost the entire length of the field and scoring a glorious 
equalising goal.” Sheffield, apparently out of disappointment over their late 
lost lead, refused to even play extra time; it was one of 16 goals Widdowson 
scored in 22 FA Cup games, and he twice reached the semi-finals of the 
competition.

William McGregor, the Scottish administrator and founder of the Football 
League, described Widdowson in an article published in 1902. “Widdowson was a 
great sportsman,” he wrote. “He was the most dangerous centre in the whole of 
England. He was a magnificent dribbler and a splendid shot, and he could run 
like a hare. They always turn out the fastest hurdlers in Nottingham, and 
Widdowson was one of the best of them. There was not a better known footballer 
in the country. His sensational dribbles – and they really were sensational – 
were always the features of his games.”

Born in April 1851, sixth of 10 children, Widdowson was named after Sam Weller 
from The Pickwick Papers, his father’s favourite Dickens character. He was 14 
when Forest were formed in 1865, 15 when he became a regular member of the side 
and 22 when he was made captain in 1873, promptly introducing a new formation 
that was to become the default in English football at least until Herbert 
Chapman came up with the WM system in the 1920s. This involved, according to 
the Evening Post, “one goalkeeper, two backs, three half-backs and five 
forwards, with himself as sole leader of the attack. In this line-up the second 
centre forward dropped back to the centre of the half-back line to act as a 
purveyor of passes down the middle of the field to the attackers.”

The forgotten story of ... the Pie and Pints match | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/the-forgotten-story-of-the-pie-and-pints-match>
It was not to be Widdowson’s last, or most lasting, innovation. He was also on 
the books of Nottinghamshire CCC, and played for them at Old Trafford in 1878 
and against the MCC the following year. In 1874, worried about the risk of 
serious injury while playing football, he cut down a pair of cricket pads and 
strapped them on his legs for a game of football, thereby inventing the shin 
pad, which was then produced and marketed by the Nottinghamshire batsman – and 
Notts County co-founder – Richard Daft. And Widdowson was to be involved in 
more novelties: in 1878 the FA used a match between his Forest side and 
Sheffield’s Norfolk FC to trial for the first time an alternative to the 
referee’s white flag, which officials used to wave when displeased, and then 
asked for his thoughts on the experiment. Following his positive feedback, the 
whistle was formally introduced. After retiring as a player Widdowson became a 
director of a local lace firm, co-owner of Beeston’s first cinema and a member 
of the FA council, coming up with the idea of an Amateur Cup – which went on to 
be contested between 1893 and 1974 – making the first experiments with 
floodlights (he organised regular if dimly illuminated evening matches between 
Forest and County) and in 1891 acting as referee in the first game played with 
goal nets.

That year, and in the same capacity, he had a hand in deciding another 
England-Scotland match, played at Blackburn’s Ewood Park. “I remember on that 
occasion buying a tartan scarf to wave for Scotland, but I never had it 
unrolled, as Scotland scarcely did anything worthy of a cheer in that match, 
which England won by two goals to one,” wrote McGregor. “But the winning goal 
was as rank an offside one as was ever scored in a big match. That rare old 
sportsman Sam Widdowson of Notts Forest was the English umpire, and he got a 
good wigging from his confrères on the English association for claiming such a 
goal.”

On Friday England and Scotland meet for the 114th time. Others have played in 
more of their games, scored more goals, and enjoy more fame, but it could be 
argued that none has been so influential on their sport. “No man did more than 
this famous all-rounder to bring careful thought and inventive genius to the 
game,” wrote the Nottingham Evening Post in 1950. “But then everything Sam 
Weller Widdowson did in sport had the hallmark of class, and the brilliance of 
a genius.”
 