
When Donald Trump tweets, PR departments tremble in their designer footwear. 
“Pretty much everybody is dreading being the subject of a tweet,” said Kristin 
Dziczek of the Michigan-based Center for Automotive Research. “Getting hauled 
out into the court of public opinion with virtually no warningis not something 
anybody wants to get engaged with 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
.”

No wonder: if, like General Motors, Ford or Toyota, you’re a car-maker 
manufacturing outside the US, having the president-elect attack your business 
model and threaten you with a massive tax bill (eg:“General Motors is sending 
Mexican-made model of Chevy Cruze to US car-dealers tax free across border. 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/816260343391514624> Make in USA or 
pay big border tax!”) is calamitous.

But not everybody need fear the tweeter. Meryl Streep couldn’t buy better 
publicity than haveTrump tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064> that she is 
“one of the most over-rated actresses in Hollywood, doesn’t know me but 
attacked last night at the Golden Globes”. Truly, there is literally nothing 
that makes me want to programme a double bill of Sophie’s Choice and Out of 
Africa more than reading that. As someone – whose spell checker doesn’t work – 
counter-tweeted: “havnt you got a job to do like running a country isntead of 
bitching like some z list celebrity, im embaressed for you”, with good reason.

In his eight years on Twitter, Trump has sent 34,300 tweets to followers now 
counted at 19.2 million, attacking 61 companies or brands. Among them the BBC 
(“a scandal ridden wasteland – a one-sided piece of garbage!”), the makers of 
Glenfiddich (“We are getting rid of all Glenfiddich garbage alcohol from Trump 
properties”), Coca-Cola (“The Coca-Cola company is not happy with me – that’s 
OK, I’ll still keep drinking that garbage”) and – love this – Twitter: “Wow,
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, Google and Facebook 
are burying the FBI criminal investigation of Clinton. Very dishonest media!”

Why does Donald diss? Trump has “like many bullies, a skin of gossamer”, 
observed Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair and longtime Trump enemy. On 
the plus side, let’s not forget, he is quite the wordsmith. “I hope everybody 
possible cancels their subscription to the failing, boring abd [sic] totally 
biased New York “Ragazine” – SAVE YOUR MONEY!” Did you see what he did there? 
“Ragazine”? Genius. And caps lock? Nice touch.

Whether Trump grows a thicker skin and stops using what Carter once described 
as his “abnormally stubby” fingers 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/10/graydon-carter-donald-trump> to 
terror-tweet from the Oval Office remains to be seen. But many must be hoping 
not. After all, for some, a late-night, rancorous terror-tweet from the most 
powerful man on Earth is just the thing to keep shareholders sweet. Here are 
some people and brands who got a bump thanks to Trump.
 John Lewis. Photograph: Sylvain Gaboury/Patrick McMullan via Getty Image 
John Lewis

Last week, the Democrat congressman and civil rights veteran told NBC that he 
did not regard the recent election as legitimate and was notplanning to attend 
Trump’s inauguration this Friday 
<https://twitter.com/MeetThePress/status/820001428852895744>. “I think the 
Russians participated in helping this man get elected. And they helped destroy 
the candidacy of Hillary Clinton,” he said. Furious, Trump tweeted: 
“Congressman John Lewis should spend more time on fixing and helping his 
district, which is in horrible shape and falling apart. All talk, talk, talk – 
no action or results. Sad!”

Lewis responded at a memorial breakfast on Martin Luther King Day this week 
with a speechin which he didn’t deign to name Trump, but clearly alluded to him 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-john-lewis-martin-luther-king-day-response-twitter-attack-a7530186.html>
: “So I say to the future leaders of this state, the future leaders of this 
nation, of the world – you must never, ever hate. The way of love is a better 
way. The way of peace is a better way,” he said.

Related: How celebrities will protest around Trump's inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-celebrities-protest-inauguration>

One result of the row is that March, Lewis’s graphic novel about the US civil 
rights movement,shot from 451st place in the overall bestseller lists to No 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/16/john-lewis-clash-with-donald-trump-sends-the-civil-rights-heros-book-to-no-1>
, while his memoir Walking the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement rose 8,699 places 
to No 2. Further down the charts, his 2012 book Across That Bridge: Life 
Lessons and a Vision for Change, which recounts lessons learned as an activist, 
leapt from 34,480 to 175 in the overall bestseller list on Amazon.com and took 
top spot on the online bookseller’s philosophy of ethics and morality chart.

Think of it this way: some industry experts have been sceptical 
<http://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/7-good-and-bad-things-that-would-happen-to-your-business-if-donald-trump-were-pr.html>
 about whether a Trump presidency will be good for American business. But, in 
fact, even before he takes office, Trump is having a positive impact. Albeit 
unwittingly.

Vanity Fair

Restaurant critic Tina Nguyen once accepted a dare to eat an eyeball that a 
butcher had popped out of the skull of a roasted pig.“That eyeball,” she wrote 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/12/trump-grill-review>, “tasted better 
than the Trump Grill’s Gold Label Burger, a ... short-rib burger blend moulded 
into a sad little meat thing, sitting in the centre of a massive, rapidly 
staling brioche bun, hiding its shame under a slice of melted orange cheese. It 
came with overcooked woody batons called ‘fries’ – how can someone mess up 
fries? – and ketchup masquerading as Heinz. If the cheeseburger is a 
quintessential part of America’s identity, Trump’s pledge to ‘make America 
great again’ suddenly appeared not very promising.”

Nguyen’s review appeared in Vanity Fair under the headline “Trump Grill could 
be the worst restaurant in America” (just imagine the competition for that 
title) before Christmas, prompting Trump to tweet: “Has anyone looked at the 
really poor numbers of @VanityFair magazine. Way down, big trouble, dead! 
Graydon Carter, no talent, will be out!”

Unfortunately for Trump’s thesis, someone looked at Vanity Fair’s numbers 
<https://www.fastcompany.com/3066693/election-2016/trump-says-vanity-fair-is-way-down-but-its-circulation-is-actually-up>
 and found that the magazine was not in trouble. Its website had 14.3 million 
unique visitors in October 2016, a 26% increase since October 2015, and more 
than double its October 2014 traffic. And paid circulation averaged 1.2m for 
the first six months of 2016, slightly higher than it was five years ago. The 
Condé Nast lifestyle magazine is bucking the trend of the print magazine sector 
beset by falling advertising revenues and plummeting sales.

But Trump’s tweet was only the latest salvo in a feud between him and Carter 
dating back more than a quarter of a century. When the former was an upcoming 
Manhattan real estate magnate, the latter was a writer for the satirical Spy 
magazine amused by Trump’s “vainglorious self-image”. “Just to drive him a 
little bit crazy,” recalled Carter, “I took to referring to him as a 
‘short-fingered vulgarian’.” Carter still receives letters from Trump. “There 
is always a photo of him — generally a tear sheet from a magazine. On all of 
them he has circled his hand in gold Sharpie in a valiant effort to highlight 
the length of his fingers. I almost feel sorry for the poor fellow because, to 
me, the fingers still look abnormally stubby.” Just before Trump decided to 
stand for the Republican presidential nomination, Carter got the latest. “Like 
the other packages, this one included a circled hand and the words, also 
written in gold Sharpie: ‘See, not so short!’ I sent the picture back by return 
mail with a note attached, saying, ‘Actually, quite short.’ Which I can only 
assume gave him fits.”

When Carter invested in prominent restaurants in Manhattan, it wasn’t long 
before Trump delivered his assessment. “Worst food in city,” Trump wrote about 
the Waverly Inn in 2013. For the past four years, the tweet has been printed at 
the top of the Waverly Inn menu – presumably for its diners there could be no 
greater enticement to eat there than the short-fingered vulgarian’s opprobrium.

American Civil Liberties Union

Last week, the ACLU announced it had received more than $7.2m (£5.8m) from 
120,000 individual donations. “This is the greatest outpouring of support for 
the ACLU in our nearly 100-year history, greater than the days after 9/11,” 
said the union’s executive director, Anthony Romero.

Why now? Because many are worried about what Trump will do to American civil 
liberties.Writing in the New York Review of Books 
<http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/11/14/way-to-stop-trump-lessons-of-war-on-terror/>
, the ACLU’s incoming legal director, David Cole, said: “Will he be able to put 
in place all the worst ideas he tossed out so cavalierly on the campaign trail? 
Building a wall; banning and deporting Muslims; ending Obamacare; reneging on 
climate change treaty responsibilities; expanding libel law; criminalising 
abortion; jailing his political opponents; supporting aggressive stop-and-frisk 
policing; reviving mass surveillance and torture?” Not on Professor Cole’s 
watch.

He could well be a busy man. The day after Trump’s election, the ACLU tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/ACLU/status/796389278033051648>: “Should President-elect 
Donald Trump attempt to implement his unconstitutional campaign promises, we’ll 
see him in court.”

New York Times

Vanity Fair isn’t the only part of the lamestream media to be getting a boost 
thanks to Trump.Subscriptions to the Gray Lady have soared 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/11/29/new-york-times-subscriptions-soar-tenfold-after-donald-trump-wins-presidency.html>
 by 132,000 since Trump’s election – a tenfold rise on the previous year, even 
though he had claimed that the paper was failing, and railed against it for 
backing Hillary Clinton. “Far from failing,” retorted Mark Thompson, the 
Times’s CEO, “we’re seeing remarkable response”.

Just maybe Trump has helped end the post-truth era he arguably created and is 
inadvertently helping catalyse the revival of quality journalism in an era 
dominated by the kind of fact-unchecked Twitter rants so virtuosically 
pioneered by the president-elect. Yeah, right. Let’s not go nuts.
 Lin-Manuel Miranda leads the cast of Hamilton. Photograph: Joan Marcus/AP 
Hamilton


In November, vice-president elect Mike Pence took in a Broadway show. 
According to Trump, it didn’t go well. “The cast and producers of Hamilton, 
which I hear is highly overrated, should immediately apologise to Mike Pence 
for their terrible behavior,” he tweeted.

Hold on. Who told Trump the musical was overrated? Presumably not his daughter 
Ivanka, who saw the show earlier in the year andwrote that it had surpassed her 
expectations <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38075425>. An 
unlikely Broadway hit about Alexander Hamilton, one of America’s founding 
fathers, the hip-hop musical by Lin-Manuel Miranda has an intriguingly 
anachronistic multi-ethnic cast and last year it won 11 Tony awards.

No matter. “The theatre must always be a safe and special place. The cast of 
Hamilton was very rude last night to a very good man, Mike Pence. Apologise!” 
Trump said, in a followup tweet. According to Miranda, though, there was 
nothing to apologise for. “When we found out he was coming, we welcomed him, we 
asked him to lead on behalf of all Americans and we related to him the 
anxieties that some of us feel,” he said.

Trump’s attack hasn’t harmed the show. It may have had the opposite effect. 
Hamilton took in more than $3mover the holiday season 
<http://deadline.com/2017/01/broadway-breaks-re3cords-with-50-million-dollar-box-office-1201877992/>
. And its Chicago run has sold out months in advance. Bookings have just opened 
forits London run, which starts in November 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/hamilton-musical-tickets-london-sale-9097702>
. Just possibly, Trump is inadvertently doing his bit for American exports.

Planned Parenthood

The women’s health service provider has 2.5 million patients and has long been 
in the incoming administration’s crosshairs. “I long for the day that Roe v 
Wade is sent to the ash heap of history, when we move past the broken hearts 
and the broken lives of the past 38 years,” Mike Pence said in 2011. During his 
primary campaign, Trump said he believed there should be “some form of 
punishment” for a women who had abortions.

Last week, House speaker Paul Ryan said that Republicans would legislate to 
defund Planned Parenthood as part of their attempt to repeal the Affordable 
Care Act.

One unintended consequence of such remarks and attacks on Planned Parenthood 
is a rise in donations.Some 20,000 have been made in Pence’s name to Planned 
Parenthood 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/people-are-donating-to-planned-parenthood-in-mike-pences-name_us_5829c5f3e4b02d21bbc97d12>
. According to the artist Bethany Cosentino,Pence gets a certificate for each 
donation <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMrzPhHBdKM/>. I don’t know how big the 
Veep’s office is, but he may have run out of wall space to display them all.
 Megyn Kelly waits for the start of the first Republican debate in 2015. 
Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
Megyn Kelly

“You’ve called women you don’t like fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting 
animals,” said the then Fox News host to Trump whenshe moderated the first 
Republican primary debate in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/07/winners-republican-debate-fox-news-moderators>
. Trump didn’t like her journalistic tone and fired back on Twitter: “Wow, 
@megynkelly really bombed tonight. People are going wild on Twitter! Funny to 
watch.” But it didn’t end there: he later branded her “overrated”, “angry”, 
“crazy” and “a bimbo”. In a later interview, he implied that she had been 
hostile to him because she was menstruating, saying she“had blood coming out of 
her eyes, blood coming out of her wherever” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/aug/08/donald-trump-menstruation-fox-news-megyn-kelly-audio>
.

Kelly described the abuse as “an attempt at bullying” that failed, and blamed 
Trump’s social media director, Dan Scavino, for encouraging hostile and abusive 
elements online. After a heated exchange between Kelly and Trump ally Newt 
Gingrich in October, Scavino issued an ominous tweet: “Megyn Kelly made a total 
fool out of herself tonight – attackingDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Watch what happens to her 
after this election is over.”

Kelly said she received death threats and obscene phone calls after her run-in 
with Trump and that she and her children had been under armed guard for 16 
months as a result. “I understand he’s a fighter, he’s a counter-puncher, I get 
all that – but even then he has such power thata single tweet can unleash hell 
in somebody’s life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/megyn-kelly-donald-trump-social-media-online-abuse>
,” she said.

What did happen to Kelly after the election? Nothing like the career-ruining 
nightmare Scavino seemed to be suggesting. This month, she quit Fox News for 
NBC, where she will host a daily daytime show and a Sunday news magazine 
programme. It’s not clear how much she will earn, but she was reportedly in 
contract talks with Fox seeking $20m andhad been due to collect $15m for the 
final year of her contract 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/megyn-kelly-seeks-salary-north-of-20-million-in-contract-talks-with-fox-news-1477527922>
. Most likely, while Kelly’s run-in with Trump was hell for her and her family, 
it didn’t damage her professional standing or earning power. Quite possibly the 
reverse.
 Kate McKinnon as Kellyanne Conway and Alec Baldwin as Donald Trump in a 
sketch for Saturday Night Live. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images 
Saturday Night Live

Late last year, Trump tweeted about Saturday Night Live 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/787612552654155776>. “Time to 
retire the boring and unfunny show. Alec Baldwin portrayal stinks. Media 
rigging election!” Is there any greater praise that a satirist can get than the 
target whining on social media about how he’s portrayed? Of course there isn’t. 
True, if us in the media did in fact rig the election we did a useless job at 
it, but let’s not go there.

Trump’s gossamer skin prickled anew this week. “Saturday Night Live is the 
worst of NBC. Not funny, cast is terrible, always a complete hit job. Really 
bad television!” he tweeted. His incoming press secretary, Sean Spicer, was 
singing from the same hymn sheet: “It’s gone from being funny to just bad. 
Those aren’t jokes. They’re inappropriate,” he told Fox News. “I think for a 
lot of people, regardless of your political persuasion, that’s not what you’re 
tuning in for.”

Sean, baby, you could not be more wrong. The latest season of the long-running 
satirical show was an eight-year high. Some 8.3 million viewers watched the 
season premiere in October, making it thehighest-rated SNL season premiere 
among 18 to 49-year-olds 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/saturday-night-live-season-premiere-ratings-donald-trump-alec-baldwin-1201829687/>
 since 2013.

Why is it doing so well? Chiefly because of Alec Baldwin’s performance as the 
Donald. He’s proved even more hilarious as Trump than Fey’s impersonation of 
Sarah Palin, than Larry David’s take off of Bernie Sanders or even the 
half-naked guy who impersonates Vladimir Putin.

Most recently, Baldwin sent up the Donald’s recent, calamitous first press 
conference as president-elect. “I’d like to ask you about your big Russian pee 
pee party,” asked the first reporter. “I don’t want to talk about the pee pee,” 
responded Baldwin’s Trump. “I want to talk about jobs. I am going to bring back 
a thick stream of jobs to this country. This country will literally be showered 
with jobs. Because I’m a major whizz at jobs.” And he is too: Trump’s going to 
be keeping Baldwin in work for the forseeable future.
 