
British drinkers have been quaffing gin in record amounts during 2016, buying 
40m bottles in a spending spree that outstripped sales growth in beer and 
sparkling wine.



Annual gin sales rose 16% to smash through the £1bn barrier for the first time 
in the UK, leading the drink industry to declare 2016 the “year of gin”.

About 40m bottles were sold over the past 12 months, enough to make 1.12bn gin 
and tonics, or roughly 28 for every person of legal drinking age in the UK, 
according to the Wine and Spirit Trade Association. This was an increase of 
200m G&Ts compared with 2012, signalling thatgin continues to grow in popularity
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/gin-consumption-soars-amid-boom-in-new-uk-distilleries>
.

A growing thirst for the spirit has also caused a surge in the number of 
distilleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2016/sep/28/small-batch-gin-production-a-photo-essay>
, with about 40 opening in 2016.

In 2010, there were only 116 distilleries in the UK, according to HM Revenue & 
Customs, but about 100 have opened in the past two years alone.

Brockmans, which claims to be the fastest-growing premium gin, said its sales 
had more than doubled in the first six months of 2016.

“Drinking habits have changed dramatically in the last five years and the 
premium gin market has been one of the biggest winners,” said its founder and 
chief executive, Neil Everitt. “The emergence of new-style gins and premium 
mixers is driving sales before food, particularly in gastro pubs.”

He added that the weakness of sterling had boosted sales in Spain, one of the 
company’s biggest markets.

London-based distiller Sipsmith, founded in 2009 at the forefront of a wave of 
new distilleries, said it was proud to be part of the “gin renaissance”.

“We launched the first copper pot gin distillery in London for nearly 200 
years in 2009, tapping into the consumer desire for provenance, authenticity 
and ultimately quality,” said founder Fairfax Hall.

“Since then a wave of craft distilleries has swept across the country.”
gin sales 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-08T17:01:37/embed.html>
The WSTA also revealed that foreign drinkers are importing gin in record 
volumes, with exports to America particularly strong. The trade body said gin 
exports to the US were up 553% in the past decade, reaching £159m in 2015.

It put the drink’s popularity with Americans down to hit British TV shows such 
as Downton Abbey and films including the James Bond franchise featuring the 
tipple.

Drinks industry experts said gin’s rise was likely to continue, with drinkers 
likely to upgrade to more expensive brands as they develop a taste for it.

Humphrey Serjeantson, research director of International Wine and Spirit 
Research, said: “As we see it, the gin boom is far from over; gin is set to 
continue its long-term repositioning from mother’s ruin to exciting and dynamic 
category.”

He said growth would be driven “by premium and above brands, with a wide 
flavour range combining with localism and, increasingly, terroir playing a key 
role.

Re-gin-eration: what’s behind the botanical spirit boom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/mar/28/re-gin-eration-whats-behind-the-botanical-spirit-boom>
“This will include the growth of a real ultra-premium segment (priced at 
£45.00 and over).

WSTA chief executive Miles Beale said: “There are many reasons why people may 
not feel like celebrating 2016 but the WSTA are pleased to give you something 
happy to reflect on – 2016 can now be remembered as the ‘Great British Gin Take 
Off’.”

According to the WSTA, the next fastest growing category was sparkling wine 
including champagne which rose 12%, ahead of beer which rose 2% and wine which 
fell by 1%. Overall, the wider British alcohol market rose 2% to £40bn.

Among wines, the WSTA identified a rise in the popularity of New Zealand and 
Argentinian vineyards at the expense of European and US wines. Annual sales of 
New Zealand wines and Argentinian wines grew, while Spanish, American, Italian 
and French wines all experienced more muted growth or declined in popularity.

The annual survey also revealed changing tastes in the wines that people buy 
to drink at home. Among the reds, sales of Merlot were up 7% to £321m, while 
Shiraz were up 6% to £300m and Tempranillo was flat at £214m.

The boom in sales of New Zealand wines helped Sauvignon Blanc lead the way 
among white wines, with sales up 10% to £708m. But Pinot Grigio and Chardonnay 
both fell out of favour, each falling by 4% to sales of just above £400m each.

The WSTA said the government cut duties on spirits, which it warned would 
boost the industry and the Treasury’s coffers. It said the cut in spirits duty 
in the 2015 budget had delivered a 4.1% increase in duty to £125m, adding that 
the UK spirit industry was “one of the most heavily taxed in Europe”.
 