
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has been warned 
to expect a “full-blown constitutional crisis” unless agreement on the terms of 
Brexit can be reached between the government and the UK’s devolved 
administrations.

The stark prediction comes as the prime minister hosts talks on Monday with 
the leaders of Scotland, Wales andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> for the first time since the 
UK voted to leave the EU on 23 June.

In a report published on Monday, the Institute for Government 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/> said unless all four leaders agree 
on the “core planks” of the UK’s negotiating position beforeMay triggers 
article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, formally starting the Brexit process, the result could be “a serious 
breakdown in relations between the four governments and nations of the UK”.

May is preparing to offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/brexit-strategy-scotland-wales-northern-ireland-direct-line-david-davis-theresa-may>
 Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, the Welsh first minister, Carwyn 
Jones, and Northern Ireland’s first minister, Arlene Foster, and her deputy, 
Martin McGuinness, a “direct line” to the Brexit secretary, David Davis, to 
allow them to help shape Britain’s EU exit strategy.

But the offer is made against a background of continuing clashes between May 
and Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/23/scotland-equal-partner-brexit-talks-holyrood>
 over who has a more substantial mandate regarding Scotland’s relationship with 
the UK and Europe, and as the devolved administration leaders present an 
increasingly united front against Westminster.

Ahead of the joint ministerial committee (JMC) meeting on Monday, in a letter 
to May, Sturgeon formally endorsed a proposal from Jones that any planned 
negotiating package should be subject to a vote in all four UK parliaments and 
assemblies.

Anticipating that the three devolved governments would seek such a vote, the 
Institute for Government noted that although the UK parliament remains 
sovereign and could legally ignore the views of Holyrood, Cardiff Bay and 
Stormont, this would be a “reckless strategy for a government committed to the 
union”.

The organisation warned that forcing the devolved administrations to comply 
“would seriously undermine relationships between the four governments, and 
increase the chances of Scottish independence and rifts in Northern Ireland’s 
fragile power-sharing arrangements”.

May will make the offer of a new official forum, which would be chaired by 
Davis and meet at least twice before the end of the year, and insist that “it 
is imperative that the devolved administrations play their part in making 
[Brexit negotiations] work.”

By placing future discussions on a formal footing, May will say she is giving 
the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish leaders “the chance for them all to put 
forward their proposals on how to seize the opportunities presented by Brexit 
and deliver the democratic decision expressed by the people of the UK”.

Sturgeon has already said she will push for substantial additional powers for 
Holyrood as part of article 50 negotiations, including over international trade 
deals and immigration.

But this appeared to be rebuffed by Davis during a visit to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> on Friday, when he insisted that any 
arrangements to leave the EU would be a “United Kingdom deal”.

A Downing Street source said while the JMC had existed since devolution, the 
discussions over Brexit had provided a new impetus for its work.


“It will be the formal forum in which the devolved administrations feed in 
their ideas and make their case on what is important around Brexit,” the source 
said.

While the relevant secretaries of state for Scotland, Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and Northern Ireland would continue to 
speak for their administrations in parliament, JMC meetings are “a chance for 
the devolved administration leaders as well,” the source said. “They do have a 
voice that needs to be heard and a role to play. And as the prime minister has 
repeatedly made clear, we’re leaving the EU as the UK.”

May is also expected to discuss the government’s position on the Brexit 
strategy at the JMC and say that contrary to some speculation, no final 
decisions have been taken and how the UK leaves the EU will not boil down to a 
binary choice.

Although May called for a “new grown-up relationship” between Westminster and 
the devolved administrations ahead of the meeting, the war of words between the 
Scottish and UK governments has continued since Thursday, when Sturgeon
published a draft bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/second-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published>
 on a second independence referendum.

The Scottish National party leader said she had a clear mandate to hold a 
second vote, because theSNP had been elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/scottish-labour-facing-third-place-after-collapse-in-vote>
 in May on a manifesto commitment to do so, should there be a “significant and 
material change in the circumstances that prevailed in 2014, such as Scotland 
being taken out of the EU against our will”.

Sturgeon has promised to work with progressive parties and Conservative 
moderates across the UK to seek to avert a hard Brexit and bring forward 
proposals to protect Scotland’s place in the single market, even if the rest of 
the UK leaves.

However, a Number 10 spokesperson immediately dismissed the plan for a second 
vote. “The prime minister and the government does not believe that there is a 
mandate for one,” they said. “There was one only two years ago. There was an 
extremely high turnout and there was a resounding result in favour of Scotland 
remaining in the UK.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&media=>
EU referendum: how Britain voted for Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video> 