
Theresa May has said the UK will be a global leader in free trade after the 
vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
, as she headed to Hangzhou in eastern China for the G20 summit on Saturday.

 May also declared it a “golden era” for UK-China relations despite the 
impending row with Beijing over the delayed decision on theHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> power station. She 
suggested she wants to use her first major global summit to prove the UK 
remains dependable in the wake of the June referendum result.

What does Theresa May really think about China? | Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/china-hinkley-point-delay-diplomacy>
Speaking at Heathrow before boarding an RAF plane, May said: “The message for 
theG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> is that Britain is open for 
business. As a bold, confident, outward-looking country we will be playing a 
key role on the world stage.”

The prime minister will have a meeting with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, on Monday, after the two-day 
summit. “This is a golden era for UK-China relations and one of the things I 
will be doing at the G20 is obviously talking to President Xi about how we can 
develop the strategic partnership that we have between the UK and China,” May 
said. “But I will also be talking to other world leaders about how we can 
develop free trade around the world, and Britain wants to seize those 
opportunities. My ambition is that Britain will be a global leader in free 
trade.”

 May is due to hold talks with leaders including Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> and Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>.

But despite a face-to-face meeting with Xi, she is not expected to make an 
announcement on theHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> project, which is backed 
by Beijing’s state-owned nuclear firm. Although a decision on whether the 
project in Somerset will go ahead is expected this month, UK officials 
indicated it would not be announced on Monday – fuelling speculation the plan 
would be scrapped or significantly altered.


“We have set out the government’s approach to Hinkley. We are currently 
considering all the component parts of that,” a UK source told the Press 
Association. “We have said we will make a decision this month – that remains 
the plan. I don’t expect one in the next few days and I don’t expect our 
Chinese or French partners are expecting one in the next few days.”

 The French energy company EDF <https://www.theguardian.com/business/edf>, 
with support from China General Nuclear, had expected to build the £18bn plant, 
but in a surprise move May’s administrationdelayed a final decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
 on the project amid reports of security concerns about Beijing’s involvement 
and the high cost of energy from the power station.

The former security minister Pauline Neville-Jones said on Saturday that 
reassurances were needed fromChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
before a decision could be made. “The issue, I think, is much more day-to-day 
security implications of having an investor of that kind who isn’t an ally – 
not an enemy – but isn’t an ally in the way most investment hitherto in to this 
country has been from the west,” she told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme.

Any final decision on Hinkley Point is expected to have major diplomatic 
implications for relations between the UK, France and China.

May’s talks with Obama follow his warning that the UK would be at “the back of 
the queue” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
 for a trade deal if it voted to leave the EU. But amid reports that the 
planned US-EU trade deal TTIP has stalled, the UK hopes for talks on a 
transatlantic agreement of its own with Washington.

 During Sunday’s summit May is also reported to want to push for action on 
tackling terrorism, including stopping the flow of money and foreign fighters 
to extremist groups such asIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>. She will press for action to make 
sure that Isis fighters are not able to find new safe havens in areas such as 
sub-Saharan Africa once they are forced out of strongholds.
 