
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has signalled 
that she will use the Brexit vote as a mandate to break decisively with David 
Cameron’s brand of Conservatism, pledging to intervene on behalf of working 
class voters and crack down on immigration.

In a populist speech to her party’s conference in Birmingham, the prime 
minister painted June’s referendum result as a “quiet revolution” that should 
force politicians to tackle public concerns, repeatedly telling delegates that 
“change must come”.

May said she saw the referendum result as a political turning point, which 
legitimised a tougher line on immigration and more state intervention in the 
public’s lives. She told her party: “It’s time to remember the good that 
government can do.”

The Guardian view on Theresa May’s conference speech: actions not words will 
decide | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-mays-conference-speech-actions-not-words-will-decide>
The Brexit vote was a message from people who “were not prepared to be ignored 
any more”, she said. “Because in June people voted for change. And a change is 
going to come.”

She faced an angry backlash, however, from opposition politicians including 
the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola 
Sturgeon, who accused her of stoking anti-immigrant sentiment by playing to 
fears about the impact of foreign workers on jobs and wages.

Corbyn said she was “fanning the flames of xenophobia and hatred in our 
communities and trying to blame foreigners” for her party’s own failures. 
Sturgeon said May’s speech and the policies she laid out were “the most 
disgraceful display of reactionary rightwing politics in living memory”.

Anticipating such criticism, May said in her speech that some people did not 
like to admit that British workers could “find themselves out of work or on 
lower wages because of low-skilled immigration”.

Business leaders also reacted angrily to a proposal the home secretary, Amber 
Rudd, made on Tuesday to force firms to reveal what proportion of their 
workforce are immigrants in a bid to “name and shame” businesses that fail to 
take on British staff.

Carolyn Fairbairn, the director general of the CBI, said: “We have been a 
magnet for talent for many years. We should be proud of our ability to attract 
the best, and this approach that appears to be around shaming companies for 
doing that is one that our members are very, very concerned about.”

Will Theresa May’s speech appeal beyond Tory conference? Our panel’s verdict | 
Jonathan Freedland, Polly Toynbee, Anne McElvoy, Joseph Harker, Giles Fraser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict>
In a speech designed to set out her core beliefs, May offered a deliberate 
rejection of the legacy of Thatcherism. “There is more to life than 
individualism and self-interest”, she said, drawing on the story of the 
triathleteAlistair Brownlee who gave up his chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-jonny-world-triathlon-series>
 to win the final race in the world series in Mexico to help his heat-dazed 
brother Jonny over the line. “We succeed or fail together.”

May also criticised the jet-setting global elite, tax-avoiding multinationals 
and sharp practice by company executives. “So if you’re a boss who earns a 
fortune but doesn’t look after your staff, an international company that treats 
tax laws as an optional extra, a household name that refuses to work with the 
authorities even to fight terrorism, a director who takes out massive dividends 
while knowing that the company pension is about to go bust: I’m putting you on 
warning. This can’t go on any more,” she said.

The prime minister appealed to disaffected Labour voters, arguing that the 
party had fled from the centre of British politics. She said theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> were now “the party of the 
workers, the party of public servants, the party of the NHS”.

She mocked the splits and abuse between Corbyn and his MPs, winning huge 
cheers by adopting her former description of her own party to describe Labour: 
“You know what some people call them? The nasty party.”

Tory conference – the Eurocidal maniacs have found their ‘Theresa Bae’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/tory-conference-the-eurocidal-maniacs-have-found-their-theresa-bae>
Concluding her 59-minute speech, May told delegates she was offering “an 
agenda for a new modern Conservatism that understands the good government can 
do, that will never hesitate to face down the powerful when they abuse their 
positions of privilege, that will always act in the interests of ordinary, 
working class people”.

She promised to take action in the coming months in a number of areas, 
including building more homes, preventing energy firms from exploiting 
customers, upgrading the broadband network and closing the gap between 
fast-growing London and the less prosperous regions of the UK. She did not, 
however, spell out details.

A Downing Street spokesperson said the government would also introduce 
measures to help savers hit by record low interest rates, after being forced to 
clarify remarks in the speech that appeared to criticise the Bank of England’s 
policy of quantitative easing.

May had said: “While monetary policy, with super-low interest rates and 
quantitative easing, provided the necessary emergency medicine after the 
financial crash, we have to acknowledge there have been some bad side effects.”

That appeared to break the convention, established since the Bank of England 
was given independence in 1997, that politicians refrain from commenting on the 
direction of monetary policy.

The Downing Street spokesperson insisted: “Quantitative easing is a matter for 
the independent Bank of England. That remains the case.”

May was preceded on stage in a packed conference hall by a crowd-pleasing 
speech from the Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, who struck a more emollient 
tone on migration, telling foreign-born workers who have settled in Scotland: 
“This is your home and you are welcome here.”

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, rejected the idea that May was 
shifting to the centre ground, calling her rhetoric “utterly divorced from her 
party’s actions over the last few days”.

He said: “The Conservatives are reckless, divisive and uncaring. They are the 
fence-building, snooping-on-your-emails, foreign-worker-listing party and that 
is something that most people will be repulsed by.”
 