
Theresa May’s government has been accused of failing to restrain the furious 
backlash against this week’s high court judgment about article 50, as one of 
her own MPs resigned, increasing the political pressure as she pledges to stick 
to her Brexit timetable.

Stephen Phillips MP: 'I can no longer live with being labelled a Tory'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/stephen-phillips-resigns-over-undemocratic-brexit-process>
Stephen Phillips, the MP for Sleaford and North Hykeham in Lincolnshire, 
stepped down on Friday with immediate effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/stephen-phillips-resigns-over-undemocratic-brexit-process>
. He said he was unhappy that the government had not planned to consult 
parliament before triggering article 50 – the issue that led toThursday’s ruling
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/theresa-may-concedes-triggering-article-50-will-need-act-of-parliament>
.

Former ministers warned that the febrile tone of media coverage, which 
included the judges who ruled against the government beingcondemned as “enemies 
of the people” by the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
, risked poisoning public debate.

Dominic Grieve <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve>, the 
Conservative former attorney general, said reading hostile coverage in the Mail 
and the Daily Telegraph “started to make one think that one was living in 
Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe … I think there’s a danger of a sort of mob psyche 
developing – and mature democracies should take sensible steps to avoid that”.

Labour also raised concerns about the absence of a ministerial response to the 
media coverage. Charles Falconer, who was lord chancellor under Labour between 
2003 and 2007, said faith in the “independence and quality” of the judiciary was
being undermined “by this Brexit-inspired media vitriol” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/assault-uk-judges-brexit-press-judiciary-constitution>
, in an article written for the Guardian.

On Saturday, Jeremy Corbyn will accuse the government of opposing democratic 
scrutiny because “frankly, there aren’t any plans, beyond the hollow rhetoric 
of ‘Brexit means Brexit’”.

The Labour leader will say in a speech: “Thursday’s high court decision 
underlines the necessity that the prime minister brings the government’s 
negotiating terms for Brexit to parliament without delay.

“Labour accepts and respects the decision of the British people to leave the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. But there must be 
transparency and accountability to parliament about the government’s plans.”

May telephoned European leaders to tell them again that she would meet her 
self-imposed deadline and trigger article 50 by the end of March 2017, despite 
losing the high court case. The prime minister has otherwise not entered the 
row.

Her spokesman refused to condemn the media coverage on Friday, saying: “I 
don’t think the British judiciary is being undermined.” But the pro-remain 
former business minister Anna Soubry told the Guardian: “I think we have to 
call this out and say ‘not in my name’.”

Soubry, a Tory MP and former journalist, said the tone of some reports since 
the referendum result was “inciting hatred … It needs somebody likeBoris Johnson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> to step up and speak out. He’s 
our foreign secretary and he knows what the reaction of the rest of the world 
is as they look at our great country and are horrified. What message are we 
sending out to the rest of the world? Probably that this nation is in grave 
danger of losing the plot – and I think we might have done.”

Johnson, who was in Berlin on Friday, used a press conference to play down the 
significance of Thursday’s ruling, which the government says it is “confident” 
it can overturn on appeal at the supreme court next month. The high court ruled 
that it was not constitutional for the government to trigger article 50 without 
a vote by MPs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-ruling-wont-change-timetable-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%3A%20'Brexit%20ruling%20won't%20change%20timetable'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-ruling-wont-change-timetable-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%3A%20%27Brexit%20ruling%20won%27t%20change%20timetable%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-ruling-wont-change-timetable-video&media=>
Boris Johnson: ‘Brexit ruling won’t change timetable’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/04/boris-johnson-brexit-ruling-wont-change-timetable-video>
Johnson urged his German counterpart, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, not to “read 
too much into the legal decision that you have just seen or indeed theSturm und 
Drang, if that’s the word I want, that is going on in parliament at the moment. 
The direction is very clear, the will of the British people was expressed very 
clearly and it is the decision ofTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> and her government to get on 
and make that process work.”

In his resignation letter to George Clark, the chairman of the Sleaford and 
North Hykeham Conservative Association, Phillips said he could no longer live 
with being labelled a Conservative.

As well as his unhappiness over the Brexit process, he also attacked the 
government for “shirking” its responsibility for unaccompanied child refugees 
and changes to the way international aid was spent. Phillips said: “Some will 
label me a quitter or, no doubt, worse. Those are labels with which I can live. 
The label Conservative no longer is.”

The Conservatives are highly likely to retain Phillips’ seat, which he held 
with a majority of 24,000; but his departure creates another distracting 
byelection, after David Cameron left his Witney seat and Zac Goldsmith stepped 
down to fight Richmond Park as an anti-Heathrow expansion independent.

On the other side, prominent Brexit supporters have told the Guardian they 
believe MPs and peers are gearing up for an audacious bid to keep Britain in 
the EU “via the backdoor”, underlining the vicious parliamentary battle that 
may lie ahead if the government loses its appeal against the article 50 verdict.


A Tory MP, Dominic Raab, accused colleagues of trying to “steal the 
referendum, not deliver on it”. Meanwhile, Labour’s Gisela Stuart, who chaired 
the Vote Leave campaign, said those in her party and others who were demanding 
that the UK remain inside the single market were effectively trying to scupper 
the will of the people.

Raab, the former justice minister who now sits on parliament’s select 
committee on leaving the EU, said: “As Lib Dem and Labour peers and MPs are now 
making clear, the ruling will be exploited by those in denial of the referendum 
verdict, who want to see us stay in the EU via the backdoor. Bluntly, they want 
to steal the referendum, not deliver on it.”

Stuart, who chaired the campaign to take Britain out of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/referendum-vote-leave-labour-people-have-spoken>
, said the courts were entitled to rule on their interpretation of the process. 
“But I think it is incumbent on parliamentarians to then also recognise that 
they don’t have sovereignty over the people. The people have made it quite 
clear they want to leave,” said the MP who now leads Change Britain, a group 
that includes prominent Brexiters such as Michael Gove.

In an interview for Radio 4’s Week in Westminster to be broadcast on Saturday, 
Stuart warned against MPs using debates about the single market or customs 
union “in pursuit of negating the people’s will”. Asked if she thought any 
politician calling for Britain to remain in those organisations was trying to 
scupper the Brexit vote, she replied: “Yes, I think I do, because what people 
made quite clear during that referendum is that democratic accountability for 
them was far more important than anything else.”

The former Cabinet minister John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale> agreed, arguing that 
the referendum result meant that even if the supreme court upholds the decision 
then parliament should either overturn it or every MP should vote in favour of 
triggering article 50. “I don’t want there to be any conditions on the outcome 
of the negotiations,” he said, adding that even if European countries block 
economic access, Britain must still leave the EU.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-told-to-act-to-calm-brexit-mob-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba50d3cc150f99fd34de7e8202f8dfb8da1597d%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20told%20to%20act%20to%20calm%20Brexit%20%E2%80%98mob%E2%80%99%20backlash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-told-to-act-to-calm-brexit-mob-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20told%20to%20act%20to%20calm%20Brexit%20%E2%80%98mob%E2%80%99%20backlash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-told-to-act-to-calm-brexit-mob-anger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba50d3cc150f99fd34de7e8202f8dfb8da1597d%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Lord Kerslake, former head of the civil service. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA 
Bob Kerslake, the former head of the civil service, said the government had 
been caught out trying to avoid a difficult debate in parliament. “The 
government would be much better off thinking how to tackle the issue,” he said.


The peer, who has been active in his scrutiny of legislation since joining the 
House of Lords, said the British public voted to leave the EU but that left 
many unanswered questions. “Whatever else it changed, I don’t think the 
referendum changed the fact of parliamentary democracy or that we operate under 
the rule of law.”


Meanwhile, the legal and political complications facing May intensified on 
Friday after the Welsh government’s counsel general, Mick Antoniw, said it 
would formally join the complainants’ side in the supreme court case next month.


Scottish government sources said Antoniw’s intervention increased the chances 
that Nicola Sturgeon would also join the action. Both devolved governments are 
concerned that their legal and parliamentary interests are being overlooked in 
May’s rush to push through article 50 without a vote.

The move would force the UK government to explain why it believed leaving the 
EU was only a matter for Westminster, even though it would have a direct effect 
on the powers of all three devolved parliaments in Edinburgh, Cardiff and 
Belfast. Scottish government lawyers have already been sitting in on the case 
as observers.

In his statement on Friday, Antoniw said: “Having considered the judgments in 
both matters, I consider that they raise issues of profound importance not only 
in relation to the concept of parliamentary sovereignty but also in relation to 
the wider constitutional arrangements of the United Kingdom and the legal 
framework for devolution.”
 