
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is under intense 
pressure to announce an emergency NHS rescue plan to parliament – amid a chorus 
of warnings that hospitals and GP services across England have finally reached 
breaking point.

Theresa May cannot ignore NHS crisis or brush off critics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-cannot-ignore-nhs-crisis>
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are demanding the prime minister, or Jeremy 
Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, the health secretary, 
appear before MPs on Monday – when parliament returns from the Christmas break 
– as doctors and medical organisations said the winter crisis was reminiscent 
of the chaos that engulfed the service in the dark days of the 1990s. Former 
Tory health minister and practising NHS doctor Dan Poulter said it was 
essential that ministers disclosed the extent of the problems, because there 
was an urgent need to focus minds and build momentum behind the search for a 
cross-party solution.

In a further sign of spiralling pressures on health and social care services, 
the president of the Society for Acute Medicine, Dr Mark Holland, called on May 
to convene a special version of Cobra, the committee that is summoned only in 
national emergencies.

While Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
sources said that they understood the concerns, they said ministers had 
addressed the problems by announcing more funding for social care and the NHS. 
They also said the NHS was equipped to deal with winter pressures that they 
said were no more serious than last year. The demands for a plan of action and 
statement to parliament came after the British Red Cross, which has been 
providing help to dozens of overstretched hospitals, said the situation 
affecting the NHS in England was a “humanitarian crisis”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftheresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bff34c299f8c920e1e5a74c826f2fd61aa205c4%2F0_91_4340_2604%2F4340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20urged%20to%20get%20a%20grip%20on%20NHS%20as%20winter%20crisis%20spirals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftheresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20urged%20to%20get%20a%20grip%20on%20NHS%20as%20winter%20crisis%20spirals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftheresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bff34c299f8c920e1e5a74c826f2fd61aa205c4%2F0_91_4340_2604%2F4340.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn has called on the PM to address the Commons. Photograph: Darren 
Staples/Reuters 
The Observer view on the crisis in the NHS | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/observer-view-on-nhs-crisis>
NHS England figures have shown cancelled routine operations at record levels 
and acute services under intolerable strain. Evidence has come to light of 
patients dying because of long waits for care, chronic shortages of beds and 
lack of staff.Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>
 said May must go before the Commons to “set out to the British people how she 
plans to fix her failure on the NHS”.

Whitehall officials said that May, who is planning a major speech on Monday 
that will address mental health, had no plan to go to the Commons. Former Lib 
Dem health ministerNorman Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamb> said that was unacceptable. 
“The situation is deteriorating. It is not sustainable. The government has a 
responsibility to be held to account.”

Leading figures working in the NHS and social care, together with the 
Conservative-controlled Local Government Association, have been warning for 
months that the failure to provide sufficient services at home and in the 
community for those requiring social care has added to pressure on hospital 
beds with disastrous knock-on affects for other patients requiring acute or 
routine treatment.GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> have also 
reported unprecedented levels of demand.

Poulter welcomed the recent announcements of extra funding for social care and 
the NHS, and May’s focus on mental heath, but said it was time for honesty 
about the size of the problems. “Despite the welcome increases, the extra money 
has barely scratched the surface of the problems facing the NHS. It is 
sometimes difficult for those in charge to admit that there are problems but it 
is vital that we are now honest about the difficulties that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and social care are facing, because 
only by being honest will we create the pressure we need for cross-party action 
and a solution.”

NHS faces 'humanitarian crisis' as demand rises, British Red Cross warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
Holland, a consultant in acute medicine in Manchester, said: “The way things 
are going we’re heading back to the bad old days of the 1990s … The consistent 
message from so many professional bodies must be heard by the secretary of 
state for health and the prime minister. The rhetoric that we have a plan and 
that more money has been pumped into the system holds no water because it is 
patently clear to everybody that pockets of hospitals are now struggling to 
cope.”

Labour’s health spokesman, Jonathan Ashworth, said: “Theresa May must commit 
to bring forward an extra £700m of social care money now to help hospitals cope 
this winter and pledge a new funding settlement for health and social care at 
the next budget so this year’s crisis never happens again.”

Keith Willett, director of acute care for NHS England, rejected the Red Cross 
claims. “On the international scale of a humanitarian crisis, I don’t think the 
NHS is at that point. Clearly, demand is at the highest level ever. But also 
our planning is probably more comprehensive than it has ever been. In many 
ways, this is a level of pressure we have not seen before and the workload that 
the NHS is being asked to shoulder in terms of medical treatment and personal 
care is very high.

“There are several reasons for that. There is winter and many more people have 
breathing and heart problems, but we know it is also very difficult at the 
moment and social care and community services are not able to react fast enough 
to free up beds to keep up the flow through hospitals.”

The chairman of the BMA council, Mark Porter, said: “The intervention from the 
Red Cross highlights the enormous pressure the NHS is facing as conditions in 
hospitals across the country are reaching a dangerous level. The government 
should be ashamed that it has got the point where volunteers have been 
necessary to ease the burden.”

A DoH spokeswoman said it had given the NHS an extra £400m to help the service 
cope with additional demand.
 