
A few days before Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is sworn in as US president, 
one of his key advisers will arrive in Canada.


Kellyanne Conway will not be in Ottawa to meet with the prime minister, Justin 
Trudeau, or senior Canadian officials. Instead,the woman who managed the final 
months of Trump’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/kellyanne-conway-trumps-secret-weapon>
 will be in Alberta for a tour of the Fort McMurray oil sands and a speaking 
gig at a fundraising dinner for a Conservative advocacy group.

The Alberta Prosperity Fund, the group that invited Conway, have trumpeted 
what they describe as a “historical” visit. “Her visit to Alberta at this time 
should send a strong signal to Canadians on the importance of this province to 
the United States,” Heather Forsyth, the organisation’s chair,said in a 
statement announcing the visit. 
<http://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/key-trump-advisor-making-historical-alberta-stop-603595896.html>

Conway’s pre-inauguration jaunt – and uncertainty over how much should be made 
of the visit 
<http://www.macleans.ca/news/canada/an-alberta-pit-stop-on-trumps-bizarro-road-to-the-white-house/>
 – is a potent symbol of how the longstanding relationship between Canada and 
the US stands to be upended by the Trump presidency.

Few countries have as much at stake. “Canada has no closer friend, partner and 
ally than the United States,”noted Trudeau as he congratulated Trump 
<http://pm.gc.ca/eng/news/2016/11/09/statement-prime-minister-canada-result-us-presidential-election>
 following the election. 
<http://pm.gc.ca/eng/news/2016/11/09/statement-prime-minister-canada-result-us-presidential-election>
 Three-quarters of Canada’s exports went to the US last year. Nearly 400,000 
people a day cross the shared border, while roughly 2.5 million Canadian jobs 
depend on trade with the US.

Trump has so far offered little indication that he plans on doing Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> any favours, said Lawrence Herman, a 
trade lawyer with Toronto’s Herman and Associates.

Instead Canada seems likely to be a target of Trump’s protectionist trade 
agenda.

“We need to be prepared for some dark and stormy days ahead with our American 
neighbours,” said Herman. “Canadian softwood lumber, beef exports and dairy 
supply management are all on the Trump shortlist.”

Trump's Nafta threats would severely harm US, Mexican chief negotiator says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
The bulk of Canada’s trade with the US flows through Nafta, the trade 
agreement routinely disparaged by Trump as the “worst deal in history”. Trump 
has vowed to renegotiate the deal and raised the spectre of withdrawal if the 
US fails to secure a better deal for its workers.

Within days of Trump being elected, the Canadian government expressed its 
willingness to renegotiate the agreement. “I think any agreement can be 
improved on,” David MacNaughton, Canada’s ambassador to Washington, told 
reporters. “If they want to have a discussion about improving Nafta then we are 
ready to come to the table to try to put before the new administration anything 
that will benefit both Canada and the United States and obviously Mexico also.”

Much of Trump’s ire during the campaign was directed towards the loss of 
American jobs to low-wage countries, said Craig Alexander of the Conference 
Board of Canada. But Canada, he pointed out, is not a low-wage country.

Still, any thickening of the border or protectionist policies could have dire 
impacts. Canadian provinces carry out more trade with American states than with 
each other, he noted.

The high level of integration between the two countries means that any tax 
cuts or incentives handed out south of the border – such as Trump’s pledge to 
reducecorporate tax rates from 35% to 15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines>
 – could create competitive challenges that Canada would be forced to address, 
said Alexander.

A Trump presidency could have some benefits for Canada. Any policies enacted 
by Trump that are perceived to be less welcoming for immigrants could be a boon 
for Canada, a reality hinted at on election night asCanada’s main immigration 
site crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/canadas-immigration-website-crashes-as-donald-trumps-us-election-lead-grows>
 after an overload of visitors.

Trump’s plans to resurrect the TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline have also 
beencheered in some quarters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/canadians-4-donald-trump-us-election-politics>
. In congratulating Trump on his “impressive victory”, Canada’s former prime 
minister Stephen Harpersaid: 
<https://twitter.com/stephenharper/status/796386491203284996> “Canada/US 
partnership is strong. There is much to do, incl. moving ahead with KXL.”

'It's a pretty disturbing time for Ukraine': Trump's Russia ties unnerve Kiev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/ukraine-trump-presidency-russia-putin>
When the US rejected plans for the pipeline last year, Justin Trudeau, 
Canada’s prime minister, said in a statement he was “disappointed in the 
decision”. One year on, Trudeau haspushed forward with plans for a Canadian 
pipeline, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/canada-approves-kinder-morgan-oil-pipeline-justin-trudeau>
 offset by plans toimpose a minimum price on carbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/28/canada-emissions-climate-change-justin-trudeau-corporate-business>
 andphase out coal-fired electricity by 2030.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/canada-coal-electricity-phase-out-2030>

One of the biggest threats posed by Trump is his reticence to engage in the 
fight against climate change, said Scott Sinclair of the Canadian Centre for 
Policy Alternatives. “We should be concerned about his pledges to deregulate in 
terms of environmental policy, the threat to leave the Paris accord, lifting 
caps on coal plants.”

The resulting divergence in climate change strategies on either side of the 
border could make Canadian companies less competitive compared with their 
American rivals and put pressure on Canada to abandon its fledgling climate 
change efforts. Speaking to reporters soon after the election, Canada’s 
environment minister insisted Trump’s victory would not force Canada to rethink 
its green strategy. “We’re moving forward, as is the world,” Catherine McKenna 
told reporters. “Everyone is absolutely committed to climate action.”

Where Trump may see success in forcing a change in government policy is in 
defence spending. During the campaign, Trump railed against allies that fail to 
meet Nato’s agreed target of spending 2% on the military. Analysts were quick 
to point to Canada, where defence spending has fallen to a record low of 1% of 
GDP with no increase on the horizon.

Recent weeks have allowed for a fuller picture to develop of what the Trump 
presidency could mean for Canada, said Wesley Wark, a national security expert 
at the University of Ottawa. “Like 99.9% of the global population, the Canadian 
government was, I think, taken completely by surprise by the Trump victory,” he 
said. “The government is now beginning, across many departments, to try and 
come to grips with it in early days.”

In areas such as border security and intelligence, the picture that emerges is 
worrisome. The trust factor that has long characterised the relationship 
between Canada and the US may be difficult to sustain under the Trump 
administration, said Wark.

Canada prepares for surge of Mexican immigrants after visa lift and Trump win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/canada-mexico-immigrants-visas-asylum-tourism>
He pointed to the contrast between Canadian openness to Syrian refugees and 
Trump’s hard line on immigrants and “extreme vetting” of Muslims. “A Trump 
White House will not look kindly or with any understanding on Canadian refugee 
policy. It will demand proof that Canada is not threatening North American 
security by admitting such refugees; it may even demand change. The tone will 
be nasty.”

The Trump presidency could also prove to be a moral quandary for the Five Eyes 
intelligence sharing network, given the leading role of the US. “For the 
Canadian government there’s going to be increasing concern about whether the 
intelligence they’re receiving from the United States is going to be 
politicised to a degree that would make it unreliable or untrustworthy,” said 
Wark.

If the Trump administration chooses to embrace some of the legal practices 
from the George W Bush era around torture or extraordinary rendition, Canada 
may be forced to re-evaluate the intelligence it hands over to the US, said 
Wark.

“We’ve never had to deal with the United States as an intelligence power whose 
conduct of intelligence might be so different and divergent from what we would 
expect,” he added. “So it really puts us in a bind, where it’s rarely been over 
decades of Canada-US cooperation.”
 