
Spend any time with your grandparents and at some stage the age-old phase 
“they don’t make them like they use to” will pop up as nostalgia gets the 
better of them. Usually it’s just the rose-tinted glasses talking, but for 
video games it’s a fact: they quite literally don’t make them like they used to.

Back in the 1980s, when the industry was in its infancy, games were often 
created by two-person teams consisting of one programmer and one artist. In the 
1990s, sprites gave way to 3D modelling, and development teams mushroomed in 
size, hoovering up specialists in disciplines across animation, level design, 
character modelling and artificial intelligence.

Today, creating the most advanced, triple-A games has become too big a task 
for a single developer leading to the rise of what is best described as a 
modular approach, where different developers work on different parts of a 
single game.

Old dog, new tricks

One developer that is pioneering the modern modular approach is no spring 
chicken. Set up in 1984, Newcastle-based Reflections swiftly established a 
reputation for bringing cutting-edge graphics to side-scrollers such asShadow 
of the Beast <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shadow_of_the_Beast> and the 
gloriously named Brian the Lion. It then morphed into a driving-game 
specialist, thanks primarily to the Destruction Derby and Driver franchises.

French publisher Ubisoft acquired the studio in 2006, expanding its remit way 
beyond its previous practice of churning out a new Driver game every three 
years or so.

Reflections is crafting the vehicle components of the upcoming Watch Dogs 2 
and Ghost Recon Wildlands and has just finished the Underground downloadable 
content (DLC) pack for The Division. It’s finishing Grow Up, the sequel to 
2015’s Grow Home – ironically, a small, innovative download game made by a 
90s-style 10-person team.

Plus, it built roughly the half of the virtual Manhattan featured inThe 
Division, along with six of its story missions and various bits of the user 
interface. In recent years, it has worked on Ubisoft games as diverse as
Assassin’s Creed Syndicate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/assassins-creed-syndicate-review-failure>
 and Just Dance.

Reflections managing director Pauline Jacquey, a French native, identifies 
several upsides to the modular development approach, having introduced two 
extra “pillars”: the small incubator that created Grow Home and Grow Up, and 
the level-design and general action-adventure expertise,as seen in The Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/14/tom-clancy-the-division-ubisoft-online-shooter-review>
 – to the developer’s driving-game skills.

Jacquey acknowledges it is unhealthy for a developer to feel its future 
depends on a single three-year project, like2011’s Driver: San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/sep/01/driver-san-francisco-game-review>
: “Driver: San Francisco was not the commercial success we wanted it to be – it 
was a success, but not enough to cover the spending on it. It led the team to 
feel a bit that if it failed, it was a big catastrophe, and I worked really, 
really hard to make them understand that it’s OK to fail.

“Ubisoft is a company in which you’re OK to fail, because you’re learning from 
that. The fact that we now have these three pillars in our strategy goes a long 
way to remove a lot of stress, because we’re balanced.”

Ridding game development of the 1950s approach

The modular development approach also chimes with Jacquey’s desire to bring 
modern, enlightened working practices to the world of development – a world
epitomised by “crunch” periods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/18/crunched-games-industry-exploiting-workforce-ea-spouse-software>
 in the final stages of a game’s creation when, so the cliche goes, developers 
work all hours, sleep under their desks and exist on a diet of pizza and Coke. 
film

No such quasi-slavery on Jacquey’s watch: “I would hate to run a company where 
everybody feels it’s like the 50s. I’m trying to do the right things but the 
right way, so the goal doesn’t justify the means.

“My ideal is that for anybody here, their personality should be totally 
aligned with what they do in their job. And then you get quality and happiness, 
and you win on all fronts.”

Crunched: has the games industry stopped exploiting its workforce?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/18/crunched-games-industry-exploiting-workforce-ea-spouse-software>
Reflections’ approach, Jacquey acknowledges, involves laying aside what could 
be seen as the company’s ego: “In the past, the image of the studio was linked 
to the image of the game – there was a total match between Driver as a 
franchise and Reflections. Today it’s more about the teams, and about the 
culture and about our values. And I find it a bit more sustainable and modern.”

The presence of members of the vehicle team with over 20 years’ service at 
Reflections bears out that shift. Ben Merrick, a vehicle realisation expert who 
has been at Reflections 13 years, is happy to put vehicles into other studios’ 
games: “I love it, because vehicles have been my passion ever since I was a 
kid, so the ability to put vehicles and computer games together is great.

“Regarding the collaboration, you’re involved in more projects, so you see 
them getting to the shelf, and you’re getting that pleasure of making things 
that are getting into people’s hands.”

Jacquey points out that the days of even the most fiercely independent 
developers working on big games on their own are well and truly over: “In 2016, 
you’ll never do a game in isolation, regardless of whether or not you’re the 
lead developer – it doesn’t happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57da66b9160a51131f95ee8363e406396fba42c%2F0_189_5657_3394%2F5657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=They%20quite%20literally%20don't%20make%20games%20the%20way%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=They%20quite%20literally%20don%27t%20make%20games%20the%20way%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57da66b9160a51131f95ee8363e406396fba42c%2F0_189_5657_3394%2F5657.jpg>
 Collaboration is the name of the game at the French-owned company. Photograph: 
Reflections 
“We work with co-development partners, marketing teams, community development 
teams, we work with players and we work with first-parties [like Sony, 
Microsoft and Nintendo].”

It’s not entirely rosy, of course. Jacquey admits that communication can pose 
problems: “It’s difficult. Obviously, everything is much simpler when everybody 
is located in the same area. But it’s simpler this way as well, because you’re 
not going through the difficulties of working with people who know more than 
you or different things than you.

“So yes, we sometimes face cultural differences and it’s not always easy: 
misunderstandings are happening much more. But at the same time, when it works, 
it’s fantastic, because then it’s sharing a culture and getting the best of 
both sides. And that means that you can progress much, much faster, and I’m 
sure that’s one of the reasons for Ubisoft’s success.”

‘There was a bit of fear, but it was the good fear’

Evidence suggests that approach is paying off. Underground, which takes the 
Division’s action into the New York subway, might be the most hi-tech slab of 
DLC ever, as it uses procedural generation to ensure every mission you 
undertake in it is randomly generated and unique. Randomly generated dungeons 
have featured in old-school RPGs for years, but not in anything as complex as 
the Division.

Jacquey acknowledges that the decision to put procedural generation to the 
test was due to time constraints: “There was a bit of fear, but it was the good 
fear, like: ‘Ah, let’s do it.’ It’s like the fear just before jumping.”

With around 300 employees and plenty of ambition, it comes as a surprise to 
find that Jacquey complains of a problem that afflicts large swathes of the UK 
developer community: an inability to recruit staff.

“We have 35 openings today, and we have a pretty ambitious growth strategy for 
the future. We’re not looking for juniors – we’re looking for seniors and 
experts, so that makes recruitment harder, of course,” she said.

It’s a problem that the games industry fears Brexit will amplify. Although 
Refections employs hundreds of Britons, the British higher education system has 
failed to provide games developers with enough graduates who possess the skills 
they need for years, so the industry has consistently looked to central and 
eastern Europe, as well as north America, for a significant proportion of its 
recruits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf454ddde07cfb719b26ecddd81ada7ffdaa33a%2F0_192_5745_3447%2F5745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=They%20quite%20literally%20don't%20make%20games%20the%20way%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=They%20quite%20literally%20don%27t%20make%20games%20the%20way%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fthey-quite-literally-dont-make-games-the-way-they-used-to%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf454ddde07cfb719b26ecddd81ada7ffdaa33a%2F0_192_5745_3447%2F5745.jpg>
 The award-winning firm looks set for further success, with the upcoming 
releases of Watch Dogs 2 and Ghost Recon Wildlands. Photograph: Reflections 
Whatever happens in the future, the French-owned company looks set to go from 
strength to strength.

You will be able to see for yourself in two of the most-anticipated games in 
development, this Christmas’s Watch Dogs 2 and next year’s Ghost Recon 
Wildlands, plus the imminent Underground pack for The Division and the 
whimsical, original Grow Up. All of which offers proof of the importance of 
cross-national collaboration.

 * 16 trends that will define the future of video games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/23/16-trends-that-will-change-the-games-industry>

 * We Happy Few – the indie game about Britain that couldn’t be more relevant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/24/we-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3> 