
Think Grimsby and you think fish. You know it, we know it. Start a chant of 
“you stink of fish” and we’ll answer with “we piss on your fish, yes we do”. 
The names of our fanzines – Sing When We’re Fishing, The Fishy, Cod Almighty – 
tell their own story. It was Liverpool’s Kop that first sang “you only sing 
when you’re fishing” at us, during an FA Cup tie in 1980. We changed the 
personal pronoun and turned an insult into a motto.Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> men, away for long periods in 
the fishing grounds, came home with a lot of catching up to do, with their 
drinking and with the Mariners.

Perhaps inevitably, then, the piscine theme finds its way into We Are Town 
<https://www.facebook.com/wearetownbook>, a new anthology of writing from 
Grimsby Town fans published by theMariners Trust 
<http://www.marinerstrust.co.uk/>. In one section of the book Grimbarian author 
Jack Waterman, reflecting on the club’s centenary exhibition in 1978, argues 
that during our heyday in the 1930s, “the prosperity of the fishing industry 
and the confidence of the town were reflected in the performances of the team”. 
In another, Town fan and former Guardian sports journalist Steve Bierley says 
of our long post-war decline: “The trawling industry collapsed, while the 
footballing knowledge of the Grimsby board could have been written on the 
dorsal fin of a small cod.”

By 1970, the decline appeared terminal for both the Mariners and the industry 
that gave us our nickname. The trawling never did revive. True, manager Lawrie 
McMenemy reignited the club in 1971-72, taking us to a fourth division title. 
In another chapter, Grimsby-supporting DJ and author Bill Brewster notes that 
we’ve had better teams since, but McMenemy remains a legend. He took his 
bleary-eyed players on to the Grimsby docks before dawn to remind them how hard 
fans had to work to earn the money for a ticket on the Pontoon of a Saturday.

But by the time of our centenary, that revival had faded as Great Grimsby MP 
and foreign secretaryAnthony Crosland 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Crosland> negotiated, unsuccessfully, an 
end to the Cod Wars with Iceland which sounded the death knell of the fishing 
industry. Everything that happened to the football club since felt like a 
battle against a strong economic tide.

And yet. In 1980, a team consisting of local youths and journeymen won the 
Division Three title and Town were back in the second tier after an absence of 
17 years. The next season we almost went one better. Back in the Fourth in the 
late 1980s, Alan Buckley, with stubborn single-mindedness, built a team of 
hard-working craftsmanship – that craft at times spilling over into sheer 
bloody genius – which again returned us to the second flight. Attendances 
remained low. An abiding theme of much of We Are Town is a failure to 
appreciate good times when they were working dazzling triangles below us on the 
pitch.

And the association with fish remained. It was something now that our parents 
had done, rather than something we did ourselves, but the fishing industry was 
still ingrained in the way we related to our town, and Town.

Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 