
It is the day after the New Year weekend. People all over the country are 
dusting off the last of the mince pie crumbs and dragging themselves painfully 
back to work. Offices are re-opening, schools filling up for the first time in 
a few weeks.

Not here. We never closed. We arrive in work – business as usual once again, 
but the ambulances are already queuing around the drive to A&E. Eight in the 
morning and the department is full.

I walk through the ambulatory care centre. Usually it’s a day unit for 
patients that need blood tests or routine investigations – but overnight it has 
become a makeshift ward because the hospital is bursting to capacity. The 
day-centre managers are unhappy because there is nowhere for the day-case 
patients to be seen now. The bed manager from the night shift looks exhausted, 
and explains she had a choice between blocking up the unit or leaving five 
elderly, frail ladies in a cold hospital corridor all night long. She can’t 
win. None of us can.

The morning progresses. Men in suits with clipboards walk the corridors, their 
faces reflecting the futility of their assignment. Their task: to move patients 
from A&E to the medical and surgical wards upstairs. But there are no beds 
upstairs. There are no beds anywhere.

My colleagues look how I feel: exhausted. ​​Some will go home and weep tonight.

The shift continues but the ambulances do not stop coming. Sepsis. Seizures. 
Overdoses. Haemorrhages. These aren’t patients in the wrong place or patients 
abusing the system – these people are exactly where they should be – but there 
isn’t the spaceanywhere to put them.


Another sick patient arrives, he needs urgent resuscitation, but the 
resuscitation bays are full. Some quick juggling by the A&E sister and a 
patient moves to a corridor to allow the acutely sick patient to get his 
treatment. He’s stabilised, but the seams of the department are creaking now.

The silver and gold command managers are doing everything they can to create 
room – they ask if we can divert our ambulances to another hospital to ease the 
pressure, but the answer is no. All the surrounding hospitals are in exactly 
the same situation. This isn’t a freak day for our area, this is winter in the
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

More time passes and more ambulances arrive. We see as many as we can. 
Antibiotics. Fluids. Pain relief. Tea. Hold a hand. Reassure. Write something 
in the notes. Move on. There are doctors seeing patients in corridors. At 
medical school we do not get lessons in how to examine a woman’s abdomen in a 
busy walkway while still maintaining her privacy, but we muddle through, and 
the patients couldn’t be more understanding and are just happy to be receiving 
care without having to wait even longer. Most have been here for hours already, 
and haven’t even seen a doctor yet.

Another ambulance arrives. The crew report that the patient is very sick, but 
there is no room inside. A doctor rushes into the back of the ambulance, makes 
a quick assessment, and sends them to a neighbouring hospital that has the 
specialist surgeons to save this patient’s life. I hear one doctor remark that 
she’s never seen the hospital as busy as this. A consultant rushes past and 
quips with a grimace that he unfortunately has.

The chaos escalates into the afternoon. The medical director – the chief 
physician – is marching through A&E, through the hospital, trying to send 
patients home where he can. We discharge patients that, were this a quiet week 
in June, would most certainly stay an extra night or two for observation and 
rehabilitation. We cannot afford them this time now. It isn’t the ideal care we 
want to give. But when there are other patients that could otherwise die in the 
corridors before we get to them, what else can we do?

My colleagues look how I feel: exhausted. Some will go home and weep tonight. 
They’ll tell their husbands or their wives that this isn’t what they signed up 
for. They wanted to help people, to be doctors, nurses, physiotherapists or 
pharmacists. But how can you help people properly in a broken system?

'The worst conditions in memory': NHS doctors describe a week in A&E
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/an-absolute-warzone-nhs-doctors-describe-their-week-in-ae>
Elsewhere, the children are rolling out of school. Offices close for the day, 
as people trudge home, weary from their first day back at work after Christmas. 
They are oblivious to the pandemonium ensuing inside our hospital, and many 
others like it up and down the country. The government will continue to deny 
the truth: that our healthcare system is desperately underfunded. It is 
understaffed. It is becoming unsafe, to the point where the Red Cross is 
declaring a humanitarian crisis. Wespend less on healthcare than most of our 
neighbours in Europe 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/nhs-in-a-nutshell/health-care-spending-compared>
. We have fewer doctors than most of our neighbours in Europe. We tried to tell 
the government. We went onstrike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/26/80-percent-junior-doctors-took-part-in-all-out-strike>
. Wewrote newspaper articles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/oct/22/nhs-doctor-surgeon-junior-contract-quit-job-stress-family-children>
. Wewent on television 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/news/a782876/watch-junior-doctor-rachel-clarke-take-down-liar-jeremy-hunt-in-a-stunning-live-bbc-interview/>
. We met our MPs. Wemarched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/live/2016/apr/26/junior-doctors-start-first-all-out-strike-live>
. We sang. Wereleased a music single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/dec/23/nhs-choir-no-1-bridge-over-you>
.

But instead of listening, the government silenced us. Drowned us out. 
Dismissed us. Vilified us. Ignored us. Jeremy Hunt will make another visit to a 
hospital. He’ll give a nice sound bite about what a sterling job everyone is 
doing, along witha warped half-lie about how they have increased NHS funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/19/jeremy-hunt-broken-nhs-england-funding-pledges>
 to help ease the pressure. He’ll pose for a photograph with us. We’ll smile 
serenely. Everything is under control. Right?

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 