
Thousands of experienced employment coaches are expected to lose their jobs 
over the next few weeks as ministers trigger the first stage of a massive 
shakeout of the government-funded welfare to work sector that will see it 
shrink by 75%.

The employment services industry is preparing for what one insider called “a 
bloodbath” as the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) moves to replace the 
work programme with the much smallerwork and health programme 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CBP-7845>.

Documents seen by the Guardian reveal that seven of the 15 work programme 
prime contractors, including big private sector names such asSerco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup> and Maximus, have not made it 
on to the initial shortlist for the new scheme.

The work and health programme shortlist, which is to be officially announced 
next week, begins a process in which the remaining eight work programme firms 
will compete with three new entrants for just six new regional contracts.

The final outcome, expected when contracts are awarded in late spring, could 
result in some firms being forced to abandon the market, or diversify into 
other contracted out public service areas, such as criminal justice or 
apprenticeships.

“This decimates the welfare to work industry. It represents the unravelling of 
nearly 20 years of unemployment support experience,” one industry insider told 
the Guardian.

Work coaches provide long-term unemployed clients with help to acquire a range 
of employment and life skills designed to increase their chances of finding 
work, such as CV writing, IT skills and literacy, as well as liaising with 
potential employers.

Thousands of work coach jobs are expected to be lost. “This means large job 
losses among really experienced frontline advisers, the majority of which are 
in charities,” said Kirsty McHugh, the chief executive of the Employment 
Related Services Association.

The work and health programme is expected to start in the autumn and aims to 
provide specialist support for long-term unemployed people, especially those 
with health conditions or a disability.

Funding will be about £100m a year over four years. This is about a quarter of 
the current annual spending on the work programme, which closes at the end of 
March, and work choice, which will continue for a few months longer.

Ministers have been warned that the cuts will undermine the government’s 
ambitious commitment tohalve the disability employment gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
 by 2020, which requires it to find jobs for about 1.2 million people with 
disabilities or long-term illnesses able to work.

Ministers are understood to believe that rising employment levels, coupled 
with the provision of extra disability employment advisers in Jobcentre Plus, 
means that recent high levels of investment in employment support are no longer 
needed.


But the Commons work and pensions committee warned in November 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/news-parliament-2015/future-of-jobcentre-plus-report-published-16-17/>
 that the scale of the cuts to the work and health programme meant that many 
disabled and ill claimants would be unable to access support.

Tony Wilson, the director of policy and research at the Learning and Work 
Institute <http://www.learningandwork.org.uk/> thinktank, said: “The work and 
health scheme will support far fewer people and it would not be able to deliver 
services to the extent that could be done previously.

“Our assessment is that this scheme will make a vanishingly small contribution 
to the halving of the disability employment gap.”

Of current work programme contractors, Serco, Maximus, Seetec, Interserve, 
Learndirect, NCG and Rehab Jobfit are not on the work and health programme 
provider shortlist.

The following firms have made it on to the shortlist, known as the framework: 
PeoplePlus (shortlisted in all six contract regions), Shaw Trust (5), G4s (5), 
Ingeus (3), Reed (3), Working Links (3), Pluss (2), Prospects (1), APM (1), 
Remploy (1) and Economic Solutions (1).

The regions covered by the framework are: central, north-east, north-west, 
southern, home counties and Wales. London and Greater Manchester will run their 
own devolved work and health scheme.

The work programme – which was launched in 2011 by the then secretary of state 
for work and pensions, Iain Duncan Smith – achieved mixed results and was
fiercely criticised 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/iain-duncan-smiths-work-programme-fails-to-find-work-for-70-per-cent-of-people-a6703136.html>
 for the low numbers of disabled and chronically ill people it succeeded in 
supporting into work.


It was also dogged by controversy over alleged misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/20/a4e-alleged-fraud-inquiry-work>
 by work coaches, and the high salaries earned by top executives. Emma 
Harrison, the founder of A4E, wascriticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/09/a4e-welfare-to-work-contract> 
for paying herself dividends of £8.6m in 2011, on top of a £365,000 annual 
salary.

Harrison, who had a brief spell as former prime minister David Cameron’s 
“families tsar” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/9102024/David-Camerons-families-tsar-Emma-Harrison-resigns-after-fraud-probe-at-her-company.html>
 sold her personal stake in A4E to Staffline group in 2015 for areported £20m 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/20m-windfall-for-emma-harrison-as-she-exits-welfare-to-work-firm-a4e-1-7231725>
. The relaunched company, PeoplePlus, is shortlisted in all six work and health 
programme areas.

Industry insiders expressed surprise that Maximus – which has gained notoriety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/06/maximus-fit-for-work-tests-fail-mental-health-patients-says-doctor>
 as the provider of the DWP’s controversial “fit for work” tests – failed to 
make the shortlist as it had been seen as one of the best performing work 
programme providers in terms of getting long-term jobless people into 
sustainable jobs.


A DWP spokesperson said: “Our new work and health programme – which our 
providers will help us deliver – will allow us to give more tailored support 
for jobseekers and there will be an overall increase in funding for people with 
health conditions and disabilities.

“Work coaches play a crucial role in supporting people into work and these 
changes will allow us to do more through our Jobcentre Plus network.”
 