
It may be a tradition that local and regional newpapers are politically 
neutral, but Trinity Mirror’s three major dailies have come off the fence over 
the EU referendum.

The Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> Evening News (MEN), 
Liverpool Echo and Newcastle Journal have urged their readers to vote for 
Remain.

In similar leading articles, the three titles argue that EU funding has been 
crucial to regenerating their cities after previous years of industrial decline.

As HoldTheFrontPage reports 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2016/news/newspapers-come-off-the-fence-as-city-dailies-back-remain/>
, the MEN devoted its front page and three inside pages to explaining why it 
thinks remaining in the EU will be good for Manchester.Its editorial stated 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/manchester-evening-news-believes-greater-11478855>
:

“In the sound and fury of the scaremongering and speculation, it has been 
difficult to navigate the referendum debate. The hype has made it hard to 
believe anything said by politicians.

But we believe a cool, clear-eyed assessment of what we do know means that 
despite the many flaws, EU membership has been good to our region.”


The Echo’s passionate and lengthy editorial, “Why staying in Europe is right 
for the New Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/staying-europe-right-new-liverpool-11479102>
”, carried the byline of the editor, Alastair Machray. It said:

“If we vote ‘Leave’ things will change and they’ll change in a bad way. Trade 
will suffer... Then there’s immigration. The bigots of the Far Right crusade 
under a flag which says Brexit means an end to it.

If you shut your eyes, put your hands over your ears and shout la, la la, very 
loudly, you could just about believe it...

Culturally, hasn’t Liverpool ALWAYS been about the mix? A cultural melting pot 
that bubbles with life and energy and creativity? We’re Irish, we’re West 
Indian. We’re the Welsh, we’re the Somali. We’re the Polish, we’re the Chinese. 
We’reLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>. Even ‘Scouse’ is a 
word of Scandinavian orgin.”

Turning to the benefits his city has enjoyed courtesy of the EU, Machray wrote:

“At the end of it all there’s loyalty. A word Liverpool, battered but unbowed, 
understands more clearly perhaps, than any other city.

25 years ago Liverpool and Merseyside were near basket-cases, down-at-heel and 
down on their luck. Two things changed that: an indomitable spirit and £2.3bn 
of European investment... We were part of Team Europe andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> saw a team member in distress. 
And it came to our aid.”

The Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> Journal carried a 
front page with pictures of politicians of all parties who are urging Britain 
to stay within the EU.

An article by political editor Jonathan Walker was headlined “The Journal 
urges readers to ‘do what’s best for the North East’ and vote remain on June 23 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/journal-urges-readers-do-whats-11477302>
”.

“This debate is too important for The Journal to stay silent,” he wrote, 
because “the British people are about to make the biggest ­political decision 
of our lives.” He continued:

“The north east is an exporting region. We exported more than £12bn of goods 
last year, and we’re the only region with a positive balance of trade.How can 
it make sense to cut ourselves off from the EU?...

Quitting the EU would also cut off investment that’s created so many jobs in 
the North East.”

Turning to immigration, Walker wrote:

“More than half of migrants in this country actually came from outside the 
EU... Leaving would do nothing to prevent their arrival.

And migrants come because there are jobs. Employers, whether private firms or 
public services such as the NHS, need them.”

And a Dutch newspaper wants us to stay too...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fthree-regional-papers-break-with-tradition-to-urge-remain-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F563eee93009e46b02c7c92ec7cb2ee337e03c1bb%2F0_20_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20regional%20papers%20break%20with%20tradition%20to%20urge%20Remain%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fthree-regional-papers-break-with-tradition-to-urge-remain-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20regional%20papers%20break%20with%20tradition%20to%20urge%20Remain%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fthree-regional-papers-break-with-tradition-to-urge-remain-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F563eee93009e46b02c7c92ec7cb2ee337e03c1bb%2F0_20_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 A letter to ‘beloved Britons’ by a Dutch paper. Photograph: Twitter 
And how about a very different sort of endorsement spotted by Tom Edwards, a 
political reporter with theWorcester News <http://www.worcesternews.co.uk/>. On 
Twitter, he posted a cutting from an unidentified Dutch newspaper, remarking: “
Have a read of this and tell me you aren’t touched 
<https://twitter.com/tomedwardsWN/status/743202106811817984?lang=en>.”

It began: “Hello Britain, this is your neighbour calling. Please don’t leave 
us... we feel at ease in your amazing country. Since our King William III (of 
Orange) married your Queen Mary II (of England) we have been related anyway.”

This might not go down so well among the nationalist community of Northern 
Ireland, of course, but let’s overlook that. The piece continued:

“Nobody in Europe appreciates your culture more than we do. The Beatles, 
Bridget Jones, One Direction, EastEnders, Brideshead Revisited, we love it all.

Many of us know Monty Python’s Dead Parrot sketch by heart. We admire your 
stiff upper lip. And every year we remember, with the greatest respect, all 
those who have fallen to liberate our country.

Now you are thinking of leaving us. Sailing out your floating country towards 
distant shores, so says your largest newspaper, the Sun.

Talking as a Dutch uncle, we have to tell you this is not a good idea. We not 
only love you, we need you. Who else supports us in keeping some common sense 
on this turbulent continent of ours?

An EU without the UK would be like tea without milk. Bitter. So please, stay. 
Stay with us.”

Touching indeed! 

 