
There was to be no fairytale late surge into the eight for the Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> as Canberra ensured Sunday’s 
match at Leichhardt Oval went to form with a 42-point thumping.

Needing a victory to secure a place in this year’s finals, the Tigers were 
simply blown out of the water by a rampant Raiders side, for whom Josh Papalii 
and Jordan Rapana both scored doubles in a comfortable 52-10 victory.

Melbourne Storm overpower Cronulla to win NRL minor premiership | match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/nrl-minor-premiership-storm-sharks-report>
When Joseph Tapine stripped the ball, picked it up himself and muscled his way 
over with six minutes left on the clock, the Raiders passed the required 42 
points to ensure they ended the regular season with a club record points haul.

There was still time for Sam Williams to pounce on a grubber from Sia Soliola 
as the Raiders brought up 688 points for the season, beating the previous mark 
of 677 set by the premiership-winning side of 1994.

Victory saw Canberra claim second spot on the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> ladder and they will now meet Cronulla 
in the first week of finals, while the manner of their convincing win – and the 
brilliance of Josh Hodgson, particularly in the first half – suggests they are 
serious contenders to land the premiership crown.

The tone for the Tigers’ day was set early, when Tim Simona overcooked his 
opening kick-off and the ball sailed out on the full; from that point onwards 
Jason Taylor’s side were never able to get a foothold in the game.

Jarrod Croker opened the scoring for the Raiders on 10 minutes before Rapana 
grabbed his first – running onto a flicked pass-of-the-season contender from 
Joey Leilua – and Papalii notched a first-half double either side of a Hodgson 
effort.

Holding a 30-4 lead at the break, the writing was already on the wall but 
there was no respite for the Tigers in the second half as Canberra piled on the 
misery, Leilua getting his name on the scoresheet before Rapana scored his 
second.

The late tries from Tapine and Williams sealed victory and ensured the Raiders 
finished in the top two for the first time since 1995, but one blot on an 
otherwise impeccable copybook came when Jack Wighton was put on report with 10 
minutes remaining for a shoulder charge on Joel Edwards.

For the Tigers, it was a disappointing end to the season after they had, 
against the odds, kept alive their hopes of reaching the finals until the very 
last day of the regular season.

It was also a sad day for Robbie Farah fans, as the departing Tigers great, 
who won the premiership with the club in 2005, bid farewell to Leichhardt 
during an emotional half-time walk around the club’s spiritual home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169bf4c75e7531919ea28545470a43e785c90262%2F0_65_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tigers'%20finals%20hopes%20die%20as%20Canberra%20underline%20NRL%20premiership%20credentials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tigers%27%20finals%20hopes%20die%20as%20Canberra%20underline%20NRL%20premiership%20credentials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169bf4c75e7531919ea28545470a43e785c90262%2F0_65_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
 Josh Mansour scored two tries as Penrith signed off the regular season in 
convincing fashion. Photograph: Brett Hemmings/Getty Images 
In Sunday’s late kick-off, Penrith sent an ominous warning to week-one finals 
opponents Canterbury with a first-half demolition of Manly in the final game of 
the regular season.


Panthers skipper Matt Moylan whipped their season-high 15,411 crowd at Pepper 
Stadium into a frenzy by having a hand in four of the tries in the 36-6 rout. 
Winger Josh Mansour nabbed a double, while rookie Nathan Cleary kicked a 
perfect six from six.

The Panthers’ win, their fifth in succession and seventh in eight games, sets 
up an intriguing elimination final against at out-of-form Bulldogs outfit at 
ANZ Stadium next Sunday. For the Sea Eagles, their fifth straight loss leaves 
them with a 13th-placed finish and plenty of thinking to do for first-year 
coach Trent Barrett. Working out the futures of injured veterans Brett Stewart 
and Steve Matai will be top of the pile.

Moylan was unstoppable from the kick-off, setting up Mansour’s first in the 
fourth minute before igniting a six-minute avalanche of points by putting Bryce 
Cartwright over the line in the 21st. The home side then went 100 metres in the 
next set, Moylan sending Waqa Blake into the clear for Dallin Watene-Zelezniak 
to finish off, and then also getting Peter Wallace under the posts three 
minutes later.

At one stage, only some friendly fire from a prone Trent Merrin could stop the 
incumbent NSW Origin pivot, who finished the game with three try and four line 
break assists.


By the time rookie Nathan Cleary converted another Mansour try on the stroke 
of half-time, the Panthers left the field to a standing ovation and a 30-0 
lead. Blake added a sixth try just minutes into the restart before the home 
side slowed down, with Wallace awarded his first rest of the season and Jake 
Trbojevic levelling the second half at six-all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2f04be6529b17d4a74749c157d75737a5616c56%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tigers'%20finals%20hopes%20die%20as%20Canberra%20underline%20NRL%20premiership%20credentials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tigers%27%20finals%20hopes%20die%20as%20Canberra%20underline%20NRL%20premiership%20credentials&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Ftigers-finals-hopes-die-as-canberra-underline-nrl-premiership-credentials%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2f04be6529b17d4a74749c157d75737a5616c56%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Bevan French’s incredible debut season ended with a hat-trick in the Eels’ win 
over the Warriors. Photograph: Mark Nolan/Getty Images 
Parramatta ended their season from hell in style, thumping the New Zealand 
Warriors <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-zealand-warriors> 40-18. A 
hat-trick to rookie fullback Bevan French showed Eels fans they have reason to 
hope going into the 2017 season as their side played with heart, pace and skill 
on a wet Auckland afternoon.

French wasn’t the only Eel to bag multiple tries, hooker Isaac de Gois also 
got in on the act, scoring a double of his own. Semi Radradra, Michael Jennings 
and French were simply too much for the Warriors to contain, they broke the 
defensive line almost at will as the Warriors compounded their problems with 15 
errors to Parramatta’s 7.

But it didn’t look like this would be the result early on. The Warriors 
started hot and were out to a 12-0 lead after just seven minutes thanks to 
tries to Manu Vatuvei and Simon Mannering.

An Eels knock-on in a dangerous position gave departing Warriors five-eighth 
Thomas Leuluai the opportunity to slip a grubber into the corner, with which 
Vatuvei made no mistake. The side then extended their lead when stalwart 
Mannering got on the end of an Issac Luke inside ball to crash over near the 
posts.

The Warriors were also dominating ball possession. Then they lapsed and 
handling errors, a hallmark of the their unsuccessful finals tilt, ushered the 
Eels back into the contest.

Makeshift fullback Tuimoala Lolohea knocked on in front of his tryline in the 
17th minute, letting De Gois in to score before the Eels hooker grabbed a 
farcical second. Luke dropped the ball attempting to collect his own 20th 
minute scrum feed, handing De Gois four points on a plate.

Parramatta then took the lead in the 28th minute when Radradra eased into the 
corner, before Mannering claimed the lead back for the Warriors after running 
into a defensive hole.

Eels fullback French capitalised on a Radradra gallop to reclaim the lead once 
again in a half that ended 22-18. The second stanza started poorly for the 
Warriors, with French crossing for two simple tries. The rookie fullback 
strolled through a hole from dummy half for his second, before grabbing his 
third when centre David Fusitu’a spilled a potential intercept in the 46th 
minute.

A late disallowed try to rookie Nathaniel Roache, followed by a Michael 
Jennings try for the Eels made the damp afternoon truly miserable for the 
Warriors, who failed to make the finals for a fifth consecutive year.
 