
Tim Wu is a law professor at Columbia University. His specialities include 
competition, copyright and telecommunications law. So far, so conventional. But 
Wu is an unconventional academic. For one thing, he ran for the Democratic 
nomination for lieutenant governorship of New York (and won 40% of the popular 
vote, though not the primary election). For another, he served for a time in 
the office of New York’s attorney general, specialising in issues involving 
technology, consumer protection and ensuring fair competition among online 
companies. “If I have a life mission,” he said once, “it is to fight bullies. I 
like standing up for the little guy and I think that’s what the state attorney 
general’s office does.”

As I said, no ordinary academic. But it gets better. Wu is also the guy who 
coined the phrase “net neutrality”, which has turned out to be a key concept in 
debates about regulation of the internet. He was for a time a senior adviser to 
the Federal Trade Commission, America’s main consumer protection agency. And 
somehow, in the middle of all this activity, he writes books that make a big 
impact.

In 2010, for example, he published The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of 
Information Empires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/02/master-switch-tim-wu-review>, a 
sobering history of the great communications technologies of the 20th century – 
the telephone, movies, broadcast radio and television. In telling the history, 
Wu perceived a recurring cycle in the evolution of these technologies. Each 
started out as open, chaotic, diverse and intensely creative; each stimulated 
utopian visions of the future, but in the end they all wound up “captured” by 
industrial interests.

The cue for his new book, The Attention Merchants, is an observation the Nobel 
prize-winning economist Herbert Simon made in 1971. “In an information-rich 
world,” Simon wrote, “the wealth of information means a dearth of something 
else: a scarcity of whatever it is that information consumes. What information 
consumes is rather obvious: it consumes the attention of its recipients. Hence 
a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention and a need to allocate 
that attention efficiently among the overabundance of information sources that 
might consume it.”

Wu’s book is a history of the attention industry, that is to say the 
enterprises that harvest human attention and sell it to advertisers. This is 
not quite the same thing as a history ofadvertising, which is a more ancient 
business. His story begins therefore not with the paid advertisements that 
featured in early newspapers and printed pamphlets, but with two separate 
developments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9239c85c16fab494bda08cb7b0169ad286e34da2%2F495_617_4131_2479%2F4131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Wu%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20internet%20is%20like%20the%20classic%20story%20of%20the%20party%20that%20went%20sour%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Wu%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20internet%20is%20like%20the%20classic%20story%20of%20the%20party%20that%20went%20sour%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9239c85c16fab494bda08cb7b0169ad286e34da2%2F495_617_4131_2479%2F4131.jpg>
 Tim Wu looks back at attempts by entrepreneurs to capture the public 
imagination. Photograph: Mike Groll/AP 
The first was Benjamin Day’s scandal sheet, the New York Sun, the first issue 
of which appeared on 3 September, 1833. Day’s big idea was to build circulation 
fast with sensational content (including what we would now call “fake news”) 
and a very low cover price. In the process, he established the attention 
merchant’s basic modus operandi: “draw attention with apparently free stuff and 
then resell it”, a business model that is still alive and prospering on the 
contemporary internet.

The second development appeared in, of all places, 1860s Paris, in the form of 
huge, wall-mounted posters portraying beautiful, half-dressed women cavorting 
over fields of vibrant colour. They were the brainchild ofJules Chéret 
<http://artnouveauposters.biz/jules-cheret-posters>, an aspiring artist and 
former printer, who understood that there are few better ways of gaining male 
attention than by displaying images of the barely clothed female form. Thus was 
the billboard ad born.

The Attention Merchants chronicles the attempts that publishers and 
entrepreneurs have made to capture and resell human attention over nearly two 
centuries, from Day in 1833 to BuzzFeed, Instagram, Google and Facebook today, 
with a major detour into state propaganda (Britain during the first world war,
Goebbels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/17/goebbels-man-behind-nazi-myth-peter-longerich-review>
 during the second) along the way.

In large measure, this is a story of communication technologies, starting with 
print, moving on to broadcast media (radio, television) and winding up with the 
internet and the technologies it has spawned (email, blogging, search engines, 
social media). But the striking feature of the book is the way it interweaves 
this story of technological development with two other strands. The first is an 
account of how the human subjects whose attention is being sought eventually 
rebel, giving rise to outbreaks of resistance that sometimes lead to regulatory 
intervention, but more often to changes of tack by the attention merchants. The 
second strand is a series of meditations on the cultural implications of the 
attention merchants’ success.

As in his previous book, Wu identifies periodic cycles in the evolution of an 
industry for which nothing succeeds like excess – at least for a time. As 
Google’s executive chairman, Eric Schmidt, once put it in an 
uncharacteristically unguarded moment: “The ideal is to get right up to the 
creepy line and not cross it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68ce0103567ed41184bebc53c7aa6fdbefcbf8c1%2F0_128_2500_3124%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Wu%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20internet%20is%20like%20the%20classic%20story%20of%20the%20party%20that%20went%20sour%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Wu%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20internet%20is%20like%20the%20classic%20story%20of%20the%20party%20that%20went%20sour%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftim-wu-interview-internet-classic-party-went-sour-attention-merchants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68ce0103567ed41184bebc53c7aa6fdbefcbf8c1%2F0_128_2500_3124%2F2500.jpg>
 Attention seeker: Joseph Goebbels, minister of propaganda in Nazi Germany. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Periodically, though, the line has been crossed. Day’s sensationalist 
approach, for example, generated an epidemic of patent-medicine fraud (there 
really was something called snake oil), until it was eventually unhorsed by 
crusading journalists and scientific research. In the 1950s, American 
television networks overdosed on quiz shows until revelations that all of the 
big ones were fixed. And in our own time, the ubiquity of intrusive smartphone 
ads has led to the ad-blocking revolt that currently threatens to undermine the 
basic business model of cyberspace.

What is even more sobering, though, is the direction of travel of the long 
journey on which the industry has taken our culture. In the US, radio brought 
advertising into people’s homes in a compelling way, especially after the 
invention of the soap opera. (The situation was different in the UK, because of 
the BBC.) Then television arrived, adding the mesmeric power of images and in 
due course created the “primetime moment” that Goebbels craved, a moment when 
the entire nation’s attention was transfixed on a single broadcast event. Not 
for nothing were the 1950s a decade of stultifying complacency.

Timothy Leary and the counterculture movement tried to break the hypnotic 
stranglehold of network TV, but in fact what really killed it was the 
fragmentation of the national audience with the arrival of cable TV and, later, 
the internet. Thus did we go from an era of mass audiences in which we were all 
treated as members of an undifferentiated whole to an age when personalisation 
technology enables Facebook and Google to profit from ads aimed – allegedly 
precisely – at a single individual.

The Attention Merchants is a sobering and significant book that takes the long 
view of technology and in the process escapes the “sociology of the last five 
minutes” that characterises so much discourse about the subject. Much of what 
we have to grapple with today is genuinely new. But there also appear to be 
some eternal verities. One is that there is no such thing as a free lunch. The 
other is that HL Mencken was right when he observed that no one ever lost money 
by underestimating the intelligence of the “great masses of the plain people”. 
Amen.

Q&A with Tim Wu

In The Master Switch, you found that the great communication technologies of 
the 20th century all went through a cycle: each started out open, chaotic, 
creative and exciting, but each eventually wound up being controlled by 
industrial interests. At the end of the book, you said that the great question 
for the internet was whether the same fate would befall it. My reading ofThe 
Attention Merchants is that you now have the answer and it’s yes. Have I got 
that right?
Yep. I had hoped that the historic cycle could be broken, but the power of 
fate or economics or whatever has proved irresistible. Everyone thought the 
web, in particular, would remain more competitive. Yet, as Lenin put it, 
quantity has a quality all of its own and the last 10 years have seen the 
emergence of a class of superpowers driven by old-school scale economics – 
especially Facebook, Google and Amazon – who have gained control over their 
respective domains and seem unlikely to be dislodged soon. Generally, as you 
gaze out across the main internet ecosystem, you see less of a competitive 
marketplace than a succession of globally dominant firms as far as the eye can 
see, followed by a tired group of companies fighting over the few crumbs left 
over.

I describe myself as a “recovering utopian” because I once subscribed to the 
techno-utopian vision of the internet’s potential. How about you? Were you an 
idealist too?
As George Carlin said: “Scratch any cynic and you will find a disappointed 
idealist.” Guilty as charged: I was an idealist and remain one, well, sort of. 
There was a hard, if old lesson in the fate of the web, namely, that to 
preserve anything public spirited takes more than good vibes – it requires some 
really hard-line institutional structure to maintain spaces that bring out the 
best in us.

Looking back at the 00s, the great mistake of the web’s idealists was a 
near-total failure to create institutions designed to preserve that which was 
good about the web (its openness, its room for a diversity of voices and its 
earnest amateurism), and to ward off that which was bad (the trolling, the 
clickbait, the demands of excessive and intrusive advertising, the security 
breaches). There was too much faith that everything would take care of itself – 
that “netizens” were different, that the culture of the web was intrinsically 
better. Unfortunately, that excessive faith in web culture left a void, one 
that became filled by the lowest forms of human conduct and the basest norms of 
commerce. It really was just like the classic story of the party that went sour.

The lesson should have been obvious, if you consider important public-spirited 
institutions like public parks, universities, museums, charities, some parts of 
the media. None of the best of these maintains a public character by just 
assuming people will be good or by adopting not-for-profit business models and 
assuming, arrogantly, that they’d be different somehow. The exception that 
proves the point isWikipedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/15/wikipedia-fund-future>, 
which did commit itself to a structured non-profit path. Today, I think 
Wikipedia can hold its head high: it has thrived without advertising or other 
commercial distortions, while attracting and handling more traffic than nearly 
any other site on Earth.

Unfortunately, most of the rest, despite plenty of California idealism, either 
just allowed themselves to self-destruct or just accepted a standard corporate 
form with its unrelenting demands for constant revenue growth. In so doing, 
they shed much of their potential to be the kind of truly remarkable 
institutions that their founders might have wanted.

In some ways, the history of early 00s web idealism reminds me a little of the 
history of the counterculture of the 1960s. Both clearly had a major cultural 
impact in their times. But both were overconfident in believing that they’d 
overcome some of humanity’s worst tendencies. Over the long term, however, it 
was only those who managed to create some kind of structure to preserve what 
they believed in that had any lasting impact.


In chronicling the history of advertising you also discern cycles: a new 
medium appears, entrepreneurs find ways of using it to capture people’s 
attention that they then sell to advertisers; the advertising becomes 
increasingly intrusive and objectionable; eventually there’s a revolt or 
pushback. At the moment, you see mobile ad-blocking and the success of 
Netflix-type immersive content as signs of the latest revolt. But you also 
clearly believe that the cycle will continue. What drives this process?
Simply put: the profit motive. Industries, unlike organisms, have no organic 
limits on their own growth; they are constantly in search of new markets or of 
new ways to exploit old ones more effectively. Having found a way to make 
money, a firm will persist trying to make more, even to the point of 
self-destruction. If the business model is advertising, that means squeezing in 
ever more ads that are increasingly intrusive and thereby making the product 
worse. In a normal market, a firm starts to realise that it has set its price 
too high when people stop buying and they back off. But with an advertising 
model, there is a delayed reaction – and then a revolt. One day people start to 
say: “I’ve had it, I quit.”

There’s a clear direction of travel in your history of advertising – towards 
more and more intrusion, culminating with the smartphone as the Trojan horse in 
everyone’s pocket. And you ask a plaintive rhetorical question: “Do we draw any 
lines between the private and the commercial?” Given where we are now,could we 
draw such a line? And how would we go about it?
When President Obama threw parties at the White House, his guests were 
required to check their phones and other devices at the door. So it was a party 
– and with no selfies, no tweeting – where everyone’s really at the party.

Obama’s example shows how you do it: by reclaiming physical spaces and making 
them non-commercial. The easiest place to do this is your home. You might have 
a policy of checking devices at the door, say, or confining their usage to one 
room in the house. However you do it, the real key is drawing physical lines, 
not mental lines, in recognition of just how weak our wills truly are. For you 
will not win trying to fight a running battle with the forces of commerce. 
You’ll end up like the alcoholic who goes to bars and says to himself: “I’ll be 
fine with just one drink.”

I’ve left Twitter. It is unusable for anyone but trolls, robots and dictators 
| Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/ive-left-twitter-unusable-anyone-but-trolls-robots-dictators-lindy-west>
One of the themes in the story you tell is fragmentation and atomisation: it 
takes us from mass media/society to the individual locked in his/her own tech 
bubble. You also have, at one point, a neat throwaway line: “Technology always 
embodies ideology.” Do you see a connection in this evolutionary story between 
information technology and neoliberalism?
The internet clearly embodied an ideological reaction to the mass media’s 
collectivist and nationalist ideology – particularly in broadcasting, whether 
it was the power of American and British national broadcasting or the 
propaganda media of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Overtly or implicitly, 
the goal of national broadcasting was always the fusing of the nation into a 
more unified whole. The American networks NBC and CBS saw “unifying the nation” 
as among their goals (conveniently, that also maximised advertising revenue). 
More darkly, Joseph Goebbels saw the point of broadcasting as achieving
Volksgemeinschaft, the people’s community, the elevation of the nation over the 
individual.

The internet was a reaction to these impulses. Invented in the 70s and 80s, it 
embodied a mixture of the countercultural and the libertarian instincts and 
with it brought the attractions and dangers of both. But it is a bit more 
complicated than that, I think, because the web, in particular, always served 
to elevate not just individuals, but subcultures and groups over the great 
undifferentiated whole. I think this helps account for a broader fragmentation 
not just along individual lines, but cultural and political lines as well. 
While once upon a time one nation tended to consist of a dominant culture and 
various subcultures, nowadays there is sometimes no real centre, no mainstream 
left, just a collection of powerful subgroups that command deep allegiances.

Whether that’s better or worse than the old conformist media I leave to the 
reader to decide. Personally, I think it is much better when it comes to 
culture, but can be absolutely terrible when it comes to politics.

• The Attention Merchants by Tim Wu is published by Atlantic (£20). To order a 
copy for £17 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/attention-merchants.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 