
John Harris (Don’t allow England to be recast as a nation of bigots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/england-rebranded-nation-bigots-intolerance>
, 10 October) is right. Labour must reclaim Englishness. Shelley expected us to 
need centuries to evolve true internationalist consciousness. Leftists demand 
it now, regarding English patriotism as supremacism (wrong, and 
counterproductive: forced denial of self hardly promotes acceptance of 
others!). Fear of self-annihilation and top-down supra-nationalism caused 
Brexit. Worse may follow unless Labour listens and addresses the dangerous 
disconnect from our institutions. Too late on Europe, sadly, but the British 
entity could be saved by recognising its constituent parts and building a 
federation (with an English parliament), utilising PR to produce diverse, 
representative, honest parties, but requiring them to cooperate to govern: more 
local, responsive, inclusive.

Labour must adapt and lead. To disapprove of celebrating Shakespeare, Tallis, 
Keats, the Beatles, and taking pride in them being English, is Stalinist and, 
frankly, weird. Promoting sensible English patriotism may be the best way to 
counter racism. Sadly,Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> now 
seems too ideologically hidebound to change; too intellectually lightweight to 
seek imaginative solutions. Advice from this member? Open your ears, eyes and 
minds, or irrelevance beckons.
Tim Thorp
Nottingham

• The refusal to allow parliament to debate the terms of Brexit is strikingly 
similar to the restriction of Labour MPs’ right to determine membership of the 
shadow cabinet. The rationale for both decisions is the suspicion that MPs will 
subvert the will of the people, ie those who voted for Brexit or grassroots 
Labour members. If I am correct in this view, it is a terrible indictment of 
our parliamentary system.
Jim Pettman
Anglars-Juillac, France 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 