
Welcome to this week’s blog, and our roundup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/sep/19/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
of your comments and photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/02/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/21/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
from last week. Let’s start with a few resolutions fromVieuxtemps 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15263994>:

1. Continue with the Reading Henry James project.

2. Continue with the EL Doctorow reading project, which will be on hold for an 
indeterminate amount of time because my ELD books are packed in boxes right now.

3. Read more short stories.

And, per usual, make the feeble, futile, useless effort to QUIT BUYING MORE 
BOOKS.

As a publisher, I feel I must urge everyone not to stop buying more books. Our 
industry would collapse without all those unread novels. But of course, we’d be 
equally lost without good readers. Not to mention re-readers likeelliese 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15548189>, who has a 
delightful-sounding Dorothy L. Sayers habit:

I seem to have made a habit of starting the new year by re-reading “Gaudy 
Night”, and because you can’t have one without the other I’ve moved on apace to 
“Busman’s Honeymoon”. I think I must have read “Gaudy Night” four or five times 
by now, and every time I do it astonishes me - not because it’s a particularly 
interesting mystery; indeed the climax rather hinges on Harriet being, in her 
own words, “the world’s worst goop”. But as soon as I open it I have that 
feeling the old Alan Bennett quote describes so well - that a hand has come 
out, and taken mine. And for some reason it surprises me, every time.

Perhaps because of the New Year, time was a prominent theme last week. 
Dylanwolf <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1263840> provided some 
touching reflections wrapped up in a review of a James Baldwin classic:


Just had the great pleasure of reading Giovanni’s Room by James Baldwin, a 
book first published in the year of my birth 1956 and written by a black 
American born in Harlem.

It is a beautiful and troubling novel that explores how our hidden or deep 
desires can impinge on our understanding of ourselves and sometimes lead us to 
cruelty, betrayal and distrust despite ourselves.


Much recommended if you haven’t read it and astonishing that it is 60 years 
old. And dear God so am I.

There were further thoughts on life’s journey from BMacLean 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11487556>:

Just finished Thomas Hardy’s Woodlanders earlier this evening. As always, 
Hardy captures the reader with engaging characters, memorable scenes, and a 
19th century rural English setting that seems to hold a fascination for me at 
this stage of my life, for some reason. Actually, I can think of a few, the 
most important perhaps being the contrast with pretty much any other Victorian 
writer I can think of: none that I’ve come across has as much sympathy and 
insight into the rural character as Hardy does.

Also, talking of time, I hope you can indulge a very long post samye88 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16414215>. Partly because it’s so 
good, and partly because: Proust. If we can’t have long extracts about the 
divine Marcel, when can we?

Encouraged by good TLSers like Yosserian and Tamewhale, I’ve given my best to 
Proust in recent months. Just finished listening to book V ‘The Captive’. 
Eternally grateful to Neville Jason, whose superb reading has made the task 
possible (text-wise I only progressed to a quarter of ‘Within a Budding 
Grove’). So I cannot recommend the audiobooks highly enough to all those who 
have the entire series on their bucket list but are daunted by the sheer length 
and at places, sheer boredom of the masterpiece.

In this particular book, I was bored to tears by the relentless 
I-love-Albertine-I-must marry-her at one moment and I-love-her-not-will-breakup 
the next. The rhythm is set by this routine: while looking at her demerits, 
Marcel knows he doesn’t love her; but just when he decides he doesn’t love her, 
she is conniving to meet some girl thus has thrown him into despair and he must 
keep her, cost what it may. I don’t mind Albertine’s bisexuality or her 
compulsive lying. I feel she has certainly lived her short and poor life to the 
fullest on her wits. I’ve grown affectionate towards her exuberant attitude to 
life. Marcel on the other hand has killed any sympathy left in me by his 
shuttling between two opposites for all eternity and his tendency to analyse to 
death every word she says and every emotion he feels in reaction.

The highlight of the whole book is the concert hosted by Mdm Verdurin 
performed by Morel and hijacked by M. de Charlus as his pet project. As he went 
on and on basking in His success, ignoring to give Mdm Verdurin credit where 
credit is due, he is digging the grave for his own downfall. But his monologue, 
oh, ever so funny, such staggering snobbery (but absolutely natural to an 
aristocrat, with the most exquisite taste in art) is exponentially enhanced by 
Neville Jason’s dramatic reading. Nobody can keep a straight face listening to 
this beauty.

Sometimes, the short recommendations - like this from julian6 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2791828> - also hit the sweet spot:

Enjoyed Cyril Connolly’s reflective journal - The Unquiet Grave - it has a 
golden glow - full of unexpected corners and ruminations.

‘Golden glow’ is a lovely way to put it. Anyone interested in Cyril Connolly 
will love reading DJ Taylor’s recent overview of literary culture, The Prose 
Factory. Fascinating man. Oh, and if you’re looking for The Unquiet Grave, be 
aware it was written under the pseudonym Palinurus.

Finally, another glowing endorsement from polpoet 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4387781>:

Days without End by Sebastian Barry - a different kind of ‘Western’, told from 
the point of view of a poor Irish immigrant, before, during and after the 
American civil war... I read it compulsively partly because I wanted to know 
how things turned out, but also because of the prose which entranced me and 
confirmed that the writer is indeed a poet too.

Interesting links about books and reading

 * Heroic publisher Melville House have a New Year resolution we can all get 
behind 
<http://www.mhpbooks.com/new-years-resolution-lets-not-fuck-about-shall-we/>. 
 * Enjoy this gallery of French pulp fiction covers 
<http://dangerousminds.net/comments/welcome_to_the_broken_pyramid_of_your_brain_the_wild_weird_beautiful_art_of>
. 
 * Apparently the 1978 Dune calendar works in 2017. And the images are 
wonderful 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/rare-dune-art-from-omni-reveals-frank-herberts-origina-1155285272>
. 
 * Pity the authors. More financial pain is coming their way 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/soa-very-concerned-authors-wake-new-tax-rules-451511>
. 
If you would like to share a photo of the book you are reading, or film your 
own book review, please do. Click the blue button on this page to share your 
video or image. I’ll include some of your posts in next week’s blog.

If you’re on Instagram and a book lover, chances are you’re already sharing 
beautiful pictures of booksyou are reading 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/nowreading/>, “shelfies” 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/bookshelf/> or all kinds of still lifes 
with books as protagonists <https://instagram.com/p/5foOfkLDFI/>. Now, you can 
share your reads with us on the mobile photography platform – simply tag your 
pictures there with #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection here. Happy 
reading!
 