
Know your parental rights


Women who are employed, either full-time or part-time, are entitled to 52 
weeks statutory maternity leave 
<https://www.gov.uk/maternity-pay-leave/overview>, and men in the UK now have 
the option to take paid shared parental leave.

Beating the parent trap: how to balance family and career – live chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jul/31/beating-the-parent-trap-how-to-balance-family-and-career-live-chat>
Things are less straightforward if you’re self-employed or on temporary work 
contracts, but mothers who work in this way are entitled to maternity 
allowance. “To qualify you will need to show 26 weeks of employment in the 66 
weeks before your baby is due,” says Katie Wood, legal officer forMaternity 
Action <http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/>. “You will also need earnings over 
£112 per week to qualify for standard rate maternity allowance of £139.58 per 
week.” Similar options are available forparents who are adopting a baby or child
 <http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1828>.

Calculate how much money you need

Sometimes, parents of young children are left with few options due to the high 
costs of childcare. A recent UK report found that 29% of mothers and 14% of 
fathers find it is simplytoo expensive to return to work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/05/childcare-expensive-mothers-want-work-trapped-home>
. “The cost of childcare can be like having another mortgage,” says Sarah 
Archer, co founder ofCareerTree <http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. “However it’s 
worth remembering that as your kids hit school age your childcare costs 
generally reduce, so keep in mind that it isn’t a permanent outflow of money.”

Juliet Turnbull, founder and chief executive of 2to3days.com 
<https://www.2to3days.com/>, says that if there are two parents, you need to 
discuss career options and childcare costs together. “Sit down with your 
partner and talk about what you both want from your career and family life. Be 
clear about how much you need to earn to afford the lifestyle you want.”

Strike a work-family balance that suits you

“You don’t have to choose between a career and being a parent,” says Danielle 
Ayres, solicitor atGorvins Solicitors <http://www.gorvins.com/>. One way to 
balance work and family life is for parents to request flexible working hours 
to fit in around childcare. “Most employers will be happy to help and support 
working parents, where they can,” says Ayres.

Though it can be a challenge to find advertised part-time roles, says Julianne 
Miles, managing director ofWomen Returners <http://womenreturners.com/>. 
“However, research has found that most employers are open to negotiating 
flexibility for the right candidate, even if they rarely state this in the job 
advert.”

When you approach an employer looking for someone full-time, think about the 
business case for working part-time, she adds. “It can also sometimes be easier 
to negotiate other forms of flexibility, such as altered start and leave times, 
home working and extended holiday leave.”

“Companies are increasingly becoming more open to offering flexible work to 
employees,” agrees Kate Headley, development director atThe Clear Company 
<http://www.theclearcompany.co.uk/>. Headley recommends starting your job 
search with websites such astimewise <http://timewise.co.uk/> and workingmums 
<http://www.workingmums.co.uk/> that focus on advertising part-time work.

But ... be flexible with your plans

It’s sensible to be open to your feelings changing after birth, says Miles. 
“Some parents love being at home with their baby, while others feel a pull to 
get back to work.”

“A lot goes into starting a family, and it doesn’t always happen according to 
our plans,” agrees Dr Joanna Martin, coach forwomen business leaders 
<http://joannamartin.com/>. “For career and parenting to work it has to be 
approached in partnership with our family needs.”

How to juggle your career with starting a family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jul/01/how-to-juggle-your-career-with-starting-a-family>
Louise Webster, founder of Beyondtheschoolrun.com 
<http://beyondtheschoolrun.com/>, adds that thinking about what is best for 
your wellbeing is really important: “It goes hand in hand with your work, so 
focus on yourself and your mindset, and what you need to do to create 
positivity for you and your family.”

Keep your career goals in focus

“Don’t think that when you start a family you need to take a step down in your 
career,” says Turnbull. “My company is working with a vast array of companies 
who are actively offering mothers and fathers senior positions.”

Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, has said “don’t leave 
before you leave” – Lisa Barnwell, founder ofBumps and the Boardroom 
<http://www.lisabarnwell.co.uk/founder-membership-sign-up/>, agrees: “Be 
mindful of your future plans but also live in the here and now.” Increasingly, 
employers are also offering senior positions asjob shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jul/19/will-job-sharing-support-gender-equality-at-work>
, which allows parents to continue to progress while taking care of young 
families.



There are no rights or wrongs

Think about what works for you, your family and your career – what suits 
someone else won’t necessarily be the best option for you, says Miles.

Turnbull agrees that there are no wrong decisions. “You make the best decision 
you can at any given moment. Also recognise that the needs and demands of a 
family change hugely over the years. Often parents change around their working 
patterns over time, so don’t feel that a decision has to be final.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 