
ER Braithwaite, the Guyanese author of To Sir, With Love, has died at his home 
in Maryland at the age of 104.

Born in Guyana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guyana> on 27 June 1912, 
Eustace Edward Ricardo Braithwaite was the child of privileged parents, both 
graduates of Oxford University. His father was a diamond miner while his mother 
raised the family. During the second world war, he joined the Royal Air Force 
to fight as a pilot before going on to Cambridge to read physics. He later said 
that he experienced no racial prejudice within the RAF.

ER Braithwaite obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/14/er-braithwaite-obituary> 
On graduating, he found himself barred from work as an engineer because of 
racism. Unable to find an alternative, he took a job as a teacher at St 
George-in-the-East school in London’s East End, which was recovering from the 
battering it had taken during the war. This experience formed the basis of his 
autobiographical novel To Sir With Love, his 1959 book later adapted into a 
film of the same name starring Sidney Poitier.

At the school, renamed Greenslade School in the film, the well-educated middle 
class graduate was confronted with casual racism, violence and antisocial 
behaviour by a group of disadvantaged pupils. Hardest to bear was the 
self-hatred the racism brought out in him and the low expectations of 
colleagues for their charges.

Gritty and unsentimental, the book shows Braithwaite gradually turning his 
class around through a mix of affection and respect. It also revealed his love 
affair with a fellow teacher – controversial at the time because the other 
teacher was white. When the film adaptation was made in 1967, Braithwaite 
criticised it, saying the love affair had been downplayed.

The book also contrasted his experience of race relations in Britain with 
those in the US, where he studied before joining the RAF. He wrote: “The rest 
of the world in general and Britain in particular are prone to point an angrily 
critical finger at American intolerance, forgetting that in its short history 
as a nation it has granted to its Negro citizens more opportunities for 
advancement and betterment, per capita, than any other nation in the world with 
an indigent Negro population.”

Caryl Phillips on the enduring appeal of ER Braithwaite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
To Sir, With Love has been hailed as a seminal work for immigrants from the 
colonies to postwar Britain. In an introduction,Caryl Phillips wrote: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 “The author is keen for us to understand that the Ricky Braithwaites of this 
world cannot, by themselves, uproot prejudice, but they can point to its 
existence. And this, after all, is the beginning of change; one must first 
identity the location of the problem before one can set about addressing it.”

After teaching, Braithwaite moved to social work, finding foster homes for 
children of colour. This formed the basis of for his 1962 book Paid Servant: A 
Report About Welfare Work in London. He went on to write a further nine books, 
a mix of novels, short-story collections and memoir.

A visit to apartheid South Africa in 1973, following the country lifting its 
ban on To Sir, With Love, resulted in Honorary White (1975). The title was a 
reference to his visa status, which granted significantly more privileges than 
enjoyed by the native black population. The book had a mixed reception: one 
criticdescribed it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/01/world/africa/01mphahlele.html> as too soft 
on the apartheid regime, too hard on the oppressed black population and too 
focused on the author.

After his social work, he moved to Paris to work for the World Veterans 
Association, before transferring to Unesco and a diplomatic career that took in 
posts as permanent representative of Guyana to the UN and Guyana’s ambassador 
to Venezuela.

From diplomacy, he moved into academia, teaching at the universities of New 
York, Florida State and Howard in Washington, where he also served as 
writer-in-residence.

When asked in 2013 whether he had stayed in touch with students from the 
London school, he admitted he had not,telling the Coffee Table blog 
<http://coffeetablenotes.blogspot.co.uk/2013/10/to-sir-with-love-er-braithwaite-looks.html>
: “I don’t know if I changed any lives or not, but something did happen between 
them and me, which was quite gratifying.”

Braithwaite’s companion, Genevieve Ast, confirmed his death on Tuesday. He 
died a day after being admitted to a medical centre in Rockville, Maryland.
 