
Premiership contenders Melbourne hung on to claim a desperate 20-16 NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> win over a gritty Newcastle at Hunter 
Stadium. The Storm’s Fijian finishers Marika Koroibete and Suliasi Vunivalu 
were the difference, crossing for three of the side’s four tries and coming up 
big in defence on several occasions.

A spectacular try from Knights fill-in fullback Jake Mamo three minutes from 
full-time set the game up for a grandstand finish. Mamo leapt over Storm 
fullback Cameron Munster to snatch a Jarrod Mullen kick out of the air, scoring 
his second try of the day next to the posts to put the Knights within striking 
distance.

NSW government may sack the Parramatta Eels board within days
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/nsw-government-may-sack-the-parramatta-eels-board-within-days>
But ultimately it was too little too late for the Knights, who lacked the 
polish to finish off the match.

Munster would make amends a few minutes later when he defused another bomb as 
Mamo was racing through on what would be the Knights’ last roll of the dice.

The Storm momentarily move to the top of the NRL ladder with the victory, 
their 10th win in 11 games. It was the Knights’ 11th straight loss and they now 
appear destined for a second consecutive wooden spoon.

Newcastle dominated territory and enjoyed a 70% share of possession in the 
opening 20 minutes, but couldn’t manage to crack the Storm line. Koroibete 
turned defence into attack in the 11th minute when he latched onto a spilled 
ball from Mamo and raced 85 metres to score.

Newcastle finally turned possession into points 10 minutes later when Mamo, 
who was filling in at fullback for Dane Gagai, took a short ball from halfback 
Trent Hodkinson and touched down to score. The video ref had a look at a 
possible obstruction, but ultimately gave the Knights the green light, much to 
the chagrin of Storm skipper Cameron Smith.

But the Knights’ lead was short-lived. Only three minutes later Vunivalu 
latched onto a Munster cut-out pass, beating two defenders to touch down for 
his 17th try this season.

After half-time, Koroibete scored his second when he steamrolled over Knights 
winger Brendan Elliott to score in the corner. The teams then traded tries 
before Mamo sailed past Munster to score and set the game up for an exciting 
finish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftoo-little-too-late-for-newcastle-as-melbourne-eke-out-nrl-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50a9175420f1c2ee77000b324d52683f26ffa2c%2F0_359_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Too%20little%20too%20late%20for%20Newcastle%20as%20Melbourne%20eke%20out%20NRL%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftoo-little-too-late-for-newcastle-as-melbourne-eke-out-nrl-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Too%20little%20too%20late%20for%20Newcastle%20as%20Melbourne%20eke%20out%20NRL%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftoo-little-too-late-for-newcastle-as-melbourne-eke-out-nrl-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50a9175420f1c2ee77000b324d52683f26ffa2c%2F0_359_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Penrith fans celebrate after snapping a two-game losing streak with victory 
over the Eels. Photograph: Mark Kolbe/Getty Images 
In the later kick-off, Penrith mounted a gutsy second half comeback to kill 
off Parramatta’s disastrous NRL season with a 22-18 win at Pepper Stadium. Down 
18-6 at the break, the Panthers piled on three unanswered tries in the second 
stanza to keep themselves in the hunt for the top eight after back-to-back 
losses.

After fighting through adversity and a whirlwind of controversy all year, the 
Eels’ finals hopes received their coup de grace at the hands of the Panthers. 
Already without Kieran Foran, Semi Radradra and Corey Norman, it all proved too 
much when star centre Michael Jennings succumbed to a hamstring injury.

The Eels looked to be coasting to victory when makeshift playmaker Clint 
Gutherson guided them to a big half-time lead. Filling in for the suspended 
Norman, Gutherson set up Bureta Faraimo and French’s first before scoring one 
himself.

However the game turned on a dime when Jennings, fresh off his game-winning 
performance for NSW in State of Origin III, went off just before half-time. His 
loss required back-rower Beau Scott to be shifted to the centres and the 
Panthers immediately exposed him, running in three tries in 11 minutes down 
their right side.

Tyrone Peachey celebrated his recall to first grade with a four-pointer before 
five-eighth Bryce Cartwright recovered from his patchy first half to score 
before Josh Mansour put his side in front.


Both sides went close to scoring in a furious last 20 minutes, with Penrith’s 
James Fisher-Harris dropping it with the line open and French bobbling a Jeff 
Robson kick as the Panthers held on.
 