
A couple of months after I took up my post as literary editor of the Listener 
in the autumn of 1986, I decided to write a review for the Christmas double 
issue: a review of two books about cats. I wrote it, marked it up for the 
typesetters, sent it off, and thought nothing more about it until one of the 
subeditors brought the corrected galley proof through to my office. “Lynne,” 
she said solemnly, “you won’t publish this under your own name, will you?” I 
replied cheerfully that I had been intending to, yes. Which was when she 
explained a great truth to me – that once a literary woman associates her name 
with cats, no one will take her seriously again.

I have been haunted by that conversation ever since. In my heart, I know that 
she was right. But on the other hand, cats are such good material. When I was 
asked to write a gothic novella three years ago, I did not hesitate to propose 
a funny one about evil, talking cats.

And now I’ve written a follow-up: The Lunar Cats. This time, we meet a ginger 
kitten mob boss who talks like Barbara Windsor and a mild scientific cat from 
the 18th century who voyages on the Endeavour with Captain Cook. It seems 
obvious to me that cats are clever and totally lacking in altruism. This means 
you can believe almost anything of them.

The following are masterworks by people who were bravely prepared to take the 
risk of being associated with cats. Noticeably, though, nearly all of them are 
male, so perhaps the subeditor’s warning should still stand.


1. Tobermory by Saki 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/complete-short-stories-of-saki.html> (HH 
Munro)
Talking cat
The ultimate talking-cat story. At a country-house weekend before the first 
world war, a guest claims to be able to bestow the gift of speech on animals. 
He is challenged to try out his gift on the resident cat, Tobermory – with 
uncomfortable results. The cat is articulate and haughty. And worst of all, he 
has spent his whole life listening and observing, with the result that he now 
knows something to the disadvantage of everyone present. Someone asks him, 
“What do you think of human intelligence?” and he prefaces his reply: “You put 
me in an embarrassing position.”

2. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/20/lewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years>
Superior cat
Rereading the Alice books recently, I realised that the Cheshire Cat was the 
only “mad” character that I actually looked forward to meeting again. Even 
Alice is pleased to see him, when his head rematerialises at the croquet match. 
Like the other creatures she encounters, the cat poses riddles and gives 
unsatisfactory answers, but he takes more of an interest in Alice than many of 
the others. “What became of the baby?” he asks (he remembers that she left the 
Duchess’s house carrying an infant). “It turned into a pig,” she says. “I 
thought it would,” he replies.

3. Edward the Conqueror by Roald Dahl 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1953/10/31/edward-the-conqueror>
Reincarnated genius cat
Dahl’s stories have recently been re-collected into themed book. The latest, 
Madness <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/madness-452355.html>, begins with 
this story of a rescued grey cat who might (or might not) be a reincarnated 
Franz Liszt. Not only does this sensitive creature react with pleasure to some 
piano music, he also seems to share the composer’s dislike of Chopin. While the 
music-loving Louisa becomes convinced that the cat is indeed a resurrected 
genius (and talks of inviting musical luminaries to meet him), her exasperated 
husband, Edward, plots to kill him.

4. The Silent Miaow translated from the feline by Paul Gallico 
<http://www.paulgallico.info/silentmiaow.html>
Guru cat
A mysterious typed manuscript entitled £YE SUK@NT MUWOQ falls into the hands 
of Gallico. He quickly realises it has been typewritten (badly) by a cat, and 
is a manual for “kittens, strays and homeless cats”, explaining how to 
manipulate humans – to get the best chair, the best food and so on. The “silent 
miaow” is the ultimate weapon, the cat explains – just open your lips as if to 
miaow, but make no sound. Humans can’t help interpreting this as bottomless 
emotion. Whatever you’re after, you’ll get it.

5. Old Possum’s Book of Practical Cats by TS Eliot 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/old-possum-s-book-of-practical-cats-5.html>
Criminal mastermind cat
Macavity – the feline equivalent of Sherlock Holmes’s Moriarty – is the 
super-brain puss in this collection. Even the shape of his head tells us how 
intelligent he is: “His brow is deeply lined with thought, his head is highly 
domed.” Just the name is perfect – Macavity rhyming with “gravity”, “depravity” 
and “suavity”. But the proof of this cat’s criminal brilliance is that whenever 
a crime is committed, “Macavity’s not there!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftop-10-cats-in-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24039f8ecef53b353b75cb71d13638883fe3a51b%2F0_1149_4554_1920%2F4554.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20cats%20in%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftop-10-cats-in-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20cats%20in%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftop-10-cats-in-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24039f8ecef53b353b75cb71d13638883fe3a51b%2F0_1149_4554_1920%2F4554.jpg>
 Felonious feline … Macavity as seen in illustrator Arthur Robins’s impression 
of TS Eliot’s famous villain. Photograph: Arthur Robins/Faber & Faber 
6. Thomasina, the Cat Who Thought She Was God by Paul Gallico 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thomasina.html>
Mystical cat
Thomasina is a large tabby belonging to the small daughter of a Scottish vet – 
a stiff and angrily bereaved man. Thomasina requires the vet’s services on a 
day when he has his hands full and he orders for her to be put to sleep. His 
daughter, deranged by grief, becomes catatonic. Meanwhile Thomasina drifts into 
a past life in which she was an Egyptian goddess and is rescued by a nice 
witchy lady who heals sick animals by mystical means. As the poor child lapses 
into fever and reaches a crisis, Thomasina recovers her memory and returns home 
to save the day at the very last minute.

7. A Case of Murder by Vernon Scannell 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/a-case-of-murder/>
Avenging cat
Cats in books seem to die by violence a lot. Tobermory escapes murder only by 
dying in a fight with another tom; Edward in the Roald Dahl story eventually 
throws the cat on a fire; the Cheshire Cat escapes beheading only because of a 
semantic discussion (can you behead someone who has no visible body?) This 
disturbing poem echoes Edgar Allan Poe: a black cat killed by a child is dumped 
in the cupboard under the stairs, where it grows and grows in the spidery dark 
– and its low, accusatory purr gets louder and louder. One day it will come 
back, and “there’ll not be a corner for the boy to hide / When the cupboard 
swells and all sides split / And the huge black cat pads out of it.”


8. Felidae <http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-679-42069-9> by  
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-679-42069-9>Akif Pirinçci 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-679-42069-9>
Sleuthing cat
There are two literary cats that everyone seems to know about – the cat 
Behemoth in Mikhail Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita, and the cat sleuth 
Francis of Felidae. I have read neither. The Master and Margarita has hordes of 
fans, but I find it unreadable, so Felidae will be the one I get round to, 
because the cat (by all accounts) reads books, uses a computer and talks about 
Kierkegaard.

Top 10 books about intelligent animals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/12/top-10-books-about-intelligent-animals>
9. The Cats’ Protection League by Roger McGough 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/poetry/outloud/mcgough_cat.shtml>
Dangerous cat
“Midnight. A knock at the door. / Open it? Better had. / Three heavy cats, 
mean and bad.” The Cat Protection League was a charity with no sinister 
overtones at all until McGough wrote this poem and gave us the image of 
protection-racket moggies using extortion on the neighbourhood doorsteps. “They 
then disappeared like bats into hell / Those bad, bad cats of the CPL.”

10. Why Cats Paint by Heather Busch and Burton Silver 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=gqWAyDoQ7wEC&printsec=frontcover&redir_esc=y>
Aesthetic cat
This hilarious spoof coffee-table book is delivered with such a straight face 
that it takes quite a while to recognise the hoax. Subtitled A Theory of Feline 
Aesthetics, it features pictures of cats alongside their supposed artworks 
(predominantly abstract expressionist). The captions are particularly good: 
“Pepper will spend up to two hours carefully examining himself in a mirror 
before commencing a self-portrait”; “Because of the abandoned manner in which 
some cats paint, biologists have branded their work as no more than 
‘obsessive-compulsive play activity which results in randomised marks of no 
meaning whatsoever’.”

• The Lunar Cats is published by Century, priced £9.99. It is available from 
the Guardian bookshop for £8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lunar-cats.html>.
 