
History began for me with my mother’s tales of Alfred burning the cakes and 
Robert the Bruce and the spider. Next came Henrietta Elizabeth Marshall’sOur 
Island Story <https://archive.org/details/ourislandstoryhi00marsuoft> – more 
kings, a few queens, some religious martyrs and the Empire. I gazed at the 
illustrations and wondered about lives long ago.

 One rainy day on a seaside holiday in 1957 aged 14, I bought Rosalie Glynn 
Grylls <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosalie_Glynn_Grylls>’s William Godwin 
and his World. A good bargain at 5s, it introduced me to Mary Wollstonecraft 
and the English Jacobins. It proved to be the opening through which I stumbled 
towards the historical perspectives of those who had opposed the status quo.

 While at university in the early 1960s, the iconoclastic historian of the 
French revolutionary army,Richard Cobb 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-richard-cobb-1324236.html>, 
plunged me into studies of the crowd. I read Eric Hobsbawm, EP Thompson and 
Christopher Hill, whose writings were turning history upside down.

 Gradually, I realised that since the 19th century, the labour movement had 
awakened interest in what earlier generations of workers had done and thought, 
and campaigns for women’s suffrage had resulted in both chronicles of 
emancipation and research into the lives of poor women.

 It became evident that participation in rebellion fostered new ways of seeing 
the past. As early as 1909, the anarchistPeter Kropotkin produced a history of 
the French revolution 
<https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-great-french-revolution-1789-1793>
 that focused on popular action rather than on leaders.

 When the women’s liberation movement started in the late 1960s, I began 
looking for the women, as well as men, who had been hidden from history. Fifty 
years on, I am still at it. The following books are drawn from a great host of 
books I admire.

1. The Black Jacobins by CLR James 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-jacobins.html> (1938)
James, an exploratory Trotskyist who loathed imperialism, racism and class 
power in equal measure, writes graphically about the 1791 slave rebellion in 
the French colony of San Domingo (later Haiti) led by Toussaint L’Ouverture. 
With calls for the French revolutionaries’ liberty and equality to apply to the 
colonised, they overcame the whites who enslaved them, a Spanish and a British 
invasion and then the army sent by Napoleon Bonaparte. The memory of this 
revolt and of its historian have proved resilient. When I mentioned L’Ouverture 
and James to a Haitian cab driver in New York I was given a free ride!

2. Primitive Rebels by Eric Hobsbawm 
<http://territorialmasquerades.net/primitive-rebels/> (1959)
Packed with bandits, mobs, anarchic millenarians and wandering journeymen, 
this delighted me as a student. Hobsbawm, being a sage member of the Communist 
Party, warned against their utopianism, but I took to them like a fish to water.

3. The Making of the English Working Class by EP Thompson 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/making-of-the-english-working-class.html> 
(1963)
A wonderful treasure trove of stories about working class people rescued from 
the condescension of posterity, this book also presents a dynamic perspective 
of class and class consciousness which has influenced left history in many 
countries. I loved it in 1963 and love it still – though I do think he was a 
bit mean to the Methodists!

Alexei Sayle's top 10 books about revolutionaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/23/alexei-sayle-top-10-books-by-revolutionaries>
4. The Women Incendiaries by Edith Thomas 
<http://www.katesharpleylibrary.net/n5tc3h> (1963)
Richard Cobb had told me about Thomas’s participation in the Union des Femmes 
Françaises during the Resistance 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Qfq4_2xF8uUC&pg=PA600&lpg=PA600&dq=the+Union+des+Femmes+Fran%C3%A7aises+during+the+Resistance&source=bl&ots=jhBxwaRIas&sig=C72OeiTUYHWbOrH4xqhxEB2oP4A&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjGgtHKjvjPAhXoBsAKHXptDZUQ6AEIHjAA#v=onepage&q=the%20Union%20des%20Femmes%20Fran%C3%A7aises%20during%20the%20Resistance&f=false>
 which left her familiar with barricades. The action and ideas of women 
teachers, book-binders and button-makers in the 1871 Paris Commune spring from 
the archives onto her pages, along with the tributes of the poets and the 
merciless contempt of the Commune’s suppressors. The Women Incendiaries 
triggered my first book,Women Resistance and Revolution 
<http://www.critical-theory.com/free-read-women-resistance-and-revolution/> 
(1972).


5. Woman’s Body, Woman’s Right: A Social History of Birth Control in America 
by Linda Gordon <http://www.curledup.com/moralpro.htm> (1974). 
A new movement was demanding a new history that could encompass women’s work 
in the home, sex, bodies, pregnancy, caring for children. Reproduction was 
being politicised. Gordon’s pioneering approach to birth control made the 
connection to the political, social, economic and cultural self–determination 
that feminists were demanding. (It was revised and updated asThe Moral Property 
of Women <http://www.curledup.com/moralpro.htm> in 2002.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fliberation-the-top-10-books-of-radical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1df0de6faefbd1b6dfed5f2d9166112d20c292b%2F0_1767_2739_1642%2F2739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20of%20radical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fliberation-the-top-10-books-of-radical-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20of%20radical%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fliberation-the-top-10-books-of-radical-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1df0de6faefbd1b6dfed5f2d9166112d20c292b%2F0_1767_2739_1642%2F2739.jpg>
 CLR James addresses spectators at Speaker’s Corner in London. Photograph: 
Hulton Getty 
6. Eve and the New Jerusalem: Socialism and Feminism in the 19th Century by 
Barbara Taylor <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v05/n17/jose-harris/natures-chastity> 
(1983)
Examining how women developed ideas of freedom and equality in the Owenite 
movement of the early 19th century 
<http://inhistorics.blogspot.co.uk/2012/06/owenism-and-cooperative-movement.html>
, Taylor reveals their challenge to the male-dominated co-operative movement. 
Some insisted that while woman was “unfree”, man must “ever be a slave”. Others 
argued that women possessed a distinct mission to create a society based on 
love and association rather than competition. Their shared dream was sex and 
class equality.

7. We Were Making History: Life Stories of Women in the Telangana People’s 
Struggle by Stree Shakti Sanghatana 
<http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;view=toc;idno=heb04652.0001.001>
(1989)
This is an impressive piece of oral history by six members of an Indian 
women’s group. It tells of the role of women in a peasant uprising against the 
autocratic power ofthe last Nizam of Hyderabad in 1947 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nizam_of_Hyderabad#List_of_Nizams_of_Hyderabad_.281724.E2.80.931948.29>
. The accounts are particularly moving because the women’s lives were so 
circumscribed and they risked everything. Most interesting for me, it probes 
how people live on after failure. In 1951, the communists who had supported 
them changed tack, leaving the rebels stranded. One woman observes: “The dreams 
were smashed. Crushed like an egg.”

8. Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Lesbian Life in 20th-century 
America by Lillian Faderman 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1991-06-09/books/bk-730_1_odd-girls-and-twilight-lovers>
 (1991)
If women’s history has been obscured, lesbian history was well nigh invisible 
when women’s liberation emerged. Faderman extends the initial focus on romantic 
friendships and bohemian experimenting by looking at the military in the second 
world war and the growth of bars and clubs in the repressive McCarthy era. She 
also explores the complex emergence of a movement from a series of subcultures. 
This is a great tribute to the ingenuity of women forced to express their 
desires through subterfuge.

9. Emma Goldman: A Documentary History of the American Years, Volume One 
(2003) and Volume Two (2005) <http://www.katesharpleylibrary.net/3bk3zs>
The anarchist Emma Goldman was a woman of many causes – free speech, women’s 
emancipation, birth control and workers’ rights. A self-educated Russian Jewish 
immigrant to the US, she read widely and loved passionately. She suffered jail 
and deportation. She has long been one of my heroines. These two volumes have 
been written and compiled with consummate scholarship by stalwarts ofthe Emma 
Goldman Papers <http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/goldman/> in Berkeley, California. 
They are accuracy heaven for researchers, and read like an adventure saga. The 
final volume is due out in 2017 and the authors have made many sacrifices to 
complete it. However, the archive exists on a knife-edge andthey are appealing 
for donations <https://give.berkeley.edu/browse/index.cfm?u=39>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN067J4ega24&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN067J4ega24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN067J4ega24&media=>
10. Strikers, Hobblers, Conchies and Reds: A Radical History of Bristol 
1880-1939 <https://www.breviarystuff.org.uk/strikers-hobblers-conchies-reds/> 
(2014)
As the cultural consensus in British society moved further and further to the 
right, it seemed that the efforts to create a wider, more democratically 
inclusive history from below had bitten the dust. But back it has come through 
a revival of interest in radical women, the peace movement,Raphael Samuel’s 
History Workshop 
<http://www.historyworkshop.org.uk/the-history-of-history-workshop/>, and the 
sprouting of local peoples’ history groups.Bristol Radical History Group 
<http://www.brh.org.uk/site/> has been particularly prolific, calling meetings 
and selling thousands of pamphlets. This is their first collection and ranges 
over anarchist community builders, tough river pilots, militant socialist trade 
unionists, new women, coffee taverns, riots and garden suburbs. It’s a book for 
rebels of all stripes.

 * Sheila Rowbotham’s most recent book is Rebel Crossings: New Women, Free 
Lovers and Radicals in Britain and the United States. It is published by Verso 
priced £25, andis available from the Guardian bookshop for £20.50 including 
free UK p&p <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rebel-crossings.html>.
 