
The popular 18th-century lexicographer Nathaniel Bailey 
<https://archive.org/details/universaletymolo00bail> had trouble with some 
definitions. When he came to “spider” he copped out, with “an Insect well 
known”. Mind you, he had already dug deep into his reference file and told us 
that a cherry was “a fruit well known”. Nowadays dictionaries are, for the most 
part, serious, sober documents, with little room for excitement. But words are 
fun; language is fun.The Word Detective 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/word-detective.html> is my story of how a 
naive Eng Lit student with an inherent distrust of old-style academia landed an 
editorial job on the Oxford English Dictionary back in 1976, and gradually 
became engrossed in the people, the friendships, the words, the places and how 
the OED itself gradually adapted to the digital era.


 These are 10 of the books that helped me along the way, and which showed me 
that I wasn’t the first person to discover there was more to lexicography than 
meets the eye.

1. Robert Cawdrey’s  
<http://engdictionaries.blogspot.co.uk/2011/10/cawdreys-table-alphabeticall.html>
A Table Alphabeticall 
<http://engdictionaries.blogspot.co.uk/2011/10/cawdreys-table-alphabeticall.html>
 (1604)
Dictionaries of English didn’t exist before 1604, and so schoolmaster Cawdrey 
was blazing a trail. He didn’t produce what we’d think of as a dictionary. He 
left out all the easy words you’d already know (there’s some sense in that) and 
focused on the “hard words”. What’s worse, he wrote it for “the benefit & helpe 
of Ladies, Gentlewomen, or other unskilfull persons” who had neglected to enjoy 
a classical or grammar-school education, but who needed to know the meaning of 
oppilation (stopping) and saboth (rest). But Cawdrey made a sound beginning: 
they say that the first step is the hardest.

2. BE’s New Dictionary of the Canting Crew 
<https://archive.org/stream/newdictionaryoft00begeuoft#page/n3/mode/2up> (1699)
The streets of Britain’s big cities were teeming with rogues and vagabonds in 
the 17th century, as least as far as BE – the forever unknown compiler who only 
ever revealed these initials – and his publisher would have us believe. 
Capitalising on this, BE’s dictionary gave the book-buying public their first 
chance to decode the frightening language of the “sturdy beggars” (beggars 
legally fit to work) or the homeless, shiftless soldiers returning from the 
European wars: famble-cheats (“Gold-rings, or Gloves”), member-mug (“a 
Chamber-pot”). Buy this and never be conned again!

3. Samuel Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language 
<http://publicdomainreview.org/collections/samuel-johnsons-dictionary-of-the-english-language-1785/>
 (1755)
Johnson had little truck, at least in his dictionary, with the discourse of 
ordinary people: all fours (“a low game of cards”); crack (“a whore; in low 
language” and also “a boaster: this is only a low phrase”). But his agenda 
shifted from writing a dictionary showing the English language at its peak of 
perfection to one that captured the language as it shifted. And he was not 
averse, as we know, to the odd subjective definition: “excise: a hateful tax 
levied upon commodities, and adjudged not by the common judges of property, but 
wretches hired by those to whom excise is paid”. Naughty lexicography.

4. Oxford English Dictionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/dec/16/britishidentity.uk> (1884-)
Our greatest dictionary (I would say that) was planned as a comprehensive 
index of English, containing every word and meaning ever used. The 19th-century 
editors soon realised that was too grand an aim: there was far too much 
esoteric scientific vocabulary, for example, that the ordinary, educated chap 
just didn’t need to know. So they left it out. But the dictionary soon settled 
down to include a glorious sweep of English of all types: formal, slang, 
British, American, South African, etc, and set the framework for national 
dictionaries across the world.

5. Henry Yule and Arthur Coke Burnell’s Hobson-Jobson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-18796493> (1886)
This dictionary of the English of the Raj was cleverly titled to give the 
impression that it was compiled by Messrs Hobson and Jobson. In fact, 
Hobson-Jobson is an anglicisation of an anguished Muslim cry uttered “in the 
procession of the Mo-harram 
<http://dsalsrv02.uchicago.edu/cgi-bin/philologic/getobject.pl?c.1:1:143.hobson>
”. The language of Anglo-India was fading when Yule and Burnell compiled their 
lively and discursive compendium, but it remains today to remind us of the 
remarkable and often problematic interaction between the British imperialists 
and the general Indian populace before Partition. It’s both great fun, and 
instructive. Where else would you find a hosbolhookum (an official document 
issued on royal authority)?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftop-10-dictionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a01d34678a07ec1b6c7f243b493b499c5ded7d%2F0_200_5262_3158%2F5262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20dictionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftop-10-dictionaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20dictionaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftop-10-dictionaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28a01d34678a07ec1b6c7f243b493b499c5ded7d%2F0_200_5262_3158%2F5262.jpg>
 ‘The language as it shifted’ … a copy of Samuel Johnson Johnson’s Dictionary. 
Photograph: Alamy 
6. James Redding Ware’s Passing English of the Victorian Era 
<https://archive.org/details/passingenglishof00wareuoft> (1909)
Ware enjoyed the camaraderie of London freemasonry and actors’ clubs at the 
end of the 19th century. Most of all, he haunted the music halls, especially 
south of the river, jotting down and preserving for us the vibrant street 
expressions that he heard all around him. His dictionary, sadly only published 
weeks before his death, glistens with idioms that passed under the radar of the 
standard dictionaries: What ho! she bumps! (“a satirical cry upon any display 
of vigour – especially feminine”), made temporarily famous by a popular song; 
cloddy, a put-down from the “dog market” meaning “aristocratic in appearance”. 
Dr Johnson would have shivered.

7. Frank Gelett Burgess’s Burgess Unabridged 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2006-02-08/features/0602080046_1_bromide-new-words-gelett-burgess>
 (1914)
Burgess subtitled his reference book “a new dictionary of words you have 
always needed”. It professed to have collected the slang of 1915. Burgess 
thought Webster a bit dull, and “Mrs Century” (the magnificent Century 
Dictionary) only a bit better. He offers a description and snuggly line-drawing 
of the huzzlecoo (“an intimate talk” or “a flirtation”), elaborates on quoobs 
(misfits) and recoils from the dogmix (“an unpleasant, uncomfortable, or dirty 
occupation … The type of the dogmix is cleaning fish”).

8. The Hacker’s Dictionary <http://www.dourish.com/goodies/jargon.html> (1971)
This was the cult go-to reference for computer geeks when I first became 
involved with computers and dictionaries in the 80s. Its title dates from the 
time when hacker just meant an edgy computer enthusiast, nor an international 
criminal. The Hacker’s Dictionary wasn’t published as a book back then, but 
existed underground on vast computer systems. Nerds would check the latest 
uses, and mail the editors if they thought they had found or (modestly) 
invented a new one. It was a wiki before we had wikis, from the days when you 
needed to know about awk (“(UNIX techspeak) an interpreted language for 
massaging text data [etc, and then a bit more etc.]”). It’s published now, so 
part of the mainstream.

The Word Detective: A Life in Words, from Serendipity to Selfie by John 
Simpson – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/03/the-word-detective-a-life-in-words-from-serendipity-to-selfie-by-john-simpson-review>
9. Robert Allen’s Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors (1981)
This is my favourite edition of my favourite dictionary, which marks me down 
as a hopeless dictionary nerd. It contains only the information you might get 
wrong (St. and St, for instance: which is “saint” and which is “street”?). It’s 
an acquired taste.

10. The Urban Dictionary <http://www.urbandictionary.com/> (1999–)
You go here to find out what a dictionary might have looked like in another 
dimension. Lots of it is spot-on, but lots of it is impressionistic. The 
trouble is, you can’t always tell which is which. It’s saved me on a few 
occasions (newspaper reports incorporating police slang that hadn’t come my way 
before), and lost me on others. I like its definition for suburban dictionary 
(“a place where suburban kids go to get definitions for urban terms and 
phrases”). As the dictionary reminds us, the “Urban Dictionary is just a subset 
of a truly Urbane Dictionary, ideally conceived”.

• The Word Detective by John Simpson is published by Little, Brown priced 
£18.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £15.57 including p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/word-detective.html>.
 